15 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND­ 
. RENEWABLE ENERGY 
FUNDING OF NEW AND RENEWABLE 
ENERGY PROJECTS 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2011IPhalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
. _-_ --- - - - _-- ~--. -- - - -- - -~ -- --- _- -----=--- 


FIFTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2010-2011) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE 
ENERGY 
FUNDING OF NEW AND RENEWABLE 
ENERGY PROJECTS 
Presented to Lok Sabha on J 8th March. 20 J J 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on J 8th March. 20 J J 
LOKSABHASECRETAruAT 
NEW DELHI 
. March. 201/lPhalguna. 1932 (Saka) 


CO.E. No. 205 
Price: Rs. 90.00 
© 2011 By LOK SAIlI.IA SloCRETARIAI 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Mis. The Indian Press. 
Delhi-I 10033. 


CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (20 I 0-11 )................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTlON................................................................................ (v) 
REPORT 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
Introductory.... 1 
A. Potential of Renewable Energy vis-a-vis Achievement..... 3 
B. Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission........................ 10 
C. Research and Development Projects related to New and 
Renewable Energy......................................................... 17 
D. Role of Central Government in funding/implementation of 
Renewable Energy Projects........................................... 25 
E. Role of States in funding/implementation of Renewable 
Energy Projects................ 29 
F. Role ofIREDA in Funding of Renewable Energy Projects.... 32 
G Role of Nationalized Banks/Aids from International 
Institutions in Funding of Renewable Energy Projects..... 41 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee................... 47 
ApPENDICES 
I. Annexure - I, State-wise details of estimated potential and 
installed capacity of grid interactive Renewable power............ 59 
Annexure - II, 11 th Plan-Targets and achievement during 
2007 -08 to 2009-10 and total 11th Plan................. 63 


PAGE 
Annexure - III. l lth Plan=-Programme-wise break-up of 
approved outlay (GBS) and expenditure during I SI Year viz: 
2007-08 to 2009-10 and 11 th Plan targets and achievement during 
2007-08 to 2009-1 0........ 66 
Annexure - IV, Incentives/Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
provided under various renewable power schemes! programmes..... 67 
Annexure - V, Programme-wise and State-wise CFA released on 
reimbursement basis during first three years of the II th Pian.... 73 
I I. Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 18.05.2010, 
07.10.2010 and 03.03.2011.................................................... 76 


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2010-2011) 
Shri MuJayam Singh Yadav-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sahha 
2. Mohammad Azharuddin 
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri P.C. Chacko 
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire* 
9. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain** 
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
II. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
12. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
13. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
14. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
16. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao 
17. Dr. K.S. Rao# 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
·Nominated w.ej 27th September, 20 I 0 vice Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
··Nominated w.ej 18th October, 2010 vice Shri Arjun Munda 
#Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 28th January, 2011 
(iii) 


Rajya Sabha 
21. Shri Govindrao Adik 
22. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore 
23. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia* 
24. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
25. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
27. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
28. Shri Mohammad Shafi* - 
29. Shri Motilal Vora 
30. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav 
I . Shri Brahm Dutt 
SECRETARIAT 
Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Pandey 
3. Shri Manish Kumar 
Additional Director 
Executive Assistant 
"Nominated w.e.f. 21st September, 2010 
(iv) 


INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee .on Energy having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifteenth Report on 'Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects'. 
2. The Committee were briefed on the subject by the representatives 
of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 18th May, 2010. To 
examine the subject in detail the Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 
7th October, 20 I O. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry for appearing before the Committee for 
evidence and furnishing the information, desired by the Committee in 
connection with the issues relating to the subject. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 3rd March, 20 II. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-II of the Report. 
18 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
NEW DELHI; 
9 March, 2011 
(v) 


REPORT 
Part I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
INTRODUCTORY 
Energy is a basic input for almost all economic activities. In fact one 
of the indicators of economic growth h~s all along been the per capita 
consumption of energy. Therefore, with projected economic growth at 
8 per cent or so, there will be a very rapid growth in energy demand. Even 
though there is huge capacity growth planned for conventional energy 
sectors, there is little doubt that current energy shortages will only increase. 
Simultaneously, there is a growing recognition, for more than one reason, 
of the dangers inherent in continuing with the model of economic 
development based on excessive consumption of fossil fuels. At the present 
rate of consumption, the limited reserves of fossil fuels would not last very 
long. Another aspect that has come into sharp focus is that developing 
countries can ill-afford to depend excessively upon petroleum imports. 
1.2 Energy security, in recent years, has gained immense strategic 
importance. Climate change has been recognized as mainly being caused by 
greenhouse gas emissions from energy intensive human economic activities 
based on fossil fuels. There is also the important issue of providing energy 
access. It has been accepted that 40 per cent of the population is currently 
denied this. In a situation of power shortage, therefore, it also appears difficult 
to fill this gap in the conventional way. Therefore, India has no alternative 
but to strive for energy efficiency and to look for renewable sources of 
energy, not only to provide additional power to the grid but also to provide 
energy access to the poor. There is also a need to replace consumption of 
fossil fuels and to reduce the demand for electricity wherever possible. 
1.3 The Government has taken a major initiative in regard the 
promotion and development of Renewable Energy Sources in the form of 
announcement of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) which 
inter-alia envisage the mammoth target i.e. the installation of Solar Power 


to the tune of 20,000 MW by the year 2022. Besides, the Government has 
also set a target of capacity addition of Renewable Energy to the tune of 
26,000 MW from various sources during the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17). 
To achieve these ambitious targets, huge amount of funds will be required. 
Considering the importance of the subject, the Committee examined the 
subject in detail by having discussions at length with the representatives of 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) and Indian Renewable 
Energy Development Authority (IREDA). 
1.4 The MNRE is the nodal Ministry of Government of India at the 
National level for all matters relating to New and Renewable Energy. The 
endeavour of the Ministry is to promote Renewable Energy technologies and 
increase the contribution of renewable energy in the total energy mix. The 
Ministry adopts a three-fold strategy for the development, promotion and use 
of renewable energy technologies across the country: (a) providing budgetary 
support for research, development and demonstration of technologies; 
(b) facilitating institutional finance through various financial institutions; and 
(c) promoting private investment through fiscal incentives, tax holidays, 
depreciation allowance and remunerative returns for power fed into the grid. 
1.5 lREDA is a 100% owned Government oflndia Enterprise working 
under the aegis of the MNRE. lREDA was set up in 1987 to promote, develop 
and finance Renewable Energy Technologies in India. 
2 


A. POTENTIAL OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 
VIS-A-VIS ACHIEVEMENT 
1.6 The MNRE has provided the following data in regard the total 
estimated potential and installed capacity of various New and Renewable 
Energy source available in the Country: 
Wind Small Biomass Bagasse Waste Solar Total 
Power Hydro Power Cogenera- to 
Projects tion Energy 
Potential 48561 15384 17536 5000 3831 • 90312 
in MW 
Installed 11807 2735 2200 65 10 16817 
Capacity 
in MW 
·Potential for Solar Energy is estimated at 20-30 MW per Sq.km. for most part of the 
Country. 
1.7 State-wise and sector-wise details of renewable energy potential 
and installed capacity are given in Annexure-I. 
1.8 When the Committee desired to know about the plans of the 
MNRE to tap the available potential of Renewable Energy, the Ministry have 
stated:- 
"The aim for the 11 th Plan is a capacity addition of 12,230 MW grid­ 
interactive renewable power. Further capacity addition of around 
57,000 MW is envisaged during the 12th and 13th Plans, leading to 
a total capacity of approx. 80,000 MW by the end of the 13th Plan 
period, comprising 43,500 MW wind power, 9,200 MW small hydro 
power, 7,400 MW bio-power, and 20,000 MW solar power as 
envisaged by 2020 under the Solar Mission approved recently. 
3 


Plan-wise projections are as under:- 
(Capacity in MW) 
Resource Capacity 11th Plan 12th Plan 13th Plan Total 
at end of (2007-12) (2012-17) (2017-22) By 2022 
10th Plan 
Wind power 7,094 9,000 17,400 10,000 43,494 
Small hydro 1,976 1,400 2,900 3,000 9,276 
power 
Bio power 1,185 1,780 2,200 2,200 7,365 
Solar power 3 500 3,500 16,000· 20,003· 
Total 10,258 12,680 26,000 31,200 80,138 
.Projection up to 2020." 
1.9 In regard the targets set under the 11 th Plan and the achievement 
so far the MNRE have stated that a total capacity of 6,560 MW of grid­ 
connected renewable power (comprising 4,714 MW wind power, 759 MW 
small hydro power, 1,079 MW bio-power and 8 MW solar power) has been 
added during the first three years of the 11 th Plan against the plan target 
of 12,230 MW approved at mid-term appraisal stage. The Ministry have also 
furnished programme-wise details of physical targets and achievements and 
financial allocation and expenditure during the first three years of II th Plan 
which are given in Annexure-II & III respectively. 
I . 10 When the Committee desired to know about the reasons for 
the shortfall in the achievement of targets set for II th Plan and the efforts 
made by the Ministry to ensure that the targets are fully met in the remaining 
period of the II th Plan, the Ministry stated in a written reply: 
"Shortfalls have been mainly in wind power, biogas and waste-to­ 
energy programmes, reasons for which and details of programme-wise 
efforts made to achieve the target for the remaining years of the 
II th Plan period are explained below: 
4 


Wind power: The 10th Plan target for the wind power sector was 
1,500 MW and achievement was 5,400 MW. Because of this. the target 
set for the I J th Plan was set as 10,500 MW, which was actually 
very ambitious. This fact was realized in 2008-09 itself and therefore 
keeping in view the progress till then, the plan target was down-scaled 
to 9,000 MW at mid-term appraisal stage. However, the target for 
2009-10 continued to be 2,500 MW as envisaged in the original target 
of 10,500 MW for the Plan. 
The wind power projects are installed in commercial mode with private 
sector investment and this sector is still mainly driven by the accelerated 
depreciation benefit. The capacity addition primarily depends upon the 
favourable investment environment for private sector as well as the 
positive regulatory support. The investment opportunities have been 
affected by global economic recession (including India), which was 
there in all sectors including wind energy. The low achievement during 
2008-09 and 2009-10 has also been on account of policy/regulatory 
issues and local problems in some States. This discouraged the private 
sector investment resulting in lower wind power capacity addition. The 
performance during 2009-10 was low in the States of Kamataka, 
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. 
Following efforts have been made to achieve the targets of 11 th Plan 
period: 
• A Generation Based Incentive scheme was introduced in end 2009 
to attract IPPs who do not avail the benefit of accelerated 
depreciation (AD). Finance Ministry and Planning Commission 
were persuaded to retain the benefit of AD which they wanted 
to end. 
• Regular reviews were held to take stock of progress/address 
bottlenecks. 
• Kamataka Government was persuaded to modify its recently 
issued Renewable Energy Policy, which sets timelines for forest 
clearance besides some other points not favouring the investment 
in the sector. 
5 


• Tamil Nadu Government was persuaded to expedite clearance of 
pending power evacuation proposals. 
• Wind Atlas was released. It will facilitate identification of potential, 
sites as well as more accurate and efficient micro-siting. 
• Detailed wind resource assessment activities to identify further 
potential sites were continued through C- WET, Chennai. 
The situation has already started improving and it is expected that full 
target of 9,000 MW will be achieved. A capacity of 1,002 MW has 
been installed in 20 I 0-11 upto September, 2010 against a capacity 
addition of only 590 MW in the same period of the preceding year. 
Biogas programme: Shortfall in respect of installation of family type 
biogas plants have been due mainly to increased cost of installations, 
reduction in cattle holding by individual families, increasing availability 
of subsidized LPG in rural areas and low priority accorded by some 
of the State Governments. Efforts made to achieve the target for the 
remaining years of the II th Plan period are given below: 
• Increased Central Financial Assistance for installation of biogas 
plants. 
• Policy modified to include implementation through entrepreneurs, 
Renewable Energy Service Companies, Self Help Groups, NGOs, 
etc. also apart from State Nodal Departments/Agencies. 
• Increased training/refresher training courses for installation, 
repair and maintenance of biogas plants. 
• Promotion of banks and financial institutions to fund installation 
of biogas plants to individual beneficiaries as well as entrepre­ 
neurs. 
Waste-to-Energy: The shortfall in achievements in the waste-to­ 
energy sector has been due mainly to the slow development of projects 
on energy from municipal solid waste (MSW). The prime factor in this 
regard the poor quality (energy content) of the available waste and non­ 
implementation ofMSW Handling and Management Rules, 2000. Even 
6 


after award of projects by the Municipal Corporations, the project 
developers are taking a long time for commencing the execution of 
projects due to delays in signing of various agreements for technology 
and equipment, power purchase, financial closures, etc. The develop­ 
ment of projects based on other wastes. However, initiative is now being 
taken for developing projects based on mix of wastes from urban and 
agricultural sectors and it is expected that the same will develop at a 
faster pace." 
1.11 The Committee further wanted to, desired to know about the 
targets set (sector-wise) financial as well as physical for the 12th Plan and 
the strategy of the Ministry to achieve the same. The Committee also enquired 
about the estimation of the fund that will be required for 12th Plan and its 
sources. In reply to this the MNRE have stated: 
"Physical and financial targets/estimation of funds requirement for 
achieving the set targets for the 12th Plan for various programmes of 
the Ministry have not been set so far, pending recommendations of the 
Working Group and Sub-Group for preparation of 12th Plan which are 
yet to be constituted by the Planning Commission. However, a 
perspective plan in respect of renewable power generation projects is 
reflected in the 11 th Plan document of the Ministry, as per which a 
capacity addition of 15,000 MW from different renewable energy 
resources (11,200 MW from wind power, 1,600 MW from small hydro 
power, 2,200 MW from bio power and 'nil' from Solar power) was 
envisaged, which translates to a total investment requirement to the tune 
of Rs. 90,000 crore. For solar power a tentative target of 3,800 MW 
is now envisaged for 12th Plan period under the Solar Mission approved 
recently, subject to review of achieveinent/progress w. r. t. the first phase 
ending March 2013. This would translate to an additional investment 
requirement of the order of Rs. 60,000 crore. The source of funds to 
meet all these investment requirements will depend on the architecture 
recommended by the Working Group yet to be constituted for 
formulation of the 12th Plan proposals." 
1.12 In 1982, a separate Department of Non-Conventional Energy 
Sources (ONES) was created in the Ministry of Energy to look after all the 
aspects relating to new and renewable energy. The Department was upgraded 
7 


into a separate Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES) in 
1992 and was re-christened as Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE), in October 2006. The Ministry in its about 30 year's tenure has 
achieved a cumulative installed capacity of 16,817 MW of Renewable Energy. 
1.13 The Committee pointed out that the cumulative achievement 
of the Ministry so far were not very encouraging and desired to know 
the reasons for the same. The Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
"The pace of exploitation of renewable energy sources is critically 
dependent on several factors which include resource availability; stage 
of technological development, availability of other cheaper or more 
convenient energy supply options, State Governments own perceived 
needs, policies and priorities, cost of generation by renewable energy 
sources, transmission arrangements, etc. 
It is also clarified that the total grid-connected renewable power installed 
capacity has reached -17,000 MW which corresponds to -11% of the 
total installed capacity of 1,61,000 MW in the country as on 31.5.2010. 
Contribution in electricity mix is estimated at - 5.5%. It is to be noted 
that in the first three years of. the 11 th Plan, capacity created from 
renewable energy sources is 6,560 MW which is about 27% of the 
total generation capacity created during this period. 
In addition, there is 36,863 MW of large hydro capacity and 4,560 MW 
of nuclear energy, both of which are actually also renewable sources, 
though not included in statistics as hydro only up to 25MW is counted." 
1.14 In reply to a specific query of the Committee related with the 
average cost of per unit of electricity generated from Solar, Wind, and Mini 
Hydro Projects vis-a-vis the rates at which energy generated from Renewable 
source is purchased by the Government, 'the Ministry have stated:- 
"The cost of electricity generation from renewable energy sources is 
highly resource and site specific. It depends on availability and intensity 
of the selected resource at the project site, the technological option 
selected for harnessing the resource, etc. The price at which the power 
is purchased by State Utilities varies from State to State. In general, 
8 


it is purchased at preferential tariffs in line with the provisions of the 
Electricity Act 2003, the National Tariff Policy 2006 and the subsequent 
guidelines announced by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) for calculating tariff for renewable energy based power 
projects. The tariff is to be calculated taking into consideration useful 
life of the project, capital cost of the project, operation & maintenance 
expenses and return on equity (RoE) of - 19% pre tax for first 10 years 
and 24% pre tax for the remaining period. The value base for the equity 
is taken as 30% of the capital cost. The SERCs are determining tariffs 
taking these guidelines and actual value of various parameters. Range 
of the levellised total tariff for different geographical regions/ States for 
current financial year fixed by CERC for power purchase from Solar, 
Wind and SmalllMini hydro projects by Utilities is given below: 
Source CERC Levellised Total Tariff 
(FY 2010-11) (Rs.IkWh) 
Wind Power 3.55 - 5 .33 
Small Hydro Power 3.22 - 4.49 
Solar Power 15.31 - Solar Thermals 
17.91 - Solar PVs 
$During 2010-11 CERC announced a tariff of Rs. 17.91 per unit for solar PV and 
Rs. 15.31 per unit for solar thermal power. However, during the process of selection of 
projects, the project developers offered discounts on CERC fixed tariff. As a result 
NVVN will purchase solar PV power at an average tariff of Rs.12.5 per unit and Rs.II.48 
per unit for solar thermal power." 
9 


B. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU NATIONAL SOLAR MISSION 
1.15 Consequent to the announcement of the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change in June 2008, development of solar energy technologies in 
the country was identified to be pursued as' a National Mission. In November 
2009, the Government of India approved the "Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Solar Mission" (JNNSM) which aims at development and deployment of solar 
energy technologies in the country to achieve parity with grid power tariff 
by 2022. The objective of the National Solar Mission is to establish India 
as a global leader in solar energy, by creating the policy conditions for its 
diffusion across the country as quickly as possible. On 11 th January, 2010, 
the Prime Minister of India launched the JNNSM in a Solar Energy Conclave 
organized by the Ministry. 
1 .16 The Mission was proposed to adopt a 3-phase approach, spanning 
the remaining period of the 1 lth Plan and first year of the 12th Plan (up to 
2012-13) as Phase 1, the remaining 4 years of the 12th Plan (2013-17) as 
Phase 2 and the 13th Plan (2017-22) as Phase 3. At the end of each plan, 
and mid-term during the 12th and 13th Plans, there will be an evaluation of 
progress, review of capacity and targets for subsequent phases, based on 
emerging cost and technology trends, both domestic and global. 
1.17 The immediate aim of the Mission is to focus on setting up an 
enabling policy environment for solar technology penetration in the country 
both at centralized and decentralized levels. The first phase (up to 2013) will 
focus on capturing of the low-hanging options in solar thermal; on promoting 
off-grid systems to serve populations without access to commercial energy 
and modest capacity addition in grid-based systems. In the second phase, 
after taking into account the experience of the initial years, capacity will be 
aggressively ramped up to create conditions for up scaled and competitive 
solar energy penetration in the country. 
1.18 To achieve the above, the Mission targets are:- 
• To create an enabling policy framework for the deployment of 
20,000 MW of solar power by 2022 . 
10 • 


• To ramp up capacity of grid-connected solar power generation 
to 1000 MW within three years - by 2013; an additional 3000 
MW by 2017 through the mandatory use of the renewable 
purchase obligation by utilities backed with a preferential tariff. 
This capacity can be more than doubled - reaching 10,000 MW 
installed power by 2017 or more, based on. the enhanced and 
enabled international finance and technology transfer. The 
ambitious target for 2022 of 20,000 MW or more, will be 
dependent on the 'learning' of the first two phases, which if 
successful, could lead to conditions of grid-competitive solar 
power. The transition could be appropriately up scaled, based on 
availability of international finance and technology. 
• To create favourable conditions for solar manufacturing 
capability, particularly solar thermal for indigenous production and 
market leadership. 
• To promote programmes for off-grid applications, reaching 
2000 MW by 2022 including 20 million solar lighting systems. 
• To achieve 20 million m2 solar thermal collector area by 2022. 
1.19 The Government has given 'In Principle' approval to the overall 
targets proposed for the various activities covered under the Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Solar Mission. The Government has also approved the 
implementation of the first phase of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission during 2009-2013 and the target to set up 1,000 MW grid connected 
(33 KV and above) solar plants, 100 MW of roof top and small solar plants 
connected to LTIlI KV grid and 200 MW capacity equivalent off-grid solar 
applications in the first phase of the Mission, till March 2013. An amount 
of Rs.4337 crore has been approved for the activities proposed under the 
first phase of the Mission till March 2013. 
The activities of the Mission inter alia include:- 
a. The implementation of the target of 1,000 MW of grid connected 
(33 KV and above) solar power plants will be through NTPC 
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN), a trading subsidiary of NTPC 
Limited. NVVN will directly purchase the solar power from the 
11 


project developers as per the norms and guidelines fixed in this 
regard. 
b. 100 MW capacity of solar rooftop and small grid connected solar 
power plants will be connected to LT/ll KV grid of the 
distribution utility and the solar power will be directly purchased 
by the distribution utilities as per the norms and guidelines fixed 
in this regard. 
c. 200 MW equivalent capacity of off-grid solar applications, both 
solar thermal and photovoltaic will be implemented through a 
combination of low interest bearing loans and lor central financial 
assistance as per the norms and guidelines fixed in this regard. 
d. In addition, the Mission will support various activities, relating to 
R&D, Human Resource Development, Technical Assistance, 
training, publicity and awareness etc. for successful implemen­ 
tation of the Mission. 
1.20 When asked about the requirement and sources of funds to 
achieve the targets set under the first phase of the National Solar Mission, 
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:- 
Activities-wise position is as under: 
S. Activity Funds Required Funds required 
No. for 11 th Plan For the phase I 
period till March, 2013 
(Rs. cr.) (Rs. cr.) 
I. Generation based Incentive (GBI) for 230 537 
Roof Top and small grid connected 
solar power plants 
2. R&D and Technical Assistance 175 300 
3. Promotion of off-grid solar applications 2080 3415 
4. Support to Solar thermal manufacturing 20 50 
5. IIRD 22 35 
TOTAL 2527 4337 
12 


The budgetary support should be adequate and no foreign Government 
has been approached for providing funds for the implementation of the 
first phase of the Mission. However, there is expected to be considerable 
foreign direct investment by the project developers. 
1.21 In regard to the implementation aspect of the National Solar 
Mission it has been found that the modalities for implementation of National 
Solar Mission are yet to be finalized. However, requirement of additional funds 
for the year 2011-12 has been made contingent to the progress made by the 
mission. On being asked by the Committee to explain this, the MNRE in their 
reply stated:- 
"The requirements of funds during 20 I 0-11 for implementation of the 
targets of the Mission is towards (i) Generation based incentive for 
supporting grid connected solar power projects implemented through 
States; (ii) Capital subsidy and/or interest subsidy for 32 MW capacity 
off-grid applications; and (iii) Grant support for R&D and technical 
assistance. 
The funding norms for the first phase of the Mission, including for 
20 I 0-11 have already been approved by the Cabinet. About 30% capital 
subsidy will be provided for various types of off-grid solar applications. 
In addition for certain category of beneficiaries, loan at 5% annual 
interest rate can also be made available for projects in Special Category 
States for non-commercial applications implemented by State Nodal 
agencies. During 20 I 0-11, Ministry will involve additional channels for 
development of solar systems. This will be done through a accreditation 
process. The new channel partners will be paid the subsidy on 
reimbursements basis. However, release of funds to the State nodal 
agencies will continue as per the existing practice. 
It may be noted that during 2010-11, the major increase in the 
requirement of funds is due to enhanced targets of 32 MW of the 
off-grid solar applications for which an amount of Rs. 250 crores has 
been kept in the budget. Ministry has already received new project 
proposals which would require release of the about Rs. 100 crores 
through the States Nodal Agencies. The Ministry has already sanctioned 
new proposals for 27 MW capacity and an amount of Rs. 120 crores 
has been released. 
13 


In case of grid connected solar power projects, the major component 
(if 1,000 MW in the first phase is to be implemented through NTPC 
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN). No funding is envisaged for setting 
up 1,000 MW capacity grid connected Solar Power Projects, as NVVN 
will sell solar power to States bundled with unallocated thermal power 
available from NTPC stations. 
With regard to 100 MW of Small megawatt size solar power plants, 
the Ministry will provide a generation based incentive (GBI) of 
Rs. 12.41 per unit of electricity fed from the plants in to the grid. This 
is based on the difference of tariff of Rs. 17.91 per unit announced 
by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission for solar PV grid power 
projects minus the notional base price of Rs. 5.5 per unit. This method 
of determining the GBI is known to the States for the last few months. 
The Tariff for purchase of Solar power by the state utilities is to be 
announced by the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions. 
Many of the States are in the process of announcing the tariff orders. 
Solar power projects of about 36 MW capacities are already under 
different stages of implantations. The amount of Rs. 30 crores is 
earmarked for such projects. IREDA has already short listed small grid 
connected solar power projects (l00 kW to 2MW capacity) of 100 MW 
capacity. An amount of Rs. 6.5 crores has been spent to lREDA for 
balance amount will required providing the first installment of 
funds to IREDA for GBI for the new grid connected solar projects to 
be commissioned in next 6-8 months. Maximum permissible time for 
SPY grid solar power projects is 12 months from the date of signing 
of PPA. 
Requirement of funds for R&D is also due to expansion of research 
and education activities by setting up centers of excellence and 
supporting new research projects at R&D institutions and also industry. 
During the year Ministry has already approved release of Rs. 29.7 
crores. 
In short the requirement of fund during 20 I 0-11 is based on a firm 
plan for expanding and upscaling the existing programmes and also to 
keep some provision for the new activities." 
14 


1.22 It was stated by the MNRE that no funding is envisaged for setting 
up 1,000 MW capacity grid connected Solar Power projects, as NVVN will 
sell solar power to the States bundled with unallocated thermal power 
available from NTPC stations. When the Committee desired the Ministry to 
explain the above set-up in detail. The Ministry infonned:- 
"NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Ltd. (NVVN), the trading ann of NTPC, 
has been designated as nodal agency by the Government and mandated 
for entering into Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with Solar Power 
Developers to purchase solar power fed to 33 KV and above grid, in 
accordance with the tariff and PPA duration as fixed by the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission. The Ministry of Power shall 
allocate to NVVN, equivalent megawatt capacity, from the Central 
unallocated quota, from NTPC power stations, at the rate notified by 
the CERC for bundling together with solar power. NVVN will undertake 
the sale of the bundled power to State utilities at the rates determined 
as per CERC regulations. This arrangement will be limited to utility scale 
solar power generated from a maximum anticipated capacity of 1000 
MW in the first phase. When NVVN supplies bundled power to State 
utilities at the rates determined as per CERC regulations, those State 
utilities will be entitled to use the solar part of the bundled power 
for meeting their Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO) under the 
Electricity Act, 2003. In order to implement the above arrangement, 
detailed guidelines for selection of grid solar power projects have been 
.de..veloped. 
No budgetary support is envisaged for setting up the grid connected 
solar power projects. However, a separate mechanism for providing 
need based budgetary support for payment security mechanism in the 
event of defaults by the State utilities in payments to NVVN is proposed 
to be established. 
During 20 I 0-11, Ministry will also involve additional channels for 
development of solar systems. This will be done through an 
accreditation process. The new channel partners will be paid the 
subsidy on reimbursements basis. However, release of funds to the 
State nodal agencies will continue as per the existing practice of a part 
of funds released in advance." 
15 


1.23 In reply to a specific query, the Ministry stated that the estimated 
requirement of funds to set up 1000 MW capacity grid connected solar power 
projects would be Rs. 12,000 crore to Rs. 15,000 crore. 
1.24 In regard to 1000 MW Grid connected solar power projects 
coming up in the first phase of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, 
the Ministry have stated that 30 project developers have been selected to set 
up 150 MW capacity of grid connected photovoltaic power plants and 
7 promoters have been selected to set up 470 MW of solar thermal power 
plants. In addition, 16 project developers have been selected to setup 84 MW 
capacity grid solar power plants under migration scheme from their 
respective existing arrangements to Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. 
I .25 On being asked about the progress regarding shaping up of Grid 
connected solar power projects coming up in the first phase of JNNSM, the 
Ministry in their reply have stated: 
"The projects selected under migration have all signed their PPAs and 
are likely to complete their financial closure by Feb., 2011. The new 
projects selected recently are expected to complete their financial 
closure by July, 2011. At present, the project developers are in the 
process of finalizing the choice of the technology to set up the plant 
and other preparatory activities. For PV related projects 12 months are 
provided for commissioning of the plants, whereas in case of the solar 
thermal power projects this time is 28 months." 
1.26 When the Committee enquired about the concession/facilitation 
sought by the Solar Power Project Developers from the Government, the 
Ministry stated: 
"Recently, some of the power project developers and the bankslfinancial 
institutions had raised concern about bankability of the proposals, 
therefore, Ministry has prepared proposal on payment security 
arrangement for obtaining approval of the competent authority. Under 
this arrangement, in case NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam is not able to 
recover payment from the state utilities, Ministry would provide 
budgetary support to NVVN to ensure regular payment to the project 
developers. " 
16 


C. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS RELATED TO 
NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
1.27 The MNRE does not take ~&D work directly. It has been 
supporting R&D and technology demonstration project in the area of 
renewable energy at various R&D institutions, CSIR lab, IITs and NITs, 
universities, and other research institutes! organizations in the area of solar 
energy, wind energy, biomass energy, biogas and other technologies. 
1.28 The Committee were informed that Research & Development 
activities of the Ministry aim at resource assessment, technology develop­ 
ment, demonstration and commercialization; _ . The Ministry supports 
Research, Design, Development and Demonstration (RDD&D) to develop 
new and renewable energy technologies, processes, materials, components, 
sub-systems, products & services, standards and resource assessment so 
as to indigenously manufacture renewable energy products and systems. A 
comprehensive policy on Research, Design, Development and Demonstration 
(RDD&D) is in place to support R&D in new and renewable energy 
sector, including associating and supporting RD&D earned out by industry 
for market development. The guidelines have special focus on the 
following:- 
• Providing core-support to R&D institutions to strengthen their_ 
expertise in the specific area for technology development and 
deployment in the country. 
• Demonstration of indigenously developed technologies in 
association with industry to facilitate commercialization. 
• Mechanism for taking up good quality projects. to achieve the 
goals set. 
1.29 The RDD&D framework of the Ministry provides guidelines for 
project identification, formulation appraisal, approval and financial support. 
It contains three Committees, namely RDD&D Project Appraisal Committee 
(RDPAC), RDD&D Sectoral Project Appraisal Committee (RDSPAC) and 
17 


Technology Demonstration Project Appraisal Committee (TDPAC) with 
Secretary, MNRE as Chairman for appraisal and recommending RDD&D 
projects for funding by the Ministry and for providing overall guidance to 
the RDD&D efforts in new and renewable energy sector. In the Xl Plan 
Period, the Ministry has substantially increased support for RDD&D in new 
and renewable energy sector and a provision ofRs. 500 crore has been made. 
The focus is on improved efficiency, cost reduction and technology transfer 
and demonstration for their commercialization. The Ministry followed a 
pragmatic approach with directed research with clear cut deliverables for 
taking up R&D projects so that the process of technology development for 
commercialization could be expedited to achieve the goal set. 
1.30 In view of importance of National Solar Mission, the Committee 
desired. to know about the outlay for Research and Development 
activities during the 11 th Plan as well as for 12th Plan, the MNRE replied 
as under:- 
"A total outlay of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated to R&D activities 
in different renewable energy sectors during the 11 th plan period. 
This will be largely sufficient to meet the projected requirement of 
Rs.175 crore funds requirement under the solar mission for the period 
up to FY20ll-12. The allocations for R&D for 12th plan period are 
yet to be finalized." 
1.31 The information in regard to Budget outlay and actual expenditure . 
on R&D during the last three years is given hereunder: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget Outlay Expenditure 
2007-08 60 31.74 
2008-09 100 27.80 
2009-10 78 43.85 
(Upto 28.02.20 I 0) 
2010-11 150 
18 


1.32 On being asked by the Committee regarding the details of the 
Research and Development Projects that are being undertaken, the MNRE 
in their reply stated as under:- 
"Major thrust is being laid on R&D in solar energy sector. At present 
19 R&D projects are under implementation on different aspects of solar 
thermal and photovoltaic technologies. Ministry has decided to 
strengthen some of the institutions as Centre of Excellence. One such 
Centre is recently sanctioned at lIT Bombay. The details are given 
below: 
Solar Photovoltaic: 
• A project has been sanctioned to a company, Maharishi Solar, to 
indigenously develop solar grade polysilicon material. 
• lIT Bombay is working on development of high efficiency solar 
cells. 
• A Bangalore based industry, HHV and lACS, Kolkata are working 
on development of multi junction thin film modules. 
• lIT Delhi is working on development of organic solar cells. 
• lIP Dehra Dun are working on development of dye sensitized solar 
cells. 
• KIlT, Bhubaneswar is working on development of CIGS based 
poly crystalline thin film sub-modules. 
• CECRI is developing storage batteries suitable for use in solar PV 
systems. 
• 15% efficiency CIGS cells/modules to be developed by an 
industry, Moser Baer. 
• 12% efficiency dye sensitized cells to be developed .by Amrita 
Nanoscience Centre. 
Solar Thermal: 
• A project has been sanctioned to lIT Bombay in collaboration with 
a consortium of industries for establishment of a testing and 
19 


simulation facility for a MW-capacity solar thermal power plant. 
The project is being set up at the campus of Solar Energy Centre 
of the Ministry. 
• A project to develop and establish performance characterization 
facility for solar glazings has also been sanctioned to CEPT 
University, Ahmedabad. 
• Research projects are being developed in consultation with experts 
from IITs and industry representatives covering solar air 
conditioning for small and large commercial establishments and 
cold storages for rural areas. A few demonstration projects for 
large capacity air conditioning systems are already under 
installation. These include 100 ton system at Muni Seva Ashram 
near Vadodara, 92 ton capacity system at TVS Suzuki Factory, 
Chennai, and 60 ton system at a hospital run by Municipal 
Corporation, Thane. 
• A technology evaluation programme was initiated with a view to 
evaluate the technology of large area solar dish concentrator 
(ARVN-160), developed indigenously under MNRE supported 
R&D project. Two projects with four large arc solar concentra­ 
tors have been sanctioned in Sangli, Maharashtra and Kota, 
Rajasthan. 
• Development of Solar Thermal cooling systems of different sizes 
for applications with Thermax. 
• Parabolic dish concentrator for steam /power generation to be set 
up in collaboration with Industry and lIT, Chennai at SEC. 
• Expert groups for solar cooling and solar thermal concentrators 
set up to draw a roadmap for these sectors." 
1.33 The Committee also wanted to know status of R&D activities in 
other developed countries working in Renewable Energy sector particularly 
the solar energy. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy replied in a 
written note as under: 
"Japan, Germany, Australia and USA are among the leading countries 
in research in solar photovoltaics. The recent developments in research 
20 


and commercial production in various solar cell technology options in 
India and other countries are given below. 
Crystalline Silicon Technology: In. the crystalline silicon solar cell 
technology the bes! research laboratory scale solar cell efficiency of 
about 25% on 4 sq. em. area has been reported in Australia. In the 
past several years the laboratory scale efficiency has been in the range 
of 240/0-25% but in the commercial production tl'ie solar cell efficiencies 
have improved and currently most of the companies manufacture solar 
cells in the range of 15-17%. There are two companies (one each from 
USA and Japan) who manufacture solar cells of efficiencies in the range 
of 19-21 %. In India the best solar cell efficiency in research has been 
reported as 19.3% on 64 sq. em area. Currently research is in progress 
at lIT-Bombay to develop solar cells with efficiency of 20% or more 
using relatively simple processes. The efficiency of solar cells in the 
commercial production is in the range of 14.5% to 17%. Currently 
majority of the world production is based on crystalline silicon solar 
cells. 
Thin Film Solar Cell Modules: There are several material (single 
junction and multi junction amorphous silicon, cadmium telluride, 
copper indium diselenide) which have shown considerable progress in 
last' two decades. The advantage of thin film solar cells is that they 
use less material, 'only a few microns material can be deposited through 
low energy consuming processes at relatively lower temperatures up 
to 5000 C. Therefore, thin film' solar cell modules are expected to be 
less expensive as compared to crystalline silicon solar cells. These 
materials have been used to make large area integrated thin film 
modules. However, the efficiencies in commercial production are 
relatively lower. Amorphous silicon based thin film modules are in 
commercial production for past several years. 
Amorphous Silicon (a-Si) Solar Cell Modules: The best efficiency 
reported on single junction amorphous silicon solar cells is about 13% 
by US based research group. The commercially produced modules have 
21 


6% - 8% efficiency. In the single junction a-Si cells light induced 
degradation is one of the major technical challenge. Usually light induced 
degradation results in reduction of about 15 - 25% of the initial output 
of the solar cell module. This has led to development of multi junction 
a-Si cells and micro/nano crystalline cells, which are more stable and 
efficiency of 10.1 % is reported by a Japanese company. In India> 12% 
efficiency has been achieved with single junction a-Si cells. R&D is 
in progress to develop multi junction cells and 10% efficiency has been 
reported in the research. While globally several hundred megawatts of 
amorphous silicon thin film modules are being produced, in India only 
one company has started production. In addition, another company in 
Bangalore has recently started production trials. This company is 
commercializing amorphous silicon thin film module technology 
developed by Indian Association for Cultivation of Science, Kolkata. 
Globally about 6-9% efficiency is reported in commercial production. 
Polycrystalline Thin Film Solar Cell Modules: Cadmium Telluride 
(CdTe) and Copper Indium Gallium Diselenide (CIGD) based solar cells 
have made considerable progress, specially in the last five years. 
Efficiencies of 16% to 19.4% have been reported with these materials. 
Commercial production has also started with both materials. In last two 
years a few production plants have been set up to manufacture CdTe 
based thin film modules. The focus of research in CdTe and CIS 
materials are to reduce losses at the interface, improve the process 
yields. In the CIS material doping of gallium, improvements in device 
voltage are some of the other key issues. There are several deposition 
processes, low cost and high through put processes needs to be 
optimized. The best efficiency for CdTe material is reported to be about 
16.7% in USA. One US Company has set up production capacity to 
make about 1,000 MW per year. At present there is no other company 
which has set up significant production capacity using this material. 
In India very little work is being done on this material at present. 
However, in past about 12% efficiency solar cells were developed in 
research laboratory. Currently no significant research is in progress in 
22 


the country on this material. For the CIGS material the best research 
level efficiency of 19.4% is reported in USA. In India the best efficiency 
was about 12%, developed at IISc, Bangalore. In the last few years 
commercial production has started in Germany, Japan and USA. At 
present one research grQUP is working to make CIGS sub-modules with 
12% efficiency. An industrial group has also proposed to develop 15% 
efficiency cells and make large area CIGS modules. In CdTe another 
group has proposed to make 12% efficiency sub-modules. These 
efforts are likely to result in establishment of pilot production facilities 
in next 3-5 years. 
Concentrator Solar Cells: It is also possible use solar cells by 
\ 
concentrating large amount oflight on a cell and conversion efficiencies 
of 40.7% to 42.8% have been reported by companies in USA. However, 
the high concentrator device structures are still at pilot scale. In recent 
years no significant research is being pursued in India. At present one 
company is engaged in assembly of concentrator modules. 
Other Solar Cell Structures: The recent trend in research is on 
development of thin film solar cell modules using dye sensitized 
materials and organic materials. These materials have potential to reduce 
the cost of solar cell modules; however, several technological issues 
concerning stability, reproducibility etc. needs to be resolved. For dye 
sensitized cells the best efficiency of 10.4% is reported by a company 
in Japan. In case of organic cells the best efficiency reported is 5.15% . 
. Globally these materials are in early stages of development. A few pilot 
facilities have been set up. In India about 7% efficiency has been 
reported on dye sensitized cells and about 3% with. organic cells. 
Recently a project has been started at Amrita Nanoscience Centre to 
develop 12% efficiency dye sensitized solar cells in the next three years. 
At present in crystalline silicon solar cells, which are now in large scale 
production, at the commercial level the Indian efforts are nearly at par 
with the international efforts. Indian companies are able to regularly 
export as the efficiency and overall performance of the Indian modules 
23 


is good. However, in various thin film solar cell module process 
technique. Indian research efforts need to catch up with the 
international efforts in the next 5-7 years. Large scale commercial 
production based -ol't>thin film modules is yet to commence. The results 
of the current research initiatives will be seen in next 3-5 years. 
Solar Thermal Energy: International R&D Efforts: International 
Energy Agency has termed the current decade as a critical window of 
opportunity for Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) technologies to grow 
and become a competitive source of grid electrical power in various 
parts of the world. In the recent times, a number of countries including 
China, South Africa, Israel, Algeria, Morocco and Egypt, besides India 
and Spain and USA have taken initiatives to develop solar thermal 
power." 
24 


D. ROLE OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT IN FUNDING/ 
~PLEMENTATIONOFRENEWABLEENERGY 
PROJECTS 
1.34 The Ministry has been facilitating funding of renewable energy 
projects taken up by State Governments as well as private entrepreneurs 
through partial Central Financial Assistance (capital subsidy) ranging from 
about 10% to as high as 90% of project costs depending on the renewable 
resource, project capacity and location, with the higher level of subsidy being 
provided for projects in NE region and Special category States. The 
methodology of availing the subsidy is either upfront release in installments 
linked with projects progress or reimbursement in full after projects 
commissioning. 
1.35 The Government is also providing several fiscal incentives which 
include accelerated depreciation and nil/ concessional excise and customs 
duties. Generation Based Incentives are being provided for Wind Power to 
attract private investment by Independent Power Producers not availing 
Accelerated Depreciation benefit. Preferential tariffs for purchase of 
renewable power are also being provided at the States level in line with the 
provisions of the National Electricity Policy 2005 and Tariff Policy 2006. 
Details of existing levels of CFA being provided under different programmes 
are given in Annexure-IV. 
1.36 When the Committee desired to know about the criteria for fixing 
varying Central Finance Assistance (capital subsidy), the Ministry in their 
written reply have stated as under:- 
"Various renewable Energy sources are not spread uniformly across the 
country; their availability and intensity is highly region and location 
specific. Furthermore, the cost of technology for harnessing these 
resources also varies widely depending on the nature and quality of the 
resources. Under these circumstances, it becomes imperative to provide 
a varying level of subsidy of different types of resources/technologies 
25 


to make the projects financially viable to investors. A higher level of 
subsidy (upto 90% of benchmark costs) is generally being provided 
for Special Category States viz. Northern-Eastern Region States, 
Sikkim, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, and also in 
specific cases, for the international border districts and UT Islands, 
keeping in view special needs of the region and overall policy of the 
Government. 
Under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission for various off-grid 
applications of solar energy, provisions of capital subsidy and/or annual 
interest bearing loans have been made based on the estimated costs of 
various devices/systems and the useful energy delivered by them for 
various applications. 
In some cases, particularly small hydro, the viability is also governed 
by projects capacity, the higher capacity projects being more viable due 
to economies of scale. As such, a higher level of subsidy smaller 
capacity projects is being given in such cases in comparison to higher 
capacity projects. Also, the projects in remote, hilly, inaccessible regions 
cost more and are being given higher level of subsidy in comparison 
of those in plains." 
1.37 When the Committee asked whether the above measures of the 
Ministry have been proved effective to promote the setting up of Renewable 
Projects and whether any need was felt to review the present mechanism, 
the Ministry stated:- 
"The various financial and fiscal incentives have been instrumental in 
widespread deployment and use of renewable energy systems/ projects. 
There is always scope for improvement in implementation mechanism 
which is as per provisions of individual programmes. The same are 
reviewed annually and suitable modifications based on feedback are 
carried out." 
1.38 The MNRE in a note furnished the following information 
regarding the allocation for 11 th Plan period and fund utilization by the 
Ministry during the first three years of 11 th Plan:- 
"A total outlay of Rs. 4,000 crore has been sanctioned for the 11 th Plan 
26 


period of which about Rs. 1,470 crore has been utilized during the first 
3 years of the Plan Year-wise details are as under:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year B.E. R.E. Actual 
2007-08 628 483 478.72 
2008-09 620 499.40 441.79 
2009-10 620 560 548.83 
Total 1868 1542.40 1469.34 
The approved budget outlay for 20 I 0-11 is Rs. 1,000 crore and the 
balance of approx. Rs. 1,500 crore shall be required during 2011-12 
to achieve the goals set up during the 11 th Plan Period as approved 
at Mid-term Appraisal stage." 
1.39 On being asked by the Committee that whether the allotted fund 
will be sufficient to meet the targets as envisaged under 11 th Plan, the 
Ministry replied:- 
"No shortfall of funds is accordingly envisaged. However, any 
additional funds that may be required due to the up-scaling of activities 
under the National Solar Mission approved recently shall depend on the 
progress of the Mission, the modalities for implementation of which 
are currently under finalization. The same would be sought from 
the Planning Commission as part of the Annual Plan proposals for 
20 I 1-12, the last year of the Plan." 
1.40 The Committee pointed out that during the first three years of 
the 11 th Plan, RE for all the three years was lower than BE. Even this RE 
could not be fully utilized in each of the three years. When the Committee 
desired to know the reasons for the shortfall in utilization of funds, the 
Ministry explained as under:- 
"During 2007-08 and 2008-09, the budget was reduced at ~E level as 
the expenditure in the first two quarters could not meet the MoF norms 
27 


of2/3rd of BE level expenditure. During 2009-10, however, the budget 
was reduced by MoF sou-motto even while the norms had been met. 
Further, during 2007-08 and 2009-10, the actual expenditure was 98% 
of RE level. However, during 2008-09 the expenditure was 88% of 
RE level, the shortfall was mainly due to declaration of General Elections 
due to which implementation and expenditure were generally impacted." 
1.41 On being asked by the Committee for details regarding release of 
Central Financial Assistance on reimbursement basis after the completion of 
the projects, project-wise and State-wise, during first 3 years of the 
11 th Plan period, the Ministry have furnished the data which is given in 
Annexure-V. These exclude programmes under which the CFA is released 
to implementing agencies in two or more installments, usually the first one 
in advance on sanction of the project/placement of order and subsequent 
releases linked to projects progress/on submission of completion reports. 
They have also provided details of physical targets vis-a-vis achievements 
during the first three years of the J 1 th plan under the programmes where 
CFA is released on reimbursement basis which is given hereunder: 
Programme Physical Target/Achievement (MW) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Biomass power 250' 266 300/345 400/447 
Biomass Gasifier for 1011 1.6 10113.2 10/11 
industries 
Small Hydro Power 
(MW) 
200/204.75 250/248.93 300/305.27 
Urban & Industrial 15115.72 15/10.02 20/20.60 
Solar Water Heating 
systems (Mln.Sq.m) 
600/4.00 6.00/5.50 6.00/6.20 
28 


E. ROLE OF STATES IN FUNDING/IMPLEMENTATION 
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS 
1.42 The programmes of promoting and financing of Renewable 
Energy Projects are mostly implemented through State Nodal Departments/ 
State Nodal Agencies and in some cases through prominent NGOs also. 
Some of the States also provide additional subsidy to beneficiaries for the 
installation of renewable energy systems. The States are also responsible for 
putting in place suitable/conducive policy and regulatory framework at their 
level for promotion of renewable energy projects and for also for State level 
statutory clearances for large capacity projects. 
1.43 On being asked by the Committee about the mechanism to ensure 
proper coordination between the State and the Centre and about its 
effectiveness in timely completion of projects, the MNRE stated as under:-- 
"Review meetings at high levels are held periodically between the 
Ministry and the State Nodal Departments/Agencies to review the 
progress of implementation of projects for which central financial 
assistance has been sanctioned and address any bottlenecks for their 
expeditious completion." 
1.44 When the Committee wanted to know the exact bottlenecks in 
New and Renewable Energy Project implementation and the efforts made by 
the MNRE to overcome them, the Ministry stated:- 
''The major problems in wind and hydro power sector are delays in 
land allotment, forest clearance, timely availability of evacuation and 
transmission facilities, regulatory issues at State level, uncertainness 
about the state policies on tariff, wheeling, banking, techno-economic 
approval from State (for hydro). 
A series of meetings have been held at the level of Secretary, MNRE 
and State Government officials of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh and Karnataka, to address these 
29 


issues and discuss policy measures needed for speedy exploitation of 
available SHP potential. The Minister, NRE has also visited these States 
and held discussion with respective Chief Ministers." 
1.45 On being further asked by the Committee if the Ministry provide 
expertise to States for implementation of various schemes which are 
dependent on the State Governments and about their marketing plans to bring 
private entrepreneurs to invest in the projects since it had been stated that 
the private entrepreneur are not interested in taking up renewable energy 
projects, the Ministry replied as under: 
"The wind and hydro power projects are implemented in India in 
commercial mode with private sector investments. 
The capacity addition primarily depends upon favorable investment 
environment for private sector in the country as well as positive 
regulatory support. Government provides fiscal incentives such as the 
accelerated depreciation, ten years tax holiday on income from sale of 
generated power, concessional custom and excise duties on specified 
components. This apart, preferential tariff is being provided in potential 
States. Recently, a generation based incentives (GBI) scheme has been 
introduced for wind power. For small hydro projects there is some 
Capital subsidy from the Ministry. A number of independent Consultants 
apart from the Alternate Hydro Energy Centre at JIT Roorkee are 
providing consultancy services for implementation of the projects." 
1.46 The most common reason cited by the Ministry for delay in regard 
to the Renewable Energy Project has been the non-cooperation or 
inactiveness of the State Governments. It has been further informed that there 
is limited role of the Central Government in timely completion of the projects. 
In this connection, the Committee desired to know the plans of the MNRE 
for ensuring the timely completion of the projects in future. In reply the 
Ministry stated:- 
"The·projects for power generation from renewable energy sources are 
being setup mainly in private sector with mostly private investments. 
The Central Government is facilitating such projects through suitable 
framework of fiscal and financial incentives, providing necessary 
30 


technical guidance, etc. For timely execution of the projects the 
entrepreneurs are dependent upon State Government on several matters. 
These include the State Government policies for land allotment, 
statutory clearances, power sale/purchase, evacuation /T &D facilities, 
etc. in which the Central Government has a little role to play. 
Nonetheless, the Ministry holds periodic review meetings with 
concerned State agencies/departments to review the progress of various 
projects and to address bottlenecks, if any, requiring Ministry's 
intervention. Unlike conventional power projects, the projects are not 
being taken up in Central Sector, so the question of their implementation 
without association of the State Governments would not arise." 
1.4 7 During the course of evidence of the representatives of MNRE, 
the Committee pointed out that the cumulative achievement in New and 
Renewable Energy sector were not satisfactory. Asked about the reasons for 
the same so that the remedial measures could be taken, the Secretary, MNRE 
deposed before the Committee as follows: 
"I wanted to make two small points. Our achievements are not dismal. 
1 think our Ministry has done well, our achievements are good, they 
are recognized, we are fifth in the world, everybody recognizes our 
achievements and our achievements are not dismal. Secondly, we are 
making a lot of effort. Work has to be done in the States. 1 cannot 
do it for them. If I have a meeting with them, I can only point to them 
that these are the difficulties and these are the steps that they can take. 
But if they do not take those steps, then the Ministry cannot be blamed 
for it ..... Yesterday, 1 was in Leh for two days. Today 1 am going to 
Himachal. Next week I am going to Uttar Pradesh." 
31 


F. ROLL OF IREDA IN FUNDING OF RENEWABLE 
ENERGY PROJECTS 
1.48 Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) 
was established on II th March, 1987 as a Public Limited Government 
Company under the Companies Act, 1956 and it promotes, develops and 
extends financial assistance for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency/ 
Conservation Projects. IREDA has been notified as a "Public Financial 
Institution" under section 4 'A' of the Companies Act, 1956 and registered 
as Non-Banking Financial Company (NFBC) with Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI). The main objective of IREDA is to give financial support to 
specific projects and schemes for generating electricity and/or energy 
through new and renewable sources and conserving energy through energy 
efficiency. 
1.49 The Committee enquired about the agencies which have been 
entrusted with the funding of new and renewable projects. The MNRE have 
furnished the following information:-- 
"The Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA), the only 
PSU and the financing arm of the Ministry, is entrusted with the 
financing of Renewable Energy projects for which it arranges resources 
from the market through borrowings from the market & bilateral/ 
multilateral agencies, internal accruals and Equity provided by the 
Ministry. For 20 I 0-11, a provision of Rs. 50 crore towards equity 
contribution to IREDA has been kept in the Budget of the Ministry. This 
apart some other financial institutions like Power Finance Corporation, 
REC, NABARD, HUDCO and Commercial Banks have also been 
financing some categories of renewable energy projects. 
The State Nodal Agencies which hold the responsibility for promotion 
of renewable energy programmes in their respective States, also 
implement some of the programmes, particularly those related to 
deployment of decentralized systems. These Agencies receive CFA from 
MNRE and funds from respective State Budgets. Some of funds are 
32 


also generated by them from project development and consultancy 
services." 
1.50 IREDA is extending financial assistance for setting up Renewable 
Energy (RE) and Energy Efficiency (EE) projects. Loan sanctioned and 
disbursed during last five years by IREDA and its plan for the remaining years 
is given in following table--, 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Loan Sanctions Disbursement 
2004-05 599.73 289'.98 
2005-06 505.83 302.51 
2006-07 588.51 410.87 
2007-08 826.15 553.64 
2008-09 1489.93 770.95 
2009-10 1823.89 890.03 
1.51 IREDA is a profit making and dividend paying company since 
beginning. Profit after tax and dividend paid during last five years are given 
below:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Profit After 
Tax 
Dividend paid including 
Dividend tax 
2004-05 30.41 6.96 
2005-06 30.65 .7.13 
2006-07 34.60 8.19 
2007-08 47.96 10.2Q. 
2008-09 56.21 13.16 
2009-10 (Provisional) 72.21 16.91 
33 


1.52 The year-wise details of corpus of lREDA during the 11 th Five 
YearPlan:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
Financial 
year 
Addition during 
the year 
Corpus fund at the 
closing of the year end 
Corpus fund at the end of IOth Five year plan 711 
2007-08 86 797 
2008-09 73 870 
2009-10 80 950 
2010-11 338 1288 
(provisional) 
2011-12 197 1485 
(provisional) 
1.53 When the Committee enquired about the steps taken by 
the GovernmentJIREDA to increase the corpus of IREDA, the MNRE 
stated:- 
"The authorized share capital of lREDA as on date is Rs. 1000 crores 
against which the paid up capital as on 31 st December, .2010 was 
Rs. 589.60 crores. The corpus fund (networth) of lREDA is estimated 
to increase to over Rs. 2500 crores by the end of 12th Five Year Plan. 
This will be by way of equity contribution of Rs. 50 crores per 
year from Government of India and by 20% increase in retained 
profit." 
1.54 When the Committee asked whether the lREDA has been effective 
in meeting the required funds for renewable power projects or there is 
any need for engaging other financial institutions/nationalized banks for 
getting required funds for the renewable power projects, the MNRE stated 
as under:- 
"IREDA is known globally and many multilateral and bilateral agencies 
look forward to IREDA for implementation of their policies on 
34 


renewable energy programmes in' India. The role of IREDA in 
developing market in India is well appreciated by World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), KfW. IREDA has been playing a vital role 
in development of the market for Renewable Energy & Energy 
Efficiency/Conservation projects financing, which is evident from the 
fact that more foreign banks and financial institutions have also started 
financing renewable energy and energy efficiency projects in India. 
There is no shortfall in availability of resources to meet the disbursement 
for renewable energy projects. Now, the renewable energy projects 
are also financed by number of financial institution such as PFC, REC, 
NABARD, HUDCO and Commercial Banks depending on specific 
category and capacity of projects." 
1.55 When the Committee desired to know abP.ut"tlle reasons for the -~-~--.-; 
gap between the loan sanctioned and the loan disbursed during all the 
preceding five years i.e. 2004-05 to 2009-10, the MNRE explained as 
under:- 
"IREDA is financing mainly for wind; hydro, cogeneration and biomass 
power projects. Wind power projects get commissioned within a year 
and the loan may get disbursed fully in the same year as that of sanction. 
The hydro, cogeneration and biomass power projects have longer 
gestation period, taking 2 to 3 years for commissioning. Accordingly, 
the loan disbursement will get spread over. a longer period: the 
disbursement in the year of sanction may be around 1 0% to 15% and 
it may take over 3 years for 1 00% disbursement. 
The loan sanctioned for such projects will get disbursed over 3-4 years 
after completion of the formalities and based on the physical progress . ...__..-, 
of the projects, as under:- 
• lst year: 10-15% . of project cost; 
• 2nd year: 60- 70% of project cost; 
• 3rd year: upto 90% of project cost; 
balance 10% of project cost out of which 5% is 
after Commissioning of the project. 
• 4th year: 
35 


Further, the main reasons for the gap between sanction and 
disbursement are:- 
• Loans sanctioned but not availed by Project Developers due to 
variety of reasons such as Developers inability to bring in financial 
contribution, non-availability of mandatory clearances, problems 
in land acquisition, delay in finalization of Power Purchase/ 
Wheeling Agreement, inability to achieve financial closure etc. 
• Further in respect of projects under implementation, the gap in 
sanction and disbursement arises due to long gestation period and 
disbursement linked to physical and financial progress of the 
project. 
• Drop out of the projects .due to variety of reasons. 
Such gaps between sanction and disbursement are a general trend in 
other term lending institutions where gestation period of projects is 
more than one year. 
1.56 On being asked whether IREDA has so far been able to meet the 
financial requirement of the Renewable Energy sector for which it has the 
mandate to finance and if not what alternatives are under consideration of 
the Government to make available the required finances. The Ministry in their 
reply stated as under:- 
"It is not intended that IREDA alone should meet the entire growing 
financial requirements of the sector which it has been mandated to 
finance. However, IREDA has so far largely met these requirements. 
With State Electricity Regularity Commissions (SERCs) announcing 
preferential tariffs for RE projects making the projects commercially 
viable, Commercial Banks and other Financial Institutions have also 
started lending for RE projects. 
Simultaneously, it is being considered under the Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Solar Mission to make IREDA a Refinancing Organization for 
the off-grid solar segment solar sector so that lending to this segment 
by Commercial Banks/Financial Institutions can be refinanced by 
IREDA, for which funds may be provided by the Government." 
36 


1.57 In regard the recovery position of the loan disbursed by IREDA 
so far it was informed that the curriulative loans disbursed upto 31st March, 
2010 amounted to Rs. 6,644 crore. ~ga~t this the total loan repayment due 
is Rs. 3,874 crore and the total loan repayment received is Rs. 3,664 crores. 
The percentage of recovery of loan is 95%. 
1.58 In regard the main beneficiaries of the loan disbursed by IREDA 
it was stated that IREDA has been extending loan to the private sector for 
setting up REIEE projects. The borrower 'portfolio includes private limited 
companies, public limited companies, Trusts, Partnership Firms, Individuals 
etc. 
1.59 On being enquired by the Committee about the projects which 
have been set up with the financial assistance of IREDA during the first three 
years of the 11 th .Plan and the plan which are proposed during the remaining 
years of the 11 th Plan, the Ministry stated as under:- 
"Financing by IREDA during the first three years of the 11th Five Year 
Plan is as follows:- 
. ( 
Particulars 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
No. of Projects Sanctioned 29 47 29 
Loan sanctioned (Rs.lCr.) 826.15 1489.93 1823.91 
Loan Disbursed 553.64 770.95 890.03 
In all three years the achievements of loan sanction and disbursement 
have surpassed the MoU targets, as would be seen from the followirig . 
table:- 
FY 2007-08 FY 2008-09 FY 2009-10 
MoU ·1chieve- MoU Achieve- MoU Achieve- 
Target :\ ment Target ment Target ment 
Loan Sanction 714 826 900 1490 1200 1824 
(Rs. in cr.) 
Disbursement 550 554 650 771 710 890 
(Rs. in cr. ) 
37 


IREDA proposes to sanction loan ofRs. 4540 crores and disbursement 
of Rs. 2100 crores during the remaining period of 11 th Plan as per the 
following details:- 
FY 2010-11 FY 2011-12 
Loan Sanction (Rs.lCr.) 
Disbursement (Rs.lCr.) 
1900 
900 
2640 
1200 
1.60 When the Committee asked about the details of the modus 
operandi of IRED A in regard providing loans (viz. eligibility criteria, scrutiny 
of project, time taken etc.) for setting up Renewable Energy Projects and 
ho~ the present systems of granting loan -can be made more attractive and 
entrepreneur friendly, the MNRE stated as under:- 
"The procedures followed by IREDA for loan sanction and disburse­ 
ment are as under: 
Eligibility Conditions for availing loan from IREDA: 
All types of applicants, who have borrowing powers and their Charter 
allows them to take up renewable energy and energy efficiency projects, 
are eligible to avail loan from IREDA. 
Procedure for sanction of loan: 
The prospective borrower is required to submit an application for the 
loan in the prescribed format which is available at IREDA and also can 
be downloaded from its website. In case the application meets the 
essential conditions for registration the application is registered and 
subsequently the project is rated for its credit worthiness and taken up 
for detailed evaluation and appraisal. If found viable from technical, 
fmancial and legal perspective, the loan is sanctioned by the Competent 
Authority and a formal sanction letter is issued. Normally, loans are 
sanctioned within a period of 90 days from the date of registration of 
the project. 
Procedure for disbursement of loan: 
After issue of the loan sanction letter, the 'borrower has to complete 
loan . documentation formalities including payment of front-end fee and 
38_ 


signing of loan agreement. After signing the loan agreement, borrower 
has to complete legal documentation pertaining to creation of securities 
for which six month period is normally allowed. IREDA disburses loan 
in one or more instalments based on the physical and financial progress. 
The present terms and conditions 'of financing including interest rate, 
loan period etc. are attractive compared to those of commercial banks 
and other financial institutions providing assistance to RE sector. 
IREDA's operations are certified under ISIISO 90ql:2008 taking into 
account its policies and systems for continual improvement of systems, 
processes and services." 
1.61 When the Committee desired to know about anticipated increased 
demand of funds in light of Solar Mission and steps taken for mobilization 
of finances and their sources to increase the corpus for meeting the demand, 
the Ministry stated:- 
"IREDA has anticipated the demand of funds in the light of the 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (mNSM) and have taken 
proactive action for mobilization of resources. The resources required 
for refinancing for banks under the JNNSM would be provided by the 
MNRE under their budgetary support. The requirement of resources 
for meeting debt requirement of grid connected solar power projects 
shall be met through borrowings from domestic and international 
sources. Talks are underway with various agencies such as AFD, 
France, KfW, Germany." 
1.62 On being sought suggestion by the Committee for further 
strengthening of financial position of IREDA, the following suggestions were 
given by the lREDA:- 
a. To improve IREDA's net worth and borrowing power, infusion, 
of funds through: 
• Increased equity contribution through budgetary support 
from Government of India; 
• Allocation of funds from the National Clean Energy 
Fund; 
39 


b. Government guarantees to raise resources from domestic and 
international sources; 
c. Approval to raise resource through tax free bonds; 
d. Reduction of Government guarantee fee to 0.25%; 
e. To declare RE sector as priority sector for banks financing. 
1.63 When the Committee asked the MNRE about the steps being taken 
by them to fulfil the demands of IREDA, it was informed that:- 
"The proposals for allowing IREDA to raise' resources through 
issue of Tax Free Bonds and those relating to government guarantees 
and declaring RE Sector as priority sector for bank financing were 
taken up with Ministry .of Finance but not agreed to. The proposal 
for priority sector lending is being taken up again specifically 
considering the solar power projects to be : taken up under the 
solar mission. As regards increase of equity contribution by GOI, the 
Ministry is already contributing every year to IREDA's equity and 
during the lith Plan; an amount of Rs'. 149.6 crore has already 
been released so far. The proposal relating to Solar Risk Guarantee 
Fund is under preparation for seeking approval of the competent 
I 
authority. " 
1.64 When the Committee desired to know about the salient features 
of Solar Risk Guarantee Fund, the Ministry stated as under:4- 
"It is proposed to establish a Payment Security Mechanism for Grid 
Connected Solar Power Projects implemented through NVVN, under 
Phase 1 of JNNSM. The Payment Security Mechanism will ensure need 
based budgetary support from MNRE to NVVN in the event of default 
by the State UtilitieslDiscoms. This will also act as a risk mitigation 
strategy and ensure financial closure of projects by the banks. The 
Scheme is proposed to be implemented by MNI,m with the provision 
ofNVVN opening the Solar Payment Security Account (SPSA) for this 
purpose. The NVVN will ensure that all efforts have been made by 
various stake holders to realize the amounts, before accessing this 
account. The proposal is yet to be approved." 
40 


G. ROLE OF NATIONALIZED BANKS/AIDS FROM 
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN FUNDING OF 
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS 
1.65 The Committee enquired from the Ministry that whether 
nationalized bankslInstitutions have also been providing financial loans! 
assistance to new and renewable energy projects. The MNRE in reply have 
stated as under:- 
"Renewable energy projects are being __ financed by number of financial 
institution such as IREDA, PFC, REC, NABARD, HUDCO and 
commercial banks depending on specific category and capacity of 
projects. The sector-wise provision is as under: 
Small Hydro - Normally, FIs ! banks fund upto 70% of the project 
cost. Getting finance for a viable project is not a problem. 
Waste-to-Energy - Financial institutions and banks are lending for 
setting up the Waste-to-Energy Projects and no problems have so far 
been experienced. 
Bio-gas - Provision of loan to individual beneficiaries for installation 
of family type bio-gas plants is being supported by NABARD. However, 
the number of proposals supported by NABARD are very limited. 
Wind Power - The wind power projects are capital intensive. IREDA 
and other financial institutions like Power Finance Corporation and 
nationalised banks are providing loans to wind power projects. This has 
not been a constraint. 
Solar PV - 16 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) in Bihar (1), Haryana (2), 
Jharkhand (1), Karnataka (1), Maharashtra (1) Rajasthan (1) and UP 
(9) are extending loans on commercial rates for installation of solar 
lighting systems. The RRBs have tied up with manufacturers!suppliers 
for supply of solar lighting systems. The concerned manufacturers! 
suppliers also provide after sales services to the consumers. By 
41 


31 st March' 2010 these banks have extended loans for installation of 
51,284 number of Spy lighting systems. In the month of March' 2010 
two of the above RRBs in UP have merged so now the number ofRRBs 
has become 15. 
MNRE has been providing incentives to these RRBs to carry out 
publicity, awareness and capacity building programme for extending 
loans to consumers for purchase of solar lights. As per information 
received from the RRBs so far, 978 publicity awareness programmes 
and 257 capacity building programmes have been organized. 
Solar Water Heating- Soft loans to users are being provided under 
an interest subsidy scheme through a: network of financial institutions, 
public/private sector banks, scheduled co-operative banks, RBI 
approved non-banking financing companies, IREDA and its intermedi­ 
aries. Interest subsidy is provided to enable loans to be extended at 
effective interest rates of 2% to domestic users, 3% to institutional 
users and 5% to industrial/commercial users. Interest free loans are 
available to domestic users in the North-Eastern States, Sikkim, 
, Himachal Pradesh, A&N Islands, J&K, Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh and 
Jharkhand. Overall fund management has been entrusted to IREDA. 34 
banks and financial institutions are participating in the scheme through 
their branch network in different parts of the country. An incentive is 
also available for motivators who bring customers to bankslFIs. 
(Capital subsidy equivalent to upfront interest subsidy is also available 
to specified category of users/ developers who do not avail soft loans)." 
1.66 With regard to refinancing, the MNRE stated that they have 
identified IREDA as the implementing agency to refinance the interested banks 
including Regional Rural Banks to offer loans to consumers at 5% annual 
interest rate. Arrangement has been made with NABARD to refinance the 
Regional Rural Banks. The concerned banks are required to sign an agreement 
with IREDA to avail funds. 
1.67 The Ministry also informed that the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and the respective State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
have fixed tariff for solar power taking into account the commercial tariff. 
Therefore, low interest bearing funds are not envisaged in the first phase. 
42 


Ministry has been discussing with many banks and other financial institutions 
to provide funding for solar power projects to eligible project developers. 
1.68 The grid connected solar power projects are to be set up by the 
project developers on build, own and operate basis, where the project 
developers are expected to arrange funds from any of the banks, based on 
their financial strength. The Ministry has not specified any particular bank 
for this purpose. The off-grid scheme for solar applications is envisaged to 
be implemented through the State Government agencies and various other 
channel partners operating in the market mode to access capital subsidy and! 
or a loan at 5% annual interest rate for the end consumer. These lending 
institutions would enter into an agreement for refinance with IREDA. The 
Interest Subsidy under the Scheme is made available to Non-Banking 
Financial Companies and the Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding 
Regional Rural Banks) by way of refinance from IREDA. Refinance on 
the same terms to Regional Rural Banks through NABARD is also made 
available. 
1.69 In regard the aids/funds received from other countries/interna­ 
tional bodies like IMF /World Bank! Asian Development Bank etc. the Ministry 
have furnished the following information: 
"IREDA has so far received funds from other countrieslbilateral/ 
multilateral agencies like Government of Netherland, World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank, KfW, Nordic Investment Bank for on lending to 
various Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency projects in India. The 
total funds tied up, received, utilized, balance to be utilized equivalent 
to Rupees in crore are as under.- 
(Rupees in crores) 
SI.No. Particulars Amount 
1. Total funds tied up 2709.40 
2. Total funds received and utilized upto 
31.3.2010 
2253.90 
3. Balance available for utilization 455.50 
43 


t The source-wise details are as under:- 
(A) Loans Already Received 
SI. Name of Lender Loan/Grant Sanctioned Received and Utilisation status! Last date to 
No. Amount* utilized balance to utilize the 
be utilized funds 
2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. Govt. of Netherland# Grant Dutch Guilder Dutch Guilder Fully utilized 
18 Million 18 Million 
(Rs. 75.00 cr.) (Rs. 75.00 cr.) 
2. World Bank - Ist LoC Loan US $ 115 Million US $ 115 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 467.26 cr.) (Rs. 467.26 cr.) 
Grant US $ 30 Million US $ 30 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 132.24 cr.) (Rs. 132.24 cr.) 
3. Danida Loan US $ 15 Million US $ 15 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 66.12 cr.) (Rs. 66.12 cr.) 
4. ADB Loan US $ 100 Million US $ 100 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 440.80 cr.) (Rs. 440.80 cr.) 


5. KtW - 1st Loan Euro 61.35 Million Euro 61.35 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 343.56 cr.) (Rs. 343.56 cr.) 
6. Word Bank - lInd LoC Loan US $ 104 Million US $ 104 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 458.43 cr.) (Rs. 458.43 cr.) 
Grant US $ 5 Million US $ 5 Million Fully utilized 
(Rs. 21.49 cr.) (Rs. 21.49 cr.) 
7. Ktw - lInd Loan •• Loan Euro 50 Million Euro 20 Million Euro 30 Million December 11, 
(Rs. 335.00 cr.) (Rs. 134.00 cr.) (Rs. 201.00 cr.) 2014 (loan) 
Grant Euro 1 million . Euro I million December 11, 
(Rs.5.70 cr) (Rs.5.70 cr) 2011 (grant) 
8. Nordic Investment Bank - Loan US $ 50 Million US $ 25 Million US$ 25 Million December 3 I, 
NIB •• (Rs. 230.00 cr.) (Rs. 115.00 cr.) (Rs. 115.00 ·cr.) 2010 
9. Ktw - Germany IIIrd Loan Euro 19.97 Million - Euro 19.97 Million December 30, 
LoC·* (Rs. 133.80 cr.) (Rs. 133.80 cr.) 2014 
Total .... A Rs.2709.40 crores Rs.2253.90 crores Rs.455.50 crores 
- 
*1 US $ = Rs. 44.08 
1 Euro = Rs. 56.00 
** I US $ = Rs. 46.00 
1 Euro = Rs. 67.00 
""" # 1 Dutch Guilder = Rs. 41. 6 7 01 


(8) In Pipelines: 
Sl. Name of Loan! Proposed Targeted Remarks 
No. Lender Grant Loan Sectors 
Amount 
I. AFD Loan Euro 70 Million Renewable Formal clearance 
(France) (Rs.400.96 crores)* Energy from DEA for loan 
execution is awaited. 
2. J1CA Loan US $ 100 Million Energy Under appraisal 
(Japan) (Rs.451.36 crores)** Efficiency & 
Renewable 
Energy 
Total Rs.852.36 crores 
*1 Euro = Rs.57.28 
**1 US$ = Rs.45.14 
46 


CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONSIRECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Potential of Renewable Energy vis-a-vis achievement 
2.1 The Committee note that the country has estimated 
potential of 90312 MW of New and Renewable Energy excluding the 
solar power which has estimated capacity of 20-30 MW per sq.km, for 
most part of the Country. Against this, the Country's present installed 
capacity from various Renewable Energy sources is only 16817 MW. 
We are using very small part of currently available renewable energy 
whereas it should have been harnessed more. Had we been able to use 
even a small percentage of total available solar energy potential that 
would have been more than enough to offset the gap between the 
demand and supply of power. Renewable Energy sources are not only 
highly beneficial from energy point of view but also from ecological 
point of view also as it is totally different from the energy that is coming 
from conventional sources i.e. coal/gas or any other fossil fuel of which 
sources are limited. The Renewable Energy sources are everlastingr'self 
sustaining without involving any human efforts in their evolution, 
development and sustenance. Therefore, the more emphasis we lay on 
utilizing the available New and Renewable Energy sources the better 
it will be for environment as well as for the development of the 
Country. Though, the MNRE have lately come up with some specific 
plans and have started doing well in. comparison to the cumulative 
achievement made upto the end of 10th Five Year Plan, there is still 
a long way to go. As the Country has herculean task in hand and the 
MNRE has their own limitations in terms of funds and infrastructure 
particularly in far off! hilly areas, there is a need for a comprehensive 
policy encompassing all aspects including accurate assessment of 
potential, effective and efficient infrastructure, friendly regulatory 
system and an investment friendly environment to give a much needed 
thrust to this sector. Considering the importance of the Renewable 
47 


Energy, the Committee strongly recommend that all out efforts should 
be made by the Government to evolve a comprehensive policy 
framework to facilitate the rapid growth of New and Renewable Energy 
projects so as to optimal utilization of available Renewable sources in 
minimum possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the detailed action plan of the MNRE in this regard. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 1) 
(ii) Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission 
2.2 The Committee are happy to note that the Government has 
approved the Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission (JNNSM) which aims at 
setting up of 20,000 MW of grid solar power, 2,000 MW off-grid solar 
power including 20 million solar lights and 20 million square meter 
solar thermal collector area by the year 2022. The Mission also aims 
at the development and deployment of solar energy technologies in the 
Country to achieve parity with grid power tariff by 2022. The entire 
Mission will be implemented in three phases. On successful achieve­ 
ment of the targets set under this Mission, it is expected that the 
Country will be established as a global leader in Solar Energy. But the 
enormity of the target set under the Mission can be understood better 
when we juxtapose the targets set and the present installed capacity 
of solar energy of the Country which is meager 10 MW(peak) along 
with the preparatory framework put in place for the first phase of the 
Mission which is already in operation and will be completed by March 
2013. It is not that the target set is impossible to achieve but keeping 
in view the previous performance, the pace of work so far, the 
Committee would like the Ministry to play an aggressive approach for 
achieving targets set for first phase fully. 
The Committee have been informed that the implementation of 
the second and third phase of the Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission would 
depend on the success of the implementation of the first phase. 
Further, the Ministry have stated that in case of grid connected solar 
power projects, the major component of 1,000 MW in the first phase 
of National Solar Mission is to be implemented through NTPC Vidyut 
Vyapar Nigam (NVVN). No funding for this has been proposed by the 
48 


Ministry. The Ministry has stated that developers for setting up 
620 MW of grid connected solar power projects have been identified. 
30 project developers have been selected to set up 150 MW capacity 
of grid connected photovoltaic power plants and 7 promoters have been 
selected to set up 470 MW of solar thermal power plants. In addition 
to that 16 project developers have been selected to setup 84 MW 
capacity grid solar power plants under migration scheme from their 
respective existing arrangements to Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission. 
The Committee have been further informed that these projects are 
expected to complete their financial closure by July, 2011. For PV 
related projects 12 months are provided for commissioning of the 
Plants, whereas in case of the solar thermal power projects, the time 
given is 28 months. This means that if all projects complete their 
financial closure by July, 2011 as planned, even then some of the 
projects may miss the deadline of year 2013 as envisaged for setting 
up of 1000 MW of solar power under phase-I of the Solar Mission. 
Moreover, at present this set up at best will achieve only 704 MW of 
solar power, including the 84 MW projects which has been migrated 
to Solar Mission from the existing installation. For remaining 296 MW, 
developers are yet to be selected. In brief, the achievement of targets 
of 1000 MW, set under the first phase of the Solar Mission, whose 
success would decide the fate of the remaining two phases of the 
Mission, is highly unlikely to be achieved. When the success of whole 
Solar Mission critically depends on how the things turn out in first 
phase of the Mission, the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in 
implementing the first phase of Mission is not only disappointing but 
also unacceptable. 
Further, the Ministry have informed that Rs. 12,000 crore to 
Rs.15, 000 crore will be needed to set up the said 1000 MW of grid solar 
power projects. fREDA alone will not be able to fulfill this huge demand 
of funds. On the other hand the Ministry have not come up with any 
kind of collaboration or understanding with any nationalized bank or 
financial institutions to fund the projects coming up in Solar Mission. 
The solar power developers have been left in lurch as far as the finances 
of the projects are concerned. From the quantum of loans advanced 
by the Financial Institutions to this Sector, it appears banks and 
49 


financial institutions are still reluctant to finance the solar power 
project due to the uncertainty of their economical viability. 
The Ministry was expected to have done collaboration/understanding 
with some nationalized banks/financial institutions and should 
have apprised them beforehand about the provisions made by 
the Government in regard to support of Renewable Energy 
projects making it easier for promoters to raise funds from these 
institutes. 
The Committee are inclined to infer that the Government is 
trying to achieve an extraordinary target with ordinary efforts and 
planning. Being the nodal agency for implementation of the Jawaharlal 
Nehru Solar Mission it has the onus to remove the hurdles faced or 
anticipated in setting up of solar power projects, be it funding, various 
clearances or streamlining of the procedures. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should act with 
urgency and dedication to make Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission a 
grand success and take all necessary steps to remove the hurdles of 
all kinds in proper implementation of the projects and set up a 
monitoring mechanism to evaluate the success of the Mission from 
time to time to ensure proper remedial measures for problems that 
may surface during the implementation of the projects. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 2) 
(iii) Research and Development Projects related to New and Renew­ 
able Energy 
2.3 The Committee observe that we are aspiring for a mammoth 
target under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, the success 
of which will much depend on the technological acumen and expertise 
we have. The technological advancement has direct role in bringing the 
cost down to reasonable level, efficacy, efficiency and durability of the 
equipments required by solar energy sector. Therefore, rapid advance­ 
ment instead of gradual improvement in the Renewable Energy 
technology can be the only way in the attainment of ambitious target 
of National Solar Mission. The Committee are anguished to note the 
past performance of the MNRE in the field of R&D relating to the 
50 


development of New and Renewable Energy sector. Budget outlays for 
R&D have been very less and the Ministry has failed in spending even 
half of the allocated fund. The Ministry in the year 2007-08, 2008-09 
and 2009-10 could spend only Rs. 31.74 crore, Rs. 27.80 crore and 
Rs. 43.85 crore (upto 28.02.2010) against the outlay of Rs. 60 crore, 
Rs. 100 crore and Rs. 78 crore respectively. In brief, the Government 
have spent Rs. 103.39 crore which is mere 43% of the total outlay of 
Rs. 238 crore. The Committee feel that the most common deterrence 
in promotion of Renewable Energy sources is the high initial cost of 
installation especially in case of solar energy. To bring down the same 
to a reasonable level technological advancement has to play a pivotal 
role. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should 
not only focus in merely increasing the installed capacity but also in - 
technological advancement as the same would make the renewable 
energy sector commercially viable resulting in the massive increase in 
installed capacity due to private investment that too without being 
dependent on the aid and subsidy from the Government. The 
Committee note that major thrust in R&D revolves around Solar 
Energy sector and 19 R&D Projects are under implementation on 
different aspects of solar thermal and PV technologies. Centre of 
Excellence are also proposed in this regard working in the development 
of solar grade polysilicon material, high efficiency solar cells, 
multifunction thin film modules, organic solar cells, dye sensitized 
solar cells etc. However, all this work is still at the incipient stage and 
may take a while before its universal· usage as anticipated. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 3) 
2.4 The Committee also find that the Country has yet not 
achieved excellence in any sphere of R&D related to Renewable Energy 
when we compare it with the achievement of other advanced countries 
in this field. Therefore, the Government should concentrate on 
Research and Development by developing indigenous technology by 
making available enough funds and incentives to not only I1Ts but also 
to private sector where enthusiastic and result oriented technical 
51 


research is being done as well as by collaboration with the 
technologically advanced countries in the field of New and Renewable 
Energy. Providing incentives/aids to the technology institutions such as 
IITs will be an investment, the benefit of which will be reaped sooner 
or later. Simultaneously, the Committee also strongly recommend that 
there is greater urgency for substantial increase in the outlay for 
Research and Development in New and Renewable Energy sector for 
much needed thrust required for this sector. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 4) 
(iv) Role of Central Government in Funding of Renewable Energy 
Projects 
2.5 The Committee note that there is a considerable gap between 
budget estimation and the actual spending of the Ministry. The 
actual spending of the Ministry during the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 
2009-10 has been Rs. 478.72 crore, Rs. 441.79 crore and Rs. 548.83 
crore, against the budget estimation of Rs. 628 crore, Rs. 620 crore 
and Rs. 620 crore respectively during the three years. The Committee 
are unhappy to find under-utilization of earmarked funds. The Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy have already been fixing moderate 
targets, furthermore, they have failed to achieve even that consis­ 
tently. Less spending of the Budget fund by the Government also means 
less achievement in terms of physical targets. 
The Committee have also been apprised that the budget outlay 
for 2010-11 is Rs. 1,000 crore and Rs. 1,500 crore for the year 
2011-12 to achieve the goals set up during the 11th Plan Period as 
approved at Mid-term Appraisal stage. After examining the subject in 
detail, the Committee have found that after the announcement of the 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission in 2009, the scenario of 
Renewable Energy sector has changed significantly. The awareness 
about the importance and promotion of New and Renewable Energy has 
increased. Mammoth targets in terms of installed capacity set under 
the National Solar Mission as well as in 12th Plan have, increased the 
responsibilities of the Ministry many folds. On the other hand the 
52 


resources of the Ministry have not been increased in that proportion. 
Against this backdrop, the Committee feel that the MNRE should play 
a leading role of expert, mentor and patron in promotion of Renewable 
Energy in the Country. To achieve this, proactive role of the MNRE 
. is essential to ensure not only adequate resources required by the 
Sector but also for investor· friendly environment. As Renewable 
Energy sector is new and there is lack of infrastructure, the investors 
are not very enthusiastic to make lnvestment in this sector. Therefore, 
endeavour of the Ministry should be on development of infrastructure 
for New and Renewable Energy projects. The Ministry has set a huge 
target of capacity addition of New and Renewable Energy to the tune 
of 13320 MW, whereas the Country's total present installed capacity 
is only 16817 MW. The Committee, therefore, recommend that with 
a view to achieve the target, corresponding increase should also be 
ensured in the Budget of the Ministry to commensurate with the 
quantum of targets set under 12th Plan. This would enable the Ministry 
to play more influential role in development of necessary infrastruc­ 
ture and more assured/ effective funding of projects related to 
Renewable Energy. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 5) 
2.6 The Committee note that the Government provides financial 
assistance/subsidy ranging from about 10% to as high as 90% of project 
costs of the New and Renewable Energy projects. The Committee feel 
that the Government besides providing financial assistance/ subsidy 
must also ensure the monitoring of the projects which avail the benefits 
from the Government. It is likely that in absence of any regulation 
from the Government, many manufacturers may not adhere to 
standard and quality as prescribed and make/install substandard 
products. There is also very poor after sale service of renewable energy 
products due to absence of proper infrastructure in this regard. This 
shakes the confidence of the end user, and poses a big deterrence in 
popularization of renewable products. We cannot ' expect from a 
common man that he would invest dearly in renewable energy products 
that too with no guarantee of proper working and after sale services 
just to save the environment. The Government should ensure that the 
53 


financial assistance/subsidy provided are utilized for installation of 
quality products otherwise the role of the Government will be limited 
to the spending of allocated budget only. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government should focus on developing 
specifications, certification, and standardization of renewable energy 
systems and products by making it mandatory for all the manufacture 
to obtain a quality control certification from an agency such as lSI etc. 
Further, it will be better if the onus of providing long-term after sale 
services is also decided involving manufacturer of the products. 
Simultaneously, for strengthening the after sales service network of 
New and Renewable Energy projects/products, the Committee recom­ 
mend that the Government should plan for setting up a dedicated nodal 
agency entrusted with the task of establishment of more and more 
after sale/installation service centers for projects/products related to 
various sectors of New and Renewable Energy i.e. Solar, Wind, Small 
Hydel etc. by collaboration of State Governments, manufactures and 
technology institutions. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 6) 
(v) Role of States in funding/implementation of Renewable Energy 
Projects 
2.7 The Committee have been apprised that the programmes of 
promoting and financing of Renewable Energy Projects are mostly 
implemented through State Nodal Departments/State Nodal Agencies 
and in some cases through prominent NGOs also. Some of the States 
also provide additional subsidy to beneficiaries for the installation of 
renewable energy systems. The States are also responsible for putting 
in place suitable/conducive policy and regulatory framework at their 
level for promotion of renewable energy projects and also for State level 
statutory clearances for large capacity projects. The major problems 
in wind and hydro power sectors are delays in land allotment, forest 
clearance, timely availability of evacuation and transmission facilities, 
regulatory issues at State level, uncertainness about the State policies 
on tariff, wheeling, banking, techno-economic approval from State 
(for hydro). It has been further informed that there is limited role of 
54 


the Central Government in timely completion of the projects. The 
Committee note that the most common reason cited by the Ministry 
for delay in regard to the Renewable Energy Project has been the 
inactiveness or non-cooperation of the State Government. The 
Committee believe that even though the Ministry do not undertake 
the New and Renewable Energy Projects directly, their responsibility 
in respect of creating favourable conditions for setting Renewable 
Energy Projects does not lessen in any manner. Being the Central nodal 
agency for the promotion of Renewable Energy, the Ministry should 
share the responsibility of removing the obstacles coming in the way 
of promotion and funding of Renewable Energy Projects. In this 
scenario, the Committee feel that there is need for a policy which 
should provide impetus to the States in regard to the promotion and 
facilitation of the Renewable Energy projects. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend a comprehensive policy in regard to the setting 
up of New and Renewable Energy project, which should be formulated 
by the involvement of all the States, so that its effective implemen­ 
tation can be ensured. The States may be given leverage to acclimatize 
the policy, according to their local needs without diluting the thrust 
areas, before its notification for implementation in the respective 
States. This mechanism will not only bring uniformity in regard to the 
promotion of the Renewable Energy but also help in streamlining the 
process of obtaining the various clearances. Once, the problem of 
clearances and avoidable hindrances are overcome this sector will 
become more attractive for private investment. 
Moreover, the role of Centre should not be limited to providing 
only fiscal incentives and subsidy to the States but should expand to 
provide guidance and expertise also. Being the Nodal Agency in the field 
of New and Renewable Energy, the Ministry should extend the 
suggestions/latest technological expertise to the States, help them 
to overcome the barriers, if any, in setting up Renewable Energy 
projects. This positive atmosphere will definitely attract more domestic 
as well as direct foreign investment i~ New and Renewable Energy 
. sector. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 7) 
55 


(vi) Role of IREDA in Funding of Renewable Energy Projects: 
2.8 The Committee note that the corpus of the Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) has been 
Rs. 797 crore, Rs. 870 crore, Rs. 950 crore for the years 2007-08, 2008- 
09, 2009-10 respectively. The Committee have been apprised that the 
fREDA, the only PSU and the financing arm of the Ministry, is 
entrusted, with the financing of Renewable Enerw projects for' which 
it arranges resources from the market through borrowings from the 
, market and bilateral/multilateral agencies, internal accruals and equity 
provided by the Ministry. In regard to the requirements of funds for 
the forthcoming 12th Plan, the Committee have been given to 
understand that a total investment to the tune of Rs. 1,50,000 crore 
shall be required. However, the sources of this fund requirement are 
yet to be identified. Against this backdrop, the corpus of the IREDA, 
which is the sole fund lending Institution dedicated to New and 
Renewable Energy Projects, is woefully insufficient. Being the specialist 
institution in this sector, IREDA has to play a role of catalyst in 
promotion and the funding of New and Renewable Energy projects and 
to instill the confidence among other Financing Institutions about the 
Renewable Projects as also about their economic viability. IREDA has 
been involved in this field for quite a long time and has vast experience. 
Although, IREDA has been a profit making PSU which has earned profit 
(after tax) to the tune of Rs.I0.20 crore, Rs.13.16 crore, and Rs. 16.91 
crore during the years 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 respectively, yet it is 
in no position to playa pivotal role in the funding of New and Renewable 
Energy projects as envisaged to attain the targets set in this sector for 
the coming years. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should properly utilize the expertise of IREDA in funding of 
Renewable Energy projects by taking effective measures to increase 
its corpus, encouraging to join the bandwagon for developing this sector 
and enabling to become a leading light for Financial Institutions. 
Needless to emphasise that the Ministry would take necessary steps 
to expand the capital base of IREDA alongwith requisite technical power 
support. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 8) 
56 


2.9 The Committee also observe that the number of projects 
sanctioned by the IREDA during the years 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 
bas been 29, 47 and 29 respectively. It shows that the financing of 
IREDA has been limited to few and relatively bigger projects. The 
Committee also found that arranging fund for bigger Renewable 
Energy projects is relatively easier than the small projects due to their 
economical viability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
IREDA should also focus in funding the smaller Renewable Energy 
projects with more attractive interest rates and simpler procedures to 
obtain loan, thereby facilitating the growth of the sector throughout 
the Country particularly in the areas which are deprived of the 
electricity. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 9) 
2.10 The Committee note that the short gestation period for 
installing wind turbines, and the increasing reliability and performance 
of wind energy machines has made wind power a favoured choice for 
capacity addition in tbe Country. Tbese reasons have led to joining of 
this sector by private players in a big way providing the lion's share 
to wind power sector out of present installed capacity. of New and 
Renewable Energy, In the case of wind power projects, tbe Ministry 
had not been providing any financial support but only fiscal incentives 
and the wind power capacity has been achieved mainly through private 
sector participation. Recently the Government has introduced Genera­ 
tion Based Incentive (GBI) scheme for the developers who are not 
availing Accelerated Depreciation benefit which in view of tbe 
Committee is a step in right direction as it will encourage the project 
developers to generate more and more wind power instead of 
abandoning the projects after availing the benefits from the Govern­ 
ment. Further, the Ministry has set a capacity addition target of wind 
energy to the tune of 17400 MW for 12th Plan against the target of 
9000 MW for the ongoing 11 th Five Year Plan. The wind power projects 
are capital intensive; hence, huge amount of fund will be required in 
setting up of these projects to achieve the target fixed for 12th Plan. 
Though, it has been stated by the Ministry that the funding of wind 
projects has not been a constraint as IREDA and other financial 
57 


institutions like Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and Nationalized 
Banks are providing loans to wind power projects, the scrutiny of the 
Committee revealed that there were slippages during the years 2008- 
09 and 2009-10 in the achievement of target in this sector. The reasons 
for the same have been assigned by the Ministry to global economic 
recession, policy/regulatory issues and local problems in some of the 
States which has adversely affected the private sector investment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all efforts should be made to 
persuade the States endowed with enough potential for setting up wind 
power projects to formulate favourable policies for this sector so that 
the barriers in setting up of wind power projects can be removed, 
making this sector investor friendly. Moreover, with a view to keep the 
momentum going, required facilities and availability of finances should 
also be ensured to private entrepreneurs to give the proper thrust for 
further development of this Sector. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 10) 
2.11 The Committee note the fact that Small Hydel Projects 
(SHP) have the potential to meet power requirements of remote and 
isolated areas. Also they do not encounter the problems associated with 
large hydel projects of deforestation and resettlement. SHP have 
reached commercial stage, therefore, private sector has started 
showing interest in investing in this sector. The country has the 
estimated power generation potential of 15,380 MW from SUP projects. 
Acknowledging the importance of the subject the Committee have 
examined the subject Small and Mini Hydel Projects in detail and 
presented their Report on the Subject. The Committee expect the 
Government to make sincere efforts to implement the recommenda­ 
tions of the Committee made in the Report in letter and spirit. 
(Recommendation SI.No. 11) 
18 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
NEW DELHI; 
9 March, 2011 
58 


APPENDIX I 
State-wise details of estimated potential for interactive renewable power 
SI. State slUTs Wind SHP Biomass Bagasse Waste to Total 
No. Power Potential Power Cogen. Energy (MW) 
Potential Potential Potential Potential 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
l. Andhra Pradesh 8968 552 578 300 187 10585 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 1333 8 0 0 1341 
3. Assam 0 213 212 0 11 435 
4. Bihar 0 213 619 300 117 1249 
5. Chhattisgarh 0 706 236 0 39 980 
6. Goa 0 9 26 0 0 35 
7. Gujarat 10645 196 1221 350 172 12583 
8. Haryana 0 110 1333 350 32 1824 
9. Himachal Pradesh 0 2268 142 0 2 2412 
10. Jammu and Kashmir 0 1411 43 0 0 1454 
11. Jharkhand 0 207 90 0 14 311 
12. Kamataka 11531 643 1131 450 219 13973 
13. Kerala 1171 708 1044 0 56 2980 
14. Madhya Pradesh 1019 400 1364 0 119 2902 
15. Maharashtra 4584 762 1887 1250 438 8921 
16. Manipur 0 109 '13 0 3 125 
17. Megha1aya 0 229 11 0 3 243 
18. Mizoram 0 166 0 2 169 
59 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
19. Naga1and 0 196 10 0 0 .206 
20. Orissa 255 295 246 0 33 830 
21. Punjab 0 390 3172 300 68 3930 
22. Rajasthan 4858 63 1039 0 93 6053 
23. Sikkim 0 265 2 0 0 267 
24. Tamil Nadu 5530 499 1070 450 240 7789 
25. Tripura 0 46 3 0 2 51 
26. Uttar Pradesh 0 292 1617 1250 270 3428 
27. Uttaranchal 0 1609 24 0 7 1640 
28. West Bengal 0 393 396 0 221 10 to 
29. Andaman and Nicobar 0 8 0 0 0 8 
Islands 
30. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 9 9 
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 0 0 0 
32. Daman and Diu 0 0 0 0 0 0 
33. Delhi 0 0 0 0 194 194 
34. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 
35. Puducherry 0 0 0 0 4 4 
Others 0 1281 1281 
Total 48561 14294 17536 5000 3831 89221 
MSD = Municipal Solid Waste. 
Potential for industrial waste for which State-wise break-up is not available. 
Contd ... 
60 


ANNEXURE J (Contd.) 
State-wise details of cumulative grid interactive renewable power 
installed capacity as on 31.03.2010 
Grid connected Renewable Power 
SI. StateslUTs Small Wind Bio-Power Solar Total 
No. Hydro Power Power Capacity 
Power Biomass Waste to 
Power Energy 
(MW) (MW) . (MW) (MW) (MWp) (MW) 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
I. Andhra Pradesh 186.83 136.10 363.25 35.66 0.10 721.94 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 73.42 0.03 73.45 
3. Assam 27.11 27.11 
4. Bihar 54.60 54.60 
5. Chhattisgarh 19.05 199.90 218.95 
6. Goa 0.05 0.05 
7. Gujarat 12.60 1863.63 0.50 1876.73 
8. Haryana 70.10 7.80 77.90 
9. Himachal Pradesh 330.32 330.32 
10. Jammu and Kashmir 129.33 129.33 
11. Jharkhand 4.05 4.05 
12. Karnataka 640.45 1472.80 336.18 1.00 6.00 2456.43 
13. Kerala 133.87 27.75 0.03 161.65 
14. Madhya Pradesh 71.16 229.40 1.00 2.70 0.10 304.36 
15. Maharashtra 245.33 2077.75 218.50 5.70 2547.28 
16. Manipur 5.45 5.45 
17 .: Meghalaya 31.03 31.03 
61 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
18. Mizoram 36.47 36.47 
19. Naga1and 28.67 28.67 
20. Orissa 64.30 64.30 
21. Punjab 132.55 62.50 9.25 1.33 205.63 
22. Rajasthan 23.85 1088.30 31.30 0.15 1143.60 
23. Sikkim 47.11 47.11 
24. Tamil Nadu 90.05 4906.72 395.70 5.65 0.05 5398.17 
25. Tripura 16.01 16.01 
26. Uttar Pradesh 25.10 567.00 5.00 0.38 597.48 
27. Uttarakhand 132.92 0.05 132.97 
28. West Bengal 98.40 4.30 16.00 1.15 119.85 
29. Andaman and Nicobar 5.25 0.10 5.35 
Islands 
30. Chandigarh 
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 
32. Daman and Diu 
33. Delhi 
34, Lakshadweep 0.05 
35. Puducherry 0.75 
Others 0.03 
Total (MW) 2735.42 11806.75 2199.63 64.96 10.28 16817.04 
MW = Megawatt, MWp = Megawatt peak. 
62 


ANNEXURE II 
11TH PLAN - TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENT DURING 2007-08,2008-09 AND 2009-10 AND TOTAL lITH PLAN 
Sl. Programme/system 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 Total 11 th Plan 
No. 
Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach. 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Grid Power (Capacities in MW) 
I. Wind Power 1500.00 1663.50 2000.00 1485.50 2500.00 1565.00 6000.00 4714.00 
2. Small Hydro 200.00 204.75 250.00 248.93 300.00 305.27 750.00 758.95 
3. Bio Power 275.00 81.00 300.00 97.50 405.00 153.30 980.00 330.80 
4. Bagasse Cogeneration 185.00 247.90 295.30 728.20 
5. Waste to Power Urban 2.00 5.00 14.00 4.72 22.00 4.72 
Indstl. 10.00 11.72 8.00 3.66 10.00 18.00 15.38 
6. Solar Power 14.00 2.00 8.15 18.00 8.15 
~ 
Total 1987.00 2145.97 2577.00 2083.49 3231.00 2330.74 7788.00 6560.30 


~ . 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
OtT-Grid (Capacities in MWeq) 
7. Waste to Power Urban 3.00 3.00 5.00 - - - 18.00 3.00 
Indstl. 5.00 4.00 7.00 7.36 10.00 15.88 12.00 27.24 
8. Non-bag Cogen 20.00 49.20 30.00 75.77 50.00 50.00 100.00 174.97 
9. Gasifiers Rural 1.00 1.02 1.00 1.03 3.00 1.08 5.00 3. I3 
Indstl. 10.00 11.62 10.00 13.20 10.00 11.08 30 35.90 
10. Aero-Gens/Hybrid 0.15 0.11 0.30 0.11 0.30 0.22 0.75 0.44 
Systems 
II. SPY Plants + Street Lights -- 033 - 1.00 5.00 3.58 5.00 4.91 
12. Water Mills (WMs)/Micro/ - 0.37 - 0.70 -- 1.72 17.50 2.79 
mini-hydel plants (144 nos. (339 nos. (447 nos. 
WMs) WMs) WMs) 
Total 39.15 69.65 53.30 99.17 78.30 83.56 188.25 252.38 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Decentra lised Renewable Energy Systems and Other Programmes 
13. Remote Village Electrification 2000 1992 1500 636 1500 1431 5000 4059 
(Nos. of Villages+Hamlets) Sanctioned! Sanctioned! Sanctioned! Sanctioned! 
1280 325 1013 2618 
Completed Completed Completed Completed 
14. Family type Biogas Plants 1.00 0.89 1.24 1.08 1.50 1.20 3.74 3.03 
(No. in Lakh) 
IS. SPY Home Light Systems (Nos.) 57,382 65,904 72,886 1,96,172 
16. Spy Lanterns (Nos.) 46,958 56,397 82,299 1,86,354 
17. SPY Pumps (Nos.) 100 42 56 106 204 
18. Solar Water Heating-collector 0.60 0.45 0.60 0.56 0.60 0.62 1.80 1.63 
area (Million Sq. meter) 
19. Solar Cookers (Nos.) 20,000 20,165 20,000 20,590 20,000 6,112 60,000 46,867 
20. Wind Pumps (Nos.) 140 80 100 OS 240 80 
c» MW = Megawatt; K W = kilowatt; KWp = kilowatt peak; sq.m. = square meter. (}1 


m ANNEXURE III 
11th Plan programme-wise break-up of approved outlay (GUS) and expenditure during 
1st 3 years viz. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 
(Rs. in crore) 
SI.No. Programme Component 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 Total 
Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp. 
1. Grid-Interactive and Distributed 110 87.92 150 116.20 220 200.88 480 405.00 
Renewable Power 
2. Renewable Energy for Rural 200 190.29 160 151.19 155 152.42 515 493.90 
Applications 
3. Renewable Energy for VIC 80 22.22 26 16.55 75 64.72 181 103.49 
Applications 
4. Research. Design and Development 60 31.74 100 27.80 78 59.47 238 119.01 
in RE 
5. Supporting programmes 130 131.85 170 126.92 82 65.58 382 324.35 
6. Spillover liabilities of 10th Plan 25 4.96 5 2.12 2 3.94 32 11.02 
Programmes 
Domestic Budgetary Support 605 468.98 611 440.78 612 547.01 1828 1456.77 
(DBS) 
7. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 23 9.74 9 1.00 8 1.82 40 12.56 
Total Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) 628 478.72 620 441.78 620 548.83 1868 1469.33 


ANNEXURE IV 
Incentives/Central Financial Assistance (CFA) provided under various 
renewable power schemes/programmes 
A. CFA UNDER OFF-GRIDIDECENTRALISED PROGRAMMES 
SI. Off-gridlDecentralised Central Financial Assistance 
No. Renewable Energy systems 
2 3 
I. Remote Village Electrification: 
Renewable energy systems for 
Electricity generation/lighting for 
households in remote unelectrified 
census viIlages/hamlets 
2. Family Type Biogas Plants NE 
Region States including Sikkim 
(except plain areas of Assam) 
Plain areas of Assam 
J&K, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand (excluding Terai re­ 
gion), Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, 
Sadar, Kurseong and Kalimpong 
sub-divisions of Darjeeling, 
Sunderbans, A&N Islands 
All Others 
90% of the cost of electricity generation 
systems subject to a pre-specified maxi­ 
mum amount for each technology and an 
overall ceilling of Rs. 18,000 per house­ 
hold. 
100% cost of a single light Solar PV home 
lighting system for BPL households. 
Rs. 11,700 to Rs. 14,700 per plant 
depending on capcity of plant and COM 
benefits availed 
Rs. 9,000 to Rs. 10,000 per plant 
depending on capacity of plant and 
COM benefits availed 
Rs. 3,000 to Rs. 10,000 per plant 
depending on capacity of plant and 
COM benefits availed 
Rs. 2,100 to Rs. 8,000 per plant depend­ 
ing on capacity of plant and COM 
Programme or NBMMP. 
67 


2 3 
3. Biomass Gasifiers for Rural Areas 15.00 lakhilOO kW for village level 
electricity generation with 100% 
producer gas engine. 
20% higher subsidy for Special Category 
States & Islands 
Rs. 2.00 lakhl300 kWe for thermal appli­ 
cations. Rs. 2.50 lakhilOO kwe with dual 
fuel engine. 
Rs. 10.00 lakhilOO kWe with 100% 
producer gas engine. 
Rs. 15.00 lakhilOO kWe with 100% 
producer gas engine in institutions. 
Rs. 20.00 lakhs per MW subject to a 
maximum of Rs. I crore/project (20% 
higher subsidy for Special Category State) 
Rs. 1.0 to 3.0 crorefMWe, depending on 
technology. (20% higher subsidy for 
Special Category States) 
Rs. 20.00 lakh to Rs. 1.00 crorelMWe, 
depending on technology. (20% higher 
subsidy for Special Category States) 
Scheme will be implemented under project 
mode Government will provide support 
through a combination of 30% and/or 5% 
interest bearing loans. 
Rs. 1.00 lakh and Rs. 1.50 lakh per kW 
for commerical and non-commercial ben­ 
eficiaries respectively. Higher support of 
Rs. 2.25 lakh per kW for projects in NE 
Region States Sikkim and Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
4. Biomass Gasifiers for Industrial 
Applications 
5. Biomass Co-generation (non-ba­ 
gasse) for captive use in industry 
6. Urban Waste to Energy 
7. Industrial Waste-to-Energy Plants 
8. Solar Energy Systems 
(PhotovoltaiclThermal) 
9. Small Aero-Generators and Hybrid 
Systems 
68 


2 3 
10. Micro-hydel plantslWater mills Rs. 0.35 lakh per watermill for mechani­ 
cal application 
Rs. 1.1 0 lakh per watermill for electrical 
application 
B. CFA UNDER GRID-INTERACTIVE RENEWABLE POWER PROGRAMMES: 
1. Small Hydro Power 
Support to new SHP projects in State ,Sector: 
Category Above 100 KW and 
up to 1000 KW 
Above 1 MW - 25 MW 
Special category and 
NE States 
Rs. 50,0001KW Rs. 5.00 crore for the first 
MW + Rs. 50 lakhlMW 
for each additional MW 
Other States Rs. 25,0001KW Rs. 2.50 crore for the first 
, MW + Rs. 40 lakhlMW 
for each additional MW 
Support to new SHP projects in private/co-operativeljoint sector: 
Category Up to 1000 KW Above 1 MW - 25 MW 
Special category and , 
NE States 
Rs. 20,0001KW Rs, 2.00 crore for the first 
MW + Rs. 30 lakhlMW 
for each additional MW 
Other States Rs. 12,000/KW Rs. 1.20 crore for the first 
MW + Rs. 20 lakhlMW 
for each additional MW 
69 


2. Biomass Power Project and Bagasse Cogeneration Projects: 
Special Category States 
(NE Region, Sikkim, 
J&K, HP and Uttaranchal) 
Other States 
Project Type Capital Subsidy Capital Subsidy 
Biomass Power projects Rs. 25 lakh X 
(CMW)"0.646 
Rs. 20 lakh X 
(CMW)"p.646 
Bagasse Co-generation by Rs. 18 lakh X 
Private sugar mills (CMW)"0.646 
Rs. 15 lakh X 
(CMW)"0.646 
Bagasse Co-generation 
projects by co-operative/ 
public sector sugar mills 
40 bar and above 
60 bar and above 
80 bar and above 
Rs. 40 lakh* 
Rs. 50 lakh* 
Rs. 60 lakh* 
Per MW of surplus 
power@ 
(maximum support 
Rs. 8.0 crore per project) 
Rs. 40 lakh* 
Rs. 50 lakh* 
Rs. 60 lakh* 
Per MW of surplus 
power@ 
(maximum support 
Rs. 8.0 crore per project) 
• For new sugar mills, which are yet to start production and existing sugar mills 
employing backpressure route/seasonal/incidental cogeneration, which exports surplus 
power to the grid, subsidies shall be one-half to the level mentioned above. 
@Power generated in a sugar mill (-) power used for captive purpose i.e. net power fed 
to the grid during season by a sugar mill 
B. Bagasse Cogeneration projects in co-operative/public sector sugar mills 
implemented by IPPs/State Government Undertakings or State Government 
Joint Venture Company/Special Purpose Vehicle (Urja Ankur Trust) through 
BOOT/BOLT model 
Project Type Minimum 
Configuration 
Capital Subsidy 
2 3 
Single coop. mill through 
BOOTIBOLT Model 
60 bar and above . Rs. 40 LIMW of surplus 
power" 
70 


2 3 
80 bar and above Rs. 50 LIMW of surplus 
power+ 
(maximum support Rs. 8.0 
crore/sugar mill) 
*Power generated in a sugar mill (-) power used for captive purpose i.e. Net power fed 
to the grid during season by a sugar mill. 
C. Bagasse Cogeneration Projects in existing co-operative sector sugar mills 
employing boiler modifications 
Project Type Minimum 
Configuration 
Capital Subsidy 
80 bar and above 
Rs. 20 LIMW of surplus 
power* 
Rs. 20 LIMW of surplus 
power* 
Rs. 20 LIMW of surplus 
power* 
Existing Cooperative Sugar 
MiIl· 
40 bar and above 
60 bar and above 
*Power generated in a sugar mill (-) power used for captive purpose i.e. Net power fed 
to the grid during season by a sugar mill. CFA will be provided to the sugar mills who 
have not received CFA earlier from MNRE under any of its scheme. 
3. Wind Power: 
Special Category States 
(NE Region, Sikkim, Jammu and 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand) 
OOther States 
For Demo Project Rs. 3.00 crore x 
©"O.646 
Rs. 2.50 crore x ©"O.646 
Commercial Wind Power Generation Based Incentive (GBI) for 
Commercial Wind Power projects @ 
Rs. 0.50 per kwh subject to a maximum 
of Rs. 62.50 lakhlMW, which do not 
avail accelerated depreciation benefit. 
© Capacity of the project in MW; ": raised to the power 
71 


4. Biomass Gasifier: 
Special Category States 
(NE Region, Sikkim, Jammu and 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand) 
©Other States 
20% higher CF~ Rs. l5,OOOIkW 
5. Solar Power: 
i. Generation based incentive linked to CERC announced tariff guidelines for 
projects connected at llkV and below. 
ii. For projects connected at 33kV and above - National Vidyut Vyapar 
Niagam (NVVN) to purchase power at a rate fixed by CERC. 
72 


ANNEXURE V 
Programme-wise and State-wise CFA released on reimbursements basis during first three years of the 11th Plan 
State CFA released on reimbursement basis (Rs./Crore) 
Biomass Power Biomass Gasifier for Small Hydro Power Urban and Industrial Solar Water Heating 
Ind. Wastes System 
2007- 2008- 2009- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2007- 2008- 2009- 
08 09 10 08 09 10 08 09 10 08 09 10 08 09 10 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Andhra Pradesh 0.780 0.042 0.20 0.248 0.098 0.265 
Aruanchal Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 0.295 0.282 
Chhattisgarh 4.740 0.053 0.011 0.035 0.093 
Goa 
Gujarat 0.378 0.088 2.67 0.757 0.50 0.238 1.23 
(j Haryana 0.164 0.161 0'()()1 0.094 0.053 0.383 


~ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 l3 14 15 16 
Himachal Pradesh 4.158 21.930 9.900 0.079 0.08 
Jammu and Kashmir 0.0080 
Jharkhand 
Kamataka 0.730 0.122 0.052 4.425 12.590 3.474 1.00 0.945 0.098 0.067 0.138 
Kerala 0.057 0.114 
Madhya Pradesh 0.236 0.035 0.08 0.022 8.0040 0.088 
Maharashtra 10.76 0.246 0.035 0.877 6.89 0.256 0.l35 0.209 
Manipur 
Meghalaya 0.050 
Mizoram 
Nagaland 
Orissa 
Punjab 1.880 3.196 0.340 0.287 4.90 0.066 0.029 
Rajasthan 0.730 0.046 0.035 0.0072 0.058 0.089 


Sikkim 
Tamil Nadu 0.730 0.202 0.081 2.16 0.0048 0.134 
Tripura 
Uttar Pradesh 0.465 0.656 0.698 2.118 0.058 0.054 0.116 
Uttarakhand 7.425 0.912 0.648 0.036 0.082 0.128 
West Bengal 0.630 0.037 0.335 0.291 
Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 
Chandigarh 0.038 0.023 
Dadar and Nagar 
Haveli 
Daman and Diu 
Delhi 0.02 0.002 0.0054 0.0055 
Lakshadweep 
Puducherry 
~ 


APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2009-10) HELD ON 18th MAY, 2010 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM '62' PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. 'to 1230 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Mohammad Azharuddin 
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri P.C. Chacko 
5. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
8. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
9. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
10. Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Motilal Vora 
12. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
13. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
14. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshiyari 
15. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
16. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav 
76 


17. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik 
18. Shri Mohammad Shaft 
19. Prof. Ani! Kumar Sahani 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Additional Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar . Deputy Secretary 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OFTHE MINISTRY OF NEW AND 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
I. Shri Deepak Gupta Secretary 
2. Shri R. Bhattacharya Additional Secretary & FA 
3. Shri Hari Kumar Joint Secretary 
4. Shri D. Majumdar CMD, IREDA 
5. Dr. B. Bandopadhyay Scientist 'G' 
6. Dr. A.R. Shukla Scientist 'G' 
7. Dr. B.M.S. Bist Scientist 'G' 
8. Dr. N.P. Singh Scientist 'G' 
9. Shri Sudhir Mohan Scientist 'G' 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy to the sitting of the Committee and desired to know about the 
various new and renewable projects undertaken by the Ministry, target set 
therefor and requirement of funds for the same during the II th Five Year 
Plan period. 
77 


3. The following important points relating to the subject were 
discussed during the meeting with the representatives of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy: 
(i) Budget allocation for New and Renewable Energy Projects for the 
year 2011-12. 
(ii) The gap between BE and RE and the actual expenditure of 
previous years and the steps taken by the Government for 
spending the allotted budget for the year 20 I 0-11 in an effort to 
achieve the set target. 
(iii) The gap between loan sanctioned and disbursement by IREDA. 
(iv) Grants and loans from international agencies for New and 
Renewable Energy Projects. 
(v) Installed capacity vis-a-vis total potential capacity of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
(vi) Requirement of fund for National Solar Mission and the 
prospective planning to arrange the same. 
(vii) Role of States in implementation of New and Renewable projects. 
4. The Committee sought clarifications on various issues relating to 
the subject and the representatives of the Ministries responded to the same. 
The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministries to furnish 
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by them during 
the sitting. 
5. *** *** *** *** 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the 
Committee has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
78 


MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMlTTEE ON ENERGY (20 I 0-11) HELD ON 7TH OCTOBER, 20 I 0 
IN COMMlTTEE ROOM '0' PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHl 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
4. Shri P. S. Ghatowar 
S. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
8. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
II. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore 
13. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia 
14. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
IS. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
16. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
17. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
79 
(vii) eed tor grvrng IlflpeLU:S I~I ,cv,,:,o,vol't technology institutes like 
E by involving e Ie. of Renewable nergy . d simultaneously allocating lITs and other engineering col~e~~s an 
f d for R&D activmes. 
of greater un . d Renewable projects- .. lernentation of New an d (viii) Role of States 10 Imp .. hanism between Centre an need for effective coordination mec 
State. . tor particularly solar .. ewable energy sec , (i ) The status of India 10 ren . . Chi Germany USA etc. IX . , . ther countnes like lOa, 
energy, vIs-a-vIs 0 . rious issues relating to 
4 The Committee sought clarificatl~~s. ~n v:f><:nonclpcl to the same. 
• ...J •. 1-. •.•.••...••..•••...• ,,""'rIt.+ •..•.•. ;H'O'C" Af" th~ l\ .nle rv . .•. 1- __ 4.L~ __ •. __ 


Shri Mohammad Shafi 18. 
19. Shri MotHaI Vora 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Pandey 
Additional Director 
3. Shri Rajcsh Ranjan Kumar Deputy Secretar\,' 
REPRESENTATIVES OFTHE MINISTRY OF NEW AND 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
Shri Deepak Gupta Secretary 
1. 
Shri R. Bhattacharya Additional Secretary & FA 
2. 
Ms Gauri Singh Joint Secretary 
3. 
Shri D. Majumdar CMD,IREDA 
4. 
Dr. B. Bandopadhyay Scientist 'G' 
5. 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHT SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON ENERGY (2010-11) HELD ON 3RD MARCH, 2010 IN ROOM 
NO. '134' PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri P.C. Chacko 
3. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
8. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9. Shri Vijay lnder Singla 
10. Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
Rajya Sabha 
II. Shri Govindrao Adik 
12. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore 


2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the 
Commitee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on: 
(i) 'Transmission and Distribution Systems and Networks'; 
(ii) 'Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects'; and 
(iii) 'Small and Mini Hydel Projects'. . 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the 
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with minor modifica­ 
tions. 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports taking into consideration the consequential changes arising out of 
factual verification, if any by the concerned Ministries. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairman to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
5. *** *** *** *** 
The Committee then adjourned. 
83 


II All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 230344%), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, 
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website '~.parliamentofindia.nic.in'. 
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available 
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for 
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are 
available on the website mentioned above." 
