24
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demand for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2011-12)]
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 ( Saka)


TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demand for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2011-12)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.12.2011
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  29.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 218
Price : R  30.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 15
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 16
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
28th December, 2011 ............................................................... 20
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
18th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................ 22
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P .C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
(iii)

24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Executive Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 24th Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 18th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on Demand for Grants of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the year 2011-12.
2. The 18th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 17th August, 2011. Replies of the Government to all
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
16th November, 2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 28th December, 2011.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 18th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
28 December, 2011 Chairman,
07 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2011-12.
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
17th August, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same day. The Report contained 8 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7
Total-06
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 6 and 8
Total-02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. WIND ENERGY PROGRAMME
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
6. In view of the performance of the Ministry under Wind Energy
Programme during 2010-11, in which they had surpassed the targets,
the Committee had expressed confidence that the Ministry would easily
achieve the physical target of 2400 MW set for the year 2011-12 thereby
surpassing the 11th Plan target of 9000 MW. The Committee had
recommended that the Ministry should play a proactive role in
conducting a survey for identifying the potential of the sector
particularly in the coastal area and play the role of a catalyst in the
promotion of the sector making it an investor friendly venture and
also to initiate Action Plan for the next Five Year Plan in order to
generate more power from wind energy.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“Ministry is taking necessary steps in carrying out wind resource
assessment to identify the potential sites for wind power projects.
It is continuously putting efforts to make this sector investor
friendly and to promote orderly growth of the sector. Out of the
target of 9000 MW set for 11th Plan, a capacity of 8465 MW has
been installed up-to September, 2011. During the current year i.e.
2011-12, a capacity of 1400 MW has been installed up-to September,
2011 and another 1200 MW is expected by March, 2012. With this,
it will be possible to achieve the physical target of 2400 MW set
for 2011-12 and also the 11th Plan target”.
8. The Committee note that against the 11th plan target of
9000 MW, a capacity of 8465 MW has been installed as on September,
2011. Further, against a target of 2400 MW for the year 2011-12, a
capacity of 1400 MW has been installed up to September, 2011. The
Ministry is expecting another capacity addition of 1200 MW by
March, 2012, which if achieved, would surpass the physical target
set for 2011-12 and also 11th plan target. The Committee trust that

3
the Ministry with their sincere efforts would be able to achieve the
targets and set a landmark of progress in the field of wind energy.
On the other hand, on the issue taking necessary steps in carrying
out wind resource assessment to identify the potential sites for wind
power projects and putting efforts to make the sector investor
friendly, the Ministry have not stated the specific steps taken by
them in this regard. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate
their earlier recommendations that Ministry should play a proactive
role in conducting a survey for identifying the potential sites for
wind power projects and also play the role of a catalyst in the
promotion of the sector making it an investor friendly venture. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
B. REMOTE VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME (RVEP)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
9. The Committee had noted that against the 11th Plan target for
electrification/illumination of 10,000 villages/hamlets under RVE
Programme, as on 28th February, 2011, 4810 villages/hamlets had been
electrified and work was under implementation in 3354 villages/
hamlets. The Committee had pointed out that one of the reasons for
the slow implementation of RVEP is the poor coordination between
the implementing agencies under RVEP and Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY). Therefore, for faster and effective
implementation of the RVE Programme, the Committee had
recommended that the MNRE in consultation with Ministry of Power
may set up a Coordination Committee consisting of representatives
from various implementing agencies at the required level which will
facilitate and monitor implementation of the two programmes under
RGGVY and RVEP specifically in identification of villages and hamlets
which will be covered under the respective programmes.
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:
“The Ministry is taking up the Remote Village Electrification (RVE)
Programme actively. The Ministry on its part is continuing its efforts
to persuade the State Governments through continuous review
meetings at various levels for identification of villages & hamlets
and their timely completion. The concerned State Governments
have a major role to play in identification of remote villages to be
covered under RVE Programme and their expeditious
implementation as electrification of unelectrified villages and
selection of mode for their electrification are in the domain of the

4
respective States. The Ministry may reach the target only if the
states actually demarcate the villages and hamlets, survey these
villages, prepare proposals for support, mobilize matching state
share and take other necessary action for timely implementations.
The Ministry continues to liaise with the state implementing
agencies on a regular basis to complete the projects in time. In so
far the achievement of target in RVE during the 11th plan period
is concerned, 6700 villages and hamlets have been sanctioned. In
addition, 2824 villages and hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier,
are ongoing. Thus all together, in the 11th Plan, 9524 villages and
hamlets are sanctioned/ongoing and 5665 villages and hamlets have
been completed as on 30th September, 2011.
The Ministry has already constituted a Coordination Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy. The Committee consists of representatives from
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Rural Electrification
Corporation, Planning Commission and representative from State
Implementing Agency. The Committee monitors the implementation
of RVE Programme in addition to sanctioning of new projects.”
11. As regard the achievement under RVEP , the Ministry in their
reply have stated that as on 30th September, 2011, 9524 villages and
hamlets are sanctioned/ongoing and 5665 villages and hamlets have
been completed against the target for electrification/illumination of
10,000 villages/hamlets during the 11th Plan. With the information
made available by the Ministry, the Committee find that more than
3800 villages and hamlets are yet to be completed which forms about
40 percent of the total 9524 villages and hamlets being undertaken/
sanctioned for electrification in the 11th Plan under RVEP . It has
been stated that the target can be reached only if States demarcate
villages and hamlets, survey these villages, prepare proposal for
support and mobilize matching State share. The Committee appreciate
this, but wish to be apprised about the prerequisites before the
sanctioning of the villages/hamlets for electrification. In the absence
of such vital inputs it may be difficult to achieve the target. Hence,
it would be prudent to prod to States to submit the required inputs
before sanctioning the villages for electrification. The Committee do
understand these constrainsts in the implementation of the
programme. However, the RVEP being one of the most important
and major programmes of the MNRE, the Ministry should strengthen
the working of the Coordination Committee and carry on the mission
till its accomplishment, in a time bound manner besides adapting
the practicable course of action before sanctioning the villages for
electrification.

5
C. RESEARCH, DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT IN NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
12. The Committee had pointed out a considerable reduction in
budgetary allocation under R&D in 2011-12 i.e. to Rs. 95 crore as
compared to the BE of Rs. 148 crore in 2010-11, particularly when the
Ministry were able to spend as much as Rs. 111 crore in 2010-11. The
Committee had felt that the R&D Sector of new and renewable energy
is in its nascent stage and requires special care and proper nurturing.
As such any reduction of financial allocation at the BE stage may
hamper the progress of various R&D Projects at whatever stage of
implementation they are. The Committee had, therefore, recommended
that the Ministry should persuade the Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance to have the requisite fund for R&D Sector for the current
year so that uninterrupted and smooth implementation of all the R&D
Projects can be ensured and new projects can be initiated without any
delay. The Committee had also recommended that thrust areas in R&D
should inter-alia include work of Photovoltaic technology as it has
great potential with regard to its usage, investment vis-a-vis its end
results.
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
Ministry is already taking up the matter with the Ministry of
Finance for additional funds for Research and Development Projects
at Revised Estimate (RE) stage”.
14. The Ministry in their reply have stated that they have taken
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds for
Research and Development Projects at Revised Estimate (RE) stage.
The Committee appreciate the action taken by the Government on
their recommendations in this aspect. The Committee trust that the
Ministry would be able to manage to get additional funds at RE
stage and ensure uninterrupted and smooth implementation of all
the R&D Projects and also initiate new projects without any delay.
The Committee had also recommended that thrust areas in Research
and Development should inter-alia include work of Photovoltaic
technology as it has great potential with regard to its usage,
investment vis-a-vis its end results. Further, the Committee had
desired close monitoring of all the R&D projects be ensured with a
view to evaluate their functioning in a result-oriented manner.
However, the Committee find that the Ministry is silent on these

6
aspects of the Committee’s recommendations. The Committee feel
that the Ministry have not taken their recommendation in its right
perspective. In fact the idea behind the Committee’s suggestion to
seek higher allocation under R&D sector is to avert the interruption
in the smooth implementation of all the R&D Projects and also to
enable them to initiate new projects so as to boost the new and
renewable energy sector. The Committee, therefore expect information
on the various R&D Projects undertaken by the Ministry particularly
in the field of photovoltaic technology and technological
advancements in other fields of renewable energy. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that thrust areas in Research
and Development should inter-alia include work of Photovoltaic
technology as it has great potential with regard to its usage,
investment vis-a-vis its end results. Further, close monitoring of all
the R&D projects should be ensured with a view to evaluate their
functioning in a result-oriented manner. The Committee may be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.

7
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that during the first four years of the
11th Plan, Rs. 2868 crore were actually allocated out of Rs. 4,000 crore
budgetary allocation for the entire Plan and an expenditure of
Rs. 2449.53 crore was made during these four years. The budgetary
allocation for the year 2011-12 is Rs. 1200 crore. Hence, the expenditure
made during the previous four years along with the outlay for the
year 2011-12 together does not meet the financial target for the entire
Plan. The total allocation for the 11th Plan i.e. Rs. 4,000 crore was
itself not a very huge sum. Keeping in view the significance of the
sector which are handled by the Ministry, that is, the alternative sources
of energy, the non-spending of this sum during the entire Plan reflects
on the performance of the Ministry. Even though the Committee were
informed that physical and financial performance during the last few
years has been very good as compared to earlier years, the Committee
feel that with proper planning, due spade work, proper foresight about
the achievable target and the available expertise with the Ministry,
fund utilisation under various heads and achievements of the targets
could have been still better leading to the benefit of the solar energy
to the needy sections of the society. The achievement of the targets
under various activities will ease pressure on the conventional systems
of energy which are not only scarce but also depleting at a fast pace
and are non-renewable. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that
there should be higher allocation for this sector along with the proper
planning of the strategy with regard to the implementation of the
various programmes being undertaken by the Ministry. They, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should take up with the Planning
Commission about higher allocation as there is a befitting case to do
so and simultaneously they should stress on proper planning and co-
ordination with implementing agencies.
Reply of the Government
The comments of the Committee have been noted. It is also
informed that the Ministry has, in its 12th Plan proposals submitted
to Planning Commission in October 2011, proposed a higher allocation

8
of Rs. 40,000 crores for the 12th Five Year Plan period in line with the
Committees’ recommendation.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that during the first four years of the 11th
Plan, the Ministry have performed well in the field of Small Hydro
Power and Biomass co-generation Programme. However, they are not
satisfied with the performance of the Ministry under various other
Programmes, viz. Remote Village Electrification, Biogas, Wind Power
etc. despite occasional good performances. The Committee find that
under RVE Programme, the Ministry had set a target for electrification/
illumination of 10,000 villages/hamlets during the 11th Plan. However,
only 4155 villages/hamlets could be electrified so far, that is, not even
50 per cent of the target could be achieved during the first four years
of the Plan. The Ministry have attributed it to the non-receipt of
proposals from the State Governments for the poor performance.
Similarly, under biogas programme, against the 11th Plan target of
6.78 lakh number of biogas plants, only 4.23 lakh plants could be
installed up to February, 2011. Also, under Wind Power Programme
against the 11th Plan target of 9000 MW a capacity addition of 7064.35
MW has been achieved during the first four years even when the
target was exceeded during the last financial year. The Committee's
examination has revealed glaring mismatch between the target set and
achieved under various programmes. Consequently a lot of
achievements are required to be achieved in the terminal year of the
Plan i.e. 2011-12. Admittedly the goals envisaged for the 11th Plan
under RVEP and Biogas Programme are not likely to be fully achieved.
The Committee strongly feel that the shortfall in achievement of targets
during 11th Plan is bound to have a cascading effect on the
achievement of targets under various programmes/projects of the next
Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to
identify the weak areas on the basis of their performance during the
first four years of the 11th Plan and take specific corrective steps for
the terminal year of 11th Plan and ensure that the non-achievement of
targets in 11th Plan do not spill over to the 12th Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
is making all out efforts to achieve 11th Plan targets in full. However
minor shortfall can occur under the Remote Village Electrification
Programme due to limited proposals from the State Governments.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]

9
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the budget outlay of Rs. 4,000 crore was
made for the 11th Five Year Plan, against which the actual allocation
made during the first four years of the Plan is Rs. 2868 crores while
Rs. 2449.53 crore were utilized which is about 85 per cent of the
allocated amount. For the annual plan 2011-12 an amount of Rs. 1,200
crore has been allocated against the total requirement of 2275 crore
(Rs. 1325 crore for Solar Mission component and Rs. 950 crore for
other programmes). Despite a hike of 20 per cent over last year
allocation, the Budget requirement for the Solar Mission has not been
taken into consideration. The target of Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resources (IEBR) for the year has also been kept at Rs. 1050 crore
vis-a-vis Rs. 1496.65 crore during 2010-11. The Committee find that
Revised Outlay for several important components like wind power
and solar power has been reduced without altering the proposed target.
Similarly, outlay under off-grid solar applications has been substantially
cut down along with the target. Areas like solar water heating have
not been allocated any sum at all. The detailed analysis of proposed
targets and outlay along with the revised targets and allocation reflect
incoherence in the planning and execution of the different projects of
the Ministry. Keeping in view the past performance of the Ministry in
previous four years of the Plan, and the planning of current year’s
programmes, it is really inconceivable to achieve the revised targets
without adequate allocation. The substantial reduction in the off-grid
solar applications reflects upon the unrealistic approach and planning.
The Committee are apprehensive as to how the Ministry would be
able to achieve the targets of the 11th Plan which were left to be
completed during the last year of the Plan, that too, a large percentage
of the total Plan targets without commensurate allocation of funds.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the planning of
the various programmes of the Ministry along with the proposed outlay
must synchronise with the actual and achievable target commensurate
with the revised outlay leaving lesser scope for any drastic reduction
or alteration of any of the important components of the various
projects/programmes of the Ministry.
Reply of the Goyernment
As furnished in the Reply under Recommendation Sl. No. 4,
Para No. 2.5 hereunder.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]

10
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the financial and physical performance
for the year 2010-11 has been satisfactory. Against an outlay of
Rs. 1,000 crore an amount of Rs. 980 crore was spent on various
programmes. Achievement in the Wind Power, Small Hydro, Bio-power
are encouraging while areas like Waste to power both Grid and
Off-grid, Water Mills and Gasifiers needs special attention. The
Committee express their satisfaction over achievements in areas such
as wind power, small hydro and Bagasse Co-generation where physical
targets have been exceeded. However, the Committee also note that
the areas where targets have been over-achieved during the last year
require reassessment for setting appropriate targets for future. The
infrastructure and expertise which are available for this project also
require technological upgradation. The current target of 2400 MW for
wind power for the year 2011-12 is uninspiring in the context of the
achievement of 2350 MW during the year 2010-11. Similarly, the targets
for Small Hydro, Bio-power also need to be revisited as they have
been already fixed for the current year. The Committee are confident
and sure that these targets will be achieved and would create a
precedent/milestone especially keeping in view the past performance
in these sectors. In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly
recommend that rational higher targets be fixed for this year in areas
where last years’ achievements are more than the targets set. Higher
outlay, if need be, may be proposed for approval from Planning
Commission as this is going to ease the pressure on conventional
energy resources while creating environment for basic development of
the country.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. It will be the
Ministry’s endeavour to set more realistic targets commensurate with
the annual budget allocation under different programmes. It is also
submitted that in the 12th Plan proposals submitted to Planning
Commission recently, the physical targets and outlays have been based
on a rigorous review of each sector/programme.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that the Jawahar Lal Nehru Solar Mission
was started in the year 2010-11 with the objective of establishing India
as a global leader in solar energy . The mission aims at achieving
20,000 MW of grid power, 2,000 MW of off-grid solar applications and

11
20 million sq.m. solar thermal collector area. The Mission is to be
implemented in three phases. For the first phase of the mission, which
is to be completed by March, 2013, a target was fixed to set up
1100 MW grid connected solar plants, including 100 MW capacity plants
as roof tops and other small solar power plants. Besides, a target of
200 MWeq, off-grid solar applications and cumulative 7 million sq.m
solar thermal collector area by March, 2013 was also fixed. A budget
of Rs. 4337 crore has been approved for these projects which are
envisaged to be completed in the first phase. The Committee find that
an amount of Rs. 286 crore (approx.) was allocated during 2010-11 for
Solar Mission and an amount of Rs. 485 crore is allocated for the year
2011-12 i.e. Rs. 55 crore for grid power and Rs. 430 crore for off-grid.
That way a huge amount of more than Rs. 3,500 crore remains
unallocated for the terminal year of the first phase of the Mission. The
Committee feel that the year-wise allocation of the approved amount
for the first phase is not only highly disproportionate but also lacks
practical wisdom, more so as the MNRE had proposed for Rs. 1200
crore for 2011-12 while they were actually allocated only Rs. 485 crore.
The poor allocation will certainly affect the pace of achievement of the
target in the first phase. The Committee observe that the Ministry had
performed at par with the financial resources available with them
during the beginning year of 2010-11 spending almost entire amount
of Rs. 286 crore under both grid and off-grid programmes. As regards
physical achievements, sanctions given by the Ministry also exceeded
the target during the year. Moreover, the Ministry were able to
commission 26.59 MW in grid power and 10.63 MWeq. In off-grid in
2010-11. In view of the physical targets set by the Ministry for the
year 2011-12 for sanction of 300 MW capacity and completion of
200 MW under grid power and sanction of 32 MWeq. and completion
of 20 MWeq. Under off-grid along with 0.6 mln.sq.m. collector area of
solar thermal, the Committee feel that even if the targets for the year
2011-12 are achieved in toto, it is definitely a difficult task for the
Ministry to achieve their original target of first phase both under grid
and off-grid programmes. Though the Ministry may easily sanction
the requisite capacity projects, but in the absence of a proper strategy
for time bound execution of all the projects, first phase targets will be
a herculean task to achieve. The ambitious Jawahar Lal Nehru Solar
Mission, therefore, appears to be crumbling in the beginning itself.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a detailed and
practicable strategy be put in place and proper plan be prepared before
the sanctioning of the projects under this mission. A time-bound
completion of the projects should also be ensured failing which some
penal provisions may be appended as the solar mission has the great
potential and promising future for the country and no laxity can be

12
allowed to creep into the successful implementation of the mission. If
it is felt that participation of Private Sector will enhance the pace,
adequate steps should be taken to involve them so that they play a
significant role in expediting development of solar energy. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to approach the Ministry of
Finance to allocate more funds as initially demanded, at the time of
revised estimates so that smooth and time bound implementation of
the projects can be ensured and that work is not suffered for want of
funds.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has taken several measures to ensure smooth
implementation of the activities undertaken in the first phase of the
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM). Ministry has in
2010-11 allotted about 800 MW capacity projects under three different
schemes under the Mission. 620 MW capacity projects were allotted
through NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN) through tariff
discounting process. This includes 470 MW capacity (7 projects) with
solar thermal and 150 MW (30 projects) with PV technology. One PV
project of 5 MW capacity was rejected at the stage of signing of PPA
and another project of 5 MW capacity was rejected at the stage of
verification of financial closure. All other 28 PV projects are expected
to be commissioned during 2011-12. The 500 MW capacity solar thermal
power projects are scheduled to be commissioned in 2013. Another
54 MW capacity PV projects are under implementation under migration
component of the Mission. These projects are scheduled to be completed
by mid October, 2011.
78 grid solar PV power projects of individual plant capacity up to
a maximum of 2 MW per Plant, with an aggregate capacity of 98 MW
were allotted in 2010-11. 8 plants of 8 MW capacity have been
commissioned up to 30th September, 2011. There is some delay in
completion of project work. As per the guidelines penalty is imposed
for each month of delay in completion of the project. Additional time
of six months, with penalties is allowed for completion of the projects.
The remaining plants are likely to be commissioned during December-
March period in 2011-12.
With regard to the off-grid solar PV projects, out of 40.6 MW
capacity projects sanctioned in 2010-11, a total of 20 MW capacity
projects are scheduled to be completed by March, 2012. So far a total
of 3 MW capacity projects have been completed. Most of the other
projects are likely to be completed by March, 2012. Ministry has also
decided to start concurrent monitoring of the projects sanctioned in
2011-12.

13
With regard to the availability of funds for the Mission, four
projects for an amount of Rs. 225 crores have been recommended by
the Inter-Ministerial Group in its meeting held on 11th August, 2011,
for funding from National Clean energy Funds. The availability of
funds in the budget of the Ministry is likely after the approval of the
second supplementary demands. Some internal readjustment of funds
may also be done at the RE stage.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that the Remote Village Electrification
Programme (RVEP) of the Ministry aims to provide lighting/electricity
using renewable energy in those remote unelectrified villages and
hamlets where grid connectivity will not be feasible in near future.
The Committee observe that against the 11th Plan target for
electrification/illumination of 10,000 villages/hamlets under RVE
Programme, as on 28th February , 2011, 4810 villages/hamlets have
been electrified and work is under implementation in 3354 villages/
hamlets. The Committee have been informed that a total of 782 villages
and hamlets for which support was sanctioned earlier by the Ministry
have been dropped by the State implementing agencies and expect a
higher number at the time of final settlement of accounts. The main
reason for dropping the sanctioned villages has been the preference of
the villages for grid electrification under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY). Further, delays in identification and
earmarking of villages and hamlets to be covered through renewable
energy systems not being electrified by grid extension under RGGVY
has always been one of the factors highlighted by the Ministry for the
poor and delayed implementation of the RVE Programme. It has also
come to the notice of the Committee that there is avoidable delay in
electrification of villages under RGGVY as no specific time schedule is
fixed for such an exercise. While the Committee appreciate the extension
of grid connectivity for electrification of the remote rural areas through
RGGVY, at the same time, they express concern over the inordinate
delay in implementation of the RVE Programme, apparently due to
the poor coordination between the implementing agencies. This delay
results not only in non-achievement of targets but deprive the end-
users in the remote areas of their basic requirement for electricity. For
faster and effective implementation of the Programme, the Committee
recommend that the MNRE in consultation with Ministry of Power
may set up a Coordination Committee consisting of representatives

14
from various implementing agencies at the required level which will
facilitate and monitor implementation of the two programmes under
RGGVY and RVEP specifically in identification of villages and hamlets
which will be covered under the respective programmes. Moreover, a
practicable time frame should be prescribed for electrification of villages
under RGGVY, if these are not covered under RVE and Co-ordination
Committee should be kept informed about each villages being electrified
under the specific scheme as also specific schedule should be spelt out
clearly. The Committee would like to be apprised about specific action
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is taking up the Remote Village Electrification (RVE)
Programme actively. The Ministry on its part is continuing its efforts
to persuade the State Governments though continuous review meetings
at various levels for identification of villages & hamlets and their
timely completion. The concerned State Governments have a major
role to play in identification of remote villages to be covered under
RVE Programme and their expeditious implementation as electrification
of unelectrified villages and selection of mode for their electrification
are in the domain of the respective States. The Ministry may reach the
target only if the states actually demarcate the villages and hamlets,
survey these villages, prepare proposals for support, mobilize matching
state share and take other necessary action for timely implementations.
The Ministry continues to liaise with the state implementing agencies
on a regular basis to complete the projects in time. In so far the
achievement of target in RVE during the 11th plan period is concerned,
6700 villages and hamlets have been sanctioned. In addition,
2824 villages and hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier, are ongoing.
Thus all together, in the 11th Plan, 9524 villages and hamlets are
sanctioned/ongoing and 5665 villages and hamlets have been completed
as on 30th September, 2011.
The Ministry has already constituted a Coordination Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy. The Committee consists of representatives from Ministry of
Power, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Rural Electrification Corporation,
Planning Commission and representative from State Implementing
Agency. The Committee monitors the implementation of RVE
Programme in addition to sanctioning of new projects.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)

15
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

16
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee observe that the cumulative physical achievement
under wind energy programme during the first four years of the
11th Plan (upto March, 2011) is 7063.35 MW against a target of
10500 MW (reduced to 9000 MW at Mid-term Appraisal stage) and
could spend around Rs. 79.17 crore against BE of Rs. 113.6 crore and
RE of Rs. 85.1 crore. Hence, a capacity addition of 1937 MW is required
to be achieved in 2011-12 to meet the reduced 11th Plan target of
9000 MW. Although the position during 2008-09 and 2009-10 were not
satisfactory, the Committee are happy to note that the physical
achievement during 2010-11 have surpassed the targets. In view of
this, the Committee trust that the Ministry with their sincere effort
would easily achieve the physical target of 2400 MW set for the year
2011-12 thereby surpassing the reduced 11th Plan target of 9000 MW.
The Committee are aware that the Ministry do not play a direct role
in capacity addition of wind energy. However the Committee are of
the opinion that the Ministry can play a pivotal role in providing a
solid base, conducive atmosphere and favourable opportunity for
private sector investment in order to boost the growth of the wind
energy sector. The Committee also feel the need for upgradation of
the technology in Wind Energy Sector, especially in development of
design of wind turbines and indigenisation of wind electric generator.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
should play a proactive role in conducting a survey for identifying the
potential of the sector particularly in the coastal area, play the role of
a catalyst in the promotion of the sector making it an investor friendly
venture. Besides the Ministry may strengthen their monitoring system
not only to achieve the 11th Plan target but also initiate action plan
for the next Five Year Plan in order to generate more power from
wind energy.
Reply of the Government
Ministry is taking necessary steps in carrying out wind resource
assessment to identify the potential sites for wind power projects. It is
continuously putting efforts to make this sector investor friendly
and to promote orderly growth of the sector. Out of the target of

17
9000 MW set for 11th Plan, a capacity of 8465 MW has been installed
upto September, 2011. During the current year i.e. 2011-12, a capacity
of 1400 MW has been installed upto September, 2011 and another
1200 MW is expected by March, 2012. With this, it will be possible to
achieve the physical target of 2400 MW set for 2011-12 and also the
11th Plan target.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee feel that Research & Development activities of the
Ministry aim at resource assessment, technology development,
demonstration and commercialisation of new and renewable energy
projects. The Committee have been highlighting the importance of
Research and Development for the development and progress for all
the renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, hydro, biogas etc.
They observe that the expenditure pattern under RD&D for the last
two years have improved. In the year 2008-09, against the BE of
Rs. l00 crore for R&D, the Ministry could spend only Rs. 27.80 crore.
However, in the year 2009-10 and 2010-11, the Ministry could utilise
Rs. 58.90 crore and Rs. 111.40 crore against the budget allocation of
Rs. 60.96 crore (RE) & Rs. 123 crore (RE) respectively i.e. more than
90 per cent. The Committee are satisfied with the progressive
improvement of the utilization of funds in R&D Sector over the years,
yet it is difficult to understand the considerable reduction in budgetary
allocation to Rs. 95 crore in 2011-12 as compared to the BE of
Rs. 148 crore in 2010-11 under this head, particularly when the Ministry
were able to spend as much as Rs. 111 crore in 2010-11. There is no
apparent reason put forward by the Government for such an
unacceptable reduction of allocation for this important sector. The
Ministry have admitted themselves that it would not be possible to
fully achieve the envisaged goals for R&D with the reduced allocation.
It will also affect the commencement of new R&D Projects causing
unwarranted delay in implementation of the whole R&D Plan. The
Committee observe that the Ministry have been able to work out the
thrust areas minutely and have made considerable progress in
achievement of the physical targets set by them. The Ministry must
have made a proper and practical assessment of the progress made so
far and requirement of funds for the future before seeking an amount

18
of Rs. 208 crore for the year 2011-12 for R&D. The Committee feel that
the R&D Sector of new and renewable energy is in its nascent stage
and requires special care and proper nurturing. Any reduction of
financial allocation at this stage may hamper the progress of various
R&D Projects at whatever stage of implementation they are. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should persuade
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance to have the requisite
fund for R&D Sector for the current year so that uninterrupted and
smooth implementation of all the R&D Projects can be ensured and
new projects can be initiated without any delay. Thrust areas in
Research and Development should inter-alia include work of
Photovoltaic technology as it has great potential with regard to its
usage, investment vis-a-vis its end results. This will certainly boost the
development of new and renewable energy sector. Further, close
monitoring of all the R&D Projects should be ensured with a view to
evaluate their functioning in a result-oriented manner.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
Ministry is already taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
for additional funds for Research and Development Projects at Revised
Estimate (RE) stage.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 8/11/2010-P&C, Dated 16.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

19
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
28 December, 2011 Chairman,
07 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

20
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 28TH DECEMBER, 2011 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohmmad Azharuddin
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri P .C. Chacko
5. Shri Baliram Jadhav
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
9. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki
11. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik
13. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.

21
3. The Committee then took up for consideration/adoption the
draft reports:
(i) 24th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 18th Report on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2011-12.
(ii) 25th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 19th Report on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2011-12.
4. The Committee adopted both the Reports without any
modification. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Reports and present the same to both the House of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

22
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
SIXTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 08
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7
Total: 06
Percentage: 75%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage: 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 6 and 8
Total: 02
Percentage: 25%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage: 00%