THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2012-13]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 231
Price : Rs. 39.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 25
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 26
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
11th December, 2012 .................................................................. 30
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
27th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................... 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Smt. Mausam Noor
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Jagadanand Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Executive Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 31st Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 27th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy.
2. The 27th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
25th September, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th December, 2012.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 27th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
17 December, 2012 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Twenty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2012-13.
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
3rd May, 2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total-12
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial No. 9
Total-01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial No. 5
Total-01
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and
Chapter-V of the Report may be furnished to the Committee within
three months of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Eleventh Five Year Plan — Performance Appraisal
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
6. In view of the low allocation of budget provision during the
11th Five Year Plan and also non-achievement of targets in some
renewable energy sector, the Committee had directed the Ministry to
ensure a better planning, coordination, management and execution
mechanism from the very beginning of the 12th Five Year Plan for
obtaining optimum utilization of funds vis-à-vis achievement of physical
targets of various programmes. The Committee had also recommended
that the Ministry should come out with proper strategy incorporating
concrete plan of action with proper monitoring mechanism for the
12th Five Year Plan and ensure the achievement of the projected share
of 17.55 per cent of the renewable energy vis-a-vis the total power
production in the country by the end of 2017 compared to about
12.19 per cent at present.
7. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action
Taken Reply have stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The
Ministry fully appreciates the daunting task before it and is laying
stress on better planning, coordination, and management and
execution mechanism from the very beginning of the 12th Five
Year Plan for obtaining optimum utilization of funds vis-à-vis
achievement of physical targets of various programmes. The
Ministry will also firm up its action plan to ensure achievement of
the 12th Plan capacity addition target for each renewable energy
sector, soon after the plan allocations are finalized and intimated.
It is also submitted that the Grid-interactive power generation
capacity is envisaged to increase to around 54,700 MW by
March, 2017. While the Ministry will put in its all out efforts to
achieve this projected target, the actual % contribution thereof in
the total installed power generation capacity will be governed by
the capacity addition in conventional sector by that time.”
8. The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s commitment for
achievement of the 12th Plan capacity addition target of the various
renewable energy sector. The Committee also acknowledge that the

3
Ministry envisages to increase Grid-interactive power generation
capacity to around 54,700 MW by March 2017. In the context of
percentage of composition of energy from new and renewable sources
the Ministry has stated that total installed power generation capacity
will be governed by the capacity addition in conventional sector by
that time. Since there is a finality in the target of capacity addition
by conventional sector as well as by non-conventional sector, there
is no scope of any uncertainty and laxity with regard to the target
achievement in the non-conventional sector. Further, the performance
of New and Renewable Energy Sector is in no way related with the
performance in conventional sector. Also if, conventional sector do
not perform upto the mark, the percentage contribution by non-
conventional sector in the total power generation will increase. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the target set forth in the 12th Plan
should be achieved by judicious deployment of resources and by
adopting impeccable and coordinated strategy to implement the
projects.
B. Renewable Power — Evacuation Problem
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
9. The Committee had been apprised that the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy is facing acute evacuation problem particularly
at the solar installations in Rajasthan and Laddakh and Wind Energy
Installations in Tamil Nadu which otherwise are ideal places for setting
up solar photovoltaic panels and wind power installations respectively.
The Committee were also apprised that the MNRE had proposed
Rs. 1500 crore for transmission infrastructure and Grid-interactive
Renewable Power Programme so that the power generated from these
projects which cannot be absorbed in the States could be navigated
and connected to the National Grid but the Planning Commission did
not grant or sanction the proposed amount stating that transmission
infrastructure is the job of Ministry of Power. In view of this, the
Committee had recommended that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy should again take up the matter with the Planning Commission
for reconsideration and finalise the authority responsible in consultation
with Ministry of Power for the job in a time bound manner in order
to give a boost to the upcoming Grid-interactive Renewable Power
Programmes so as to utilize the power generated fully .
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:—
“Although the allocation of Rs.1500 crore for transmission
infrastructure has not been approved for the Annual Plan 2012-13,
a total requirement of Rs. 7,000 crore towards this component has
been projected by the Ministry in its 12th plan proposals submitted
to the Planning Commission. Further necessary action will be taken
by the Ministry soon after final approval of the plan proposals by
competent authority that is presently awaited.”

4
11. The Ministry had stated that the Planning Commission had
not sanctioned the proposed amount of Rs. 1500 crore for
transmission infrastructure stating that this is the job of Ministry of
Power. In this context, the Committee had asked the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy to take up the matter with the Planning
Commission for reconsideration and finalise the authority responsible
in consultation with Ministry of Power. The Ministry has informed
that a total requirement of Rs. 7000/- crore towards this component
has been projected by the Ministry in its 12th Plan proposals
submitted to Planning Commission and final approval is awaited.
The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue it for taking
conclusive action under intimation to the Committee. They would
also like to know the details of the scheme for utilizing Rs. 7000
crore during the 12th plan for transmission infrastructure as also the
beneficiary areas of the scheme.
C. National Solar Mission
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
12. Under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, the
Committee had noted that against the first phase target of 1100 MW
capacity addition of grid connected solar power generation, a total
capacity of 503.09 MW was installed as on February, 2012 and against
a target of 200 MWp capacity equivalent off-grid solar photovoltaic
system fixed for the first phase, the Ministry have sanctioned SPV
projects aggregating to 118.12 MWp during 2010-11 and 2011-12, out
of which only 25 MWp equivalent capacity has been installed. The
Committee were disappointed with the progress made under Solar
Mission. They were also concerned that non-achievement of the first
phase targets will have the cascading effect on the remaining ambitious
targets of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. The Committee,
had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should make a serious
effort including upscaling of their targets for the year 2012-13 of the
Solar Mission to accomplish the first phase target.
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:—
“Against a target of 100 MWp during 2010-11 and 2011-12, the
Ministry sanctioned projects aggregating to 118.12 MWp. Since the
funds provided to the Ministry during 2012-13 are not adequate,
the Ministry has reduced the target of sanctioning to 30 MWp.
However, more projects are likely to be sanctioned if the funds are
made available from National Clean Energy Fund or any other
resource during the current year. Projects aggregating to 30 MWp
are likely to be commissioned during the current financial year.
The implementation of JNNSM is progressing steadily as per targets
and timelines envisaged. As per latest information, a capacity of

5
1154 MW of grid connected solar power has been selected for
setting up during Phase 1 against a target of 1,100 MW. This
includes 620 MW selected during Batch-1, 84 MW under migration
scheme, 100 MW under Rooftop PV and Small Solar Power
Generation Programme (RPSSGP) and 350 MW under Batch-2. Out
of this, a capacity of 268.3 MW has already been commissioned,
while 340 MW of solar PV projects under Batch-2 and 470 MW
solar thermal projects under Batch-1 have time for completion up
to February, 2013 and May , 2013 respectively. Additionally, a
capacity of 4 MW under RPSSGP scheme has also been
commissioned, which is under verification. The policies brought
out under JNNSM has also encouraged various States to bring out
State specific solar policies, and some States have made substantial
progress in setting up grid connected solar power projects in the
country. Including this, the total capacity of solar power projects
has crossed over 1,000 MW (1044 MW as on 31st August 2012),
and the actual achievement is likely to be much above the
Phase-1 targets.
The Ministry is closely monitoring progress of projects which are
under implementation. A review meeting was recently organized
at Jodhpur, Rajasthan, for solar PV projects under Batch-2 which
was attended by the representatives of the State Government, State
Utilities/Discoms, District Administration, Pollution Control Board
and NVVN. Various issues related to land, transmission line for
connectivity, technology tie-up and financial closure were discussed.
As per reports received from NVVN, all the projects with aggregate
capacity of 340 MW under Batch-2 have achieved financial
arrangement.
For solar thermal power projects, an expert committee comprising
of eminent scientist and representatives of NTPC and CEA has
been constituted to review progress of implementation. The
Committee has already visited sites of these plants and a report
on the same has been received.
The Payment Security Scheme, as was approved by the Cabinet,
has been implemented and funds have been released from
budgetary sources of the Ministry to NVVN.”
14. The Committee note that the Ministry is optimistic of
achieving Phase 1 target of 1,100 MW of grid connected solar power.
At the same time, they have stated that since the funds provided to
the Ministry for the year 2012-13 are not adequate, they have reduced
the target of sanctioning to 30 MWp and stated that more projects
are likely to be sanctioned if the funds are made available from
National Clean Energy Fund or any other resource during the current
year. The Committee would like to know the Ministry’s initiative to

6
raise the required fund in order to implement the planned projects
effectively. The Ministry has also stated that the policies brought
out under JNNSM has also encouraged various States to bring out
State specific solar policies, and some States have made substantial
progress in setting up grid connected solar power projects in the
country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details
including the quantum of achievement, technology applied and the
utilization vis-à-vis the potential, of the States which have made
substantial progress in the solar energy sector. While acknowledging
the efforts of the Ministry under JNNSM, especially the review
meeting to sort out various problematic issues such as land
transmission line for connectivity, technological tie up and financial
closure, the Committee would like the Ministry to upscale the targets
for 2012-13.
D. Remote Village Electrification Programme (RVEP)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
15. The Committee had noted that the initial 11th Plan target for
electrification of 10,000 villages and hamlets was reduced to 7000, out
of which only 6900 villages and hamlets have been sanctioned which
includes 1058 border villages sanctioned under a special package for
electrification in border villages of Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee
were informed that the duration of RVE Programme is approved up
to March 2012. The Committee were unhappy that even when the
reduced targets of 11th Plan could not be achieved, the Ministry’s
12th Five Year Plan programmes do not include the RVE Programme
at all. The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Ministry
should critically review their performance and accomplish the remaining
unelectrified villages and hamlets which were sanctioned in 11th Plan
in a time bound manner and also for re-assessment/evaluation of the
RVE programme and continue the programme in the 12th Five Year
Plan in a more effective manner.
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:—
“The Ministry had been implementing Remote Village Electrification
Programme for providing financial support for lighting/basic
electrification in those remote unelectrified census villages and
unelectrified hamlets of electrified census villages where grid
extension was not found feasible by the State Governments and
hence were not covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin
Vidyutikaran Yojana. Such villages were provided basic facilities
for lighting/electricity through various renewable energy sources.
The programme was implemented in States by State notified
implementing Agencies. The programme completed on 31st March
2012 as per the approval of the Cabinet.

7
The overall target of 10000 villages and hamlets for the 11th Plan
was laid on the basis of approximate projection for the number of
villages which were not likely to be covered through grid by the
States. Tentative indications received by that time from States, for
such villages, were utilized for these projections. This was also
explained in the 11th Plan document of the Ministry. The targets
set for sanction of financial support become at the best notional in
light of the initial indications received from the States for the
number of villages required to be covered. Projects were sanctioned
on case to case basis after proposals are submitted by the
implementing Agencies as per the guidelines of the scheme. During
the 11th Plan period, proposals for coverage of 7091 villages and
hamlets (including 1058 border villages of Arunachal Pradesh) were
received from various State Governments, which were sanctioned
by the Ministry. In addition, 2824 villages and hamlets, which were
sanctioned earlier, were ongoing. Thus all together, in the
11th Plan, 9915 villages and hamlets were sanctioned/ongoing and
5947 villages and hamlets have been completed which also includes
the villages and hamlets sanctioned/ongoing prior to the 11th Plan
period. The Ministry on its part is making all out efforts to
persuade the State Governments though continuous review
meetings at various levels for timely completion of these villages
& hamlets.”
17. The Committee find that under RVEP during the 11th Plan,
9915 villages and hamlets were sanctioned/ongoing and 5947 villages
and hamlets have been completed including the villages and hamlets
sanctioned/ongoing prior to the 11th Plan period. The Committee
find that more than 3968 villages and hamlets are yet to be
completed. The Ministry have also stated that they are making all
out efforts to persuade the State Governments through continuous
review meetings at various levels for timely completion of these
villages & hamlets. However, the Ministry failed to furnish specific
reply to the recommendation of the Committee regarding continuation
of the RVE Programme in the 12th Plan. Instead the Ministry has
stated that the programme was completed on 31st March, 2012 as
per the approval of the cabinet. The concern of the Committee is for
providing basic lighting/electrification in the unelectrified remote
villages and hamlets where grid connection is not found feasible. In
the Committee’s view, discontinuing the RVE Programme, if done, is
nothing but depriving the people living in the remote countryside
particularly border areas of their basic rights. The Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like to be apprised
about the action being taken under RVE programme and also the
timeframe by which the incomplete villages would be electrified.
They would also await specific response of the Ministry whether
the RVE Programme would be continued in the 12th Plan period in
case certain villages are uncovered or remain un-electrified after
completion of the sanctioned/ongoing electrification projects under
the Scheme.

8
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in Eighteenth Report, under Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker’
The Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2011-12 was presented to Parliament on 17th August,
2011. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
16th November, 2011. The Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on
the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Eighteenth Report was presented to Parliament on
29th December, 2011. In the said Report, the Committee had reiterated
their two recommendations on ‘Wind Energy Programme’ and
‘Research, Design and Development in New and Renewable Energy’
and had also commented on the ‘Remote Village Electrification
Programme’ (RVEP) of the Ministry. Final Action Taken Statements on
the recommendations contained in the 24th Report were received from
the Ministry on 30th March, 2012. The Committee find that the Ministry
in their Final Action Taken Statements have replied only to the issues
relating to ‘Wind Energy Programme’ and ‘Research, Design and
Development in New and Renewable Energy’ and not given any reply
on the issue relating to ‘Remote Village Electrification Programme’
(RVEP). The Committee desire that the reply to the recommendation
of the Committee contained in their 24th Report pertaining to the
‘Remote Village Electrification Programme’ may be furnished in the
prescribed format immediately . Moreover, the Committee observe that
more than six months have passed since the presentation of the
Eighteenth Report to the Parliament. The Committee would like to
remind the Ministry to observe the provisions of Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker’ and arrange for the Statement by the
Minister in the House regarding the status of implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighteenth
Report, expeditiously.

9
Reply of the Government
The replies to the recommendation of the Committee listed at
Sl. No. 7 Para 20.2.8 (Para 11 of 24th Report) pertaining to the Remote
Village Electrification Programme have been furnished by the Ministry
to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 13th June 2012. The Statement by the
Minister for New and Renewable Energy regarding the status of
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee contained
in the 18th Report of the Standing Committee of Energy on Demands
for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
has also been laid in Lok Sabha by on 11th May 2012.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
Eleventh Five Year Plan — Performance Appraisal
The Committee note that during the 11th Five Year Plan, the actual
budget provision made available to the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy (MNRE) was Rs. 4068 crore (BE)/Rs. 3897.80 crore (RE) and an
amount of Rs. 3798.37 crore was actually utilized. While the
Government has done fairly well in utilization of the allocated amount
particularly for Grid-interactive & off Grid renewable power generation
and Renewable Energy for Rural Applications programmes, the fund
utilization was on lower side, especially during the first half of the
11th Plan period, under Renewable Energy for Urban, Industrial and
Commercial Applications and Research, Design and Development in
Renewable Energy Programmes. The trend of the utilization of the
allocated funds indicate that the amount made available under various
programmes were not being utilized properly during the first three
years of the Plan period in general and the utilization of funds
increased considerably during the last two years, thus giving a better
picture to the total tally of utilization of funds on completion of the
11th Plan. The Committee also find that the Ministry were not satisfied
with the GBS component of the total outlay amounting to Rs. 4000 crore
for 11th Plan period and had represented to Planning Commission to
enhance the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) component showing
apprehension that the approved Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) would
be inadequate for achieving the 11th Plan goals/targets. The Ministry
were then advised that the issue could be revisited at the time of
Annual Plan discussion. Had the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy been able to utilize the allocated amount properly in the first
half of the Plan, the Committee feel that probably the Planning
Commission would have reconsidered the Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) Component during the mid-term appraisal. However, the Gross
Budgetary Support (GBS) component of the Plan outlay remained more

10
or less the same during that period. Though the Ministry can have a
sense of satisfaction at the end of the Plan for having been able to
manage a respectful utilization, yet there is certainly an element of
regret for missing the opportunity of getting enhanced GBS outlay
during the concluded Five year Plan.
The Committee expect that the Ministry would ensure a better
planning, coordination, management and execution mechanism from
the very beginning of the 12th Five Year Plan for obtaining optimum
utilization of funds vis-à-vis achievement of physical targets of various
programmes.
The Committee note that the physical achievements during the
11th Plan had been 13124.97 MW capacity against the target of
14162 MW under Grid Power and that of 505.11 MWeq against the
target of 441.25 MWeq under Off-Grid Power upto February, 2012. The
overall achievements have remained almost at par with the targets
nearly in all the programmes of Grid Power and Off-Grid barring a
few areas like urban Waste to Power in both Grid and Off-Grid Power,
Rural Gasifier and SPV Off-Grid programmes, where the physical
achievements are not satisfactory. The Committee also find that the
Ministry had reduced physical target substantially i.e., from coverage
of 10,000 villages to 7000 villages/hamlets under Remote Village
Electrification Programme during 11th Plan against which 6900 villages/
hamlets could be completed. Nevertheless, the Committee appreciate
the efforts made by the Ministry to produce satisfactory outputs in
certain areas like Wind Energy, Small Hydro, Bio-Mass and Solar Grid
Power in the first phase. At the same time the Committee feel that the
Ministry have got a daunting task ahead during the 12th Five Year
Plan where a proposed target of 29,800 MW under Grid Power, that
is an increase of about 110 percent from 11th Plan target and
3,267 MWeq under Off-Grid Power, that is more than six times higher
than the 11th Plan target is to be achieved. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should come out with proper strategy
incorporating concrete plan of action with proper monitoring
mechanism for the 12th Five Year Plan and ensure the achievement of
the projected share of 17.55 per cent of the renewable energy vis-a-vis
the total power production in the country by the end of 2017 compared
to about 12.19 per cent at present.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The
Ministry fully appreciates the daunting task before it and is laying
stress on better planning, coordination, and management and execution
mechanism from the very beginning of the 12th Five Year Plan for
obtaining optimum utilization of funds vis-à-vis achievement of physical
targets of various programmes. The Ministry will also firm up its

11
action plan to ensure achievement of the 12th Plan capacity addition
target for each renewable energy sector, soon after the plan allocations
are finalized and intimated.
It is also submitted that the Grid-interactive power generation
capacity is envisaged to increase to around 54,700 MW by March 2017.
While the Ministry will put in its all out efforts to achieve this projected
target, the actual % contribution thereof in the total installed power
generation capacity will be governed by the capacity addition in
conventional sector by that time.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
Demands for Grants of MNRE for 2012-13
The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy has got a marginal increase in the Budget Estimate for the
year 2012-13 (Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 1385 crore) over the
Revised Estimates of previous year (Gross Budgetary Support of
Rs. 1360 crore). The Committee also note that the Ministry had sought
a Gross Budgetary Support to the tune of Rs. 5,582 crore in their
annual plan to achieve the targets. The Planning Commission
subsequently reduced the amount to Rs. 2,979 crore. The Committee
are surprised to note that the Ministry of Finance has sanctioned a
meagre amount of Rs. 1,385 crore only as Gross Budgetary Support
for the year 2012-13 which is not even 25 per cent of the proposed
demand of the Ministry. Further, the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy have submitted that this amount would be grossly inadequate
for upscaling of activities envisaged under various programmes of the
Ministry in the year. Scrutiny of the information supplied by the MNRE
reveals that the programme of the Ministry like Solar Photovoltic (SPV)
Off-Grid programme have suffered a setback due to lack of required
funds leading to non-achievement of target during the first phase of
the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. As such the Ministry are
unable to meet a committed Central Financial Assistance (CFA) liability
of Rs. 1141.88 crore towards the sanctioned 118.12 MWp SPV Off-Grid
projects during 2010-11 and 2011-12. The Ministry need to sanction an
additional capacity of about 82 MWp during 2012-13 to meet the target
of 200 MW in the first phase of the mission. The Committee are
unhappy to note that a target of only 30 MWp could be fixed for the
year 2012-13 due to the fact that the allocation of funds for year has
slipped to only Rs. 332 crore. They feel that adequate funding is a
must for harnessing the potential of available renewable resources.
The Committee are unable to comprehend that the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy, which has upgraded their performance over

12
the years on both financial and physical fronts and have ambitious
plans for the next Five Year Plan are rather being punished by the
Ministry of Finance by not acceding to the recommendations of even
the Planning Commission with regard to budgetary allocation to the
MNRE for the year 2012-13. Against this backdrop of excellent
achievement and in the light of the significance of renewable energy
vis-à-vis conventional energy the Committee recommend that the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should pursue with the
Ministry of Finance as well as Planning Commission and be persistent
to get allocation of more funds for the Ministry so that the renewable
energy programmes, particularly the project of the ambitious Solar
Mission may not face a setback in the beginning itself. They urge that
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should reiterate their demand
before the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance while
reflecting the importance and significance of their programmes and
activities especially with the perspective of energy security, energy
access, climate change, reducing dependence on conventional sources
of energy and ever increasing demand for energy.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has taken up the matter with Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance. Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission has
informed that the programmes of the Ministry deserve more resources
in Twelfth Plan as a whole and hope to be able to respond adequately
once the resources position for the full plan period is finalized over
the next four months; also that he had apprised the Finance Minister
of the additional requirements of the Ministry who agreed that based
on the performance of the Ministry in absorbing resources during the
year, more funds could be sought at RE stage, depending on the overall
resource position. The Ministry will accordingly pursue the matter with
Planning Commission and Finance Ministry at RE stage. The Ministry
is also seeking additional funds for specific projects under National
Clean Energy fund.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
Renewable Power-Grid and Off-Grid Programmes
The Committee note that upto 29 February, 2012 the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy had achieved 3409 MW capacity (including
States initiatives in Solar Power) against the physical target of
3435 MW during 2011-12 under Grid-interactive power. The allocation
during the year was Rs. 284 crore at BE stage and Rs. 276.10 crore at
RE stage whereas the actual expenditure of Rs. 275.10 crore could be

13
made in the year 2011-12. Under Off-grid/Distributed Renewable Power,
the achievement was 116.46 MWeq (upto 29th February, 2012) against
the physical target of 128.50 MWeq in 2011-12. The allocation at BE
stage was Rs. 470 crore and at RE stage was Rs. 464 crore while the
expenditure of Rs. 461.98 crore was actually made in the year 2011-12.
The Committee find that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
had proposed for an allocation of Rs. 2380 crore to achieve the physical
target of Rs. 4165 MW (including Rs. 1500 crore for transmission
infrastructure) under Grid-power in 2012-13 and an allocation of
Rs. 654 crore was sought to achieve the target of 216 MWeq under
Off-grid/DRPS in 2012-13. The Committee are surprised to observe
that the Ministry of Finance has not paid heed to the proposal of
Rs. 1500 crore for development of transmission infrastructure and even
for the physical target achievement, actual allocation for 2012-13 has
been reduced by more than Rs. 400 crore w.r.t. the proposed allocation
even though the physical target has remained more or less the same
under Grid-interactive power. Allocation is also less under Off-Grid
Distributed Power as compared to the demand. The Committee have
been given to understand that the target of the Solar SPV applications
in Off-grid Distributed Power had to be reduced to the level of
30 MWeq from what could have been about 100 MWeq in 2012-13,
due to less allocation of funds. The allocations have been substantially
reduced as compared to the demand particularly in Wind Power, Small
Hydro Power and Solar Power under Grid-interactive, while these three
components constitute about 88 per cent of total Grid-interactive target
for the year 2012-13. The Committee are happy to find that the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has picked up well over the years in
their performance in both physical and financial terms. While taking
note of the sincere efforts of the Ministry in the development of the
renewable energy, particularly Wind, Small Hydro and Solar Energy,
the Committee feel that there is no scope for any complacency and a
lot more is required to be done in further identification of potential
and its realization giving impetus to both Grid and Off-grid
programmes. Rather the Committee are concerned about fixing of the
physical targets and wish that the off-grid target should have been
enhanced in 2012-13 from the target of 128.5 MWeq for the previous
year instead of lowering it slightly to the level of 126 MWeq for the
current year. Similarly, the Committee are not convinced with the
reduction of allocation from Rs. 470/464 crore (BE/RE) in 2011-12 to
Rs. 450 crore (BE) in 2012-13. The Committee are of the opinion that
the renewable energy development programmes should not suffer due
to lack of required funds and the strategy for achievements of goals
in 12th Plan period should be made in such a way that the financial
allocations are adequate to meet the physical targets and produce the
desired results. However, the Committee would like to point out that
the Ministry had performed reasonably well during the pervious year
with almost similar pattern of allocation and hope that they would

14
achieve targets of 2012-13 also with innovative ways, meticulous
planning, flawless execution, improved R&D and appropriate
monitoring mechanism.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
will seek additional funds at Revised Estimates stage for all its major
programmes including off-grid schemes, whose outlay have been
curtailed on account of inadequate Budget allocation during 2012-13.
It will also review and firm up its strategy for achievement of set
goals in the 12th Plan period soon after the plan allocations are
finalized and intimated.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee were informed during the oral evidence that the
expansion of solar photovoltaic projects in Rajasthan, especially in
districts like Jodhpur, Jaisalmer and some other cities will lead to
large demand for technically qualified technicians and that they had
requested Rajasthan Government to propose setting up ITIs in those
areas for providing training to take advantage of the opportunity of
employment for the local youth. The Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy is ready to provide monetary support for this purpose. The
Committee find the proposal of the MNRE a very effective proposition
and emphasize that the Ministry should take up the matter with the
Government of Rajasthan and other similar placed States expeditiously
reflecting the utility and purpose for training the youth which would
lead to gainful employment opportunities. The Committee may be kept
abreast of the progress in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry had written to Rajasthan Government and also the
Gujarat Government for strengthening of the ITIs in the State and for
strengthening of the ITIs in the State and for organizing of training
programmes in renewable energy sector by these ITIs, for which the
Ministry could extend financial support. Progress thereafter is as
follows:
• Grant-in-aid of Rs. 50 lakh has been provided by the
Ministry to National Institute of Technology, Jaipur to
upgrade its laboratory and library facilities for renewable
energy courses initiated by it.

15
• Grant-in-aid of approx. Rs. 24 lakh has been sanctioned by
the Ministry to the Directorate of Employment & Training,
Gandhinagar, Gujarat towards recurring expenditure and
stipend for 450 students to be trained in 9 institutes under
MES courses.
• Course material developed by the Ministry has been
provided to Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
for incorporation in ITI syllabus and also posted on
Ministry’s website for use by other interested institutions/
States.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
National Solar Mission
The Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission which was approved
by the Government of India in November, 2009 and started in 2010.
It aims at development and deployment of solar energy technologies
in the country to achieve parity with grid power tariff by 2022. The
target of the Mission include deployment of 20,000 MW of grid
connected solar power and 2,000 MW of off-grid solar applications by
2022 and that the Mission would be implemented in three phases,
where first phase concludes in March, 2013. The Committee note that
against the first phase target of 1100 MW capacity addition of grid
connected solar power generation, a total capacity of 503.09 MW has
been installed as on February, 2012, leaving a capacity of 597 MW to
be installed during 2012-13 which is the terminal year of first phase
of the Mission. Further, against a target of 200 MWp capacity equivalent
off-grid solar photovoltaic system fixed for the first phase, the
Ministry have sanctioned SPV projects aggregating to 118.12 MWp
during 2010-11 and 2011-12, out of which only 25 MWp equivalent
capacity has been installed so far. The Committee have been informed
that a target of 30 MWp has been fixed during 2012-13, which if
achieved, will lead to the total capacity addition of 1st Phase under
off-Grid SPV systems to 55 MWp against a target of 200 MWp. The
Committee are disappointed with the progress made so far under Solar
Mission. Keeping in view, the last two years’ performance of the
Ministry, the Committee are apprehensive about achievement of the
physical targets of the first phase of the Mission. The Committee are
concerned that non-achievement of the first phase targets will have
the cascading effect on the remaining ambitious targets of the
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Ministry should make a serious effort
including upscaling of their targets for the year 2012-13 of the Solar
Mission to accomplish the first phase target and ensure that the non-

16
achievement of target in the first phase do not spill over to the second
phase of the Mission.
Reply of the Government
Against a target of 100 MWp during 2010-11 and 2011-12, the
Ministry sanctioned projects aggregating to 118.12 MWp. Since the
funds provided to the Ministry during 2012-13 are not adequate, the
Ministry has reduced the target of sanctioning to 30 MWp. However,
more projects are likely to be sanctioned if the funds are made available
from National Clean Energy Fund or any other resource during the
current year. Projects aggregating to 30 MWp are likely to be
commissioned during the current financial year.
The implementation of JNNSM is progressing steadily as per targets
and timelines envisaged. As per latest information, a capacity of
1154 MW of grid connected solar power has been selected for setting
up during Phase-1 against a target of 1,100 MW. This includes
620 MW selected during Batch-1, 84 MW under migration scheme,
100 MW under Rooftop PV and Small Solar Power Generation
Programme (RPSSGP) and 350 MW under Batch-2. Out of this, a
capacity of 268.3 MW has already been commissioned, while 340 MW
of solar PV projects under Batch-2 and 470 MW solar thermal projects
under Batch-1 have time for completion up to February, 2013 and
May, 2013 respectively. Additionally, a capacity of 4 MW under RPSSGP
scheme has also been commissioned, which is under verification. The
policies brought out under JNNSM has also encouraged various States
to bring out State specific solar policies, and some States have made
substantial progress in setting up grid connected solar power projects
in the country. Including this, the total capacity of solar power projects
has crossed over 1,000 MW (1044 MW as on 31st August, 2012), and
the actual achievement is likely to be much above the Phase-1 targets.
The Ministry is closely monitoring progress of projects which are
under implementation. A review meeting was recently organized at
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, for solar PV projects under Batch-2 which was
attended by the representatives of the State Government, State Utilities/
Discoms, District Administration, Pollution Control Board and NVVN.
Various issues related to land, transmission line for connectivity ,
technology tie-up and financial closure were discussed. As per reports
received from NVVN, all the projects with aggregate capacity of
340 MW under Batch-2 have achieved financial arrangement.
For solar thermal power projects, an expert committee comprising
of eminent scientist and representatives of NTPC and CEA has been
constituted to review progress of implementation. The Committee has
already visited sites of these plants and a report on the same has been
received.

17
The Payment Security Scheme, as was approved by the Cabinet,
has been implemented and funds have been released from budgetary
sources of the Ministry to NVVN.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that under Off-grid SPV programmes, the
budgetary allocation during the year 2010-11 was Rs. 227.49 crore (BE)
and Rs. 254.99 crore (RE), whereas, the actual expenditure was
Rs. 254.50 crore. In 2011-12, the actual expenditure was Rs. 458.64
crore against the BE and RE of Rs. 390 crore and Rs. 486.5 crore
respectively. For the year 2012-13, the allocation is only Rs. 332 crore.
The Committee find that in the beginning, a target of 200 MWp
capacity equivalent off-grid SPV systems was fixed for the first phase
i.e. from April, 2010 to March, 2013. The Committee were informed
that the MNRE had sanctioned 118.12 MWp equivalent against a total
target of 100 MWp in 2010-11 and 2011-12 taken together, but the
reported achievement were merely of 25 MWp equivalent. Keeping in
view the total first phase target of 200 MWp equivalent, a target of
atleast 80 MWp should have been fixed for the terminal year of the
first phase viz. 2012-13. However, the Committee are unhappy to
observe that a target of only 30 MWp has been finally fixed during
2012-13 as the allocation of fund is only Rs. 332 crore for the year.
MNRE has itself admitted that the target for 2012-13 has been reduced
due to non-availability of funds during the year. The Committee feel
that the drastic reduction of target from proposed 100 MWp to
30 MWp for the year 2012-13 will badly affect the implementation of
projects under off-Grid SPV Systems in particular and the JNNS Mission
in general. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to
pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance for more allocation of funds at RE stage.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has approached Ministry of Finance for allocating
additional funds from the National Clean Energy Fund for few projects.
The Inter-Ministerial Group in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance has approved off-grid SPV systems/power projects of
22.6 MWp with an allocation of Rs. 210.91 crore for the year 2012-13
and 2013-14.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]

18
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
Remote Village Electrification Programme (RVEP)
In their 18th Report, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in consultation with the
Ministry of Power may set up a co-ordination Committee consisting
of representatives from various implementing agencies at the required
level to facilitate and monitor implementation of two programmes
under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and Remote Village
Electrification Programme specifically in identification of villages and
hamlets which will be covered under the respective programmes. The
Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have inter-alia submitted that a
co-ordination Committee has already been constituted under the
Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
The Committee consists of representatives from the Ministry of Power,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Rural Electrification Corporation, Planning
Commission and representatives from the State Implementing Agencies.
The Committee monitors the implementation of RVE Programme in
addition to sanctioning of new projects. The Committee are satisfied
that a Co-ordination Committee has been constituted in accordance
with their recommendation. They would, however, like to be apprised
of effectiveness of this Committee in co-ordinating and implementing
the desired objectives of identification of villages for RVE Programmes,
coverage of villages so far and time-bound programmes for
electrification of the remaining villages etc. The Committe would also
expect the Coordination Committee to coordinate and ensure the
maintenance and monitoring of the systems installed in electrified
villages.
Reply of the Government
A Coordination Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy which had got
representation from Ministry of Power, Ministry of Panchayati Raj,
Rural Electrification Corporation, Planning Commission and
representative from State Implementing Agency. The Committee met
frequently to monitor the implementation of RVE programme in
addition to sanctioning of new projects. As a result of continuous
follow up and monitoring 7091 villages and hamlets were sanctioned
during the 11th Plan period. The Committee had been effective in
proper coordination with Rural Electrification Corporation/Ministry of
Power for identification of remote villages and hamlets for coverage
under the RVE programme. The Ministry continues to follow up with
the respective States to persuade them to expedite the implementation
of RVE programme.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]

19
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
Research, Design and Development in New and Renewable Energy
The Committee note that there is policy for promoting research,
design and development activities in new and renewable energy sectors.
It has provision to support R&D for technology development and
demonstration through various academic and research institutions
including autonomous bodies and centres. The thrust area of research
and development activities should include resource identification,
resource assessment, technological development, demonstration,
popularization, cost competitiveness and commercialization of new and
renewable energy sources. They can become an effective alternative of
conventional sources of energy provided due attention is given to R&D
in this sector.
For the year 2012-13, an amount of Rs. 194 crore has been
earmarked for R&D activities. Of this Rs. 64 crore will be for research
Institutions under MNRE such as Solar Energy Centre and wind energy
technology, wind national institutes of renewable energy. The remaining
Rs.130 crore be utilized for R&D efforts in solar energy, bio-energy,
hydrogen energy, fuel cells and small hydro areas.
No doubt, as compared to last three years, R&D allocation for the
year 2012-13 has shown an increase but it is not adequate enough as
required by this sector. The total budgetary allocation of the Ministry
is less than 0.50 per cent of the total budget of the Government. From
the allocation of Rs. 3355 crore, only Rs. 194 crore has been allocated
for R&D sector. It is high time that the Government ensures that R&D
activities do not suffer for want of funds. Regarding major achievement
under R&D activities during 2011-12, the Committee have been
informed that hydrogen energy, bio-fuels and solar energy were the
main areas in which R&D activities were focussed and that for the
year 2012-13, the focus of the R&D support will be on solar energy,
hydrogen energy/fuel cells and wind power which will also cover
Bio-energy and small hydro power. The Committee are happy to note
that of late various Centres of Excellence like different IITs, AHEC
Roorkee, CSIR, the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology Delhi,
National Petroleum Research Institute Dehradun, National Physics
Laboratory, etc. have been roped in with regard to various research
programmes of the renewable energy sector.
The Committee feel that the R&D is the most crucial and prime
factor for development of all the renewable sources of energy especially
keeping in mind the shift of country’s focus from fossil fuel (coal/
gas/oil) to these renewable sources of energy like solar, wind, hydrogen,
biogas etc. Further, the endeavour of the Ministry itself to increase its
share in the total energy sector from present 12.19 per cent to
17.55 per cent in 2017 would call for enhanced allocation to this R&D
sector.

20
The Committee urge the Ministry also to focus on technological
advancements in other countries and adopt new technologies. They
emphasize that the efforts being made or the experiments being
undertaken by the Ministry in regard to Hydrogen Energy along with
CNG, fuel cells, electric and hybrid electric vehicles should be pursued
vigorously and with a result and commercial-oriented approach. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy should persuade the Ministry of Finance for additional funds
for R&D projects at Revised Estimate stage.
Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry
lay increased emphasis on R&D in the new and emerging renewable
energy sector. It will also persuade Ministry of Finance for additional
funds for R&D projects at Revised Estimates stage.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that with a view to institutionalize the various
efforts for giving fillip to renewable energy sector, Solar Energy
Corporation of India and the Sardar Swarn Singh National Institute of
Renewable Energy are proposed to be established under the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy. The Solar Energy Corporation of India
will function as a Section 25 Company whereas Sardar Swarn Singh
National Institute of Renewable Energy will be an autonomous
institution. The Solar Energy Corporation will cover the entire gamut
of activities under National Solar Mission for development of solar
sector in the country. The objective of the corporation will inter-alia
include plan and execute an integrated programme on development
and deployment of solar energy technologies to achieve
commercialization. To own, operate and manage any type of power
stations (both Grid and Off-Grid) to promote research and development,
site selection for power stations, power evacuation and to exchange,
distribute and sell power as per the policies of the Government of
India. This will also assist MNRE in executing Mission’s objective
through appropriate mechanism besides coordinating with all stake
holders. It will facilitate work of R&D Advisory Council and Industry
Advisory Council. It would also provide inputs, although ancillary in
nature, but essential in the overall development of the sector like the
industrial development technology transfer, joint ventures, incentives
and investment related matters. Since, this Corporation is going to be
an umbrella organization looking after every possible and foreseeable
activities for development of solar energy under National Solar Mission,
the Committee would watch with keen interest the progress of its
operationalisation.

21
Similarly, the Committee observe that the Sardar Swarn Singh
National Institute of Renewable Energy has been established with a
view to focus on research in bio-energy. With the development of
state-of-the art laboratory and R&D projects, the laboratory is set to
operationalise by June, 2012 and development of R&D projects will
receive the big boost. This body is being established as an autonomous
body. Simultaneously , it is also proposed to set up a National Bio Fuel
Development Board and strengthen the existing institutional
mechanisms. In the opinion of the Committee, the existing institutional
mechanism as ordained under Allocation of Business may result in the
duplication of the efforts and overlapping of responsibility with Sardar
Swarn Singh National Institute of Renewable Energy. The work on the
Sardar Swarn Singh National Institute of Renewable Energy is nearing
completion whereas on Solar Corporation of India, it is at the
preliminary stage and both when operationalise, will be acting as
catalyst for rapid growth of renewable energy resources of the country.
The Committee, while welcoming the initiatives of the Government
to institutionalize their efforts, recommend that the constitution of larger
projects should be done in such a manner that they do not result in
duplication of efforts, progress of work be ensured in a time bound
manner and the role assigned to them is performed with sincerity and
professionalism with par excellence. There should also be special
mechanism to periodically review the functions of these bodies with
regard to the target set by them and their timely achievement so that
corrective measures can follow on the non-performance of these bodies.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
will ensure that the role and functions of the different institutes/bodies
do not overlap or interfere with one another. The observations of the
Committee have been noted. The Ministry will ensure that the role
and functions of the different institutes/bodies do not overlap or
interfere with one another.
A mechanism already exists for performance review of NIRE. The
progress of its research works is being monitored periodically by a
project review committee constituted by MNRE. The overall progress
of the institute is being monitored periodically by the Finance
Committee, R&D Committee and the Governing Council.
SECI has been set up only recently and the Ministry's efforts are
presently directed at making it fully functional. Its functioning will,
however, also be reviewed periodically with regard to set targets and
achievements. SEC presently functions as a part of the Ministry and
not a separate autonomous institution.

22
SEC presently functions as a part of the Ministry and not a separate
autonomous institution.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
Evaluation of Renewable Energy Sources
The Committee note that the process of preparing resource
estimation identification and assessment of potential of various forms
of renewable energy are at an incipient stage, bereft of accurate scientific
process and largely depending on manual, unscientific or semi-scientific
processes. As regards, the estimation of solar energy potential, semi-
scientific tenor appears to have been introduced with the contribution
from Indian Meteorological Department, use of satellite images and
establishment of 50 solar radiation resource assessment stations at the
sites having high potential for solar power. But these efforts only
provide indicative value of solar resources. It has been planned to
bring out first draft of solar satellite by the end of the year based on
data collected from solar radiation resource assessment stations and
IMD stations.
The methodology for assessment of wind energy is also
conventional as it is defined by Latitude and Longitude so that the
locations indicated as windy are the places where new masts can be
erected and measurement can be done. The scope of assessing the
potential of bio-mass energy are further complicated and less scientific
as the information is collected through (GIS) maps from survey groups
and processed data from satellite images of ISRO. Similarly are the
processes for other sources of renewable energy like, small hydel, tidal
and geo-thermal etc. also needs review and updation.
The current task of assessment of various energy resources is a
daunting one. The Committee feel that despite the complexities
involved and arduousness of the exercise efforts should be made to
overcome the problem so as to achieve the objective. The weather/
geographical conditions prevailing in various parts of the country with
regional or special characteristic should be taken into account. The
Committee feel that potential assessment should be linked with it. By
now it must be abundantly clear to the Ministry as to which geographic
areas are highly concentrated pockets for potential of various sources
of renewable energy in the decreasing order. Accordingly, segmentation
can be done with regard to potential of the resources so as to focus
their efforts on harnessing the same. Consequent to such segmentation
and identification, it should be ensured that efforts are undertaken in
high density zones for harnessing whereas potential identification efforts

23
can be focused elsewhere. This will economise expenditure, minimize
efforts while maximize the yield. Based on this characteristic, specific
research should be done about the nature, behavior, potential and the
availability of such natural bounties in lesser pockets. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that efforts in this regard should be
reinvigorated. If needed, the views/services of the related
organizations/individuals can also be considered as an additive in
accurately assessing the potential.
Reply of the Government
The Wind Resource Assessment Programme is being coordinated
by the Centre for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai, an
autonomous institution of Ministry. So far 31 States and Union
Territories have been covered involving establishment of over 685 wind
monitoring stations. Out of the total stations established so far,
233 stations have found to have wind power density in excess of
200 W/m
2 at 50 m height. Seven volumes of ‘Wind Energy Resource
Survey in India’ have so far been published covering wind data for
234 sites in 14 States/UTs. As per the estimation carried out earlier,
the country has a potential of 49,130 MW at 50 m height. However,
in view of improved technology and higher hub heights, the potential
is likely to go up. The Ministry through the C-WET is getting the
wind resource reassessment done at 100 m height. A total of
75 monitoring stations in 7 states are being established to measure the
wind data. This will help in further identification of wind potential
sites for installation of wind power projects.
The task of estimation of solar radiation has many dimensions
especially keeping in view prospects of development of concentrating
solar technologies. Till now, IMD has been the sole agency engaged in
monitoring of weather parameters including solar radiation, however,
these stations are largely located in urban areas whereas large solar
projects are likely to be set up in remote and far flung areas. Potential
assessment of solar radiation related to the weather/geographical
conditions prevailing in various parts of the country has been achieved
through data monitored under weather stations set up by IMD and
geographic areas with high potential are quite known at this stage.
Optimum design of the solar power projects, however, require much
detailed data comprising of the temporal variations of the solar
radiation covering its different characteristics such as direct, diffuse
and global. In order to be able to generate this information/data, MNRE
took an initiative to set up 51 advanced solar radiation resource stations
located in high potential areas for solar energy. The data from these
stations has become now available to developers and other stakeholders
from CWET Chennai. In order to maintain quality of data, online

24
system has been developed for checking data in cooperation with
German experts. In developing areas of differentiated availability of
solar radiation, it is also proposed to take help of satellite images
which are available from national as well as international sources. The
expansion of the network envisages to set up a few facilities to measure
atmospheric optical depth to help in simulation of effect of atmospheric
particles on the availability of solar radiation. The Ministry is interacting
with IMD, ISRO and IITs for coordinated efforts in this direction, and
would be open to interact with more experts/institutions as may be
suggested by the Committee.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
Information and Public Awareness
It is undeniable fact that renewable energy sector is now seen as
a significant player in the grid connected power generation and an
essential player for energy access. However, the Committee feel that it
is also important to generate mass awareness about renewable energy
programmes, policies, incentives, systems, products and devices. The
Committee is also aware the MNRE implements their information and
public awareness programme through Government channels i.e. State
Nodal Agencies (SNAs), Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
(DAVP), National Film Development Corporation (NFDC), Doordarshan,
AIR, etc. It also publicise new and renewable sources of energy systems
and devices through exhibitions, bus panels, hoardings, kiosks etc and
a variety of print, electronic and outdoor publicity.
The Committee, however, find that an allocation of Rs. 30 crore
(BE) was made for Information and Publicity in 2011-12 while the
same has been reduced to Rs. 20 crore for the year 2012-13. The
Committee urge the Ministry to pursue the matter with Planning
Commission and ensure that the allocation be adequately increased
for this purpose.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The
Ministry will try to step up its activities under publicity and awareness
programmes and seek higher allocation at RE stage.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]

25
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

26
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
Remote Village Electrification Programme (RVEP)
The Committee note that the Ministry is implementing Remote
Village Electrification Programme for providing basic lighting/
electrification in those remote unelectrified villages and hamlets where
grid extension is not found feasible by the State Governments and
hence are not covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran
Yojana. They have been informed that the duration of RVE Programme
is approved up to March 2012. The Committee are unhappy to find
that the initial 11th Plan target for electrification of 10,000 villages and
hamlets was reduced to 7000, out of which only 6900 villages and
hamlets have been sanctioned which includes 1058 border villages
sanctioned under a special package for electrification in border villages
of Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee find that so far only 3186 remote
villages and hamlets have been provided renewable energy based
system and projects and another 400 remote villages and hamlets are
under implementation in various North-Eastern States under the
scheme. They also fail to understand that even when the reduced
targets of 11th Plan could not be achieved, the Ministry’s 12th Five
Year Plan programmes do not include the RVE Programme at all. In
Committee's view, the RVE Programme of the Ministry was a good
initiative for providing basic lighting/electrification in the unelectrified
remote villages and hamlets where grid connection is not found feasible.
Therefore, discontinuing the RVE Programme is depriving people of
their basic rights in the remote countryside particularly border areas.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should critically
review their performance and accomplish the remaining unelectrified
villages and hamlets which were sanctioned in 11th Plan in a time
bound manner now. The Committee also feel the need for
re-assessment/evaluation of the RVE programme and continue the
programme in the 12th Five Year Plan in a more effective manner so
that the plans are converted into reality and the population living in
remote and far flung areas get the basic lighting/electrification thereby
improving their living conditions.

27
Reply of the Government
The Ministry had been implementing Remote Village Electrification
Programme for providing financial support for lighting/basic
electrification in those remote unelectrified census villages and
unelectrified hamlets of electrified census villages where grid extension
was not found feasible by the State Governments and hence were not
covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana. Such
villages were provided basic facilities for lighting/electricity through
various renewable energy sources. The programme was implemented
in States by State notified implementing Agencies. The programme
completed on 31st March 2012 as per the approval of the Cabinet.
The overall target of 10000 villages and hamlets for the 11th Plan
was laid on the basis of approximate projection for the number of
villages which were not likely to be covered through grid by the
States. Tentative indications received by that time from States, for such
villages, were utilized for these projections. This was also explained in
the 11th Plan document of the Ministry. The targets set for sanction of
financial support become at the best notional in light of the initial
indications received from the States for the number of villages required
to be covered. Projects were sanctioned on case to case basis after
proposals are submitted by the implementing Agencies as per the
guidelines of the scheme. During the 11th Plan period, proposals for
coverage of 7091 villages and hamlets (including 1058 border villages
of Arunachal Pradesh) were received from various State governments,
which were sanctioned by the Ministry. In addition, 2824 villages and
hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier, were ongoing. Thus all together,
in the 11th Plan, 9915 villages and hamlets were sanctioned/ongoing
and 5947 villages and hamlets have been completed which also includes
the villages and hamlets sanctioned/ongoing prior to the 11th Plan
period. The Ministry on its part is making all out efforts to persuade
the State Governments though continuous review meetings at various
levels for timely completion of these villages & hamlets.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

28
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
Renewable Power — Evacuation Problem
The Committee were apprised during the oral evidence that the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is facing acute evacuation
problem particularly at the solar installations in Rajasthan and Laddakh
and Wind Energy Installations in Tamil Nadu which otherwise are
ideal places for setting up solar photovoltaic panels and wind power
installations respectively. The problem may aggravate in future also as
more and more solar energy units are coming up under National Solar
Mission and Wind Energy Technology is also showing incremental
progress in the country. The Committee were also apprised that the
MNRE had proposed Rs. 1500 crore for transmission infrastructure
and Grid-interactive Renewable Power Programme so that the power
generated from these projects which cannot be absorbed in the States
could be navigated and connected to the National Grid. The Secretary,
MNRE also informed the Committee that the Planning Commission
did not grant or sanction Rs. 1500 crore for transmission infrastructure
stating that this is the job of Ministry of Power. In view of this, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy should again take up the matter with the Planning Commission
for reconsideration and finalise the authority responsible in consultation
with Ministry of Power for the job in a time bound manner in order
to give a boost to the upcoming Grid-interactive Renewable Power
Programmes so as to utilize the power generated fully. The Committee
would await follow-up action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Although the allocation of Rs. 1500 crore for transmission
infrastructure has not been approved for the Annual Plan 2012-13, a
total requirement of Rs. 7,000 crore towards this component has been
projected by the Ministry in its 12th Plan proposals submitted to the
Planning Commission. Further necessary action will be taken by the

29
Ministry soon after final approval of the plan proposals by competent
authority that is presently awaited.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/6/2011-P&C
Dated 25-9-2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
17 December, 2012 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

30
APPENDIX I
MINUTES  OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2012-13) HELD ON 11TH DECEMBER,
2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora— in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
3. Smt. Mausam Noor
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
11. Shri Jagadanand Singh
12. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
13. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
15. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
16. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director

31
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.
The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on:
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in
27th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in
28th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Power.
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with a minor
modifications in Action Taken Report on the recommendations
contained in 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
5. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

32
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of recommendations 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total: 12
Percentage: 86%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage: 00%
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which
the reply of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. No. 9
Total: 01
Percentage: 07%
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which
final reply of the Government is still awaited:
Sl. No. 5
Total: 01
Percentage: 07%