THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained  in the
Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔHydro PowerÑ
A Sustainable, Clean and Green Alternative Õ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.03.2018
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 07.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 ( Saka)


COE No. 292
Price : R 53.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-2018) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies....................................................... 24
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 26
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ..................................................... 30
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
February 15, 2018 ............................................. 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
17th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Energy ........................................................ 36
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2017-18)
Dr. Kambhampati Hari BabuÑ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T .K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
(iii)

(iv)
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh Ñ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Ñ Director
3. Ms. Deepika Ñ Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Third Report on the action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the 17th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on the subject ÔHydro PowerÑA Sustainable,
Clean and Green AlternativeÕ.
2. The 17th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 6th May,
2016 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day.
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations, except two,
contained in this Report were received on 9th August, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 15th February, 2018.
4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 17th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARI BABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with Action
Taken by the Ministry of Power on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee (2015-16) on the subject ÔHydro PowerÑA Sustainable, Clean
and Green AlternativeÕ.
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
6th May, 2016 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the
same day. The Report contained 14 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of 12 out of 14 Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14
Total-08
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs replies:
Serial No. 13
Total-01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 3, 6 and 11
Total-03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 2 and 12
Total-02
Chapter-V

2
4. Action Taken Notes in respect of the following
Recommendations contained in the Report are still awaited:Ñ
(i) Recommendation No. 2 relating to constitution of sub-
committee(s) to look after various issues related to the
subject and to examine the subject intensively and
extensively by holding meetings with various Government
agencies and other stakeholders involved; and
(ii) Recommendation No. 12 relating to study of the remaining
river basins and expediting the process of granting
environmental clearances.
The Committee draw attention of the Ministry towards the fact
that the 17th Report on the Subject ÔHydro Power - A Sustainable,
Clean and Green AlternativeÕ was presented to the Parliament on
6th May, 2016 and the Ministry was expected to furnish Action
Taken Replies regarding the Recommendations/Observations
contained in that Report within three months of its presentation to
the Parliament. However, the Action Taken Replies were furnished
on 9th August, 2017 i.e. the Ministry took 15 Months to furnish the
replies and Action Taken Replies in respect of two Recommendations
are still awaited. The Committee have taken a serious view of this
delay and they expect the Ministry to adhere to the prescribed time
limit.
5. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
Recommendation No. 3
6. The Committee had noted that out of the total potential of
1,45,320 MW assessed in the country, Arunachal Pradesh alone had
46,805 MW of hydro power capacity that was to be developed. The
Committee had noted that in Arunachal Pradesh, where there was
approval for 12,000 MW capacities, only 2,705 MW capacity was under
development and a meagre 200 MW was under operation. It was a
well- known fact that the gestation period of hydro power projects
was comparatively longer, owing to the elaborate process of survey,
preparing DPR and obtaining various clearance and difficulties faced
during construction of the project itself, which were mostly in remote
and uninhabitable areas. The Committee were concerned to note that
there were 25,962 MW capacities which were yet to be taken up for

3
any development. There was every possibility that the project which
were at various stages of development could take upto 7-8 years or
even more to be operational. In this scenario, the future of about
26,000 MW capacity which had not been taken up for development,
looked very bleak. It was also a fact that in the long run, hydro power
proved cheaper as flowing water was used for its operation; therefore,
the sooner we develop and start harnessing hydro power, the lesser
would be the per unit cost. The Committee, therefore, had strongly
recommended that:Ñ
(i) All-out efforts should be made by the Government to ensure
that the construction work on the projects which have got
all the clearance should be started without any loss of time.
(ii) To ensure that the timeline for the projects, which are under
various stages of development, is adhered to, the Government
should take pre-emptive as well as prompt resolution of any
issue which may crop up during their development.
(iii) The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to
make efforts on priority basis to ensure the balance capacity
of 25,962 MW, which is yet to be developed, is allocated for
development at the earliest.
7. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as
under:Ñ
ÒThe following monitoring mechanism is in place in the Ministry of
Power to coordinate countryÕs hydro capacity addition programme
and to ensure that the timelines for project execution are adhered
to:
(a) Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the under
construction hydro power projects (above 25 MW) in
pursuance of Section 73 (f) of Electricity Act, 2003. The
progress of each project is monitored continuously through
site visits, interaction with the developers & other stake
holders. Chairperson, CEA holds review meetings with the
Power Projects Monitoring Panel (PPMP) and monitoring
divisions of CEA.
(b) Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP), set up by the Ministry
of Power , independently follow up and monitors the progress
of the hydro projects.
(c) Ministry of Power also reviews the progress of ongoing
hydroelectric projects regularly with the concerned officers
of CEA, equipment manufacturers, State Utilities/CPSUs/
Project developers, etc.

4
(d) Further , in order to improve the capacity performance of
the power sector public undertakings, and to ensure that
the projects are commissioned on time, the Government has
taken the following steps:
➢The project implementation parameters/milestones are
incorporated in the annual MoU signed between
respective CPSUÕs and MoP and the same are monitored
during the quarterly performance review meetings of
CPSUÕs and other meetings held in MoP/CEA.
➢The issues related to erection and supply of Electro-
Mechanical equipment is expedited with BHEL in various
meetings held in CEA/MoP and other local issues
affecting the progress of works are taken up with
respective State Governments by the Concerned CPSU/
MoP .Ó
8. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has furnished a list of various monitoring mechanisms to
coordinate the countryÕs Hydro Capacity Addition Programme and to
ensure that the timelines for project execution are adhered to.
But, the Ministry has not provided any detail regarding outcome of
these monitoring mechanisms.
The Committee had noted in their report in May, 2016 that in
Arunachal Pradesh there was approval for 12,000 MW capacity, out
of which 2,705 MW capacity was under development and a meagre
200 MW was under construction. The Committee have expected the
Ministry to come up with updated data, especially when the Ministry
has taken 15 Months to furnish the Action Taken Replies.
In view of the above, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should furnish the latest status regarding Hydro Power Development
in Arunachal Pradesh and they reiterate their recommendation that:
(i) All-out efforts should be made by the Government to
ensure that the construction work on the projects which
have got all the clearance should be started without any
loss of time.
(ii) To ensure that the timeline for the projects, which are
under various stages of development, is adhered to, the
Government should take pre-emptive as well as prompt
resolution of any issue which may crop up during their
development.
(iii) The Committee strongly recommend to the Government
to make efforts on priority basis to ensure the balance
capacity of 25,962 MW, which is yet to be developed, is
allocated for development at the earliest.

5
Recommendation No. 5
9. The Committee, in the preceding para, had noted that the
performance of the Private Sector in hydro power had not been up to
the mark for various reasons. The Committee were of the firm belief
that involvement of private players in a big way was necessary for the
development of hydro power sector. However , they were not sure
whether this would happen soon. On the other hand, the Committee
found that the Government has giant Public Sector Undertakings like
NHPC, NEEPCO, THDC, etc., having the required infrastructure,
manpower and expertise, who are also specialized in the development
of hydro projects. Despite all these, these PSUs did not have many
projects to develop. The Committee felt that under-utilization of these
PSUs was nothing but sheer waste of available resources and expertise.
In Arunachal Pradesh, after utilizing their expertise to prepare DPRs,
many projects had been assigned to private players who were new in
this field. The Committee had also been apprised that hydro power
projects were allotted in Arunachal Pradesh on payment of upfront
premium on ÔFirst come First served basisÕ. Since this upfront premium
was not included in the cost of the projects, the same could not be
calculated for tariff determination. However , NHPC or Government
PSUs could not pay upfront premium as they did not have provision for
the same, because of which all the projects allocated to them were
taken back and allocated to private companies who paid upfront
premium. The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended that:Ñ
(i) It has become imperative to promote PSUs engaged in hydro
power by allocating them more and more projects as they
have the required infrastructure, expertise and resources to
work in remote areas; besides, they do not have problems
in arranging finances for projects.
(ii) The Government should take necessary steps to discontinue
the practice of payment of upfront premium for allocation
of hydro projects.
10. In its reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under:
(i) ÒAt present, following projects have been allotted to Central
PSU and these projects are at various stages of development.
Details are given below:
Status of H.E. Projects allotted Nos. I.C.
to CPSUÕs (MW)
      1 2 3
Under Construction 13 6235

6
H.E. Projects concurred by CEA and 10 5102
yet to be taken up for construction
H.E. Projects under Examination in CEA 3 714
DPR Returned by CEA to project authorities 1 130
for resubmission
H.E. Projects under S&I 3 1504
Total 30 13685
It is observed, that apart from the above a number of project
have been allotted to private sector for implementation.
However , a majority of the projects are yet to take off.
Some of them are progressing at a slow pace.
(ii) The Tariff Policy, 2006 provides for upfront payment as one
of the bidding criteria for the hydro power projects. It is
also to mention that Hydro Power projects were allotted to
IPPs on payment of Ôup front premiumÕ in accordance with
the Tariff Policy, 2006. But there was no impact on the tariff
on account of the above, since this premium was not included
in the project cost. However , this provision has now been
removed in the Tariff Policy, 2016.Ó
11. With regard to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has furnished details regarding status of Hydro Projects
that have been allotted to the CPSUs. It has been stated that apart
from the projects that have been allotted to the CPSUs, a number
of projects have also been allotted to private sector for
implementation.
The Committee note with satisfaction that the provision regarding
upfront payment as one of the bidding criteria for the Hydro Power
Projects has been removed in the Tariff Policy, 2016. However, the
Committee are concerned to note that a majority of the projects
are yet to take off and some are progressing at a slow pace which
implies that the hydro power sector has been neglected and hardly
any effort has been made by the Government to ease numerous
obstacles in its development.
Recommendation No. 6
12. The Committee had noted that 96,524 MW capacity of pumped
storage scheme had been identified in the country. Out of this, capacity
      1 2 3

7
of 4,785.6 MW was under operation and 1,080 MW was under
construction, whereas 1,000 MW projects DPR were prepared and
submitted to CEA. The Committee had found that development of
pumped storage scheme in the country was at a rudimentary stage and
its utilization against the total potential was meagre. Considering the
vast network of electricity grid in the country and the quantum of
electricity demand, it was not difficult to gauge the range of fluctuation
in power demands. Pumped storage schemes were meant for storing
energy and using at times when demands for electricity soars. Hence,
pumped storage scheme would be quite beneficial for developing
ancillary power market and in meeting sudden high demands of
electricity. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that due
attention should be given to develop identified pumped storage schemes
in the country.
13. The Ministry of Power, in its reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒApart from catering to peaking demands, pumped storage projects
are becoming increasingly important to meet the balancing power
requirements for ensuring grid stability in the light of large capacity
addition envisaged from renewable resources like solar (100000
MW) and wind (60000 MW) by 2022 which supply intermittent and
variant power.
Around 40% of the pumped storage potential identified in the States
like MP , Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Karnataka could not be taken up for
development etc. due to variety of other reasons like their location
in Reserve Forests, Coal mines, Western Ghat region (declared as
Eco-Sensitive Zone by MoEF and all the construction activities have
been stopped) etc. As such, an assessment of the do-able Pumped
Storage Schemes in the near future has been made by CEA in
consultation with various State Governments and various CPSUs
involved in hydro power development. Based on these consultations,
13 Nos. of PSS having aggregate capacity of 8345 MW have been
identified for providing benefits in near future which includes
schemes on existing hydro projects as well as new pumped storage
schemes.Ó
14. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that around
40% of the pumped storage potential identified in the States like
MP, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Karnataka etc. could not be taken up for
development and all the construction activities there have been
stopped due to variety of reasons like their location in Reserve
Forests, Coal Mines, Western Ghats Region, etc., which have been

8
declared as Eco-Sensitive Zone by the MoEF. It has also been stated
that an assessment of the do-able Pumped Storage Schemes in the
near future has been made by CEA in consultation with various
State Government and CPSUs involved in Hydro Power Development
and based on these consultations, 13 Nos. of Pumped Storage
Schemes having aggregate capacity of 8345 MW including schemes
on existing Hydro Projects have been identified for development.
The Ministry itself has stated that apart from catering to peak
demand, Pumped Storage Schemes are important to meet the
balancing power requirements for ensuring grid stability in the light
of large capacity addition envisaged from Renewable Sources like
Solar (100 GW) and Wind (60 GW) by 2022.
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should hold
consultations with MoEF and try to find a way out as about 90,000
MW of capacity should not be abandoned right away. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that due attention should
be given to develop identified Pumped Storage Projects in the
country.
Recommendation No. 11
15. The Committee, during the examination of the subject, had
been apprised that some States had imposed heavy water cess, which
had affected the viability of hydro power projects due to increase of
tariff by more than one rupee. The Committee had felt that this issue
would only exacerbate the grim scenario of hydro power sector of the
country. They had desired the Government to take up this matter with
the States concerned and find out some solution to this problem so
that the already distressed hydro power sector was exempted from the
additional burden in the form of water cess. The Committee, therefore,
had recommended that:Ñ
(i) There should be no retrospective charges like cess on water,
reallocation of DPR rate projects for want of upfront premium
or any other kind of levy which is likely to impact the
competence of the tariff of hydro power.
(ii) The State Governments concerned may be taken on board in
this regard so as to ensure that such lateral super-imposition
retrospectively is not taken recourse to for any reason.
16. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:Ñ
ÒWater is a State Subject. However, it has been taken up with the
State Governments that levying of Cess and other such charges
result in making the tariff uncompetitive and hence should not be
resorted to.Ó

9
17. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that Water is a State subject.
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has taken up the
matter related to the levying of Water Cess and other such charges
with the State Governments concerned. But, the Committee are of
the view that the fact that Water is a State subject does not absolve
the Ministry of its responsibility towards development of the Hydro
Sector which is already in a grim situation.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should take up the matter
of Water Cess and other charges with the State Government
concerned with utmost sincerity and find out some solution to this
problem so that the already distressed hydro power sector is
exempted from the additional burden of water cess. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that:
(i) There should be no retrospective charges like cess on
water, reallocation of DPR rate projects for want of upfront
premium or any other kind of levy which is likely to impact
the tariff of hydro power.
(ii) The State Governments concerned may be taken on board
in this regard so as to ensure that such lateral super-
imposition of cess retrospectively is not taken recourse to
for any reason.

10
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Seventeenth Report, under Direction 73A of the
ÔDirections by the SpeakerÕ
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that as per the present policy, hydro power
plants upto 25 MW capacities are considered as renewable energy
sources and are under the purview of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, whereas, hydro power plants having capacities more than
25 MW are considered conventional energy source and are dealt with
by the Ministry of Power. In reply to the query of the Committee as
to why not all the hydro power projects, irrespective of their capacity,
cannot be considered as renewable energy sources, the Ministry have
stated that as per the Allocation of Business Rules, all matters relating
to Small/Micro Hydel Project of and below 25 MW capacity comes
under the domain of the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE).
Declaring all hydro power projects as renewable energy source is a
policy decision which may involve joint consultation between the
Ministry of Power , Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, State
Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee, during the
examination of the subject, have learned that hydro power is a clean
and green source of energy and unlike conventional thermal plants
does not emit pollutants into the environment. The Committee also
found that there is no logic for segregation of hydro power into
renewable energy and conventional energy and also its baseline, viz.
25 MW. The Committee wonder if perpetuity of the source and non-
emission of pollutants are the criteria for considering a source as
renewable energy, then why cannot hydro power projects having
capacity of more than 25 MW be also counted as renewable sources.
The Committee was informed by the Ministry that in view of the
examination of the subject, the Cabinet has recently approved the
new tariff policy in which hydro power has been exempted from the
renewable solar power obligation. The result of the new tariff policy
will be exemption of hydro power from the account for meeting the
obligation of buying solar power. The Committee believe that this is a
step in the right direction and will act as an incentive for the hydro

11
power sector. The Committee feel that the spirit of the tariff policy
in exempting hydro power from the solar obligation is also an
endorsement that hydro power, irrespective of the capacity, should be
treated as renewable sources of energy because solar power obligation
is nothing but equivalent of renewable power obligation and hydro
power exemption signifies that it meets the basic criteria of these
obligations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:Ñ
(i) All types of hydro power should be treated as renewable
sources of energy.
(ii) If necessary, legislative provisions may be introduced in this
regard as defining hydro a renewable source involves a policy
decision and allocation of business in the Government as
well.
(iii) The exemption of hydro power from solar power obligation
in the new tariff policy be made permanent.
Reply of the Government
In compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, the
Ministry has initiated a policy intervention to formulate a hydro power
development policy, which envisages following interventions:Ñ
¥ Declaring all hydropower (irrespective of size) as Renewable
Energy.
¥ Provide Hydro Power Obligation (HPO) within currently
mandated Non-Solar RPOs to qualify for dispatch priority,
however such HPO/RPO benefit would be available to such
> 25 MW HEPs which attain COD within 5 years after
notification of this policy.
¥ Providing 4% interest subvention during construction
(maximum of 7 years) and 3 years post COD to all hydropower
projects (both public and private sector) above 25 MW,
attaining COD within 5 years after notification of this policy
with funding from Coal Cess/NCEF/DONER (NLCPR) or any
other source of fund. However , it would be mandatory that
the benefits of such interest subvention should be passed on
to the consumers in all cases, including in those cases where
PPAs have already been signed prior to the policy.
¥ Excluding cost of enabling infrastructure from project cost
for tariff calculations and reimbursement of the same from
appropriate funds of the concerned department/entities of
the GoI/State Govts.

12
¥ Engaging with banks and CERC for rationalizing tariffs through
a combination of measures.
Create a Hydro Power Development Fund (HPDF) by ear-marking
funds from the Coal Cess/NCEF/DoNER (NLCPR)/or any other source of
funds. This fund would be located within a suitable entity under the
administrative control of Ministry of Power.
The proposed draft policy would address the recommendation of
the HonÕble Committee and is likely to encourage private as well as
public sector investment in hydro power sector.
[Ministry of Power, File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated:09/08/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
The Committee note that out of the total installed hydro power
capacity of 42,433.4 MW, only 3,154 MW capacity, which stands at a
meager 7%, belongs to the Private Sector. The Committee further note
that the Private Sector, in the 11th Plan period, could manage to
achieve only 1,292 MW hydro power generation capacity against their
mediocre target of 3,491 MW. Also, during the ongoing 12th Plan, their
actual achievement so far is only 595 MW against the target of
3,285 MW. The Committee find that this is in sharp contrast with their
contribution in the thermal power sector in the 11th and in the ongoing
12th Plan. The Private Sector, in thermal power , during the 11th Plan
had achieved 21,720 MW against their target of 11,552, a whopping
188% of their target. Even in the ongoing 12th Plan, they have already
achieved 44,667.5 MW capacities, against the target of 43,540 MW and
there is one more year to go for the Plan period to be completed. The
Committee are dismayed over the grim condition of hydro power sector
in respect of capacity addition, wherein, even the Private Sector, an
outstanding performer in thermal power , has miserably failed. The
above mentioned figures speak volumes about the hydro power scenario
of the country. The Committee, during the examination of the subject,
learnt that many private players who have been allocated hydro power
projects are finding it difficult to construct/complete the project due
to various reasons, including their inexperience in the field. It has also
been learnt that in some cases, though they have managed to complete
the projects, their faulty construction is a cause of concern now. Since
hydro power projects are site-specific and mostly located in remote
areas, they demand a high level of expertise and quality manpower,
whereas most of the private players are lacking in this aspect. The
hydro power sector has been neglected for decades and hardly any

13
effort has been made by the Government to ease numerous obstacles
in their development. This has led to a shift of focus of the private
players to thermal power which is much easier and less risky to develop
and that too with a shorter gestation period. However, the Committee
are of the considered view that to bring about a rapid growth in hydro
power similar to the thermal sector, it is imperative to involve private
players. Since the Government have now put its focus back on hydro
power , the Committee feel that the steps taken in regard to reviving
the sector should not become an unproductive exercise but should be
concrete and capable of making this sector attractive for the Private
Sector on sustainable basis.
(i) The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government,
while drawing up the plan and policies to revive the sector
should also make enabling provisions to attract private players
to this sector in a big way.
(ii) The Committee also desire that the Government should make
suitable provisions/take steps so that only private players
with required capabilities and expertise could be allocated
hydro power projects so as to ensure that the allocated
projects are developed within the stipulated time period.
Reply of the Government
A no. of measures have been taken by the Government in the past
for development of hydro power sector including formulation of Hydro
Policy, 2008 to boost the hydro power development in the country
which includes the following:Ñ
¥ Transparent selection criteria for awarding sites to private
developers.
¥ Enables developer to recover his additional costs through
merchant sale of upto a maximum of 40% of the saleable
energy.
Recently Government of India came out with revised Tariff Policy,
2016 with the following other provisions related to hydro sector:Ñ
¥ Cost plus Tariff regime (in which tariff is to be determined
by the regulator under section 62 of Electricity Act, 2003)
has been extended for public & private sector hydro power
projects up to 15.08.2022.
¥ Certainty of long term PPA for min. 60% of capacity, balance
through merchant sale - Provision for extension of PPA beyond
35 years for a further period of 15 years.

14
¥ Enabling provision for suitable regulatory framework
incentivizing HEPs for using long term financial instruments
- in order to reduce tariff burden in the initial years.
¥ Depreciation - Developer shall have the option of charging
lower rate of depreciation vis-a-vis the ceiling determined
by CERC.
It is to mention that the development of hydro project is affected
due to number of other reasons like land acquisition, law & order
problem, geological surprises inadequate infrastructure facilities,
financial crunch with the developer, inter-state issues etc. As such,
the proposed Hydro Power Policy, 2017 aims to address all the other
issues comprehensively.
[Ministry of Power, File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated:09/08/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee, in the preceding para, have noted that the
performance of the Private Sector in hydro power has not been up to
the mark for various reasons. The Committee are of the firm belief
that involvement of private players in a big way is necessary for the
development of hydro power sector. However, they are not sure whether
this would happen soon. On the other hand, the Committee find that
the Government have giant Public Sector Undertakings like NHPC,
NEEPCO, THDC, etc., having the required infrastructure, manpower
and expertise, who are also specialized in the development of hydro
projects. Despite all these, these PSUs have not many projects to
develop. The Committee feel that under-utilization of these PSUs is
nothing but sheer waste of available resources and expertise. In
Arunachal Pradesh, after utilizing their expertise to prepare DPRs,
many projects have been assigned to private players who are new in
this field. The Committee have also been apprised that hydro power
projects were allotted in Arunachal Pradesh on payment of upfront
premium on ÔFirst come First served basis Õ. Since this upfront premium
is not included in the cost of the projects, the same cannot be calculated
for tariff determination. However , NHPC or Government PSUs cannot
pay upfront premium as they do not have provision for the same,
because of which all the projects allocated to them were taken back
and allocated to private companies who paid upfront premium. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that:Ñ
(i) It has become imperative to promote PSUs engaged in hydro
power by allocating them more and more projects as they

15
have the required infrastructure, expertise and resources to
work in remote areas; besides, they do not have problems
in arranging finances for projects.
(ii) The Government should take necessary steps to discontinue
the practice of payment of upfront premium for allocation
of hydro projects.
Reply of the Government
(i) At present, following projects have been allotted to Central
PSU and these projects are at various stages of development.
Details are given below:Ñ
Status of H.E. Projects allotted Nos. I.C.
to CPSUÕs (MW)
Under Construction 13 6235
H.E. Projects concurred by CEA and 10 5102
yet to be taken up for construction
H.E. Projects under Examination in CEA 3 714
DPR Returned by CEA to project authorities 1 130
for resubmission
H.E. Projects under S&I 3 1504
Total 30 13685
It is observed, that apart from the above a number of project
have been allotted to private sector for implementation.
However , a majority of the projects are yet to take off.
Some of them are progressing at a slow pace.
(ii) The Tariff Policy, 2006 provides for upfront payment as one
of the bidding criteria for the hydro power projects. It is
also to mention that Hydro Power projects were allotted to
IPPs on payment of Ôup front premium Õ in accordance with
the Tariff Policy, 2006. But there was no impact on the tariff
on account of the above, since this premium was not included
in the project cost. However, this provision has now been
removed in the Tariff Policy, 2016.
[Ministry of Power File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09/08/2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)

16
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee note that the development of a hydro power project
is a long and cumbersome process. It is also a fact that little
technological advancements have been made in this sector either to
curtail the long gestation period or increase the efficiency of generation
of electricity with lesser amount of water. During the examination of
the subject, the Ministry stated that the major advancements during
recent years have been the use of advanced Tunnel Boring Machines
for excavation of tunnels, Tunnel Seismic Prediction machines to predict
the geology ahead of the tunnel face upto 200m, use of advanced Drill
Jumbos for excavation of tunnels etc. These technologies help in
reducing the construction period to some extent. The Committee firmly
believe that technological advancements can provide further boost to
the distressed hydro power sector. However , not much attention has
been paid to this crucial aspect. The advancements as apprised to the
Committee have been limited to the excavation of the land only.
Improvement in the size and efficiency of generator , turbines and
other related equipment is one area which has not been paid the
desired attention. Improvement in this area with a scientific approach
may open up new avenues in reducing the time and cost involvements.
During the visit to Narmada, the Committee was apprised that a new
technology, namely, ÒScrew TechnologyÓ has been invented in Germany
which is capable of running turbines with the flow of only 10% of water
as compared to the requirement of present day technology. If this
technology is found to be successful and effective, it will give a fillip
to the hydro sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:Ñ
(i) Government must give utmost priority to research and
development activities of hydro power.
(ii) Emphasis should be on indigenous research and development
relating to hydro power.
(iii) We should also explore the options of collaboration with
advance technologies in this sphere across the world and if
needed, latest technologies from advanced countries should
be adopted.
Reply of the Government
CPSUs have an R & D wing since April, 2011 with established
R & D policy guidelines. Efforts are being made to do some quality
R & D works in consultation with various reputed R & D institutions and
Academic institutions such as IITs etc. CPSEs are adopting latest

17
technology in its construction projects as well as S&I (survey &
Investigation) stage. Latest practices like micro earthquake studies,
neo- techniques/paleo-seismic studies, magneto telluric (MT) surveys
has also been used successfully in certain hydro electric projects. To
minimize geological surprises in tunnels, probe holes and Tunnel Seismic
Prediction (TSP) are being used.
Concrete face Rock fill dam (CFRD) and cut off wall were provided
first time in India at dam of Dhauli Ganga HE Project in Uttarakhand
to reduce time consuming excavation work as well as cost of project
by way of special design and construction techniques necessary to
overcome the difficulties created by 70 mtr. thick alluvium overburden
in the river bed with large amount of pebbles and boulders. Roller
Compacted Concrete (RCC) was used in the dam of Teesta Low dam
Project-IV in (W.B.) which is an economical as well as time saving with
strength and durability technique. Jet grouting has been introduced
for the first time in India at Teesta-V HE Project (510 mw), Sikkim.
Application of Remote Sensing and GIS in estimation of river inflow/
discharge in to the reservoir of Kameng H.E.Project.
[Ministry of Power, File No.10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09/08/2017]
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee note that so far financial institutions have been
granting loan to hydro projects for a period of 10-12 years, entailing
repayment of debt in the initial 10-12 years only, whereas the life of
the hydro projects is 35 years and more. Therefore, higher cash flow
is required in the initial years on account of repayment of debt. To
meet the increased cash flow requirement, a higher rate of depreciation
is allowed (5.28%) for the initial period of 12 years for the purpose of
determination of tariff. As a result, the tariff of hydro power is quite
high in the initial years. The tariff then reduces, once the loan is
repaid and the plant is fully depreciated. That being so, the issue of
the initial higher tariff of hydro power has become one of the biggest
concerns as the same has gone up to Rs. 5-6 per unit. Since thermal
power tariff is still on the lower side, the States are naturally finding
tariff of hydro power too high; therefore, they are not ready to purchase
it causing non-execution of Power Purchase Agreements in some
instances. The Committee are concerned with the state of affairs and
feel that it will be most undesirable for hydro power to become
unsellable for whatever reasons. The Committee have strongly felt
that to develops the hydro power sector at a desirable pace, there is
an urgent need to provide long term finances to hydro power projects.

18
The provision of long term financing will help in levelizing the tariff
of hydro power in place of the initial higher tariff. The Committee,
during the examination of the subject, was apprised that two financial
institutions relating to the power sector , namely, PFC and REC have
now modified their policy to extend loans for a longer period of
25 years to hydro power projects. The Committee are glad with the
prompt action taken by the Ministry and further recommend that:Ñ
(i) The provision of providing long term loans should not be
limited to these two PSUs but utmost efforts be made by the
Government to make the required provisions and persuade
other financial institutions and banks as well to lend finances
to hydro power project for longer tenure.
(ii) The Committee recommends that the average lifespan of
the hydro power , for calculation of tariff per unit, be treated
as 30 to 40 years. The Government must change the policy
and also ask the financial institutions to give long term
finances to make hydro power affordable and attractive.
(iii) The Committee also recommend that long term bonds with
sovereign guarantee should also be floated to provide long
term finances to this sector.
Reply of the Government
As per para 5.8 of revised Tariff Policy notified on 28.01.2016, the
Appropriate Commission shall provide for suitable regulatory framework
for incentivizing the developers of Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs) for
using long term financial instruments in order to reduce the tariff
burden in the initial years.
According to the CERC Tariff Regulations, 2014 the life span of
hydro power project has been fixed as 35 years for the purpose of
calculation of tariff.
In the proposed Hydro Power Policy 2017, it is proposed to engage
with banks and CERC for rationalizing tariffs through a combination of
measures.
[Ministry of Power File No.10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09/08/2017]
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that there are hydro power projects which
are being delayed due to lack of finances. The Committee also note

19
that apart from the problem of getting loan only for shorter tenure,
the hydro power projects have to pay high rate of interest on the loan
amount. The Committee have further noted that the gestation period
of hydro power project, i.e. 8-10 years is longer as compared to
thermal plants where it is 4-5 years and solar power plants where it
is only one year. Therefore, return on the investment made in hydro
power projects starts to flow only after 8-10 years. This way, given the
same rate of return and calculating the overall project life cycle,
hydro power projects yields a lesser return as compared to thermal
and solar power plants. These financial issues are resulting in higher
tariff of hydro power which is ultimately paid by the end users. The
Committee strongly believe that electricity is critical for the economic
progress of the country. Considering the numerous inherent benefits
and in view of the upcoming huge capacity addition in renewable
source, the development of hydro power sector has become critical.
However , so far, hydro power sector has been neglected and not given
the due attention. Since the Government, for various reasons, has now
decided to focus on hydro power sector , it is important that this sector
should not only be provided long term finances but also at more
reasonable rate of interest to make tariff of hydro power competitive
and sellable. The Committee, therefore, recommend the following:
(i) Tax free bonds, similar to the infrastructure sector , should
be issued for the hydro power sector.
(ii) The Government should sincerely find out ways and means
to provide multilateral funds from international agencies,
viz. World Bank, ADB, etc., for the hydro power sector.
(iii) The Government should also explore avenues to provide funds
to the hydro power sector by the Life Insurance Corporation
of India (LIC) and Pension Funds.
(iv) Cash rich PSUs of the country should invest in hydro power
sector for diversification, as fossil fuels are limited.
(v) Similarly, various PSUs of hydro power should be encouraged
to invest in other hydro power projects.
(vi) The Committee also desire that hydro power projects,
depending on their importance, may be declared as vital
infrastructure and should be extended the required support
and benefits to overcome any obstacles in their development.
Reply of the Government
(i) Hydro generation is already a part of the Infrastructure sector
according to Definition of Infrastructure lending by the RBI
circular dated 25.11.2013. As per the information available

20
in CEA, NHPC had already Issued Tax free bonds in the recent
past. Government allows Hydro PSUs to issue tax free bonds.
This allows them to borrow funds at reduced interest rates.
(ii) The multilateral funds from international agencies viz. World
Bank, ADB etc. is available at a lower rate of interest,
thereby reducing the tariff.
(iii) NHPC has already availed the Term Loan from LIC for hydro
power sector in the past.
(iv) NTPC Ltd., a Maharatna CPSE which is mainly involved in the
development of thermal power projects, has already invested
in the Hydro power sector by setting up of hydro power
projects like Kol Dam, Lata Tapovan, Tapovan Vishnugad,
Rammam etc. Moreover , PSUs like NTPC, NHPC, THDC,SJVN
etc are also implementing renewable projects like Solar,
Wind etc.
(v) NHPC Ltd., a PSU in the hydro sector has already made
investment in Chenab Valley Power Projects [P] Limited
(CVPP), which has been incorporated as a Joint Venture
Company of NHPC Limited, JKSPDC and PTC (India) Limited
for execution of 3 Hydroelectric Projects namely Pakal Dul,
Kiru and Kwar with aggregate capacity of 2164 MW at Chenab
River Basin in Distt. Kishtwar of Jammu & Kashmir, with
equity participation of 49%, 49% and 2% by NHPC,JKSPDC &
PTC respectively. Similarly, some PSUs have also formed JVs
viz. NHPC (with Druk Green power corpn. Ltd. of RGoB),
NHPC (with Druk Green power corpn. Ltd. of RGoB), SJVNL
(with Druk Green power corpn. Ltd. of RGoB) and THDC
(with Druk Green power corpn. Ltd.of RGoB) for executing
hydro projects in Bhutan. THDC is also planning to develop
Malshej Ghat and Humabrali PSS in Maharashtra.
(vi) The Govt. through various provisions in its policies is already
extending certain support & benefits to hydro projects in
their development. These include:
¥ Exemption for procurement of power through Tariff
based bidding till 15.08.2022.
¥ Para 5.8 of revised Tariff Policy 2016, provides for
suitable regulatory frame work for incentivizing the
developers of Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs) for using
long-term financial instruments in order to reduce the
tariff burden in the initial years.

21
¥ Higher rate of return on Equity (RoE) @ 16.5% for Storage
type hydro generating stations including pumped storage
and Run of River generating stations with pondage.
[Ministry of Power, File No.10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09/08/2017]
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee note that the project financing cycle of hydro
projects is very different from that of the other infrastructure projects
like highways and railways, for the main reason that in a hydro project
the investigation on the site, pre-investigation survey, as preparation
of DPR are far more complex and take a longer time. Secondly, it takes
time to obtain environment and forest clearances. Moreover , land
acquisition and rehabilitation is a very long third stage process. Normally,
DPR is prepared after pre-investigation which, by the time of obtaining
all the clearances, becomes obsolete and requires estimate revision.
Till the time land is acquired, the need for second revised estimation
looms large. At the time of the start of actual construction work,
these varying estimations create much confusion in various financial
calculations. The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend:
(i) The Ministry should take necessary action in regard to
adopting the practice of treating financial appraisal and
financial approval as two distinct stages.
(ii) The activities before the actual start of the construction
work should be treated as pre-investment activities.
Therefore, the financial appraisal at this stage should be
approved as pre-investment activities and not as original
cost estimation.
(iii) The final financial approval taken at the time of actual start
of work should be treated as original cost estimate to adjust
cost escalation, if any, so that the need for resubmission of
project approval in case of any cost escalation does not
arise.
Reply of the Government
The above recommendation of the committee are already being
adhered to. The investment proposal for a project is considered in two
stages. The first stage is investment approval for Survey & Investigation,
and other pre investment activities. This is treated as financial
appraisal/approval for the pre investment activities. Subsequently,
Detailed Project Report (furnishing total cost of the project also

22
indicating the cost of pre-construction activities) for Hydro Power
Projects costing above Rs 1000 crore is submitted by the Developer to
CEA for techno-economic concurrence. After approval of CEA, the
investment proposal for the entire project is taken up for approval by
the Government in respect of Public Sector Undertakings and this cost
is considered as Original Cost Estimate. The actual construction work
is started after this investment approval.
[Ministry of Power , File No.10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]
Recommendation No. 14
The Committee note that most of the hydro power potential lies
in far-flung and remote areas. The access to these sites and their
development, in the absence of any connecting road and enabling
infrastructure, is an issue. In these conditions developers face many
difficulties in developing these projects. The Border Roads Organization
(BRO) has been entrusted with the work of constructing roads to these
sites. During the examination of the subject, when the Committee
asked for the reasons for delays in their road projects, the BRO have
stated that the major roadblock in development of road projects is
acquisition of land. Land being a State subject, lot of problems are
being faced. In many cases, even after compensation money was given
by BRO to revenue authorities and the same has been disbursed to
affected people, mutation of the land has not been done. Secondly,
obtaining forest and wildlife clearances take years leading to further
delays in road projects. Also, lack of labourers, especially in the States
of Arunachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir , further aggravates the
problem. Moreover , the Committee note that the BRO does not have
sufficient capacity to construct roads at a required pace and in a
definite timeframe. The Committee feel that these road projects are
important enabling elements of hydro power projects; hence they
should also be given the due attention. The Committee believe that
delay in these road projects will have a cascading effect on the
developmental timeline of hydro power projects and result in cost
overrun. It is obvious that any cost overrun will ultimately increase the
tariff. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) The Government should take up the matter of land acquisition
issue affecting the BRO road projects with the respective
State Governments at appropriate level with a view to finding
amicable and lasting solutions. They should also persuade
the States which are endowed with hydro power , to grant
forest and wildlife clearance to BRO road projects more

23
expeditiously and liberally as the time bound development
of many hydro power projects are dependent on the timely
completion of these connecting roads.
(ii) The BRO should make utmost efforts to expedite the
execution pace of the allocated road projects. The Committee
also recommend to the Government to consider the issue of
augmenting the capacity of BRO or make provisions to allow
them to engage private contractors for the time-bound
development of these crucial projects, subject to stringent
quality control.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power has been holding regular meetings with Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and Border Road Organization
(BRO) to discuss the status of various critical stretches of roads and
bridges being implemented in the State. The recommendations of the
Committee have been noted.
[Ministry of Power , File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]

24
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTÕS REPLIES
Recommendation No. 13
The Committee note that there is an urgent need to fast track
hydro-electric projects by the CEA. Though it has been stated that the
mechanism has been streamlined, yet much more requires to be done
with the coordination of various agencies which are involved in the
process of according clearance for the projects. The Central Water
Commission, Geological Survey of India, Central Soil and Mineral
Research Station and several divisions of the Central Electricity Authority
take their own time, leading up to several years, before a clearance
is given for the project. This unnecessarily leads to huge escalation in
cost estimation. The Committee have been informed that before formal
taking up of DPR for concurrence, clearances are given for various
chapters by CEA. Thereafter, DPR is taken up for appraisal by CEA and
a time period of 150 days is required for getting the financial appraisal,
lay out and other issues. The Committee feel that this process consumes
too much time, which is avoidable. Once chapters are approved with
the guidance of CEA and discussed extensively then the timelimit of
150 days for CEA to accord approval appears to be a bit longer which
requires rationalization. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) The entire process of approval of various stages before the
commencement of the DPR requires to be streamlined, with
a view to reducing the time frame involved therein.
(ii) The timelimit of 150 days for CEA to accord approval to DPR
should be curtailed to not more than 60 days as all the pre-
requisites are already completed with the knowledge and
concurrence of various divisions of CEA.
Reply of the Government
As per Òguidelines for accord of concurrence to Hydro Electric
Schemes submitted to the AuthorityÓ, before formally taking up the
DPR under examination only 9 chapters (out of 24 chapters) are
appraised during the Pre-DPR stage. These are mainly related to planning
and investigation aspects. Subsequently, the DPR is prepared
incorporating design and cost/financial aspects of civil structures and
E&M equipment based on the planning and investigation approved in
the Pre-DPR stage.

25
In the post -DPR stage, the designs of all components (Civil as well
as E&M) are examined and appraised and concurrence is accorded.
These activities are to be carried out in 150 working days as per
guidelines. These time lines have been fixed recently after detailed
deliberation with all the appraising groups in CEA-CWC and finalized
by Ministry of Power. The same have been duly approved by HonÕble
Minister of Power. It is informed that out of 150 days, appraisal of
design aspects is to be completed in 90 days; quantities, cost/financial
aspects in 50 days and 10 days are kept for various activities such as
preparation and circulation of agenda note and convening of
concurrence/appraisal meeting related meeting related to accord of
concurrence by the authority. As such the timeline fixed for concurrence
of DPR by CEA appears justified.
[Ministry of Power , File No.10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]

26
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that out of the total potential of 1,45,320 MW
assessed in the country. Arunachal Pradesh alone has 46,805 MW of
hydro power capacity that is to be developed. The Committee note
that in Arunachal Pradesh, where there is approval for 12,000 MW
capacities, only 2,705 MW capacity is under development and a meager
200 MW is under operation. It is a well-known fact that the gestation
period of hydro power projects is comparatively longer , owing to the
elaborate process of survey, preparing DPR and obtaining various
clearance and difficulties faced during construction of the project
itself, which are mostly in remote and uninhabitable areas. The
Committee are concerned to note that there are 25,962 MW capacities
which are yet to be taken up for any development. There is every
possibility that the project which are at various stages of development
could take upto 7-8 years or even more to be operational. In this
scenario, the future of about 26,000 MW capacity which has not been
taken up for development, looks very bleak. It is also a fact that in
the long run, hydro power proves cheaper as flowing water is used for
its operation; therefore, the sooner we develop and start harnessing
hydro power, the lesser will be the per unit cost. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that:
(i) All-out efforts should be made by the Government to ensure
that the construction work on the projects which have got
all the clearance should be started without any loss of time.
(ii) To ensure that the timeline for the projects, which are under
various stages of development, is adhered to, the Government
should take pre-emptive as well as prompt resolution of any
issue which may crop up during their development.
(iii) The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to
make efforts on priority basis to ensure the balance capacity
of 25,962 MW, which is yet to be developed, is allocated for
development at the earliest.

27
Reply of the Government
The following monitoring mechanism is in place in the Ministry of
Power to coordinate countryÕs hydro capacity addition programme and
to ensure that the timelines for project execution are adhered:
(a) Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the under
construction hydro power projects (above 25 MW) in
pursuance of Section 73(f) of Electricity Act, 2003. The
progress of each project is monitored continuously through
site visits, interaction with the developers & other stake
holders. Chairperson, CEA holds review meetings with the
Power Projects Monitoring Panel (PPMP) and monitoring
divisions of CEA.
(b) Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP), set up by the Ministry
of Power , independently follow up and monitors the progress
of the hydro projects.
(c) Ministry of Power also reviews the progress of ongoing hydro-
electric projects regularly with the concerned officers of
CEA, equipment manufacturers, State Utilities/CPSUs/Project
developers, etc.
(d) Further , in order to improve the capacity performance of
the power sector public undertakings, and to ensure that
the projects are commissioned on time, the Government has
taken the following steps:Ñ
➢The project implementation parameters/milestones are
incorporated in the annual MoU signed between
respective CPSUÕs and MoP and the same are monitored
during the quarterly performance review meetings of
CPSUÕs and other meetings held in MoP/CEA.
➢The issues related to erection and supply of Electro-
Mechanical equipment is expedited with BHEL in various
meetings held in CEA/MoP and other local issues
affecting the progress of works are taken up with
respective State Governments by the Concerned CPSU/
MoP .
[Ministry of Power , File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that 96,524 MW capacity of pumped storage
scheme has been identified in the country. Out of this, capacity of
4,785.6 MW is under operation and 1,080 MW is under construction,
whereas 1,000 MW projects DPR are prepared and submitted to CEA.
The Committee find that development of pumped storage scheme in
the country is at a rudimentary stage and its present utilization against
the total potential is meager. Considering the vast network of electricity
grid in the country and the quantum of electricity demand, it is not
difficult to gauge the range of fluctuation in power demands. Pumped
storage schemes are meant for storing energy and using at times when
demands for electricity soars. Hence, pumped storage scheme will be
quite beneficial for developing ancillary power market and in meeting
sudden high demands of electricity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that due attention should also be given to develop identified
pumped storage schemes in the country.
Reply of the Government
Apart from catering to peaking demands, pumped storage projects
are becoming increasingly important to meet the balancing power
requirements for ensuring grid stability in the light of large capacity
addition envisaged from renewable resources like solar (100000 MW)
and wind (60000 MW) by 2022 which supply intermittent and variant
power.
Around 40% of the pumped storage potential identified in the states
like MP , Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Karnataka could not be taken up for
development etc. due to variety of other reasons like their location in
Reserve Forests, Coal mines, Western Ghat region (declared as
Eco-Sensitive Zone by MoEF and all the construction activities have
been stopped) etc. As such, an assessment of the doable Pumped
Storage Schemes in the near future has been made by CEA in
consultation with various State Governments and various CPSUs involved
in hydro power development. Based on these consultations, 13 nos. of
PSS having aggregate capacity of 8345 MW have been identified for
providing benefits in near future which includes schemes on existing
hydro projects as well as new pumped storage schemes.
[Ministry of Power , File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

29
Recommendation No. 11
The Committee, during the examination of the subject, was apprised
that recently some States have imposed heavy water cess, which has
affected the viability of hydro power projects due to increase of tariff
by more than one rupee. The Committee feel that this issue will only
exacerbate the grim scenario of hydro power sector of the country.
They desire the Government to take up this matter with the States
concerned and find out some solution to this problem so that the
already distressed hydro power sector is exempted from the additional
burden in the form of water cess. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:
(i) There should be no retrospective charges like cess on water,
reallocation of DPR rate projects for want of upfront premium
or any other kind of levy which is likely to impact the
competence of the tariff of hydro power.
(ii) The State Governments concerned may be taken on board in
this regard so as to ensure that such lateral super-imposition
retrospectively is not taken recourse to for any reason.
Reply of the Government
Water is a State Subject. However , it has been taken up with the
State Governments that levying of Cess and other such charges result
in making the tariff uncompetitive and hence should not be resorted
to.
[Ministry of Power , File No. 10/5/2016-H-II, Dated: 09.08.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

30
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note that the country has total installed power
generation capacity of 2,78,884 MW, wherein, the share of hydro power
is only 15% as compared to thermal power , which is 70%. The Committee
also note that the share of hydro power in the total energy mix has
been falling ever since 1962-63, when the share of hydro was at its
peak of 51%. The Committee further note that against the total assessed
potential of 1,45,320 MW of hydro power in the country, 37,648 MW
capacity is installed and operational and 11,812 MW capacity is under
development stage, whereas a whopping 95,860 MW capacity is yet to
be developed. In regard to the falling share of hydro, the Ministry have
stated that lack of adequate infrastructure, drying-up of funding by
bilateral/multilateral agencies, increasingly stringent environment
clearance regime for hydro projects after the 1970s due to the
worldwide focus on environmental/ecological/R&R issues and
consequent activism against the development of hydro projects by
NGOs/Environmental activists, and greater emphasis on rapid
development of thermal power during the 1970s for quicker capacity
addition in view of large scale industrialization have contributed to
the slow growth/decline of hydro share in the subsequent years. In
addition, factors like land acquisition issues, R&R issues, inter-State
issues and non-tie-up/non-availability of requisite finances on long
term basis, etc. have further slowed down the development of hydro
power. The Ministry have stated various steps that have been taken by
the Government to boost the hydro power sector. However , in the
considered view of the Committee, the present installed capacity of
hydro power proves that they were not effective enough. The Committee
have been given to understand that a capacity addition of 1.75 lakh
MW of Solar and Wind power has been envisaged by the Government.
Since these sources of energy are intermittent in nature, there will be
a need for balancing power which could start-up and shut down quickly
to provide stability to the gridÑthis could be gas powered thermal
power or hydro power. It is a well-known fact that there are many gas
powered power plants which are either stranded or running way below
their optimum PLF due to non-availability of the required amount of

31
gas. Hence, development of hydro power becomes the only option.
Moreover, for fulfilling global commitments to contain emission levels,
choosing hydro power will be more judicious. Therefore, the Committee
believe that we are left with no choice but to develop the hydro
power sector rapidly. The Committee was apprised by the Ministry that
owing to detailed examination of ÔHydro PowerÕ subject by this Standing
Committee, they have formed two sub-Committees to look into the
overall legal regulatory framework and various financing options for
hydro power. The Committee are pleased with the prompt action taken
by the Ministry and are of the belief that this will go a long way in
identifying and resolving the issues that have been hindering the
development of the hydro power sector. The Committee recommend
that:
(i) The Government should adopt a holistic approach for optimum
development of the hydro power sector in the country and
thoroughly revise the present Hydro Power Policy, as per the
needs of the time.
(ii) The two sub-Committees, formed by the Ministry to look
after various issues related to the subject should meet
regularly and examine the subject intensively and extensively
by holding meetings with various Government agencies
involved and other stakeholders.
(iii) Further , the findings/recommendations of these sub-
Committees should be sincerely and promptly implemented
by the Government.
Recommendation No. 12
The Committee, during the examination of the subject, have found
that hydro power projects get delayed due to various reasons, which
causes cost overrun and ultimately results in increased tariff. The
main reason cited for the extended delay is obtaining of environmental
clearances, which has been cited as the biggest road block in the
development of hydro power sector. To bring clarity on the issue, the
Committee heard the views of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change. It was stated that since the notification of EIA in
2006, environmental clearances have already been accorded to
numerous hydro power projects. However , in a majority of cases,
construction work is yet to be started. Further , out of the assessed
hydro power capacity of 45,000 MW in Arunachal Pradesh, only 405 MW
capacity is operational and 2,710 MW capacity is under construction.
In case of 8,500 MW capacity projects which have all the clearances,

32
the development work has not started yet. In regard to pendency of
hydro projects before MoEF&CC for clearance, it was stated that out
of 45,000 MW, projects of 6,600 MW only are pending with them. They
further stated that they have started to undertake study of various
river basins. The outcome of these studies will commonly be applied
to all the projects in that basin for the purpose of environmental flow,
litigation related to disaster and bio-diversity. In regard to hydro power
development in the Himalayan region, they stated that certain pockets
and area above 3,000 meter are not being touched in view of the risk
of damages to environment and biodiversity. Scrutinizing all the related
facts and figures and considering the differing views in regard to
environmental clearances, the Committee are of the view that the
perception that environmental clearances are the biggest roadblock in
the development of the hydro power sector does not hold water. The
Committee note that there are various projects which have been
accorded all the environmental clearances, even after which they are
not being developed. The Committee are also of considered view that
both environment and the development of the country are of utmost
importance and hence there is an urgent need to strike the light
balance between the two. The Committee while endorsing the concept
of river basin study, recommend that:
(i) The work related to study of the remaining river basins
should be completed expeditiously.
(ii) The Committee are of the firm view that certain sensitive
areas in respect of environment and bio-diversity should not
be touched; however , in rest of the areas there is a need to
make the process of granting environmental clearances in a
more expeditious and hassle free manner for hydro power
projects.
(iii) The Committee further recommend to the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change to prepare and
disseminate clear cut guidelines in respect of granting
clearances to all concerned.
(iv) The Committee also recommend that the CEA should further
streamline the process of granting clearances to fast track
hydro power projects.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARI BABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

33
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 15th FEBRUARY , 2018 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Hari Babu Ñ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh
10. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
12. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri T .K.S. Elangovan
15. Shri Oscar Fernandes
16. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
17. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
18. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
19. Smt. Viplove Thakur

34
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh Ñ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Ñ Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip Ñ Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then
took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:Ñ
(i) Draft Report on ÔStressed/Non-performing Assets in Electricity
SectorÕ.
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔEvaluation of
Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power ExchangesÕ
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the
year 2016-17Õ.
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔHydro Power
- A Sustainable, Clean and Green AlternativeÕ.
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔEnergy
Access in India - Review of Current Status and Role of
Renewable EnergyÕ.
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2017-18Õ.
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔNational
Electricity Policy - A ReviewÕ.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
change. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the
above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the second part of the Budget Session.
4. *** *** *** *** ***

35
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** *** ***
8. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

36
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
SEVENTEENTH REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14
Total: 08
Percentage 57.14%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies:
Sl. No. 13
Total: 01
Percentage 07.14%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 3, 6 and 11
Total: 03
Percentage 21.43%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 2 and 12
Total: 02
Percentage 14.29%