TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twelfth Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on Commercial Losses]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2016
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 15.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 ( Saka)


COE No. 280
Price : R 53.00
' 2016 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2016-2017) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
reply ......................................................... 28
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
reply of the Government has not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 29
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which final reply of the Government still
awaited ..................................................... 32
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
9 December , 2016 .............................................. 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
12th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Energy ........................................................ 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2016-17)
Dr. Virendra Kumar Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
6. Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
9. Dr. Arun Kumar
10. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
11. Shri Malyadri Sriram
12. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
13. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
14. Shri Jagdambika Pal
15. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
16. Shri M.B. Rajesh
17. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
18. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
19. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
20. Shri Devender Singh alias Bhole Singh
21. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T .K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Ram Jethmalani
(iii)

(iv)
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan
26. Shri La. Ganesan
27. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
28. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
29. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Ñ Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar Ñ Senior Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 25th Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 12th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔMeasures to Check
Commercial Losses Õ pertaining to the Ministry of Power.
2. The 12th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11th December ,
2015 and was laid on 14th December , 2015 on the Table of
Rajya Sabha. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 20th October , 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 9th December, 2016.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 12th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
14 December, 2016 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken  by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the  T welfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Measures to
Check Commercial Losses.
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to, Lok Sabha on
11th December , 2015 and was laid on 14th December , 2015 on the
Table of Rajya Sabha. The Report contained 15 Observations/
Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15
Total-14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs reply:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply
of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial No. 1
Total-01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
Recommendation (SI.No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. The Committee had noted that energy losses occur in the process
of supplying electricity to the consumers due to both technical and
commercial reasons. The technical losses, which are inherent in a
system, are due to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipment
used for transmission, transformation, sub-transmission and distribution
of power. Commercial losses are caused by pilferage by hooking
bypassing meters, defective meters, and errors in meter reading and
in estimating unmetered supply of energy. These technical and
commercial losses, along with the shortage due to non-realization of
total billed amount, constitute Aggregate Technical & Commercial
(AT&C) losses. The Committee had further noted that before the concept
of AT&C loss was worked out, Transmission and Distribution (T&D) loss
was being calculated. T&D loss is the difference in input energy and
energy billed and in this method, there is no accounting for losses
because of low collection. On the other hand AT&C loss is the difference
in input energy and energy for which revenue has been collected.
Hence, AT&C loss concept was introduced as it captures both billing
and collection efficiency while T&D captures only billing efficiency.
The Committee were given to understand that Discoms are benefited
directly with the introduction of the concept of AT&C losses as their
performance can be judged more accurately by taking care of the
collection of revenue aspect. Also in addition to the billing as per the
Committee, had however , found that this concept has not been followed
religiously. Rather , the concept of AT&C losses is concentrated on
transmission losses.
Knowingly, the aspect of commercial losses has been ignored which
has resulted into further deterioration of the financial health of
DISCOMs. It had also obfuscated the concept of losses inasmuch that
the biggest component of the losses, i.e. pilferage or theft of
electricityÑcould never come to the center stage. With a view to
addressing the need for elimination of pilferage or theft of electricity,
the Committee took up this subject for detailed examination.

3
During the examination of subject, the Committee was apprised
that at present there are no means to segregate the technical and
commercial-losses. However, it was also stated that some study was
done by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) indicates:Ñ
¥ The losses in Distribution Sector has been brought down
from 40+% to 20+%.
¥ Presently, AT&C losses in the country is around 22%.
¥ AT&C losses means
a. Transmission loss
b. Commercial loss
¥ The process of bringing the power to the outskirt of city/
villages is around 6 to 8%.
¥ The figure for commercial losses, i.e. last point distribution
losses is around 16 to 18% per CEA/Expert.
The Committee had therefore, recommended thatÑ
(i) First and foremost, segregation of technical and commercial
losses should be done, even if it is in approximation. The
Committee are of the firm belief that this will not only help
in having a clear picture of different components of the
losses but will also be instrumental in containing the overall
loss level by pin-pointing the efforts to the specific areas.
Further , segregated values will never prevent anyone from
aggregating them to use it for the required purposes.
(ii) Henceforth, Commercial losses should be calculated
separately and be brought to the public domain by all the
Discoms/Agencies.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:Ñ
ÒA Pilot study has been conducted for segregating Commercial
losses and Technical losses in ten towns (Dehradun, Visakhapatanam,
Hyderabad, Bhopal, Kolkatta, Ahmedabad, Navi Mumabi, Shimla,
Panchkula, Bhatapara) by Power Finance Corporation (PFC). The
report has been sent to the Standing Committee of Parliament on
Energy on 10.08.2016 vide this Ministry Õs OM No. 5/1/2016-IPOS
(Pt.). The technical losses in these towns were in the range of

4
2.62% to 7.71% and commercial losses were in the range of 1.14%
to 36.91% for their AT&C losses in the range of 4.94% to 38.18%.
Technical losses in these 10 towns were calculated using GIS based
network analysis module of the IT system installed under RAPDRP .
Commercial losses were calculated by subtracting technical losses
from AT&C loss of respective towns. Report also says that the
technical loss for a distribution network cannot be a fixed figure
because it depends on several factors like the pattern of energy
use, intensity of load demand, load density & capability and
configuration of the distribution network which varies with above
element.Ó
8. The Committee in their original report have recommended
for segregation of technical and commercial losses even if it is in
approximation as this will not only help in having a clear picture of
different components of the losses but will also be instrumental in
containing the overall loss level by pinpointing the efforts to the
specific areas. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry
have made sincere efforts and a Pilot study has been conducted for
segregating Commercial losses and Technical losses in ten towns by
Power Finance Corporation (PFC). The findings of the study have
been as per expectations of the Committee, the technical losses
ranges from 2.62% to 7.71%, whereas, commercial losses are as
high as 36.91%. The Ministry have further stated that the said Report
also says that the technical loss for a distribution network cannot
be in fixed figure because it depends on several factors like the
pattern of energy use, intensity of load demand, load density &
capability and configuration of the distribution network which varies
with above elements. The Committee do agree with the above
conclusion of the Report, however, they do not find it in
contravention of their recommendation. The Committee do
understand that technical losses cannot be a static figure for all the
areas/town and for all the time, nonetheless, even their approximate
range band would be able to serve the purpose of segregation to a
great extent. The Committee, therefore, would reiterate that on
the basis of above study the concept of segregation of commercial
and technical losses should also be applied to all these cities wherein
the erstwhile R-APDRP scheme (Now, IPDS) was implemented for
Computerized Data Collections and follow-up remedial measures for
detecting and plugging leakages in electricity supply. And the separate
figures of commercial and technical losses should be brought to the
public domain by all the Discoms/Agencies.

5
Recommendation (SI.No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
9. The Committee had noted that there have been several schemes
and programmes of Government that are aimed at reducing of losses.
These include schemes for financial restructuring of the Discoms in
addition to the IPDS. The schemes also inter-alia include DDUGJY ,
Rating of Discoms, Quarterly Review of AT&C Losses, Concept of Feeder
Manager, Profit Centre Approach, etc. However, despite various
initiatives, the efforts towards loss reduction are not yielding the
desired results. Around 1100 towns in various States across the country
have been declared Ôgo-liveÕ under part-A of the R-APDRP . The data
regarding use of electricity is flowing from these Ôgo-liveÕ towns making
it easy to identify the places and the reasons for the losses. The
Committee had felt that in such a scenario, the desired results will
start flowing in as the ground work regarding identification of the
losses has been completed these Ôgo-liveÕ towns. As such, henceforth,
there cannot be any alibi for non-performance, particularly when
incentives are also being offered for certain results. The Committee
had, therefore recommended that:Ñ
(i) State-wise ÔGo LiveÕ towns be selected for decided trajectory
of losses within a definite time frame.
(ii) Various programmes and schemes aimed at reduction of losses
should be linked only to these areas to produce better and
definite results.
(iii) The-system of SCADA needs a re-orientation as its results
are yet to be analyzed for the purpose of targeting loss
reduction.
(iv) The selection criteria of population of 30,000 and above for
a town, to become eligible for R-APDRP programme, should
be relaxed and small towns should also be brought within its
purview for the purpose of data collection to identify and
reduce commercial losses.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:Ñ
Ò(i) & (ii) Under IPDS, AT&C loss reduction target is 15% for all
towns funded under Part-B of the scheme. AT&C loss reduction
shall be monitored for five years with one year after Go-Live of all
towns in a State and conversion of loan to grant is linked to
achievement of target of AT&C loss reduction to 15% level.
(iii) SCADA is a system designed for improving reliability of Power
Supply. It is designed for remote isolation of faulty section and

6
remote control of feeders so that the location of the power supply
can be easily identified and the supply restored through remote
operation via alternate supply routes. As such, SCADA interventions
are to improve the reliability of power supply and are not capable
of reducing AT&C losses. Under R-APDRP Part-A (SCADA) was
approved for 72 towns.
(iv) Erstwhile R-APDRP aims at reduction of AT&C losses to below
15% in towns with population greater than 30,000 as per 2001
census (10,000 for special category States). IPDS was launched in
Dec., 2014 for urban areas has enlarged to cover larger urban
areas by including towns under urban category as per census 2011,
district headquarters & towns notified by State Government Under
Integrated Power Development Scheme, State utilities are permitted
to extend IT system for other towns also by adding additional
hardware. The IT system established under R-APDRP is scalable &
expandable in modular fashion. In line with the directions of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee for energy, all Census 2011
towns, 4041 in number , will be covered under IT implementation
under IPDS, for which a decision has already been taken by the
Monitoring committee of IPDS in its 7th meeting. Ó
11. The Committee in their orginal report inter alia had
recommended that the selection criteria of population of 30,000
and above for a town, to become eligible for R-APDRP programme
be relaxed and small towns should also be brought within its purview
for the purpose of data collection to identify and reduce commercial,
losses. The Committee are glad to note that the Ministry have agreed
to cover all 4011 (2011 census towns) under IT implementation of
IPDS, for which a decision has already been taken by the Monitoring
committee of IPDS in its 7th meeting. The Committee while
appreciating the Ministry for their prompt action in this matter, feel
that this is a step in the right direction.
Recommendation (SI.No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
12. The Committee had noted that under the concept of Feeder
Managers and the profit center based approach, 11 KV/feeders are
treated as the basic unit of monitoring. Distribution utility and State
distribution utilities assign feeders to Junior Engineers (known as Feeder
Manager). 11 KV feeders are operated as business units, accounting for
metering, billing, and collection. Since a JE/AE is required to deal
with one/two feeders on an average, full responsibility can be assigned
to him. Feeder managers have all the necessary data/information on

7
metering, billing, collections, etc. and they are assigned targets to
improve metering; billing and collection by taking measures such as
vigilance, new connection drive etc. which reduce the AT&C losses of
the feeders. The Committee, while fully endorsing this concept, had
recommended that the Government should extend and expand the
concept of Feeder Manager and Profit Centers all over the country and
ensure its intensive implementation.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:Ñ
ÒFeeder Manager Concept is emphasized during all interactions
with Utilities. Ministry of Power has advised for implementation of
Online Feeder Monitoring System (OFMS), whereby feeder data
from all 11 KV feeders of R-APDRP towns are being captured and
monitored centrally. Till 30.09.2016, 16,103 feeders in urban areas
have been connected for online monitoring. Ó
14. The Committee in their original Report had recommended
that the Government should extend and expand the concept of
Feeder Manager and Profit Centers all over the country and ensure
its intensive implementation. The Committee note with satisfaction
that feeder data from all 11 KV feeders of R-APDRP towns are being
captured and monitored centrally. Also, the Committee have been
informed that till 30.09.2016, 16,103 feeders in Urban areas have
been connected for online monitoring. The Committee desire that
the remaining feeders shall also be connected for online monitoring
in the shortest possible time.

8
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (SI.No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
Problem of A T & C losses in the Country
The Committee note that the electricity sector has been facing
many problems since long. The sector has expanded reaching out to
the remote areas of the country; however , the financial-health of the
sector is a cause of utmost concern. With a view to reforming the
sector , ÔThe Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2003 Õ was enacted; one of
the main features of the Act was to bring in reforms by unbundling the
State Electricity Boards intogeneration, transmission and distribution
units. Financial restructuring plan was also notified to bailout State
distribution companies to achieve financial turnaround by restructuring
their debt. An integrated rating Methodology for State Discoms to help
in identifying their strengths and weaknesses was also formulated. The
National Electricity Policy provided for the accelerated development
of the private sector by Supplying electricity to all areas, protecting
the interests of the consumers, quality power of specified standard
and ensuring commercial viability of the electricity sector.
However , the reforms brought into the sector have not been of
much help as sector is beset with problems of huge aggregated technical
and commercial lose which have not been properly addressed. Of this,
commercial losses constitute a major chunk. The electricity sector is
going through a period of transition and unless the reasons responsible
for the ill-health of the sector are Identified and fixed, no improvement
can take place.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:Ñ
(i) The percentage of Electricity losses, irrespective of the nature
of losses i.e. whether technical or commercial should be
capped at an acceptable level and time-bound remedial
measures should urgently be implemented.
(ii) No agency has taken note of commercial losses and efforts
are made only to cover them up under the garb of
comprehensive AT&C losses. The involved agencies should
be made answerable and accountable.

9
(iii) High losses in the electricity sector have led to the poor
economic health of the State Distribution Companies; this
need to be remedied.
(iv) The reforms introduced to improve the sector and its
financial/commercial viability, need to be reviewed
essentiallyÑto ascertain why they failed in achieving the
intended target
(v) To improve the functioning of the sector, such high/heavy
Commercial losses, cannot be allowed any longer.
Reply of the Government
AT&C loss reduction trajectory (discom-wise) up-to 2019-20 has
been finalized by the Ministry of Power in consultation with States
with the objective of achieving 15% AT&C loss at national level. A copy
of the trajectory finalized in consultation with the States after extensive
consultations, duly incorporating the commitment of the States
under the Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY) is enclosed as
Annexure-I.
To improve the economic health of the DISCOMs, and to have a
permanent sustainable solution to the problem, after extensive
stakeholder consultations and deliberations on previous attempts at
financial turnaround of DISCOMs, UDAY was launched as an optional
scheme for States to join till 15th October , 2016, a total of 17 States/
UTs, viz. Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat,
Bihar, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir, Haryana, Uttrakhand, Goa, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Manipur , Puducherry, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra
have joined UDAY . UDAY incorporates a slew of measures to achieve a
defined outcome of reduction in AT&C losses in the States to a level
of 15% in three years.
Further , Post Go-Live Reports are being generated by Utilities from
IT system for monitoring of AT&C loss reduction etc. to facilitate
administrative actions by Utility. Various initiatives are being regularly
reviewed centrally at highest level of MoP , Gol during monthly Review,
Planning and Monitoring meetings with respective Secretaries of States
to improve delivery.
Smart meters have a potential to improve the billing efficiencies
by ensuring an automatic collection of Energy data from consumers,
besides enabling energy audits down to the consumer level. Smart
meters also have a capability of reducing pilferage of electricity due

10
to the built in anti-tamper arrangements. In the revised National tariff
policy published in the Gazette of India on January 28th, 2016, the
State regulators have been mandated to provide Smart meters for
consumers on a consumption based criteria by December 2019. Further,
the policy mandates provisions of Smart meters to all consumers to
enable energy audits. As a follow-up to this intervention, the Central
Electricity Authority (CEA) has released the commercial specifications
and the rollout strategy for Smart meters to all States vide their letter
No CEA/DPD/AMI/2016/992-1029 dated 31.08.2016. The Ministry has
also requested the Forum of Regulators (FOR) to sensitize the State
regulators towards these provisions vide its Letter No 26/9/2015-IPDS
dated 08.09.2016. These enablers would help States/DISCOMs to procure
and provide Smart meters to the consumers.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated: 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the current status of AT&C losses in the
country is extremely worrisome, although a gradual decrease can be
noted in the loss since the year 2011-12 to 2014-15. Whereas it was
26.63% in 2011-12, it has been brought down to 21.6% in the year
2014-15. However, there are still about 20 States wherein the losses
varies from 22% to 71.23%; in 4 States, it varies from 16.18% to 19%.
That going so, the average losses at 21.6% raises serious concern.
While the Committee do not want to belittle the efforts made to
address the problem areas, they are of the considered view that there
is an apparent lack of will and to achieve the objective. The Committee,
noting also the pace at which things are moving, feel that a time-
bound action plan is the need of the hour to tackle the problem.
Although the issue relates to the States and the degree of the problem
may differ from State to State, yet it cannot be left unattended. In
this regard, the Committee are clear that State specific action plan
should be drawn up with near uniformity to address the issue of
Commercial losses.
(i) Action plan in three months duration may be prepared based
on the circumstances of the States with a specific target of
bringing down commercial losses.
(ii) The loss prone areas to be identified, their data analyzed
and remedial measures taken in these zones.
(iii) There should be no compromise on the achievement of the
loss reduction targets during the period of these action plans.

11
(iv) Non-fulfillment of the objective be viewed adversely and
officer concerned be made available.
(v) The loss reduction target should be 5% at least of the
occurring losses during the period of the action plan.
Reply of the Government
Establishment of IT enabled system in urban towns that can enable
State Utilities to identify loss prone areas in such towns. Of these
eligible 1409 Part-A (IT) towns, 1226 towns have already been  declared
Go-Live implying that IT system have been established under R-APDRP ,
are able to identify high loss areas and take remedial measures.
The Ministry has embarked upon a plan to identify loss pockets and
loss making feeders by ensuring online feeder data integration with
the National Power portal. An App called ÒUrjaÓ been launched in the
public domain for use on Mobile phones, through which the loss levels
of feeders in each of the Go-live towns can be seen. The App can be
downloaded by anyone having access to Android Play Store or Apple
Store on their Mobile phones. This would enable States/DISCOMs to
take managerial actions to contain losses. Loss reduction targets have
been finalized in consultation with the States under the provisions of
IPDS, 24X7 and UDAY schemes.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated: 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (SI.No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
Loss Reduction Programmes
The Committee noted that the Ministry, with the objective of
reducing-high AT&C losses and commercial losses Õ in the country, had
launched the Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme
(APDRP) way back in 2002-03. The APDRP performance had limited
success in achieving its objectives and some of the components like
investment in IT related energy audit and accounting works were not
even taken up. It has been observed that very few States have taken
up standalone IT solutions under APDRP and full benefits of these IT
solutions could not be derived as integration of all the IT solutions was
not adopted. Based on the 10th Plan experiences, APDRP was later
modified and launched as the Restructured-APDRP in 2008. The objective
of R-APDRP was of reduction in AT&C loss in urban areas Ñ towns and
cities with population of more than 30,000 (10,000 for special category
States). Private distribution utilities were not covered under the

12
programme. Projects under the scheme are taken up in two parts.
Part-A aims to establish IT enabled system with Data Centre, Customer
Care Centre etc. for energy accounting/auditing and Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) for bigger towns (population: 4 lakh and
Annual Energy Input: 350MU) whereas-part-B is for upgradation &
strengthening of electrical networks in these towns. Projects worth
Rs. 39197.72 crore (Part-A: Rs 6,983.53 crore covering 1409 towns and
72 SCADA projects; Part-B: Rs. 32,214.19 crore covering 1258 towns)
are under implementation.So far, 19 out of 21 Data Centres have been
commissioned and 1058 towns have been declared ÒGo-LiveÓ under
Part-A of the programme Part-B projects have been completed in 282
towns. The Government have now subsumed R-APDRP into the Integrated
Power Development Scheme with the additional objective of
strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution networks in the urban
areas and metering of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in
the urban areas. The Committee believes that the implementation of
these schemes will improve the Electricity Distribution Systems in the
country and help in containing AT&C losses. However , the fact that
distresses the Committee the most is the pace of their implementation.
After the lapse of 12-13 years since the inception of programme aimed
at reduction of AT&C losses, substantial parts of the country are yet
to get the required infrastructure as envisaged under the various
programmes and the AT&C losses are still way too high. The Ministry
have stated that the effectiveness of this programme in containing loss
could be evaluated only when the components are fully implemented.
The Committee are deeply concerned that the Ministry do not have a
definite time-frame for completion of this programme and stress that
these programmes should not be allowed to continue indefinitely. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that:
(i) There should be a definite time-frame for coverage of all
the cities under the scheme and consequent reduction of
AT&C losses.
(ii) The effectiveness of the programme should be evaluated
during its currency and not on its completion.
(iii) The scope and ambit of the programme should be enlarged
with special focus on the pace of its implementation.
Reply of the Government
Gol launched IPDS in December , 2014, to supplement the effort of
Utilities in strengthening their sub-transmission and distribution network
in Urban Areas. Coverage of the new scheme includes urban towns and
Utilities prioritized urban towns across State for funding under IPDS.
The IPDS interventions are likely to be completed by 2019-20.

13
The Scheme provides for appointment of Third Party Concurrent
Evaluation Agency (TPCEA) for concurrent monitoring and evaluation
of projects during implementation stage. The scope of IPDS has been
enlarged (w.r.t. erstwhile R-APDRP) to include more urban towns and
the 7th meeting of the Monitoring Committee of IPDS has decided to
accord an in-principle approval to extension of incremental IT
interventions to an additional 2600 Urban towns; this would cover all
4041 Statutory urban towns (as per 2011 Census) under IT interventions.
To ensure quick results, it has been targeted to prioritise energy audit
related works under these interventions by December , 2017.
Further , introduction of Project Management Agency (PMA) in IPDS
likely to improve pace of implementation of projects covered.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated: 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that 1058 towns have been declared ÒGo-
LiveÓ under Part-A of the R-APDRP Programme and Part-B, Projects
have been completed in 282 towns. Go-Live towns, are towns where
IT work is completed and town energy data has started flowing to the
Data Centre for Energy accounting and auditing. Utilities have started
using this data for Energy accountingIauditing and to take administrative
measures for controlling AT&C losses, Since there are several towns
where electricity networks have been strengthened and upgraded under
R-APDRP and live data are available for monitoring the system, the
committee recommends that the Government should select some towns
for running Pilot Projects. The Objective of these projects should be
to reduce AT&C losses to the minimum possible level and that too in
a definite time-frame. The Committee believes that such Pilot Projects
will not only be a testing ground for efficiency and effectiveness of
the programme being run to reduce AT&C losses and, if successful, will
become role models for other towns.
Reply of the Government
At the instance of MoP , PFC has taken up an Impact Assessment
Study to assess the benefits of Part-A (IT) implementation. Same has
been conducted in 76 towns in 14 States where all towns have been
declared Go live. The key findings are as under:
(a) The IT System established has enabled identification of A
T&C Loss pockets and utilities have started taking corrective
measures
(i) AT&C Loss reduction reported in 85% of these towns

14
(b) IT System established has enabled accurate measurement of
Reliability of Power viz. total hours of power supply.
(i) >85% Reliability observed in 66 towns
(c) Single Window Customer Care Center has been established
for all type of complaints in these States. Web Self-service
and multiple payment options have also been made
operational.
(i) Overall improvement reported in customer convenience
in all parameters
(ii) 78% of Consumer Grievances are redressed within SERC
time limits.
(iii) 72% of New Connections have been released within
SERC time limits.
(iv) Upto 41% of consumers in respective towns have started
using e-payment mode
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee noted that efforts had been made in the past to
contain  commercial losses, but without the desired results. Many
reasons have been given for technical and commercial losses which are
of a routine nature. Reasons like poor repair and maintenance of
equipment, overload of existing lines, non-installation of sufficient
capacitors, etc. for technical and low metering/ billing, theft, tempering
of meters and unaccountability of employees for commercial losses are
far satisfactory as all these reasons are not beyond technical and
administrative solutions. Citing these reasons for sickness of the sector
is unacceptable and better the lack of will of quarters concerned to
conduct the sector efficiently and professionally. In that context, the
Committee feel that with due diligence appropriate technical innovation
and support, these factors can easily be overcome.
The Committee note that upgradation of distribution network and
the use of Information Technology as envisaged under R-APDRP/IPDS
will, per-se, not bring down AT&C losses. It will only provide information
and data as to how much losses being incurred in the system and
where. On the basis of the information obtained, through such
technology, Discoms will have to make managerial intervention to
contain the losses. Therefore, technology will only inform and facilitate

15
taking decisions to contain losses. The Committee have also noted that
it is not ownership, viz. Public or Private, of the Discoms that determines
the efficiency of Discoms and the loss level, but the managerial styles/
skills adopted by them. There are examples Where Government run
Discoms have been able to reduce AT&C loss significantly, whereas
some private Discoms have miserably failed to contain their losses. In
view of these, the Committee concluded that:
(i) High commercial losses are purely a managerial issue and
depend on the willingness and managerial skills of the Discoms
rather than on their ownership.
(ii) Appropriate and, timely maintenance and installation of
adequate capacity equipment will resolve the, problem of
technical losses, including overloading of existing lines.
(iii) Several DISCOMs have been able to bring AT&C losses down
to the national Target of 15%; the functioning of these Discoms
should be emulated.
(iv) We need not wait for the completion of R-APDRP/IPDS for
reduction of Commercial losses there are several Managerial
intervention that can be take up to do this.
(v) Metering of each and every feeder/transformer should be
implemented without any further delay. The concept of
Feeder Management has great potential to reduce commercial
losses, therefore utmost efforts should be made to persuade
all the Discoms to adopt it.
(vi) The use of Geographical Information System (GIS) in the
Distribution Sector should be encouraged. Based on that the
use of High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) lines and Aerial
Bunched Cables should be started in the-areas prone to high
losses.
Reply of the Government
(i) PFC publishes ÒReport on performance of state power utilitiesÓ
particularly indicating AT&C losses. Management of utilities
is expected to take note of their losses and initiate
commensurate administrative action for reduction of AT&C
losses.
(ii) The ongoing IPDS support Utility Õs effort towards
strengthening of its sub-transmission and distribution network
in urban areas and Utilities are prioritizing the work in their
urban towns in the State.

16
(iii) Under IPDS, MoP/Power Finance Corporation regularly share
among all utilities, the best practices followed by States in
distribution sector for improvement in infrastructure,
customer services and in reduction of AT&C losses. Further,
based on the observations of the Standing Committee on
19.10.2015, PFC has taken up a study of 10 Discoms where
AT&C loss has reduced in last 5 years. A copy of the report
has been sent to the Standing Committee of Parliament on
Energy vide this MinistryÕs OM No. 5/1/2016-IPDS (Pt.) dated
10.08.2016.
(iv) Metering of all feeders/Distribution Transformers is being
insisted upon under Integrated Power Development Scheme.
Monitoring of 11 KV feeders centrally at All  ndia level by
porting data through IT enabled system of all feeders in the
urban areas to National Power Portal (NPP) has been
developed by NIC. Till 30.09.2016, a total of 16,103 out of
31,640 Urban feeders have started exchanging data with the
portal in a short period of only 10 months. A system of
sharing the analysis of loss prone feeders with the States has
been started on a monthly basis. Details of the feeder Õs
performance is also uploaded on the IPDS website. The
process of integration of the feeder data with the online
portal is being hastened.
(v) Use of Geographic Information System (GIS) based Asset
Mapping & Consumer Indexing was essential part of
Restructured Accelerated Power Development & Reforms
Programme. High Voltage Distribution System (HVDS) and
use of Aerial Bunched Cables provision has been included in
the scope of works under the component of strengthening of
sub-transmission and distribution network in IPDS.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that there are several towns where works
under R-APDRP have been completed and data related to distribution
system are being captured and compiled The Committee are of the
opinion that these data are very important in containing AT&C losses
and will facilitate DISCOMs to make the required interventions. They
also believe if these data are put in the public domain, it will not only
lead to greater transparency, but also compel DISCOMs to take needful
actions. The Committee, therefore recommend that these data should
be made available online for the information of the general public as
well.

17
Reply of the Government
The post Go-live reports [comprising of reports on Town-wise AT&C
losses, monitoring of High loss feeders, New Service connection release,
Consumer complaint redressal and Power reliability] of the R-APDRP
Go-live towns is being uploaded on IPDS web-portal by concerned
Discoms and is available for viewing by concerned executives of Utilities,
State Govt., PFC and MoP . The Utilities have also been advised to put-
up these reports on their web-sites in public domain and the same has
been uploaded by most of the Utilities. Further , the Urja App displays
the information of AT&C losses of all Go-live R-APDRP towns for public
information.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 8)
The Committee note that there have been several schemes and
programmes of Government that are aimed at reducing of losses. These
include schemes for financial restructuring of the Discoms in addition
to the IPDS. The schemes also inter-alia include DDUGJY , Rating of
Discoms, Quarterly Review of AT&C Losses, Concept of Feeder Manager,
Profit Centre Approach, etc. However , despite various initiatives, the
efforts towards loss reduction are not yielding the desired results.
Around 1100 towns in various States across the country have been
declared ÔGo-liveÕ under Part-A of the R-APDRP . The data regarding use
of electricity is flowing from these ÔGo-liveÕ towns making it easy to
identify the places and the reasons for the losses. The Committee feel
that in such a scenario, the desired results will start flowing in as the
ground work regarding identification of the losses has been completed
these ÔGo-liveÕ towns. As such, henceforth, there cannot be any alibi
for non-performance, particularly when incentives are also being offered
for certain results. The Committee, therefore recommend that:
(i) State-wise ÔGo liveÕ towns be selected for decided trajectory
of losses within a definite time frame.
(ii) Various programmes and schemes aimed at reduction of losses
should be linked only to these areas to produce better and
definite results.
(iii) The system of SCADA needs a reorientation as its results are
yet be analyzed for the purpose of targeting loss reduction.
(iv) The selection criteria of population of 30,000 and above for
a town, to become eligible for R-APDRP programme should

18
be relaxed and small towns should also be brought within its
purview for the purpose of data collection to identify and
reduce commercial, losses.
Reply of the Government
(i) & (ii) Under IPDS, AT&C loss reduction target is 15% for all
towns funded under Part-B of the scheme. AT&C loss reduction shall
be monitored for five years with one year after Go-live of all towns
in a State and conversion of loan to grant is linked to achievement of
target of AT&C loss reduction to 15% level.
(iii) SCADA is a system designed for improving reliability of Power
Supply. It is designed for remote isolation of faulty section and remote
control of feeders so that the location of the power supply can be
easily identified and the supply restored through remote operation via
alternate supply routes; As such, SCADA interventions are to improve
the reliability of power supply and are not capable of reducing AT&C
losses. Under R-APDRP Part-A (SCADA) was approved for 72 towns.
(iv) Erstwhile R-APDRP aims at reduction of AT &C losses to below
15% in towns with population greater than 30,000 as per 2001 census
(10,000 for special category States). IPDS was launched in Dec., 2014
for urban areas has enlarged to cover larger urban areas by including
towns under urban category as per census 2011, district headquarters
& towns notified by State Govt. Under Integrated Power Development
Scheme, state utilities are permitted to extend IT system for other
towns also by adding additional hardware. The IT system established
under R-APDRP is scalable & expandable in modular fashion. In line
with the directions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for energy,
all Census 2011 towns, 4041 in number , will be covered under IT
implementation under IPDS, for which a decision has already been
taken by the Monitoring committee of IPDS in its 7th meeting.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 9)
While examining the subject, the Committee felt that theft is
being covered up under agricultural electricity supply. The Committee,
therefore recommend that all efforts should be made for metering of
total electricity supply, irrespective of its use Metering of each and
every feederl transformer will help to identify and focus on the
problematic areas for taking necessary action. It will also help in
securing accountability and extending incentives for Discom officials,

19
as the case may be. The Committee also found that there are various
legal provisions that are a deterrent electricity theft, but their strict
and proper execution is required. The Committee therefore, recommend
that a system should be developed having incentive and penalties with
appropriate legal execution of these provisions should also be ensured.
Reply of the Government
The responsibility of reduction of thefts in the Distribution network
is primarily with the Discoms and power departments/utilities. There
are enabling punitive provisions against power theft for Electricity
Distribution Companies in the Electricity Act 2003. The Ministry of
Power has made several interventions such as IT enablement of
distribution infrastructure, feeder metering, feeder segregation and
monitoring of AT&C loss trajectories through various schemes such as
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) and Deendayal Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) to detect and prevent power theft.
Under the aegis of UDAY , IEC campaigns under Power theft are also
to be conducted by the participating States.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No. 10)
Energy Audit
The Committee are dismayed to note that the concept of Energy
Audit is still in a rudimentary stage in the electricity sector of the
country In the absence of effective energy accounting and auditing,
utilities can never know the causes and locations of the technical or
commercial loss because of which no curative measures can be taken.
The Committee believes that there is immense scope of energy
saving if energy audit is extensively and mandatorily undertaken. The
Committee are of the firm belief that Energy Audit is a prerequisite
for reduction of AT&C losses as such Energy Audit will show the Discoms
where to focus to contain the losses. Since energy audit with the use
of Information Technology is essential for effective action against theft
and avoidable technical losses, the Committee recommend that
(i) Utmost efforts should be made to make Energy Audit of
Discerns in the country mandatory
(ii) State Regulators must ensure the energy Performance audit
of the Discoms, besides their financial and economic audit.
Appropriate penal provisions should also be there for non-
compliance of the energy audit provisions.

20
Reply of the Government
Under R-APDRP , the IT system established essentially comprises of
ÔEnergy Audit Õ module. Utilities are using the said module for energy
auditing in R-APDRP Go-live towns.
Further , in order to enable energy audit in the distribution system,
following provisions have been made in the revised Tariff Policy notified
in the Official Gazette on 28.1.2016-
Para 8.3(3)
ÒIn order to enable energy audit in the distribution system, all
distribution companies shall ensure smart meters in their electricity
system throughout the chain from transformers at 132kV level
right down to distribution transformer level at 11 kV and further
down to each consumer. Further, in order to reduce theft of power,
the distribution companies should have enabling feature like
distribution SCADA with distribution management system and energy
audit functions. SERCs shall mandate these to be in place within
two years. Ó
Further , provisions of punishment for non-compliance of orders or
directions have been provided in section 146 of the Electricity Act,
2003, as underÑ
ÒWhoever , fails to comply with any order or direction given under
this Act, within such time as may be specified in the said order or
direction or contravenes or attempts or abets the contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made
there under , shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend
to one lakh rupees, or with both in respect of each offence and
in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which the
failure continues after conviction of the first such offence:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the
orders, instructions or directions issued under section 121. Ó
These penalty provisrons are proposed to be made more stringent
through the amendments in the Electricity Act, 2003 under
consideration.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]

21
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 11)
Feeder Management
The Committee note that under the concept of Feeder Managers
and the profit center based approach, 11 KV/feeders are treated as
the basic unit of monitoring. Distribution utility and State distribution
utilities assign feeders to Junior Engineers (known as Feeder Manager).
11 KV feeders are operated as business units, accounting for metering,
billing, and collection. Since a JE/AE is required to deal with one/two
feeders on an average, full responsibility can be assigned to him.
Feeder managers have all the necessary data/information on metering,
billing, collections, etc. and they are assigned targets to improve
metering; billing and collection by taking measures such as vigilance,
new connection drive etc. which reduce the AT&C losses of the feeders.
The Committee, while fully endorsing this concept, recommend that
the Government should extend and expand the concept of Feeder
Manager and Profit Centres all over the country and ensure its intensive
implementation.
Reply of the Government
Feeder Manager Concept is emphasized during all interactions with
Utilities. Ministry of Power has advised for implementation of Online
Feeder Monitoring System (OFMS), whereby feeder data from all 11 KV
feeders of R-APDRP towns are being captured and monitored centrally.
Till 30.09.2016, 16,103 feeders in Urban areas have been connected
for online monitoring.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 12)
AT&C losses and Financial Health of Discoms
The Committee note that AT&C losses have a direct bearing on the
financial health of Discoms and therefore, reduction AT&C losses has
become the. Pre-requisite improvement of their financial health. Unless
Discoms reduce AT&C losses to reasonable levels, extending bailout
packages to them by the Government for improving their financial
condition would never yield any positive result. The severity of this
problem could be understood by the fact that 1% of AT&C loss of a
Discom, if monetized, ranges from Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 300 crore. With
the increase in the cost of electricity supply, it tends to grow in the
coming years. In other words, reduction of mere 1% will provide extra

22
revenue to the tune of Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 300 crore to a Discom to
strengthen its Distribution Network arid further reduce the losses. This
will lead to-a cycle of reforms in the Distribution Sector which the
Discoms themselves would be able to finance by way of reducing AT&C
losses. The Committee believe that to make it happen there is need
for concerted, prompt and sincere action by the agencies involved
with it, viz. the Union Government, the State Governments, CERC and
SERC. The Committee also believe that in the absence of clear
demarcation of responsibilities and assigning of accountability, -there
is every possibility of the agencies playing the blame game. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
(i) The task of reducing AT&C losses (chiefly commercial losses)
shout be taken as a ÔMissionÕ to be completed in a definite
time frame wit unambiguous delineation and demarcation of
responsibilities.
(ii) The time frame and the responsibilities so assigned should
be made available in the public domain also.
Reply of the Government
These recommendations are closely related to distribution sector
and the responsibility of reduction of AT&C losses in the Distribution
network is primarily with the Discoms and power departments/utilities,
However , to facilitate the reduction of AT&C losses and to improve
power distribution system, the government has launched various
programmes/schemes i.e. DDUGJY , IPDS, FRP , NEF , UDAY etc. Further,
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission had also sent these
recommendations to State Electricity Regulatory Commissions for
compliance/comments.
The trajectories for reduction of AT&C losses have been formulated
and finalized in consultation with the States,
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-1 PDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13, Para No. 13)
Pilot Project
The Committee note that the Union Government have launched a
number of initiatives to contain commercial losses-however , they are
not fulfilling the desired objective for whatever reasons. This does not
negate the relevance and importance of the ongoing programmes/

23
schemes of the Government for containing the losses. The efforts in
this regard require a pragmatic approach with the cooperation of all
concerned. This exercise may encroach upon the established procedures,
territorial jurisdiction and the prevalent practices. Despite this, the
gravity of the issue cannot be ignored and we will have to look for
innovative steps. To begin with, the Union Government and the State
Governments may collaborate to initiate pilot projects in the areas/
pockets of mutual agreement. The areas chosen for pilot projects may
be dealt with by ensuring all the technical and administrative resources
so as to be a role model for the other loss making areas.
In these zones of action plan metered electricity, installation of
smart meters, replacement of defective meters, proper upkeep and
maintenance of electrical appliances and adequate capacity
transformers should form part of the methodology. Collection and
processing of data, feeder-wise, and if possible, transformer-wise, will
definitely add to the efforts of containing commercial losses. Installation
of efficient electrical architecture and proper HT: L T ratio will help
in identifying and reducing technical losses. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that:
(i) Union/State Governments should initiate pilot projects for
containing commercial losses.
(ii) The pilot projects may, inter alia, dwell upon the issue of
smart meters, replacement of defective meters, 100% billing,
installation of adequate capacity transformers, etc.
(iii) Feeder-wise data collection, their analysis and standardization
will also help.
(iv) Calculation of data transformer-wise may also be considered
as it will leave no scope for commercial losses.
Reply of the Government
Replacement of defective meters, smart meters for SCADA towns
(sanctioned under R-APDRP) and installation of transformers is covered
under IPDS. IT system developed under R-APDRP facilitates collection
of feeder-wise data in R-APDRP towns. At the same time, Distribution
Transformers are also being metered under IPDS and DDUGJY . Feeders
that are being connected progressively are being sorted out on high
loss/low loss parameters and information being placed on Web. Nodal
Officers of PFC are taking up the cases of poor feeder performance
with the respective States/DISCOMs.

24
Smart meters have a capability of reducing pilferage of electricity
due to the built in anti-tamper arrangements.
They also have a potential to increase billing efficiency of the
DISCOMs. In the revised National tariff policy published in the Gazette
of India on January 28th, 2016, the State regulators have been mandated
to provide Smart meters for consumers on a consumption based criteria
by December 2019. Further , the policy mandates provisions of Smart
meters to all consumers to enable energy audits. As a follow-up to this
intervention, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has released the
commercial specifications and the rollout strategy for Smart meters to
all States vide their letter No. CEA/DPD/AMI/2016/992-1029 dated
31.08.2016. The Ministry has also requested the Forum of Regulators
(FOR) to sensitize the State regulators towards these provisions vide
its Letter No. 26/9/2016-IPDS dated 08.09.2016. These enablers would
help States/DISCOMs to procure and provide Smart meters to the
consumers.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para No. 14)
Success Stories
The Committee note that the State of Goa has brought down its
commercial losses to 10.72% in the year 2013-14. Similarly, the States
of Delhi, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh also have below the targeted
AT&C losses of 15% at the national level. These are success stories for
which these States need to be complimented; as such, there is great
scope for learning from the experiences of these States. The success
stories of these States should duly be recognized and discussed at the
appropriate forum. The Forum of Regulators (FOR) can take note of
the achievements, discuss and adopt the same for the States which are
not making improvements. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) The success stories of the States like Goa, Delhi, Maharashtra
and Andhra Pradesh be sufficiently highlighted and emulated.
(ii) However there is no scope for complacency as there is further
scope for reduction in losses to bring it to the international
level.
Reply of the Government
(i) Under IPDS, MoP/Power Finance Corporation regularly share
among all utilities, the best practices followed by States in

25
distribution sector for improvement in infrastructure,
customer services and in reduction of AT&C losses. Further,
based on the observations of the Standing Committee on
19.10.2015, PFC has taken up a study of 10 Discoms (including
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh) where AT&C loss has
reduced in last 5 years. The study report has been submitted
to the Parliamentary Committee for Energy vide this MinistryÕs
letter No. 5/1/2016-1 PDS (Pt.) dated 10.08.2016.
(ii) The target for reduction of AT&C losses, based on IPDS,
UDAY and 24X7 Power for all commitments is 15% as per the
trajectory enclosed as Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para No. 15)
Role of Regulators in reduction of Losses
The Committee note that Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003
provides for guiding principles for terms and conditions for determination
of tariff by the Appropriate Commission. As per these provisions, the
State Commissions while specifying the terms and conditions of tariff
shall be guided inter alia , by the factors which will encourage
competition, efficiency, economical use of resources, good performance
and optimum investments. The SERCs/JERCs are also mandated to
factor in the principles of rewarding efficiency in performance. In
regard to the role of SERCs in reduction of AT&C losses the Committee
was informed by the Ministry that the State Commissions usually draw
up a trajectory for reduction of transmission and distribution losses or
aggregate technical and commercial losses, and the performance of
distribution utilities on this account is reflected in the tariff allowed
by the Commission. It was further stated that the Forum of Regulators
(FOR) has been discussing the issue of loss reduction at regular intervals.
Some of the best practices on reduction of distribution losses, including
reduction of commercial losses, have been compiled by the FOR
Secretariat. Analyzing the present electricity distribution scenario in
the country, the Committee have found that the SERCs/FOR have made
very little effort to contain high AT&C losses in the country. While
examining the subject, the Committee also felt that instead of
facilitating the development of the electricity sector , especially the
Distribution Sector , and safeguarding retail consumers, the State
Regulators have become an instrument in the hands of the Discoms to
penalize honest consumers by making them pay for the misdeeds of
dishonest consumers and the inefficiency of the Discoms by taking into

26
consideration the unacceptably high AT&C losses as cost while
determining tariff. The Committee find it is Regulators who have
institutionalized the losses rather than discouraging it, and that State
Regulators have miserably failed to ensure the strict compliance of the
trajectory drawn for the reduction of AT&C losses by the Discoms. The
Committee believe that the State Regulatory Commissions, being the
regulators of the electricity sector , also have the onus to ensure
reduction of AT&C losses by Discoms under their purview. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that:
(i) Efforts should be made to make SERCs accountable in regard
to containment of AT&C losses.
(ii) While determining the tariff of electricity, the burden of
commercial losses should not be passed on to the honest
consumers.
Reply of the Government
In order to encourage metering and billing and to reduce theft of
electricity, following provisions have been made in the revised Tariff
Policy notified in the Official Gazette on 28.1.2016Ñ
Para 8.4 (3)
ÒThe Appropriate Commission may provide incentives to encourage
metering and billing based on metered tariffs, particularly for
consumer categories that are presently unmetered to a large extent.
The metered tariffs and the incentives should be given wide
publicity. Smart meters have the advantages of remote metering
and billing, implementation of peak and off-peak tariff and demand
side management through demand response. These would become
essential in future for load-generation balancing due to increasing
penetration of intermittent type of generation like wind and solar
power.
Appropriate Commission shall, therefore, mandate smart meters
for:
(a) Consumers with monthly consumption of 500 units and more
at the earliest but not later than 31.12.2017;
(b) Consumers with monthly consumption above 200 units by
31.12.2019.Ó
Further , Para 8.2.1 (2) of the Tariff Policy also provides that AT&C
loss reduction should be incentivized by linking returns in a Multi-Year

27
Tariff (MYT) framework to an achievable trajectory. Greater transparency
and nurturing of consumer groups would be efficacious. For Government
owned utilities improving governance to achieve AT&C loss reduction
is a more difficult and complex challenge for the SERCs. Prescription
of a MYT dispensation with different levels of consumer tariffs in
succeeding years linked to different AT&C loss levels aimed at covering
full costs could generate the requisite political will for effective action
to reduce theft as the alternative would be stiffer tariff increases.
Third party verification of energy audit results for different areas/
localities could be used to impose area/locality specific surcharge for
greater AT&C loss levels and this in turn could generate local consensus
for effective action for better governance. The SERCs may also
encourage suitable local area based incentive and disincentive scheme
for the staff of the utilities linked to reduction in losses.
The SERC shall undertake independent assessment of baseline data
for various parameters for every distribution circle of the licensee.
The SERC shall also institute a system of independent scrutiny of
financial and technical data submitted by the licensees.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-IPDS dated 19.10.2016]

28
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLY
-NIL-

29
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Segregation of Commercial Losses from AT&C losses
The Committee note that energy losses occur in the process of
supplying electricity to the consumers due to both technical and
commercial reasons. The technical losses, which are inherent in a
system, are due to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipment
used for transmission, transformation, sub-transmission and distribution
of power. Commercial losses are caused by pilferage by hooking
bypassing meters, defective meters, and errors in meter reading and
in estimating unmetered supply of energy. These technical and
commercial losses, along with the shortage due to non-realization of
total billed amount, constitute Aggregate Technical & Commercial
(AT&C) losses. The Committee further note that before the concept of
AT&C loss was worked out, Transmission and Distribution (T&D) loss
was being calculated. T&D loss is the difference in input energy and
energy billed and in this method, there is no accounting for losses
because of low collection. On the other hand AT&C loss is the difference
in input energy and energy for which revenue has been collected.
Hence, AT&C loss concept was introduced as it captures both billing
and collection efficiency while T&D captures only billing efficiency.
The Committee were given to understand that DISCOMs are benefited
directly with the introduction of the concept of AT&C losses as their
performance can be judged more accurately by taking care of the
collection of revenue aspect also in addition to the billing the
Committee, however , find that this concept has not been followed
religiously. Rather , the concept of AT&C losses is concentrated on
transmission losses.
Knowingly, the aspect of commercial losses has been ignored which
has been ignored which has resulted into further deterioration of the
financial health of DISCOMs. It had also obfuscated the concept of
losses inasmuch that the biggest component of the losses, i.e. pilferage
or theft of electricityÑcould never come to the center stage. With a
view to addressing the need for elimination of pilferage or theft of
electricity, the Committee took up this subject for detailed examination.

30
During the examination of subject, the Committee was apprised
that at present there is no means to segregate the technical and
commercial-losses. However, it was also stated the some study done
by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) indicates:
¥ The losses in Distribution Sector has been brought down
from 40+% to 20+%.
¥ Presently, AT&C losses in the country is around 22%.
¥ AT&C losses meansÑ
a. Transmission loss
b. Commercial loss
¥ The process of bringing the power to the outskirt of city/
villages is around 6 to 8%.
¥ The figure for commercial losses, i.e. last point distribution
losses is around 16 to 18% per CEA/Expert.
The Committee therefore, recommends thatÑ
(i) First and foremost, segregation of technical and commercial
losses should be done, even if it is in approximation. The
Committee are of the firm belief that this will not only help
in having a clear picture of different components of the
losses but will also be instrumental in containing the overall
loss level by pinpointing the efforts to the specific areas.
Further , segregated values will never prevent anyone from
aggregating them to use it for the required purposes.
(ii) Henceforth, Commercial losses should be calculated
separately and be brought to the public domain by all the
DISCOMs/Agencies
Reply of the Government
A Pilot study has been conducted for segregating Commercial losses
and Technical losses in ten towns (Dehradun, Visakhapatnam, Hyderabad,
Bhopal, Kolkata, Ahmedabad, Navi Mumabi, Shimla, Panchkula,
Bhatapara) by Power Finance Corporation (PFC). The report has been
sent to the Standing Committee of Parliament on Energy on 10.08.2016
vide this MinistryÕs OM No. 5/1/2016-IPDS (Pt.). The technical losses in
these towns were in the range of 2.62% to 7.71% and commercial
losses were in the range of 1.14% to 36.91% for their AT&C losses in
the range of 4.94% to 38.18%.

31
Technical losses in these 10 towns were calculated using GIS based
network analysis module of the IT system installed under RAPDRP .
Commercial losses were calculated by subtracting technical losses from
AT&C loss of respective towns. Report also says that the technical loss
for a distribution network cannot be a fixed figure because it depends
on several factors like the pattern of energy use, intensity of load
demand, load density & capability and configuration of the distribution
network which varies with above element.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 5/2/2016-I PDS, dated 19.10.2016]

32
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
14 December, 2016 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

33
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2016-17) HELD ON 09.12.2016 AT 0930 HOURS IN
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ÔDÕ, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 0930 hours to 1000 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Virendra Kumar Ñ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
4. Shri Arun Kumar
5. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
6. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
7. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri La Ganesan
9. Shri Javed Ali Khan
10. Dr. Pranbhakar Kore
11. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
12. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip Ñ Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. Thereafter , the Committee
took up for consideration the following draft Reports:Ñ
(i) ÔEnergy Access in India - Review of Current Status and Role
of Renewable Energy Õ.

34
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the T wentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔPower Generation
from Municipal Solid Waste Õ
(iii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the Twelfth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔCommercial Losses Õ
(iv) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the Fifteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2016-17, clause by
clause.
3. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the
aforementioned draft Reports without any changes. The Committee
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present the
same to Lok Sabha/lay in Rajya Sabha in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 12TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA)
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14 and 15
Total: 14
Percentage 93.33%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:
            -Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
SI. No. 1
Total: 01
Percentage 6.66%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
           -Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%