STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty
Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Energy Access in India —
Review of Current Status and Role of Renewable Energy]
36
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Energy
Access in India — Review of Current Status
and Role of Renewable Energy]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.03.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  07.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


COE No. 295
Price : Rs. 45.00
© 2018 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset
New Delhi 110 064.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2017-18) ..................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report..................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government.................................... 6
CHAPTER  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies..................................................................... 23
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration.................... 24
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......... 25
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  Sitting  of  the Committee held on
15th February, 2018................................................. 26
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on  the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 22nd
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Energy............................................................... 29

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-18)
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes

24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirty-sixth Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Twenty-Second Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on Energy Access in India — Review of Current
Status and Role of Renewable Energy pertaining to the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy.
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
15th December, 2016 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report
were received on 16th August, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 15th February, 2018.
4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report of the Committee
is given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
comments of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body
of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Energy
Access in India — Review of Current Status and Role of Renewable
Energy, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2016 and
was laid on the same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The Report contained
14 Observations/Recommendations.
2. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total - 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
- Nil -
Total - 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of
the Government has not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-IV
1

2
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply
of the Government is still awaited:
- Nil -
Total - 00
Chapter-V
3. The Committee in principle accepted all the replies furnished by
the Government. However, they will deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require merit comments.
4. The Committee also desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Comments contained in Chapter-I of the Report may
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
Energy Access
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1)
5. The Committee had noted that the concept of energy access
was not dealt with in the manner having focus on providing electricity to
all the villages/persons irrespective of size and the geographical locations in
the country. Access to energy is essential for economic growth and human
development. Its absence constraints generation of productivities, income
and employment. The proposition of energy access as such envisions the
ability to obtain the energy access on demand/desire. It must also be within
the economic connection and supply range of the energy network or
supplier. For universal access to energy to electricity its prerequisites are
that we should have a clear definition of energy access. Considering the
scenario in its entirety and the stakes involved, the Committee had
recommended that a clear definition of energy access be laid down with
the objective of achieving it for the growth of the people and the backward
areas of the country. The definition may, inter alia, include availability of
energy to one and all in every nook and corner of the country irrespective
of the geographical constraints and non-availability of conventional electricity
network/carrier.
6. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action
taken reply has stated:
"The recommendation of the Committee has been noted".

3
7. In view of the absence of clarity in definition of Energy
Access, the Committee had recommended that a clear definition of
energy access be laid down with the objective of achieving it for the
growth of the people in the backward areas of the country. The
Committee note that the Ministry has merely noted the
recommendation of the Committee but does not come out clear on
the concept of energy access. The Committee expect the Ministry to
share their views and concept on energy access and the various
initiatives taken by them for fulfillment of the same. The Committee
desire that the Ministry may come out with a clear definition of
energy access keeping in view the Committee's recommendation.
The Committee therefore, would like to re-emphasize that the
definition of energy access may be laid down and which inter alia,
include availability of energy to one and all in every nook and corner
of the country irrespective of the geographical constraints and non-
availability of conventional electricity network/carrier.
Electricity For All
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3)
8. The Committee had noted that Electricity For All has been
a declared objective of the Union and State Governments since 1970, when
the rural electrification was identified as a key component of the minimum
needs programmes. A number of schemes like Kutir Jyoti Scheme, Pradan
Mantri Gramodaya Yojana, the Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme
and the Accelerated Electrification of one lakh villages and one crore
households in the year 2004-05, RGGVY and DDUGJY have been initiated.
The Committee had also noted that despite a plethora of schemes, we have
not been able to achieve the objective of Electricity For All or the energy
access by the common man in the country. The Committee had therefore,
recommended that the outcome of each of the schemes initiated with
regard to Electricity For All may be reviewed and shortcomings/deficiencies
identified to fix them, so that ongoing schemes/programmes do not suffer
from the same deficiencies which have been responsible for the non/short
delivery or performance schemes implemented to provide Electricity For
All.

4
9. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their reply has
stated:
"As per REC, the left out un-electrified villages (18452 un-electrified
villages as on 01.04.2015) are, by & large, last mile villages which
are difficult to access and electrify. The electrification work is being
monitored in real time on GARV app, in which physical progress is
provided by Gram Vidyut Abhiyantas & mid-course corrective
measures are taken by States, REC and Ministry of Power.
Further, DDUGJY scheme, as a whole is being reviewed at the
following levels:
At State level, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary
is in place to monitor progress and resolve issues relating to
implementation viz. allocation of land for sub-stations, right of way,
forest clearance, railway clearance, safety clearance etc.
At District level, District Development Co-ordination & Monitoring
Committee namely DISHA (administered by Ministry of Rural
Development) headed by senior most Member of Parliament (Lok
Sabha) is in place to review and monitor implementation of central
sector schemes including DDUGJY .
At Central level, inter-ministerial Monitoring Committee on DDUGJY
headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, Government of India
also monitor implementation of scheme. Besides, the progress is
reviewed with States/Power Utilities in Review, Planning and
Monitoring (RPM) meeting of Ministry of Power on monthly basis.
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), the nodal agency,
monitors implementation of scheme through its project offices at
field level. REC has developed a web enabled Mobile App, 'GARV'
for monitoring of village electrification.
Based on the feedback/issues raised from all the stakeholder viz.
implementing agencies, Contractors, Project Monitoring agencies,
RQM, NQM, TPIA, State Governments of DDUGJY scheme during
the review meetings necessary corrective measures are being taken
including amendments in the DDUGJY guidelines and Standard Bidding
Document, to increase the benefits of the schemes at large to the
rural population."

5
10. The Committee are informed that the left out un-electrified
villages (18452 un-electrified villages as on 01.04.2015) are, by and
large, last mile villages which are difficult to access and electrify. The
Committee do not agree with the excuses that those villages are
inaccessible. If the existence of the said villages are possible, why
electrification of those said villages are not possible? At this age of
advance technology, machinery and equipment, it is high time for the
Government to reach out to every nook and corner of the country.
Distance, topography etc. should not be a constraints for electrification
of even the remotest areas of the country.
The Committee however note that the review of DDUGJY
scheme at different level did not yield the desired result. While
reviewing the scheme, the Committee desire that the objective of
Electricity For All or the energy access by the common man in the
country may be the focus of the assessment. The Committee also
would like the Ministry to initiate Evaluation Study for all the
remaining Schemes which have not been covered so far. The
Committee, therefore would like to stress that the outcome of each
of the schemes initiated with regard to Electricity For All may be
reviewed and shortcomings/deficiencies be identified to fix them, so
that ongoing schemes/programmes do not suffer from the same
deficiencies which have been responsible for the non/short delivery or
performance of schemes implemented to provide Electricity For All.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No.1)
The Committee note that the concept of energy access has not been
dealt with in the manner having focus on providing electricity to all the
villages/persons irrespective of size and the geographical locations in the
country. Access to energy is essential for economic growth and human
development. Its absence constraints generation of productivities, income
and employment. The proposition of energy access as such envisions the
ability to obtain the energy access on demand/desire. It must also be within
the economic connection and supply range of the energy network or
supplier. For universal access to energy to electricity its prerequisites are
that we should have a clear definition of energy access. To meet it in
reality, lot of spade work in cohesion may be required which would have
innovative institutions, enabling mechanism targeted policies, subsidies and
finances within its ambit. Considering the scenario in its entirety and the
stakes involved, the Committee recommend that:
i. A clear definition of energy access be laid down with the objective
of achieving it for the growth of the people and the backward
areas of the country. The definition may, inter alia,  include
availability of energy to one and all in every nook and corner of
the country irrespective of the geographical constraints and non-
availability of conventional electricity network/carrier.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy- OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2)
The Committee note that lack of energy access is mainly rural issue.
The Committee are also aware that a sizeable population of urban areas are

7
also deprived of the energy access, yet, the problem mainly revolves around
rural context where it is phenomenally higher than urban areas. In view of
the Committee, the lack of electrical infrastructural network is a significant
factor contributing to the state of absence of electricity access of common
man in the country. Another important factor adding to the problem is the
non-availability of accurate figures regarding un-electrified villages and
households of the country. Government mainly relies on the figures supplied
by the State Governments and there are huge discrepancies with regard to
the electrified/un-electrified villages of the country. The mismatch in figures
makes the scheme of electrification of villages ineffective and defunct. The
flagship schemes of the Government like RGGVY and DDUGJY have not
yielded the desired results despite the utmost sincerity and efforts of the
Government. The intrinsic question comes as to why we are unable to
achieve the target. So long as we do not develop a countervailing mechanism
to authenticate the number of electrified/un-electrified villages/households,
this problem will remain unresolved and we will be shooting in the dark
only. An effective mechanism should be developed, which is not an
unattainable task to minimize the dependence on the procedure of the
acquisition of figures for this purpose. Some unconventional methods will
have to be explored to know the accurate and real numbers of un-electrified
villages/households. This identification could be done with the help of the
new agencies like UrjaMitra and the elected representatives of the people.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that:
i. For the purpose of the electrification of villages and to ensure
energy access to all, the identification of villages should be done
at block level through independent agencies/individuals in which
the elected representatives can also be involved to endorse the
findings of such individuals/agencies. They may also be asked
as to how and in what manner energy access can be made a
reality in remote and inaccessible areas or where this is yet
become a reality. This exercise will help in mapping the un-
electrified villages and also fixing the requirement of energy.
Reply of the Government
Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. (REC) stated that there were
18,452 un-electrified villages in the country as on 01 April 2015. This data
has primarily been provided by the States which has been further ratified

8
by the public representatives through District Electricity Committee (now
DISHA). However, if any village is found un-electrified during
implementation, the same is also included for electrification. The progress
of electrification works in these un-electrified villages is also updated in
near real time basis in 12 milestones and villages are GIS mapped and also
monitored on GARV mobile App. The GARV app is in public domain.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy- OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3)
The Committee note that Electricity For All has been a declared
objective of the Union and State Governments since 1970, when the rural
electrification was identified as a key component of the minimum needs
programmes. A number of schemes like Kutir Jyoti Scheme, Pradhan Mantri
Gramodaya Yojana, the Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme and
the Accelerated Electrification of one lakh villages and one crore households
in the year 2004-05, RGGVY and DDUGJY have been initiated. The
Committee note that despite a plethora of schemes, we have not been able
to achieve the objective of electricity for all or the energy access by the
common man in the country. There is no denying the fact that considerable
progress has been made but a lot needs to be done to attain the goal of
energy access. The Committee feel that to achieve the purpose, the
involvement of local people from project conceptualization of commissioning
and sustained operation, maintenance could be the important factors for its
success. The energy can be from grid, off-grid solutions including mini
grid or standalone systems. Therefore, the Committee recommend that:
i. The outcome of each of the schemes initiated so far with regard
to Electricity For All may be reviewed and shortcomings/
deficiencies identified to fix them, so that ongoing schemes/
programmes do not suffer from the same deficiencies which
have been responsible for the non/short delivery or performance
schemes implemented to provide Electricity For All.
Reply of the Government
As per REC, the left out un-electrified villages (18452 un-electrified
villages as on 01.04.2015) are, by & large, last mile villages which are

9
difficult to access and electrify. The electrification work is being monitored
in real time on GARV app, in which physical progress is provided by Gram
Vidyut Abhiyantas & mid-course corrective measures are taken by States,
REC and Ministry of Power.
Further, DDUGJY scheme, as a whole, is being reviewed at the
following levels:
At State level, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary
is in place to monitor progress and resolve issues relating to
implementation viz. allocation of land for sub-stations, right of way,
forest clearance, railway clearance, safety clearance etc.
At District level, District Development Co-ordination & Monitoring
Committee namely DISHA (administered by Ministry of Rural
Development) headed by senior most Member of Parliament (Lok
Sabha) is in place to review and monitor implementation of central
sector schemes including DDUGJY .
At Central level, inter-ministerial Monitoring Committee on DDUGJY
headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, Government of India
also monitor implementation of scheme. Besides, the progress is
reviewed with States / Power Utilities in Review, Planning and
Monitoring (RPM) meeting of Ministry of Power on monthly basis.
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), the nodal agency,
monitors implementation of scheme through its project offices at
field level. REC has developed a web enabled Mobile App, 'GARV'
for monitoring of village electrification.
Based on the feedback/issues raised from all the stakeholders viz.
implementing agencies, Contractors, Project Monitoring agencies,
RQM, NQM, TPIA, State Governments of DDUGJY scheme during
the review meetings necessary corrective measures are being taken
including amendments in the DDUGJY guidelines and Standard Bidding
Document, to increase the benefits of the schemes at large to the
rural population.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy-OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]

10
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4)
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
The Committee note that the Deen Dayal Upadhayaya Gram Jyoti
Yojana (DDUGJY) aims at electrification of the un-electrified villages of the
country. Villages are to be electrified through grid connectivity and the term
of the scheme has been extended up to 2020. The Committee feel that this
flagship scheme of the Government has a potential to fulfil the ambition of
energy access in India to a greater extent. The Scheme has a total outlay
of Rs. 40300 crore with the budgetary support of Rs. 33453 crore. Under
the scheme, Government has also taken up a joint initiative with the States
for preparation of State specific action plan for 24x7 power for all. Besides,
rural electrification component projects with outlay of Rs. 32860 crore
have also been subsumed in DDUGJY making the total outlay of the scheme
to Rs. 75893 crore of which 63.27 will be provided through budgetary
support of the Government and balance would be contributed by the States
from their own resources/loans from financial institutions/banks. The
Committee note that there is no financial crunch as far as the implementation
of the scheme is concerned. However, despite availability of funds and
other required infrastructure to implement the scheme, the desired progress
has not been made to achieve the physical targets. The tenure of the
scheme is being extended every time on the non-achievement of the targets.
This situation leads us to believe that there may be systemic shortcomings
which are hampering the growth and achievement of desired results under
the scheme. There is no guarantee that the scheme will not be further
extended beyond 2020 and all the targets will be achieved within the
extended stipulated timeline. This kind of the approach instills the sense of
lethargy in the implementation of the scheme and prevents us to identify
and rectify the systemic inefficiencies. The indefinite procrastination will
eat up our resources and multiply the simple problem into manifolds. This
attitude cannot be allowed to persist. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that:—
i. Since the inception of RGGVY in the year 2005, the scheme
should be analysed thread bare and reasons be identified for its
failure to achieve the targets. It should also be found why the
problem has not been fixed so far.

11
ii. Urgent and efficacious measure should be explored to make the
implementation of the scheme a success failing which the
responsibility for non-achievement of the target under the scheme
should also be fixed.
Reply of the Government
REC states that so far, the progress has been satisfactory & the
targets have been achieved, barring a few States. The project is being
monitored microscopically at all levels & issues addressed proactively,
without delay.
Further, REC has deployed Gram Vidyut Abhiyantas (GV As) to assist
State Governments/DISCOMs in monitoring of electrification of villages
with effect from 01.01.2016. Once the village is declared as electrified by
the State DISCOMs, the GVAs visit the village and the details regarding
electrification of villages are uploaded on a Mobile App - GARV and web
portal - garv.gov.in for use by all the stakeholders and dissemination of
information to public for bringing in transparency in the system.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy-OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5)
The Committee note that during the 10th and 11th Plans, the target
under each category of the electrification i.e. (i) Unelectrified villages
(ii) Intensive electrification of electrified villages and (iii) BPL connections
were not met by good margin. Only 2,28,06,032 BPL connections could
be provided against the target of 2,64,93,948. Moreover, there is no clarity
with regard to intensive electrification of village and electrification of village.
There is always a difference of opinion with regard to the number of
electrified villages and the remaining villages for electrification. The
Committee has also been apprised that no targets are fixed for intensive
electrification of electrified villages. This kind of approach results in duplicity
of work as well as in sham exercise in the name of electrification. It also
raises the question as to what is the basis for selection of electrified villages
for intensive electrification. This is an inconsistent policy leaving much
scope for discretion, insincerity and specious approach. The besetting of

12
these factors into any scheme are sufficient to make it unworthy, disoriented
and unproductive. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
i. The multiplicity of the agencies involved therein and the high
stakes that the scheme carries a proper, thoughtful, inclusive,
implementable and target-oriented guidelines should be framed
to make it successful. There is no point in indulging over repeat
exercises like partial electrification and intensive electrification
of villages. It is a waste of time and resources and should be
avoided at any cost.
ii. Appropriate guidelines in this regard may be framed or reframed
immediately as the case may be and the Committee be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per REC, Under DDUGJY, access of electricity is being provided
in un-electrified villages as well as already electrified villages. Creation of
additional infrastructure (Intensive electrification) in already electrified villages
is done to provide access of electricity to un-electrified households. Under
DDUGJY, GoI is providing free service connection to BPL households and
access of electricity is provided to APL households to facilitate extension
of service connection by the utility immediately as and when the same is
demanded by the APL household.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy-OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6)
The Committee note that during the 12th Plan period, total 768
projects under DDUGJY have been sanctioned. These projects include 495
off-grid projects. The project cost for the sanctioned project is Rs. 23774
crore of which Rs. 167 crores are for off-grid projects. This will cover
the electrification of 9125 un-electrified villages of which 113 un-electrified
villages will be of off-grid. Intensive electrification of 231852 electrified
villages will also be done during the period and release of free electricity
connection of 132.56 lakh BPL households will be done of which 19415
such households will be from off-grid. As on 30.09.2016, electrification of
4701 villages has been done including 53 villages from off-grid sources.

13
Intensive electrification of 41554 electrified villages has been done whereas
12.87 lakh BPL households connections have been released. The Committee
note that the 12th Plan period is about to end but we are not even half way
to the target in any of the category of electrification. This needs serious
appraisal on an urgent basis as to why we are lagging behind in electrification
under DDUGJY . The Committee are aware that usual excuses will be given
for non-performance. This trend is not at all acceptable and there should
be some element of accountability for non-achieving the target. When the
projects were sanctioned and targets set, the entire process of electrification
might have been conceived and laid down. If the possible hurdles hampering
the progress and their remedy cannot be foreseen, thereby, resulting in the
time and cost overrun, it raises serious questions about the efficacy of the
scheme as well as the competence of the agencies involved. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:—
i. The target under DDUGJY should be fixed in a realistic manner
and once they are finalized, there should be no compromise for
any reason whatsoever with regard to the achievement of the
targets. Adducing reasons and excuses for non-performance
will give leeway to the officials/agencies to escape accountability
which will not be in the interest of the timely completion of the
project and achievement of the targets.
Reply of the Government
REC states that based on our earlier experience, Government of
India, through REC, has appointed Gram Vidyut Abhiyantas (GV As), for
real time monitoring of projects. The issues raised by GVAs are promptly
addressed by States, REC and Ministry of Power. Electrification of balance
un-electrified village (18452 as on 01.04.2015) has been targeted to be
completed, on mission mode, by May 2018. Electrification of these villages
is being monitored on GARV app, assigning 12 milestones on the progress.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy-OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7)
The Committee have been apprised about the concept of the intensive
electrification of the electrified villages stating that keeping in view the

14
objective of the scheme to provide access to electricity to all households,
it is envisaged to create rural electricity infrastructure in un-electrified
villages as well as in already electrified villages. Creation of rural electricity
infrastructure in already electrified villages for providing access to electricity
to remaining un-electrified households and providing free electricity
connections to BPL households has been termed as 'Intensive Electrification
of Villages' under the scheme. Under Intensive Electrification (IE) mainly
lines are erected and capacity of distribution transformer is enhanced. It
has also been stated that against the sanctioned 7,28,440 number of electrified
villages for intensive electrification, as on 30.09.2016 electrification of
3,81,430 electrified villages has been completed so far. The Committee are
concerned to know the prevailing state of affairs under the DDUGJY for
intensive electrification of electrified villages which envisages creation of
rural electricity infrastructure in un-electrified villages as well as in electrified
villages. This is surprising as to whether the electrification already done in
a village of whatever quantity is done without electricity infrastructure?
Why this repeat exercise in the face of the fact that huge number of
villages are still left for electrification. The Committee do understand that
the electrification of entire village is essential but it should have been done
from the beginning itself instead of indulging in this kind of time and money
consuming frivolous exercises. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—
i. It should be ensured that the factors like intensive electrification
of electrified villages should be avoided and all out efforts should
be made for the wholesome electrification of the un-electrified
villages and also of the partially electrified villages so as to avoid
the repeat exercise involving time, money and technical efforts.
Reply of the Government
As per REC, due to funds constraints, a criteria of population of the
targeted villages was stipulated in earlier scheme. However, in DDUGJY
(new scheme), there is no criteria of population for a village to be electrified;
all habitations irrespective of its population, is considered for electrification.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8)
The Committee note that Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG)
is the available option to provide electricity access to the electrified

15
habitations. It is a cost effective, efficient, self-sufficient, technically less
complicated and locally available resource consumption system to provide
electricity to the areas where grid connectivity is either not feasible or not
cost effective. The renewable sources of energy such as bio-mass,
bio-fuels, bio-gas, mini hydro solar etc., can be characterized as effective
source of Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG). Primarily, it is an
off-grid distribution network for local requirements of limited periphery. So
far 4604 new projects have been sanctioned under DDG with the project
cost of Rs. 1470 crore. The target for electrification under the scheme is
the electrification of 3586 un-electrified villages and 1,87,286 BPL household
connections. As on 31st October, 2016, only 518 projects have been
commissioned which is far from satisfactory. The Committee note that
there is a huge gap between the target and the achievement, consequently,
a large number of habitations in BPL households are yet to be electrified
because the projects sanctioned under DDG Scheme are from component
of the DDUGJY . This has also led to financial re-orientation as far as this
scheme is concerned. The Committee find that poor planning and
implementation of DDG result in the end waste of resources as they are
of perishable nature. If this is done as expected, not only the resource
utilization will be effective but also lead to illuminating of households and
villages which are yet to see the electricity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:–
i. The projects under DDG should be sanctioned in a manner
wherein targets are achievable. The time period for
implementation of these projects should also be streamlined
keeping in view the seasonal and cyclical availability of resources
as well as the low gestation period in the commissioning of the
projects.
Reply of the Government
REC updated that the progress of electrification works is updated in
near real time basis in 12 milestones and villages are GIS mapped and also
monitored on GARV mobile App.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]

16
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the concept of innovative financing has
been introduced to implement the DDG and it has been stated that REC
through its field offices helps the States in documentation of the processes.
Besides, the financing pattern of DDUGJY scheme provides incentive to the
performing State utilities. On achievement of stipulated milestones, the
subsidy component is increased to 75 per cent of the project cost. This is
done on timely completion of the scheme as per the laid down milestones,
reduction in AT&C losses as per finalized trajectory and up front release of
admissible revenue subsidy by the State Government based on the metered
consumption. The Committee find that standalone system has been introduced
under DDG consisting of 200 Wp panel, battery, 5 LEDs, Fan, Mobile
charger, 25 watt power socket etc., available to each household. However,
the condition of reduction in AT&C losses has been laid down for release
of additional subsidy. It is incomprehensible why this condition has been
made applicable and whether it is realistic and feasible in the standalone
arrangements. To link release of additional subsidy with this kind of
impractical condition amounts to non-granting of subsidy. Similarly, the
upfront release of admissible revenue subsidy by the State Government
based on improved consumption is also a mirage. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that:—
i. Linking DDG, with this kind of preposterous conditions will
only discourage the scheme, thereby, denying the already deprived
sections of society their rightful claim on electricity.
Reply of the Government
REC states that under DDG projects, 60% of the project cost (85%
in case of special category States) is given as grant under DDUGJY and
balance is arranged by respective implementing Agencies/State Governments
through Loan/Equity. However, the aforesaid subsidy component is increased
to 75% (90% in case of special category States) subject to only one
condition i.e. timely completion of DDG projects. It is submitted that
condition regarding reduction on AT&C losses and upfront release of
admissible revenue subsidy by State Government are not applicable in DDG
projects; it is applicable only in grid connected electrification works.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]

17
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10)
Remote Village Electrification Programme
The Committee note that the Government is implementing remote
village electrification programme by providing financial support for lighting
using renewable energy sources in those un-electrified remote census villages,
hamletsof electrified census villages where grid connectivity is either not
feasible or not cost effective and which are not covered under DDUGJY
for grid electrification. This scheme is implemented through State
Government Power Departments or the Forest Department. A subsidy up
to 90 per cent of the cost of installation of various renewable energy
devices are provided under the scheme. The Committee note that there has
been good progress under the scheme as about11335 villages and hamlets
have been electrified against the target of 13059, up toAugust, 2016. Work
is on in 637 villages, whereas, 1087 villages have been dropped from the
sanctioned projects.The Committee understand the difficulties involved in
the scheme of remote village electrification yet, they cannot be left
unattended.The Committee strongly recommend that:—
i The villages which are not covered under the DDUGJY and are
to be electrified under some other schemes should also be given
due attention and priority. Border and remote villages should not
feel alienated for want of electricity and hence, a time
bound programme should be chalked out to cover all the
villages for electrification under the various schemes of the
Government.
Reply of the Government
The program of Remote Village Electrification (RVE) which was
earlier operational under MNRE, is now handled by Ministry of Power.
However to meet the demand of electricity in remote locations using solar
power packs, Ministry is implementing Solar Off Grid PV and Decentralized
programme. Under this scheme, the provision of 30% subsidy is available
for general States and upto 90% for special category States.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]

18
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 11)
Off-Grid/Decentralized Solar Photo Voltaic Programme
The Committee note that Off-Grid/Decentralized Solar Photo V oltaic
Programme is supported for rural electrification in mini grid mode. Under
the programme, various off-grid/grid connected and decentralized photo
voltaic systems/applications up to a maximum capacity of 500 KWP per
site are supported. It is implemented for rapid upscaling in an inclusive
mode thereby, reducing the transaction cost and time. 30 per cent subsidy
of benchmark cost for various solar devices is provided and funding under
the scheme is done in project mode. Similarly, 40 per cent of the benchmark
cost are also provided for small capacity power plants up 1300 WP. Loan
from bank is mandatory to avail subsidy under the scheme. The Committee
welcome these steps and emphasize that this scheme should be given due
popularity and incentive so as to widen its scope in rural and inaccessible
areas. This scheme has a potential to mitigate the hardships of people living
in remote and inaccessible areas. Over one million households are already
meeting their lighting energy needs through solar energy. Solar street lighting
is another very useful application for public lighting purpose. Till now, over
4 lakh street lights have been installed throughout the country. The Committee
are aware that to improve the standard of living and quality of life of those
section of population which are deprived of access to electricity, solar
photo voltaic mechanism can be helpful in mitigating their hardship. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:
i. Solar photo voltaic system should be appropriately developed
and remodelled into different devices so that it can become
more useful to the people living in remote areas. Street lights,
home lights and lantern can be suitably designed to sustain
round the clock while re-energizing themselves during the day.
ii. It should be made a public movement for the purpose of
electricity access in the areas where grid connectivity is not
possible.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is already promoting solar basel devices for remote
areas of the country, for providing lights and promoting livelihood activities.

19
Solar Charkha and Solar lighting dome are two such devices which have
been developed in the recent years. Specifications and standards for the
solar street lights and home lights have been developed to provide sufficient
lighting in rural households.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy— OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16.8.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the Government has taken up an ambitious
programme for installation of 1 lakh solar water pumping system for
irrigation and drinking water. The provision of 30 per cent Central Financial
Assistance has been made under the programme. Ministry of Drinking
Water and Sanitation has also been associated for installing 15,330 pumps
for providing community drinking water. In addition, 30 thousand solar
pumps will also be installed through bank loan with 40 per cent Central
Financial Assistance for irrigation purpose to individual farmers. The
Committee while welcoming the move of the Government also congratulate
them for this initiative in which the contribution from the beneficiary is
only of 20 per cent. 40 per cent of the Central Financial Assistance and for
rest of the 40 per cent of the cost, loan at normal rates are made available
through banks. In this regard, the Committee would like to emphasize the
fact that the cost of the solar pump should be realistic and implementable
as the subsidy is based on the cost of water machine. The Committee
would also like to draw the attention of the Government about the life and
durability of these machines failing which the entire initiative will be negated.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that:
(i) The system of installation of solar water pumps should be made
transparent, time bound and efficient.
(ii) It should also be ensured that the machines installed for the
purpose are of high quality and maintenance free to the extent
possible.
(iii) This should be done with utmost care and with indigenous
technology involving of the beneficiary.

20
Reply of the Government
Under the Off Grid PV and Decentralized solar applications
Programme, sufficient measures have been built into the scheme to ensure
transparent, time bound and efficient system for allocation and procurement
of solar pumps. These pumps are procured by the implementing agencies
through a transparent tendering process. Timely installation has been ensured
by setting timeline in the scheme and strict monitoring for compliance. The
scheme also has a penalty clause which is activated in case of delays
beyond the prescribed timelines. Further the quality is ensured by accepting
only test lab certified solar pumps for the installation. The quality is also
checked and verified by providing an inspection report while submission of
project completion report. The utmost care has been taken for maintaining
quality of the systems.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16.8.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para No. 13)
The Committee note that initiatives regarding solar water pumping
system for irrigation and drinking water are based as per the requirements
of the most needy sections of the society. The Programme is at the nascent
stage and need vigorous strengthening. For confidence building of the
people into the programme proper technical and administrative measure
should be taken so as to popularize it among them. Funding pattern for
installing the machine including subsidy component is a well considered
move and the Committee applauded the Government for this. However,
there is no scope for complacency and we should strive for excellence in
the working of the mission. The various components of the mission should
be of high standard and competitive in cost. Adequate maintenance
infrastructure should also be made available as backup arrangement so that
the possible obstacles in the machines are well taken care of. To popularize
the programme other measures can also be considered sincerely. We should
concentrate our efforts to make this programme a success as this will
largely reduce the dependence of farmer on the conventional sources of
electricity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
i. A watch should also be kept on the water output from these
solar photo voltaic water pumping system. If necessary, the
performance standard motor also be prescribed in this regard.

21
ii. This useful move be popularized among the masses and efforts
should be made to cater to ever increasing demand of the system.
The sustainability of the various components of the mission
should also be ensured by introducing the quality checks at the
appropriate levels.
Reply of the Government
The specifications issued by the Ministry have already prescribed
water output per watt peak with respect to water head of the pump.
Further, proactive measurements are taken to meet the performance of the
solar pumps. This includes the quality check of the pumps through Ministry's
empanelled test labs.
The Ministry is taking efforts to publicize not only solar pumps but
other solar energy systems by various medias like Radio Broadcasting of
programme 'Akshay Urja aur Hum' every week for general masses. Ministry
also put efforts to raise awareness about renewable amongst students,
teachers, scientists and public at large. These programmes are implemented
with specific focus on respective target groups. The mediums deployed
include electronic media such as radio, TV , spot films etc. print media,
newspapers, exhibitions, seminar/symposia etc.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy— OM No. 8/7/2015
dated 16.8.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 14)
The Committee note that Government has come out with a scheme
Atal Jyoti Yojana which is a sub-scheme under off-grid and decentralized
solar application to provide solar street lighting system in rural, semi urban
and urban areas with inadequate coverage of grid power. The scheme also
involves Members of Parliaments on the basis of their understanding of the
needs and aspirations of the local people. The scheme is to be implemented
in the States where household electrification is less than 50 per cent as per
2011 census. 75 per cent of the cost of the street light will be made
through Budget and remaining 25 per cent can be arranged from MPLADS
fund, panchayat funds, municipality or other urban local body's fund. The
Committee find this scheme to be insufficient and also sketchy. The Scheme
aims to cover the urban, semi urban, rural areas with inadequate coverage

22
under grid power. This will lead to duplicity as there is no justification of
inadequate power within the jurisdiction of grid network. The other condition
of its implementation of less than 50 per cent household electrification is
also not in consonance with the scheme. This is primarily a street lighting
scheme and to implement it in areas where there is no household electricity
will make it ineffective as people will tend to get electricity into their
households from the network of this scheme. That may result in the mass
destruction of the scheme and becoming non-productive. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:
i. The Atal Jyoti Yojana should be a compact scheme on the lines
of other schemes under DDG. There should be wholesome
electrification of household as well as streets under the scheme
so as to avoid any kind of misuse of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
For the electrification of household, Solar Power Packs and Home
Lighting systems are being provided to eligible beneficiaries under Solar Off
Grid PV and Decentralized Programme. This scheme provides subsidy for
home lighting systems as well as street lights. The AJAY scheme, on the
other hand, caters the need of community by providing solar street lights
through MPLAD funds. The two schemes are different with different set
of target groups. Further to avoid duplicity the precautions are being made
to avoid sanctioning of the street lights in the same area.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy– OM No 8/7/2015
dated 16/8/2017]

23
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
-NIL-

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-NIL-

25
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVA TION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AW AITED
-NIL-
 N EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

26
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 15TH
FEBRUARY, 2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM G-074,
PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
MEMBERS
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh
10. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
12. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
15. Shri Oscar Fernandes
16. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
17. Shri S. Muthukaruppan

27
18. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
19. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up
the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on ''Stressed /Non-performing Assets in Electricity
Sector".
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Evaluation of
Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power Exchanges'.
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the year
2016-17.
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Hydro Power —
A Sustainable, Clean and Green Alternative'.
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Energy
Access in India — Review of Current Status and Role of
Renewable Energy'.
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2017-18.
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'National Electricity
Policy — A Review'.

28
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any change.
The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the
second part of the Budget Session.
4 . X X X      X X X        X X X X X X
5 . X X X      X X X        X X X X X X
6 . X X X      X X X        X X X X X X
7 . X X X      X X X        X X X X X X
8 . X X X      X X X        X X X X X X
The Committee then adjourned.

29
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
22ND REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 14
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total: 14
Percentage 100%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
- Nil -
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect  of  which the
reply of the Government has not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
-Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
- Nil -
Total: 00
Percentage 00%

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(T el. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (T el. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The
said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."