STANDING COMMITTEE
2 4 ON ENERGY
(2016-2017)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on Power Generation from Municipal Solid Waste]

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELH

December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


TWENTY FOURTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2016-2017)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Power Generation
fiom Municipal Solid Waste]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2016
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2016

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2016/4grahayana, 1938 (Saka)


Price : Rs. 49.00

© 2016 By Lok Sapna SicrETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by M/s. Akashdeep Printers,
20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110 002.


CONTENTS

Pace (४)

Composition OF THE Commitree (2016-17) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (५)
CHAPTERI पकाएी:...................- 1
CHAPTERIL Observations/ Recommendations which have been

accepted by the Government 10
CHAPTER IIL Observations/Recommendations which the Committee

do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's

replies. 27
CHAPTERIV  Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the

Committee and require reiteration 28
CHAPTER V — Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which

final replies of the Government are still awaited.......... 29

APPENDICES
1 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
09.12.2016 30
वा. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/ Recommendations contained in the

20th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing

Committee on Energy.. ve 7352



nv

RY

wv

2

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

(2016-2017)
Dr. Virendra Kumar —- Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Sultan Ahmed
Shri Om Birla
Shri M. Chandrakasi
Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
Dr. Arun Kumar
Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
Shri Malyadri Sriram
Shri R.P. Marutharajaa
Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
Shri M.B. Rajesh
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
Shri T.K.S. Elangovan

Shri Oscar Fernandes

(iii)


Gy)

Shri Ram Jethmalani
Shri Javed Ali Khan
Shri La. Ganesan
Dr. Prabhakar Kore
Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
Shri 5. Muthukaruppan
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
Shrimati Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary _
2... Shri N.K. Pandey =

3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip _

Joint Secretary
Director

Under Secretary


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-
fourth Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on ‘Power
Generation from Municipal Solid Waste’.

2. The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
Sth August, 2016 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received
on 4th November, 2016.

3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 9th December, 2016.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.

5. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have accepted all the
recommendations of the Committee. However, action taken by the Government
on some of the Recommendations that require merit comments are commented.

New Deu; DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
14 December, 2016 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 23, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

७)


REPORT
CHAPTER 1

This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in their Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Power Generation from
Solid Waste.

2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 5 August,
2016 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report
contained 16 Recommendations/Observations.

3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the Government.
These have been categorized as follows:

(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total -16
Chapter-Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

Nil Total -00
Chapter-II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:

Nil Total-00

Chapter-TV


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies
of the Government are still awaited:

Nil Total-00
Chapter-V

4. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have accepted
all the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee however,
desire and expect the Ministry to implement the recommendations of
the Committee in letter and spirit, in a time bound manner. They further
desire that Action Taken Notes on implementation of the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.

5. The Committee however, will deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require merit comments.

A. Municipal Solid Waste : Generation, Composition and Potential

Recommendation (Serial No. 1)

6. The Committee in their ori
total quantity of w

ginal Report had noted that out of the
generated in the country i.e. 1.43 lakh metric tons per
day, only 0.33 lakh metric tons is being treated and disposed. As per the data
furnished by the Ministry, some of the States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Punjab, Uttrakhand, ete., have performed very badly in
terms of treatment of their waste. The waste that these States treat is abysmally
low. There is an urgent need to step up efforts so as to achieve 100% scientific
processing and disposal of Municipal Solid Waste by 2019, as envisaged by
the Government, under Swachh Bharat Mission. The Committee had also
noted that the figures regarding waste generation, collection and treatment,
given by the Ministry, pertain to urban areas only, whereas the Committee
found that a large amount of waste is generated in rurai are
not been taken into account anywhere. There should be some facility to collect
and treat solid waste at Panchayat level also as all the waste in rural areas is
not suitable to be converted into organic manure. The Committee had therefore,
recommended that:

also which has

(i) All the Urban Local Bodies should be encouraged to prepare an
Action Plan, in a time bound manner, for establishing. Waste-
treatment Facilities, employing any technology according to their


Gi)

1४

local needs, in their respective areas so as to achieve 100%
collection and treatment of MSW all over the Country,

Waste generated in the Villages should be taken into account anda
proper mechanism for the collection and treatment of the same
should be initiated at the Panchayat level also.

The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Reply

has stated as under:—

lig

National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP), 2008 mandates each
ULBs to formulate their Tespective City Sanitation Plan (CSP) in
overall conformity to the National Policy. Swachh Bharat Mission
(SBM) mandates 100 % collection, transportation and treatment
of solid waste by 2nd Oct., 2019. SBM is guided by NUSP, 2008.
Under SBM, all the Mission cities/towns had prepared their CSPs.

The new Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 published by
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change have been
notified with the responsibilities for the different Ministries/States/
UTs/ULBs/ Departments in solid waste management.

‘The Ministry is also having the responsibility of providing guidelines

to the State/ULBs. Thus, the Ministry has formulated/contributed

to the following documents in consultation with the other

Ministries.

(i) Revised Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual published
in 2016

(i) Report of the Task Force on Waste to Energy published by
NITI Aayog (erstwhile planning Commission) on May 2014

Both these documents detail the various solid waste management
Practices that can be adopted by the ULBs.

(i) Report of the Task Force describes the various WtE
technological options available in the Country and their
suitability based on the population and geography.

Both these documents are available in the web portal of SBM.

(i) Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation may fund the rural
part of such projects as the subject matter of rural areas is
being dealt with by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.



8. On the Committee's recommendation that a proper
mechanism for the collection and treatment of waste generated in the
village should be initiated at the Panchayat level, the Ministry of Urban
Development suggest that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
may fund the rural part of such projects as the subject matter of rural
areas is being dealt with by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
However, the Committee feel that as the subject matter ie MSW is
within the purview of the Ministry of Urban Development and they are
the nodal Ministry, they haye full responsibility in the matter. Moreover,
if the Ministry of Urban Development feel the need to involve the
“Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in the project, they may set
up a coordination mechanism for the same.

B. Municipal Solid Waste: Generation, Composition and Potential
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)

9. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that the waste that
is generated in the Country is a mixed waste comprising a large amount of
inert material and a very high moisture level unlike in other countries. High
level of moisture and inert in the waste make it difficult to derive power from
it. The Committee found that there is no proper system of collection from the
source of waste generation and municipal sanitation workers collect waste
primarily through street sweeping, ete. Also, there is no practice of sorting of
waste at source ina scientific way. In view of the Committee, there should be
efficient mechanism for segregation of waste at the source as it has become
a herculean task all over the country. The Committee had therefore,
recommended that:—

(i) Citizens should be encouraged to keep segregated bins for wet,
dry and hazardous waste and to stop littering on the streets.

(ii) Segregation of waste should be made mandatory in all Government
Offices, Households, Commercial Establishments, etc. and if need
be a penalty may be imposed for non-compliance.

(ii) Proper training should be provided to municipal workers regarding
segregation of waste for efficient utilization of resources.

(iv) Awareness and sensitization programmes should be conducted for
the best practices in the field of waste handling to bring in behavioural
changes in public.


10.

The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Reply

has stated as under:—

"@

(ii

(iii)

(iv)

As per the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 it is mandated for
all the waste generators to segregate and store the waste generated
by them in three separate streams namely bio-degradable, non-
biodegradable and domestic hazardous wastes. Further, the Rules
had delegated powers to the local authorities and village panchayat
to frame bye-laws and prescribe criteria for levying of spot fine
for persons who litters or fails to comply with the provisions of
these rules and delegate powers to officers or local bodies to levy
spot fines as per the bye laws framed.

As per the Rules, the word "waste generator" means and includes
every person or group of persons, every residential premises and
non-residential establishments which generate solid waste.

MSW Rules, 2016 has made it mandatory for all waste generators
to segregate the waste and it prescribes criteria for levying of fines
for persons who fails to comply with these rules.

As per the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it is the
responsibility of the local authorities and village panchayats to
educate workers for door to door collection of segregated waste
and transporting the unmixed waste to processing or disposal facility
and to provide training on solid waste management to waste-pickers
and waste collectors.

Under Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), 15% of total Central
allocation to the States has been earmarked for IEC & Public
Awareness component. Of this, 12% has been earmarked for States
and the remaining 3% has been earmarked for the Ministry. The
Ministry has developed e-modules & is developing it further in
various areas of Municipal Solid Waste Management which includes
capturing of best practices in various fields.

Further, as per the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it is the
responsibility of the local authorities and village panchayats to create
public awareness through information, education and
communication campaign and educate the. waste generators
including the best practices in the field of waste handling".


11. The Committee are happy to note about the enforcement of
Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 which mandated all the waste
generators to segregate and store the waste generated by them in three
separate streams of bio-degradable, non-biodegradable and domestic
hazardous wastes. The Rules had also delegated powers to the local
authorities and village panchayat to frame bye-laws and prescribe criteria
for levying of spot fine for persons who litters or fails to comply with
the provisions of these rules and delegate powers to officers or local
bodies to levy spot fines as per the bye laws framed. As per the said
Rules, it is the responsibility of the local authorities and village
panchayats to educate workers for door to door collection of segregated
waste and transporting the unmixed waste to processing or disposal
facility; and to provide training on solid waste management to waste-
pickers and waste collectors. Although the Rules mandated the waste
generator, delegated powers to the local authorities and village panchayat
for different tasks, the Solid Waste Management Rules being at its
nascent stage, the Committee are concerned about the implementation
of the Rules in letter and spirit by local authorities and village
panchayats. The Committee therefore, feel that the Ministry of Urban
Development being the nodal Ministry in this sector should ensure
implementation of the Management Rules 2016 by various stakeholders.

C. Status of Waste to Energy projects in the country
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)

12. The Committee in their original Report had noted that except Okhla
and Ghazipur Plants, all the remaining Waste to Energy Plants including Pune
Plant have completely failed to take off. The Committee visited the Okhla and
Pune Waste to Energy Plants for first-hand knowledge of working of such
plants and found that while working of Okhla Plant (Delhi) was satisfactory,
Pune Plant was a complete failure. The Committee had noted that most of the
Waste to Energy Plants have been set up in the country under private sector
driven PPP mode and most of these plants have failed to function properly. In
view of the Committee, Public Sector must come forward and set up at least
two demonstration Waste to Energy Plants which would give a message that
the Government is committed to the cause of scientific management of
Municipal Solid Waste in general and adoption of the methods of Waste to
Energy in particular and it believes that such a project is viable and can be run


efficiently and that all the risks associated with such projects were not
transferred to the private partners. The Committee had therefore, recommended
that:-—

(i) The model of Okhla Plant (Delhi) may be replicated in other cities
for safe disposal of MSW generation of Power.

(ii) The Government/PSUs should set up at least two demonstration
Waste to Energy Plants to give a message that the Government is
committed to the cause of scientific management of Municipal
Solid Waste.

13, The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Reply
has stated as under:—

(i) As per the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) Guidelines, the States/
UTs/ULBs are empowered to’select the technology of their
convenience for treating solid waste, generated in their jurisdiction,
based on their requirements and actual site conditions.

(ii) This issue will be taken up at an appropriate level in the Government
for taking suitable decision.

14. With regard to their recommendation for replication of the
model of Okhla Plant (Delhi) in other cities for safe disposal of MSW
and generation of Power, the Committee are apprised that the SBM
Guidelines empowered the States/UTs/ULBs to select the technology of
their convenience for treating solid waste, generated in their jurisdiction,
based on their requirements and actual site conditions. With due
acknowledgement of the Guidelines, the Committee are of the view
that the Ministry of Urban Development is responsible to guide the
States/UTs/ULBs for imparting experiences gained at one Plant to other
Plant in the country,

Further with regard to the Committee's recommendation to set
up at least two demonstration Waste to Energy Plants by the PSU/
Government, the Ministry responded that they will be taking up this
issue at an appropriate level in the Government for taking suitable
decision. The Committee trust the commitment of the Government
and desire that the Committee may be apprised of the action taken in
this regard.


D, Cluster model of the State Government of Andhra Pradesh
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)

15. The Committee in their original Report had noted that in the State
of Andhra Pradesh, Project Developers are required to set up a Waste to
Energy Plant on a PPP mode ona Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer
(DBFOT) basis and are selected through a tariff based competitive bidding
. Also, ULBs are responsible to deliver waste to the Developer at the
identified project site/location at their own cost without paying any Tipping

proc

Fee to the Developer and APDISCOMs are responsible for procurement of
power generated from the project. There is also a provision of Scientific
landfilling of the projects from the WtE Plant and development of the scientific
landfill by the Developer at its own cost, etc. The Committee appreciated the
efforts of the State Government of Andhra Pradesh in this regard and felt that
Andhra Model may serve as an example to other Stat
adopt innovative methods for scientific disposal and treatment of Municipal
Solid Waste. The Committee also felt that there is a need to showcase the few

s to come forward and

succes:
spread awareness and encourage States to come up with innovative methods
suitable to their local conditions. The Committee had therefore, recommended

tories that the Country have in the field of Waste to Energy so as

that:—

(i) The Committee laud the efforts of the Government of Andhra
Pradesh for their initiative in the MSW management and taking a
lead in the country in Waste to Energy sector.

(ii) States should be encouraged to come forward and adopt innovative
methods for scientific disposal and treatment of Municipal Solid
Waste.

(iii) The success stories in the field of Waste to Energy should be
showcased so as to spread awareness and encourage more States
to come up with innovative methods which suit their local condition
the-best.

16. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Reply
stated:—

(i) No comments.

(ii) Agreed.


(iii) Ministry had already put some of the successful case studies of
solid waste management including WtE in the e-learning portal for
Swachh Bharat (Urban). Further, Ministry is in the process of
preparing 100 e-learning Modules in sanitation including WIE.
These may be referred by the ULBs for capacity building and
selecting a suitable technology.

17. The Committee find the response of the Ministry on the
observation/recommendation of the Committee lauding the efforts of
the Government, of Andhra Pradesh for their initiative in the MSW
management as non challant. The intention of the Committee in this
regard is to spread the success stories of one State to another States in
the field of Waste to Energy, so as to encourage more States to come up
with more innovative methods in waste management. However, the
Committee appreciate the steps of the Government with regard to the
solid waste management including waste to energy in e-learning portal
for Swachh Bharat. The Committee, therefore urge the Ministry to
have a close look at the Andhra model and showcase their success stories
so as to spread awareness and encourage other States to come up with
innovative methods suitable to their local conditions.


CHAPTERIT

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Twentieth Report, under Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker!

Recommendation (SI. No. 1)

The Committee note that out of the total quantity of waste generated in
the country i.e. 1.43 lakh metric tons per day, only 0.33 lakh metric tons is
being treated and disposed. As per the data furnished by the Ministry, some of
the States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Punjab, Uttrakhand,
etc., have performed very badly in terms of treatment of their waste. The
waste that is these states treat is abysmally low. There is an urgent need to
step up efforts so as to achieve 100% scientific processing and disposal of
Municipal Solid Waste by 2019, as envisaged by the Government, under
Swachh Bharat Mission. The Committee, also note that the figures regarding
waste generation, collection and treatment, given by the Ministry, pertain 10

urban areas only, whereas the Committee find that a large amount of waste is
generated in rural areas also which has not been taken into account anywhere.
There should be some facility to collect and treat solid waste at Panchayat
level also as all the waste in rural areas is not suitable to be converted into
organic manure. Therefore, the Committee recommend that:—

(i) All the Urban Local Bodies should be encouraged to prepare an
Action Plan, in a time bound manner, for establishing Waste
treatment Facilitics, employing any technology according to their
local needs, in their respective areas so as to achieve 100%
collection and treatment of MSW all over the Country.

(ii) Waste generated in the Villages should be taken into account and a
Proper Mechanism for the collection and treatment of the same
should be initiated at the Panchayat level also.

Reply of the Government

1, National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP), 2008 mandates each
ULBs to formulate their respective City Sanitation Plan (CSP) in overall

10


conformity to the National Policy. Swachh Bharat Mission ( SBM) mandates
100 % collection, transportation and treatment of solid waste by 2nd October,
2019. SBM is guided by NUSP, 2008. Under SBM, all the Mission cities/
towns had prepared their CSPs.

2. The new Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 published by
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change have been notified with
the responsibilities for the different Ministries/States/UTs/ULBs/Departments
in solid waste management.

3... The Ministry is also having the responsibility of providing guidelines
to the States/ULBs. Thus, the Ministry has formulated/contributed to the

following documents in consultation with the other Ministries.

(i) Revised Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual published in
2016.

(i) Report of the Task Force on Waste to Energy published by NITI
Aayog (erstwhile planning Commission) on May 2014.

4. Both these documents detail the various solid waste management
practices that can be adopted by the ULBs.

(i) Report of the Task Force describes the various WtE technological
options available in the Country and their suitability based on the
population and geography.

Both these documents are available in the web portal of SBM.

(i) Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation may fund the rural part
of such projects as the subject matter of rural areas is being dealt
with by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation,

[Minis

7 of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-201 5-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 2)

The Committee note that the waste that is generated in the Country is a
mixed waste comprising a large amount of inert material and a very high
moisture level unlike in other countries, High level of moisture and inerts in
the waste make it difficult to derive power from it. The Committee find that
there is no proper system of collection from the source of waste generation
and municipal sanitation workers collect waste primarily through street



sweeping, etc. Also, there is no practice of sorting of waste at source in a
scientific way. In view of the Committee, there should be efficient mechanism
for segregation of waste at the source as it has become a herculean task all
over the country. So, the Committee recommend that:—

(i) Citizens should be encouraged to keep segregated bins for wet,
dry and hazardous waste and to stop littering on the streets.

(ii) Segregation of waste should be made mandatory in all Government
Offices, Households, Commercial Establishments, etc. and if need
be a penalty may be imposed for non-compliance.

(ii) Proper training should be provided to municipal workers regarding
segregation of waste for efficient utilization of resources.

(iv) Awareness and sensitization programmes should be conducted for
the best practices in the field of waste handling to bring in behavioural
changes in public.

Reply of the Government

As per the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 it is mandated for all
the waste generators to segregate and store the waste generated by them in
three separate streams namely bio-degradable, non-biodegradable and domestic
hazardous wastes. Further, the Rules had delegated powers to the local
authorities and village panchayats to frame bye-laws and prescribe criteria
for levying of spot fine for persons who litters or fails to comply with the
provisions of these rules and delegate powers to officers or local bodies to
levy spot fines as per the bye laws framed.

As per the Rules, the word "waste generator" means and includes every
person or group of persons, every residential premises and non-residential
establishments which generate solid waste.

MSW Rules, 2016 has made it mandatory for all waste generators to
segregate the waste and it prescribes criteria for levying of fines for persons
who fails to comply with these rules.

As per the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it is the responsibility
of the local authorities and village panchayats to educate workers for door to
door collection of segregated waste and transporting the unmixed waste to
processing or disposal facility; and to provide training on solid waste
management to waste-pickers and waste collectors.

12


Under SBM, 15 % of total Central allocation to the States has been
earmarked for IEC & Public Awareness component. Of this, 12% has been
earmarked for States and the remaining 3% has been earmarked for the Ministry.
The Ministry has developed e-modules and is developing it further in various
areas of Municipal Solid Waste Management which includes capturing of
best practices in various fields.

Further, as per the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it is the
responsibility of the local authorities and village panchayats to create public
awareness through information, education and communication campaign and
educate the waste generators including the best practices in the field of waste
handling.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 3}

The Committee observe that for Bio-methanation, wet bio-degradable
waste is required; for Combustion of RDF, dry high organic waste is required;
for Gasification, organic or fossil based carbonaceous material is required
and for Pyrolysis, organic waste is required. Mass Burning of MSW is the
only method which does not require any segregation of waste and uses mixed
waste. However, this method of Mass Burning is detrimental to the environment,
so should not be resorted to on a mass scale. Most of the above mentioned
technologies require proper segregation of waste, however, there is lack of
an efficient mechanism to segregate waste into bio-degradable/dry/wet/
carbonaceous materials etc. components. Also, none of these technologies
have yielded desired results due to variety of reasons.

(i) The Government should provide proper policy and cost effective
technological support for W to E Sector as existing technologies
do not seem to be compatible to local requirements.

Gi) Efficient, financially affordable and environmentally suitable
technological methods should be adopted to recover energy from
the waste without compromising on the viability of Waste to Energy
Plants and ensuring better public health,

ii) Mass burning of municipal waste should be discouraged and
prohibited as it is detrimental to environment and also a major source
of health hazards.

13


Reply of the Government

Government of India is taking various initiatives to make the waste to
energy plants in the Country financially viable. As per the latest amendment to
the Electricity Tariff Policy 2006 by Ministry of Power it has been made
mandate for the State Electricity DISCOMs to purchase all power generated
from municipal solid waste at the rate determined by appropriate authority.

Further, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) has notified
the generic tariff of Rs.7.04 per unit and Rs.7.90 per unit for Municipal Solid
Waste and Refuse Derived Fuel based waste to energy plants, respectively
for year 2015-16.

Also, all currently available technologies in WtE along with their
applicability, usage and challenges are discussed in the Ministry's Municipal
Solid Waste Management Manual published in 2016.

Further, as stated in | (i) the report of the Task Force on Waste to
Energy describes the various WtE technologies available in the Country and
their suitability based on the population and geography of the ULBs has been
discussed.

However, the States/UTs/ULBs are empowered to select technology for
treating solid waste, generated in their jurisdiction, on their own based on
their requirements and actual site conditions as per the SBM Guidelines.

Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 prohibits the burning of waste
and authorises the local authorities and village panchayats to penalise the
defaulters of the Rules as per the bye laws framed

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 4)

The Committee note that except Okhla and Ghazipur Plants, all the
remaining Waste to Energy Plants including Pune Plant have completely failed
to take off. The Committee visited the Okhla and Pune Waste to Energy
Plants for first-hand knowledge of working of such plants and found that
while working of Okhla Plant (Delhi) was satisfactory, Pune Plant was a
complete failure. The Committee note that most of the Waste to Energy Plants
have been set up in the Country under private sector driven PPP mode and
most of these plants have failed to function properly. In view of the Committee,

14


Public Sector must come forward and set up at least two demonstration
Waste to Energy Plants which would give a message that the Government is
committed to the cause of scientific management of Municipal Solid Waste in
general and adoption of the methods of Waste to Energy in particular and it
believes that such a project is viable and can be run efficiently and that all the
risks associated with such projects are not transferred to the private partners.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that:—

(i) The model of Okhla Plant (Delhi) may be replicated in other cities
for safe disposal of MSW generation of Power.

(ii) The Government/PSUs should set up at least two demonstration
Waste to Energy Plants to give a message that the Government is
committed to the cause of scientific management of Municipal
Solid Waste.

Reply of the Government

As per the SBM Guidelines, the States/UTs/ULBs are empowered to
select the technology of their convenience for treating solid waste, generated
in their jurisdiction, based on their requirements and actual site conditions

This issue will be taken up at an appropriate level in the Government for
taking suitable decision.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM. (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 5)

The Committee note that the process of generating power from waste
is carried out at a high temperature of more than 800° C thereby preventing
formation of dioxins and WtE plants are said to be seen as pollution management
practice to mitigate crude dumping or landfilling of waste. However, the
Committee observe that the locals generally complain of pungent odour coming
out of Waste to Energy Plants. So, it should be taken care of by the agency
concerned and it should be ensured that all the Waste to Energy Plants in the
country adhere to the Environmental norms and defaulters should be penalized
Therefore, the Committee recommends that:-—

(i) Appropriate technology must be used in all the Waste processing
facilities to mitigate the problem of pungent odour.

15


Gi) A regulating mechanism must be evolved to ensure that all the
"Waste to Energy' Plants in the country adhere to the Environmental
norms and defaulters be penalized.

Reply of the Government

All the waste processing have their operating procedures/manuals to
eliminate the pungent odour.

All the Waste to Energy Plants in the country are already being monitored
by the State Pollution Control Boards of the concemed States by the ‘consent’
mechanism i.e., (i) consent to establish and (ii) consent to operate, for their
adherence to the environmental standards as prescribed by them.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 6)

The Committee note that the problems plaguing the waste to energy
sector vary from irregular and inadequate quantity of supply to non-payment
of agreed fee and non-marketability of waste processed projects, including
power. The remedial measures, as informed by the Government, do not seem
to be efficacious enough to redress the problem. Several, steps have been
initiated under Swatchh Bharat Mission for MSW management by way of
grant to project cost, Viability Gap Funding (VGF) to States in Urban Local
Bodies (ULB) etc., in incentivisation of cities for regular supply of garbage,
ete. However, these steps have not succeeded to the desired extent in motivating
the sector to come up in a desired manner, The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:—

(i) The entire process of waste to energy needs a revisit with a view
to making it efficient, effective and delivery prone.

(ii) The grant/funding to States and Urban Local Bodies (ULB) be made
more attractive.

(iii) Other motivational. measures should be taken in a time bound and
targeted manner to encourage direct involvement and participation
of the people.

Reply of the Government

- As stated in reply to 1 (i), the report of the Task Force describes the
various WtE technological options available in the Country and their suitability
based on the population and geography.

16


As per the latest revision to the SBM guidelines, the central assistance
for municipal solid waste component has been raised from present 20% to
35%, subject to the overall State-wise funds envelope for SWM remaining
unchanged.

As stated in reply to 2 (iv), under SBM, 15 % of total Central allocation
to the States has been earmarked for IEC & Public Awareness component to
encourage direct involvement and participation of the people.

Further, Ministry has recently launched 'Swachhata App’ to increase the
people's participation in solid waste management. With the App, any registered
citizen can post their grievance regarding the solid waste collection and
transportation by the ULBs that already registered with the application. Based
on the complaints received in the app the ULBs have to act and solve the
problem in a time bound manner.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/#/2015-2015-SBM (Pt)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 7)

The Committee note that the participation of the private sector in the
waste to energy programme has not come up to the expectation. The Committee
has been apprised that so far the private sector has participated only in a
limited manner, with few agencies active in the sector. They are there in the
PPP mode, wherein the performance of the project becomes a joint/umited
effort. The PPP arrangements are not single responsibility contract, but based
on the participation between local Government and the private sector.
Consequently, the interests of the private sector may not be as encouraging
due to several factors. To encourage participation of the private sector in a
wholehearted manner, various incentives can be offered and all the anticipated
obstacles must be removed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:~

(i) Adequate ways and means should be allotted to ensure the
wholehearted participation of private sector in MSW management.

(ii) Tax exemptions/rebates/holidays for equipment and machinery etc.
should be considered to encourage private participation in the sector.

Reply of the Government

As stated in the reply to 3 (i) & (ii), Government of India is taking
various initiatives to make the waste to energy plants in the Country financially

17


viable including amending to the Electricity Tariff Policy 2006 to mandate the
State Electricity DISCOMs to purchase all power generated from municipal
solid waste and notifying the generic tariff which is attractive enough for
private sector to invest in the field. Determination of Generic Tariff will boost
the financial viability of Waste-to-Energy plants in the country.

Ministry of Finance may take up the matter as the subject matter is
being dealt with by them, especially after the recommendations of Group of.
Secretaries.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 8)

The Committee note that the five Pilot Projects were launched by (MNRE)
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy with an aggregate capacity of 57
MW. Howeyer, out of these five Pilot Projects, only the one at Okhla of 16
MW is in a functional state. The Committee are dismayed to note that two
projects could not be completed due to paucity of funds and the plant at Pune
is not functional due to technical reasons. The Committee also note that Public
Interest Litigation has been filed against the Okhla Waste Management Plant.
These are serious issues and, if not resolved, lead to demotivation in the
sector and may jeopardize the future activities with regard to waste to energy.
The non-commissioning of plants on the ground of paucity of funds is not at
all acceptable to the Committee. If issues of such public importance are dealt
with in such manner, then the future of the waste to energy sector and its
success can only be a point of debate and discussion. The technical glitch at
the Pune Plant is not insurmountable but the way it has been dealt with speaks
volumes of the lack of adequate effort from the Government side. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:—

(i) There should be no paucity of funds with regard to Pilot Projects
undertaken by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

(i) Technical reasons for non-operation of a Plant is a commonplace
excuse and it cannot be allowed to hamper the operations of the
project. This should be resolved in a time bound manner.

(ii) The issues of Public Interest Litigation should be addressed
holistically as these may hurt the other projects as well. Hence,
effective pre-emptive measures should be taken in this regard before

18


the appropriate bodies to dispel any misgivings regarding the
functioning of the plant and its adverse environmental impact in
and around it.

Reply of the Government

The subject matter is being dealt with by Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy.

Agreed.
Yes, agreed.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4thNovember, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 9)

The Committee note that MSW Management is 4 Siate Subject and as
per the 74th Amendment to the Constitution, solid waste management as a
function needs to be transferred by the State Government to Urban Local
Bodies. However, the transfer of this function is yet to take place. In addition
to ULBs, solid waste management has also been discharged by State agencies.
Thus, the responsibility for planning, designing, implementation, operation
and maintenance of the municipal solid waste rest with the State Government
agencies and ULB concerned. The Committee find that management of
municipal solid waste is not efficient and scientific by the agencies concerned
and itis done by street sweeping, incurring most of the expenditure amounting
to 70% of the earnings of the local bodies. This also hampers the process of
waste collection at source to its final disposal at the energy plants. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:—

(i) _ The process of garbage collection should be upgraded by the ULBs
and State agencies concerned and be made more scientific and
efficient.

(ii) 8 proper estimation should be made by the ULBs concerned
regarding the approximate quantity of municipal waste generated
everyday so as to ensure its supply to the waste energy plant ina
definite manner,

Reply of the Government

Government of India provides 35% grants for setting up efficient garbage
collection & transportation system. Moreover, Ministry of Urban Development

19


has signed MoUs with BSNL, MTNL & DIMTS for providing GPS tracking
of Garbage Collection Vehicles.

Almost all the ULBs in the Country has already assessed the approximate
amount of waste being generated in their jurisdiction, based on their solid
waste management activities.

{Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (PL)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 10)

The Committee note that there are multiple entities involved in collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of MSW like Ragpickers, Kabadiwalas,
Sanitation workers of Municipal Authorities, private contractors who have
their own sweeping staff, waste collectors and vehicles to transport the waste
from collection points to disposal sites, plant operators, etc. The Committee
are of the view that the Urban Local Bodies should adopt a coordinated
mechanism for collection, transportation and disposal of MSW. It should be
the responsibility of the ULBs to supply the required quality and quantity of
MSW to Waste to Energy Plants, failing which a penalty may be imposed on
them. Ragpickers and Kabadiwalas may be brought into the formal system by
the State Governments and ULBs in so that the collection efficiency can be
maximised. Therefore, the Committee recommend that:-—

(i) ULBs should supply required quality and quantity of MSW at the
doorstep of the 'Waste to Energy' Plant failing which a penalty
may be imposed on them.

(ii) Ragpickers and Kabadiwalas should be integrated with the formal
system by the State Governments and ULBs in order to maximise
the collection efficiency.

(iii) ULBs should make efforts to involve civil society/NGOs/Resident
Welfare Associations in management of waste and spreading
awareness among the ma:

Reply of the Government

It is proposed that an integrated SWM system should be adopted by an
ULB which is run by one operator. This will ensure the supply of required
quality and quantity of MSW at the doorsteps of W2E Plants.

20


As per the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it is the responsibility
of the Secretary, Urban Development Department in the State or Union territory
through the Commissioner or Director of Municipal Administration or Director
of local bodies to provide broad guidelines regarding integration of waste
picker or informal waste collectors in the waste management system.MoUD
has formulated model municipal bye-laws, which has included this provision.
The model bye-laws have been circulated to States/ULBs for adoption.

Under SBM, civil societies/NGOs/ Resident Welfare Associations are
being involved in management of waste and spreading awareness.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4thNovember, 2016]

Govt. of India's Initiatives for promotion of power generation from
Municipal Solid Waste

Recommendation (SI. No. 11)

The Committee observe that at the Central level, various Ministries, i.e.
the Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, etc. are involved
in handling Municipal Solid Waste, viz. its collection, transportation, treatment
and safe disposal. There is a need for coordinated efforts to be made to solve
the problem of garbage and to make Waste to Energy projects successful and
viable. A Monitoring Committee, consisting of representatives from all the
Central Ministries concerned, along with the representatives of the State
Governments and Urban Local Bodies, should be set up to coordinate the
efforts at each level and suggest suitable methods and technologies to be
adopted, to make the Waste to Energy Plants viable. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that:—

(i) Coordinated efforts need to be made to solve the problem of garbage
and to make the Waste to Energy Projects successful and viable.

(ii) A Monitoring Committee, consisting of representatives from all
the Central Ministries like the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, etc., along with the representatives of
the State Governments and Urban Local Bodies, should be put in
place to coordinate the efforts at each level and suggest suitable
methods and technologies to be adopted, on a case to case basi

21


to make the Waste to Energy Plants a success. .,, (iii) Monitoring
Committee may also have technical experts, financial analysts,
representatives from private sector, etc,

Reply of the Government

Yes, agreed. Necessary action will be taken in this regard.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt)

dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 12)

The Committee note that the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) has notified Generic tariff for Waste-to-Energy of Rs 7.90 per unit
of power for Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF). The Committee are of the view
that fixing of tariff by the CERC be treated as indicative/supportive. The right

solution will be that the ta

ff should be decided through competitive bidding.

Open competitive bids should be invited has been done by Andhra Pradesh
and Punjab. Therefore, the Committee recommend that:—

w@

(ii)

(iii)

(i)

ii)

The practice of tariff determination by the CERC must be reviewed.
Ifneed be, the Electricity Act may be amended for the same.

Tariff of electricity generated from all the Waste to Energy Plants
should be decided through the process of competitive bidding.

The initiative of the Government of Rajasthan regarding Waste to
Energy Plant to arrive at tariff for Waste to Energy is a welcome
step. The pricing of Waste to Energy Power is unique as the
difference between the tariff set by CERC and tariff arrived at
through competitive bidding should be given to State DISCOMs as
royalty.

Reply of the Government
CERC has given only the indicative tariffs for 2015-16 and the

actual rate of purchase of power may be different for different
States/UTs based on the rate fixed by the Appropriate Authority.

There are various bid parameters which can be adopted for selecting
an operator for setting up of Waste to Energy Plant, Tariff based
bidding is one of the bid-parameter which has to be adopted.


CERC has given only the indicative tariffs for 2015-16 and the actual
rate of purchase of power may be different for different States/UTs on the
rate fixed by the Appropriate Authority. However, giving royalty to DISCOMs
based on the difference between the tariff set by CERC and tariff arrived at
through competitive bidding is the policy matter of States/UTs

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt,)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Recommendation (SI. No. 13)

The Committee note that it has been made mandatory for State DISCOMs
to purchase power from the Waste-to-Energy plants at the tariff of Rs 7.90
and this increased cost of electricity would ultimately be borne by the common
consumers. The Committee is of the view that waste disposal is the
responsibility of the State Governments and the ULBs; as such, the cost
should be borne by them and not by the common consumer, The Committee
also note that common people are made to pay twice for the disposal of the
same garbage; they pay to the local bodies for collection of garbage from
their home and again a high rate of electricity has been imposed on them to
compensate the producer of electricity from waste. This practice of ensuring
15% to 20% profit to the producer of electricity from waste and taxing common
people twice for the same should be avoided. Therefore, to make the Waste
to Energy Plants viable, the Committee recommend that:—

(i) The big polluters such as restaurants, hotels, marriage halls and
other commercial establishments should be asked to develop
scientific methods of segregation of waste and its disposal, failing
which, they should be made to pay more through tax/cess/fine.

(ii) Some alternate mechanism should be adopted so that common
people are not compelled to pay twice for the collection and disposal
of garbage.

Reply of the Government

Ministry supports the idea of decentralised waste processing and has
included it in model municipal bye-laws. However, the implementation of the
same is with the States/UTs/ULBs as the subject matter is being dealt with by
them.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt)
dated 4th November, 2016]

23


Recommendation (SI. No. 14)

The Committee note that although the respective Ministries have been
implementing a number of Rules, Policies, Promotion Programmes, etc. for
support and promotion of Waste to Energy in India, like Manual on Municipal
Solid Waste Management; MSW Management and Handling Rules, 2015; Tariff
Policy; Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways Notification; Indian
Standard on Bio-Gas; custom duty and excise duty exemption, etc., but the
desired results have not been achieved so far. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that:—

(i) All the Rules, Policies, Programmes relating to the Waste to Energy
Sector should be monitored regularly in an integrated manner for
their proper and efficient implementation so as to support and
promote 'Waste to Energy’ in India. है

(ii) Scientific treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste should
be made compulsory under the Swachh Bharat Mission.

(iii) 100% collection and treatment of solid waste should be made a
binding criterion for short listing of cities under the Smart City
Project and every city should be encouraged to come out with
their own proposal for the same in a time bound manner.

Reply of the Government
Yes, agreed.

Under SBM, scientific treatment and disposal of the waste are mandatory
for all the Mission cities/towns.

Sanitation including solid waste management is already one of the eligible
components under Smart Cities Mission and solid waste management includes
100% collection and treatment of solid waste. Therefore, no revision of
guidelines is envisabed at this point of time.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

Cluster model of the State Government of Andhra Pradesh
Recommendation (SI. No. 15)

The Committee have observed that in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Project
Developers are required to set up a Waste to Energy Plant on a PPP mode on

24


a Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) basis and are selected
through a tariff based competitive bidding process. The ULBs are responsible
to deliver waste to the Developer at the identified project site/location at their
own cost without paying any Tipping Fee to the Developer and the
APDISCOMs are responsible for procurement of power generated from the
project. There is also a provision of scientific landfilling of the rejects from
the WtE Plant and development of the scientific landfill by the Developer at its
own cost. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the State Government of
Andhra Pradesh and are of the view that the Andhra Model may serve as an
example to other States to come forward and adopt innovative methods for
scientific disposal and treatment of Municipal Solid Waste. That being the
case, there is a need to showcase the few success stories that the country
have achieved in the field of Waste to Energy so as to spread awareness and
encourage also States to come up with innovative methods, appropriate to
their native conditions. Therefore, the Committee recommend that:—

(i) The Committee laud the efforts of the Govt, of Andhra Pradesh
for their initiative in the MSW management and taking a lead in the
country in Waste to Energy Sector.

(ii) States should be encouraged to come forward and adopt innovative
methods for scientific disposal and treatment of Municipal Solid
Waste.

(iii) The success stories in the field of Waste to Energy should be
showcased so as to spread awareness and encourage more States
tocome up with innovative methods which suit their local condition
the best.

Reply of the Government
No comments.
Agreed.

Ministry had already put some of the successful case studies of solid
waste management including WtE in the e-learning portal for Swachh Bharat
(Urban). Further, Ministry is in the process of preparing 100 e-learning
Modules in sanitation including WtE. These may be referred by the ULBs for
capacity building and selecting a suitable technology.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

25


Global Status of Waste to Energy
Recommendation (SI. No. 16)

The Committee note that there are about 2200 Waste to Energy Plants in
the world with a disposal capacity of about 255 million tonnes of waste per
year. Modern Technologies have been deployed, especially in Europe, Japan,
Australia, China and USA. The Committee understand that the European Union's
strategy is to become a recycling society, seeking to avoid waste as far as
possible and to reuse waste generated as a resource. The Committee also
note that the situation prevailing in various countries indicates that concerted
efforts are being made to minimize waste generation and maximize recycling
of waste. Incineration or mass burning is in vogue in countries where availability
of land is scarce. However in USA, as per USEPA data of 2013 only 86 W to
E plants are currently operational in 24 States with a capacity of 97000 TPD
generating 2790 MWH. Of the MSW generated only 7% is incinerated, 24 %
is recycled and the remaining 69 % is landfilled. From 1995 to 2005, strict
emission norms, especially for dioxins and furans prevented more plants to
be set up, full thrust on recycling, reuse and recovery. In view of the above,
the Committee recommend that best practice from other countries which
have been running Waste to Energy Plants successfully should be suitably
studied and where possible adapted to the Indian conditions to make Waste to
Energy Projects in the country viable, efficient and safe for the environment.

Reply of the Government
Yes, agreed.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 6/4/2015-2015-SBM (Pt.)
dated 4th November, 2016]

26


CHAPTER IIL

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES,

- NIL -

27


CHAPTERIV

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE RETERATION

- NIL -

28


CHAPTER ५

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILLAWAITED

- NIL -
New DEetut DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
14 December, 2016 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 23, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


APPENDIXI

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2016-17) HELD ON 09.12.2016

AT 0930 HOURS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 'D',
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 0930 hours to 1000 hours
PRESENT
Dr. Virendra Kumar —Chairperson

Lok Sabha

N

Shri Sultan Ahmed

3. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
Shri Arun Kumar

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

=o हुआ

Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri La Ganesan
9. Shri Javed Ali Khan
10. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
11. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
12, Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary =— Joint Secretary
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

2. Atthe outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised
them of the agenda for the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:—

(i) ‘Energy Access in India—Review of current Status and Role of

Renewable Energy’.

30


(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Power Generation from
Municipal Solid Waste.

Gii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Twelfth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Commercial Losses’.

(iv) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Fifteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Power for the year 2016-17, clause by clause.

3. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the
aforementioned draft Reports without any changes. The Committee authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present the same to Lok Sabha/
lay in Rajya Sabha in the current Session,

The Comunittee then adjourned,

31


32

APPENDIX I

(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

TWENTIETH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

Total number of Recommendations 16

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SI. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total: 16

Percentage 100%

ions/Recommendations which the Committee do
sire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 0%

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 0%


—_————— न ननननतन
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their
outlets. The said information is available on website

‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these

items are available on the website mentioned above.”
eee