STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the year 2016-17]
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
35

THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2016-17]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.3.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.3.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)

COE No. 294
Price : Rs. 48.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-18) ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ....................................................... 24
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ...... 25
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 27
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
15th February, 2018 .......................................................... 28
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
16th Report (16th Lok  Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ..................................................... 31

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirty-fifth Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Sixteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
2nd May, 2016 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 16th August, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 15th February, 2018.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
5 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the year
2016-17, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2nd May, 2016 and was
laid on the same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The Report contained
10 Observations/Recommendations.
2. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total-09
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply
of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial No. 4
Total-01
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-V
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4)
5. The Committee had noted that the major activities
undertaken by the Ministry under the wind energy programme for the
year 2016-17 include finalization of repowering policy, finalization of
wind-solar hybrid policy, finalization of the National Wind Energy
Mission, etc. The Committee had hailed the initiatives taken in the wind-
solar hybrid which they felt is the need of the hour. In view of the much
talked about global warming and El Nino which are going to have impact
the river water system and the oceans, the Committee felt that the only
way out is to utilize the wind capacity as well as solar energy. The
Committee were also concerned about the delay in the finalization of the
National Wind Energy Mission. The Committee had therefore,
recommended that:—
i) The Ministry may prepare a roadmap for the hybrid system
to make optimum use of solar and wind energy for generation
of electricity.
ii) A pilot project on wind-solar hybrid system may be initiated
on priority basis.
iii) The Comm ittee may be apprised of the progress regarding
finalization of the repowering policy, the National Wind
Energy Mission and the wind-solar hybrid policy.

3
6. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken
reply has stated:—
“ As suggested by the Committee, the Repowering Policy has been
finalized and issued in August 2016. The policy provides a
facilitative development and evolves a new policy regime which
would encourage retrofit and/or replacement of old projects.
Ministry has also issued draft National Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy
and got comments from the stakeholders. The main objective of the
policy is to optimally utilise resources such as land and transmission.
National Wind Energy Mission (NWEM) document was circulated
to related Ministries/Departments for comments and the document
has been finalised after suitably incorporating the comments. During
last two years various new initiatives have been taken for the wind
sector and the wind capacity has reached 32.75 GW at the end of
2016-17. Considering recent developments, it is felt that the need
for NWEM may not be required.”
7. The Committee are informed that the Repowering Policy has
been finalized which will facilitate the development and evolve a new
policy regime, encouraging retrofit and/or replacement of old projects.
As informed, the Committee trust the Ministry to make the most out
of the Repowering Policy to boost the wind energy sector.
The Committee note that the Ministry has issued draft National
Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy, pending finalization seeking comments from
the stakeholders. The Committee desire the Ministry to speed up
finalization of the policy, so as to make optimum use of solar and wind
energy for generation of electricity. The Committee would also like to
reiterate that a pilot project on wind-solar hybrid system may be
initiated on priority basis.
Regarding the National Wind Energy Mission, the Committee
are informed that the document was finalized after suitably
incorporating comments received from related Ministries/Departments.
The Committee are, however, surprised to note that after coming such
a long way, the Ministry now, do not feel the need for NWEM. This
shows the non-seriousness of the Ministry in their planning. The reason
for discontinuing the NWEM was stated to be the capacity addition
of 32.75 GW wind energy achieved at the end of 2016-17. The Ministry
appears highly satisfied with their performance. The Committee feel
that wind energy being the fastest growing renewable energy

4
technology for generating grid connected power amongst various
renewable energy options, they should not be complacent with their
achievement but should make every effort to exploit the wind energy
sector so as to boost the renewable energy sector as a whole. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to have relook with regard
to their approach on the NWEM.
Biogas
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para. No. 7)
8. The Committee had noted that the Ministry has been supporting
programmes for the deployment of renewable energy systems and devices
such as biogas plants, photovoltaic systems, biomass gasifiers, solar
cookers and solar thermal systems, remote village electrification
programme and village energy security test projects. A scrutiny of the
data provided revealed a continuous reduction of the budgetary allocation
at RE stages and the actual expenditure was much lesser. Further, the
physical achievement were very discouraging. Regarding non-achievement
of biogas targets, the Committee were informed that it was due to the
high cost of installation of biogas plants and improved supply of LPG
of rural areas. In view of the performance of the Ministry, the Committee
were doubtful about the successful implementation of the biogas
programme and apprehended that investment in the sector could be a
waste of valuable resources. The Committee had therefore, recommended
that:—
i) The Ministry may critically review and evaluate the
implementation of the biogas programme in the rural areas
in terms of their feasibility, affordability and availability of
the technology, so as to ensure the investment in the sector
does not go in vain.
ii) The Ministry may also ensure that the operational system of
the already installed biogas plants are functioning well and
also as per plans.
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has stated:—
“ As desired by the Committee, an Independent Evaluation Study
for the Central Sector Scheme, National Biogas and Manure
Management Programme (NBMMP) implemented during the
12th Five Year Plan Period (2012-13 to 2016-17) has commenced in

5
ten States namely Assam, Sikkim, Odisha, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Telangana, Kerala, Chhattisgarh and Punjab, Planning
(India) Limited, A-50, Ashoka Enclave-II, Sector-37, Faridabad-
121003. The suggestions/recommendations as given by the Standing
Committee has been incorporated in the objectives and Terms of
References (ToR) of the study. The survey work has been completed.
Report is awaited.
There are 8 Biogas Development and Training Centres (BDTCs)
functioning in the country in various IITs and Universities. They
are also entrusted with the task of inspection of Biogas plants in
the States of their jurisdiction. These centres inspect the already
installed biogas plants on random sample selection basis and
prepare a report in the prescribed format and send it to MNRE
for monitoring the operational status of the plants already installed.
Based on the current years, 2016-17 inspections and reports received
up to 31.12.2016, an overall functionality of biogas plants has been
reported to be about 94%. In addition to the above, letters have
been written to all the programme implementing State Nodal
Agencies (SNAs)/State Nodal Departments (SNDs)/Khadi and
Village Industries Commission (KVIC) as well as Biogas
Development and Training Centres (BDTCs) to ensure 100%
functionality of the biogas plants installed by them and also enforce
the terms and conditions of the post-installation operation and
maintenance of the installed biogas plants under the five year free
warranty provisions. States have been also asked to inspect the
biogas plants on their own and maintain a database of installed
plant vis-à-vis operational plant. Action Taken Reports are being
sought from the States.”
10. In accordance to their recommendation, the Committee are
happy to note that the Ministry has initiated an Independent Evaluation
Study for the Central Sector Scheme, National Biogas and Manure
Management Programme (NBMMP) implemented during the 12th Five
Year Plan Period (2012-13 to 2016-17). The States include Assam, Sikkim,
Odisha, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Telangana, Kerala,
Chhattisgarh and Punjab. The Committee are informed that the survey
work has been completed and that Report is awaited. The Committee
desire that the Report may be finalized early. The Committee also
would like the Ministry to initiate Evaluation Study for all the
remaining States which have not been covered under the scheme so
far.

6
Research, Design, Demonstration and Development in New and
Renewable Energy (RDD&D)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para. No. 9)
11. The Committee had noted a continuous reduction in the budget
allocation under RDD&D at the RE stage. Moreover, they had found that
even the reduced amount could not be fully spent. The Committee had
however noted that during 2015-16, although a lesser amount was allocated
at the BE stage (Rs. 90 crore), it has been enhanced at RE stage (Rs. 106
crore). Nonetheless, the actual expenditure as on 28.03.2016 was only
Rs. 62.46 crore which was only 59 per cent of the R.E. Regarding the
activities during the last three years, the Committee were informed that
RD&D is being supported in the field of solar, biogas, biofuels, Hydrogen
Energy and fuel cells and wind. For the year 2016-17, the Committee had
noted that an outlay of Rs. 498.00 crore was allocated under RDD&D
which includes Rs. 53 crore for MNRE Institutions. The Committee had
also noted that for faster development of technologies in the R&D sector,
the MNRE have renamed the technological institutions. While the motive
in renaming the institution was laudable, the Committee felt that outputs
are more important for which the Ministry should endeavour. The
Committee had therefore recommended that:—
i) The Ministry may ensure a coordinated approach for
successful collaboration among the technological institutions
and industries to achieve the goal of renewable energy
technology development.
ii) The Ministry should concentrate on development of materials
and technologies which are most efficient and cost effective.
Simultaneously constant and close monitoring of all the R&D
projects should be ensured with a view to evaluating their
functioning in a result-oriented manner.
iii) The Ministry should focus on full utilization of the allocated
funds, so that more funds may be sought at the RE stage.
12. The MNRE in their Action Taken Replies has stated:—
“The MNRE is in the process of review of achievements of RD&D
Programme implemented in 12th Plan period for drawing up an
action plan. An award scheme for encouraging innovation in new
and renewable energy has been launched in July 2017. The MNRE
is in the process of bringing out “Technology Development and
Innovation Policy” in furtherance of RD&D effort aiming at

7
promoting indigenous technology development and manufacture,
improving quality and reliability of energy supply for large scale
deployment of new and renewable energy for various applications.
A Lab Policy for Testing, Standardization and Certification for RE
Sector has been brought out for quality control of new and renewable
energy systems/devices/components. The same is under
consideration for release and implementation.”
13. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry is in
the process of reviewing the achievements of RD&D Programme
implemented in 12th Plan period for drawing up an action plan.
Evaluation/Assessment is required for any programme/scheme for its
smooth and successful implementation further. The Committee desire
the Ministry to accelerate the process and apprise them the outcome.
The Committee note that the Ministry is bringing out ‘Technology
Development and Innovation Policy’ to strengthen the RD&D effort
and ‘A Lab Policy’ for Testing, Standardization and Certification for
RE Sector for quality control of new and renewable energy systems/
devices/components of the RD&D. The Committee desire the Ministry
to hasten up finalization of the said Policy, which will boost the RD&D
effort aiming at promoting indigenous technology development and
manufacture, improving quality and reliability of energy supply for
large scale deployment of new and renewable energy for various
applications. Committee may be apprised of the follow up action.

8
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Performance of Twelfth Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1)
The Committee find that the budgetary allocation for the entire
12th Plan is Rs. 19113 crore, against which an amount of Rs. 9653.91 crore
has been actually allocated during the first four years of the Plan period.
Hence, Rs. 9459.09 crore, i.e. 49 per cent of the Plan allocation is still left
for utilization in the terminal year of the Plan. The total actual expenditure
of the first four years of the Plan period, as on 28th March, 2016, was
Rs. 9326.01 crore which accounts for only 49 per cent of the GBS allocation
for the 12th Plan. As four years of the Plan period are over, the Ministry
were expected to utilize at least 80 per cent or a major portion of the
total budget allocated for the 12th Plan. On the physical performance,
against the physical target of 29800 MW grid power capacity for the
12th Plan, 14993.11 MW power capacity has been achieved, which is
50 per cent of the Plan target. The Committee note the Ministry’s ambitious
target of 1,75,000 MW capacity of renewable power by 2022. In view of
the foregoing:—
(i) The Committee would like the Ministry to revisit their policies
and programmes under various renewable energy resources;
(ii) The Comm ittee recommend that the Ministry should make
a serious effort for achievement of the physical targets of the
12th Plan with maximum utilization of allocated funds for
the 12th Plan, so that the cascading effect of the 12th Plan
will not spill over to the next Plan.
Reply of the Government
Against 12th Plan outlay of Rs. 19,113 crore, actual allocation at
R.E. stage was Rs. 13961.21 crore which was 73.04% of the outlay. Further,
an expenditure of Rs. 13327.29 crore has been incurred against RE of
Rs. 13961.21 crore which was 95.46% of RE.

9
Against a physical target of 29,800 MW of Grid Power capacity
addition during 12th Plan period an achievement of 29,462 MW has been
reported which was 98.87% of 12th Plan target. The commutative
achievements have reached to 57244.23 MW at the end of 12th Plan.
As suggested by the Committee, the Ministry is in a process of
reviewing all major programmes i.e. Solar, Wind, Small Hydro Power
and Bio Power programmes so as to achieve the commutative target of
1,75,000 MW by the year 2022.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Demands for Grants of MNRE for 2016-17
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2)
The Committee find that the Plan Outlay of Rs. 6160.73 crore (BE)
during the year 2015-16 was enhanced to Rs. 9648.78 crore at the RE
stage. This is due to the enhanced support from the National Clean Energy
Fund (NCEF) from Rs. 2500 crore to Rs. 4000 crore and Internal and Extra
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) from Rs. 3373.06 crore to Rs. 5402.55 crore.
The Committee observe that during the last three years, the Plan Outlay
of the Ministry has been enhanced at RE stage, which indicates the
commitment of the Government towards implementing renewable
energy programmes. The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s effort to
mobilize supplementary Demands for Grants at the RE stage. Although
the whole amount of allocation at the RE has not been fully spent during
the last three years, the Committee find that during the year 2015-16, an
amount of Rs. 10474.24 crore could be spent which is more than the RE
of Rs. 9648.78 crore. For the year 2016-17, the Committee note that the
Ministry had sought Rs. 9115.40 crore as Plan Outlay (excluding IEBR).
However, against this, an amount of Rs. 5000 crore (BE) was allocated
as support from NCEF. The Committee also note that there is an increase
of Rs. 753 crore, i.e 17.75 percent, in the budgetary support for the year
2016-17 over the Revised Estimates of the previous year’s support of
Rs. 4246.23 crore. The Committee are informed that additional funds will
be required for achieving the higher targets set for renewable energy
sector. As the allocated amount (Rs. 5000 crore) is much lower than the
projected amount (Rs. 9115.40 crore), the Committee are apprehensive
that unless additional allocation is made, implementation of various
programmes of the Ministry will be seriously affected. The Committee

10
observe that for the year 2016-17, the Ministry are projecting Internal and
Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) to the tune of Rs. 9118.85 crore. The
Committee trust that the Ministry will make all-out efforts additional
funds from IEBR to meet the additional requirement of funds. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:—
(i) Additional Gross Budgetary Support may be provided to the
Ministry as supplementary Demands for Grants at the RE
stage;
(ii) The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should make
concerted efforts to mobilize additional funds from Internal
and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR), the National Clean
Energy Fund (NCEF) and other renewable energy
development fund so as to achieve the targets set for the
current financial year under various programmes of the
renewable energy sector.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2016-17, against a B.E. of Rs. 5,000 crore and RE
of Rs. 4307 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 3871.32 crore which
was about 90% of the R.E. Further, in pursuance of budget announcement
for the year 2016-17 IREDA raised funds of Rs. 1,640 crore by issuance
of Government of India fully service taxable bonds. This amount was for
the promotion of Renewable Energy programmes of the Ministry. An
amount of Rs. 1615.22 crore was released by IREDA for different
programmes of the Ministry as per requirement.
Hence, a total amount of Rs. 5486.54 crore was utilized for
promotion of various Renewable Energy programmes during 2016-17.
Further, IEBR of Rs. 10,336.40 crore was also mobilised during the year.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3)
The Committee note that wind power potential in the country at
the height of 100 metre has been estimated to be more than 3,00,000 MW.
Against this, a total capacity of 25188 MW has been reportedly installed

11
as on January, 2016. The Committee note a fluctuating performance during
the last three years, viz. in 2013-14 and 2014-15, against the targets of
2500 MW and 2000 MW, wind energy capacities of 2079 MW and 2312
MW, respectively, have been achieved. However, the performance in
2015-16 is quite discouraging, i.e. against a target of 2400 MW, only 1744.78
MW capacities has been installed (as on January, 2016). The budget
allocated in each of the three years has been reportedly fully utilized.
For the year 2016-17, the Committee are informed that a physical target
of 4100 has been set with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 365 crore. When
the Ministry could not achieve a physical target of 2400 MW with an
allocation of Rs. 314 crore in 2015-16, the Committee are apprehensive
about achievement of the enhanced target with the current allocation.
The Committee also note that the fiscal and financial incentives available
include concessional custom duty and special additional duty, excise duty
exemptions, income tax holiday, Accelerated Depreciation (AD) and
Generation Based Incentive (GBI) for those who do not avail AD benefit.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—
(i) The Ministry may approach the Ministry of Finance to allocate
more funds at the time of Revised Estimates so as to ensure
that implementation of the wind energy projects does not
suffer due to shortage of funds.
(ii) The Ministry should spare no efforts to achieve the physical
target of 4100 MW wind energy capacity for the year
2016-17.
(iii) The Ministry should also give due publicity to the fiscal and
financial incentives available to the industry.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2015-16, actual achievement was reported as 3423.05
MW against a target of 2400 MW for wind energy. During the year
2016-17 an achievement of 5502.37 MW was reported against a target of 4000
MW taking commutative achievement to 32279.77 MW as on 31.03.2017.
During 2016-17 an amount of Rs. 365 crore was kept as BE and
additionally Rs. 123.95 crore was also made available through budget
re-appropriation. Thus a total of Rs. 488.95 crore was released from
budget. Further, an amount of Rs. 891.186 crore was also released from
the money raised through bonds. Hence, the total amount released was
Rs. 1380.13 crore for wind GBI which is the highest ever.

12
Programme for creating awareness among masses about the benefits
of renewables including wind energy is an integral part of Ministry’s
activities. Main objectives of the programme include: (a) popularise and
create awareness about Government of India’s programmes, policies, fiscal
and financial incentives provided with respect to new and renewable
energy; (b) create mass awareness about technological developments and
promotional activities taking place in renewables from time to time in
the country; (c) make people aware about the availability of renewables
including their proper use, repair and maintenance facilities, etc.;
(d) expand and promote the market for renewables systems and devices;
and (e) raise awareness about renewables amongst students, teachers,
scientists and public at large. These programmes are implemented with
specific focus on respective target groups. The mediums deployed include
electronic media such as radio, TV , spot films etc; print media, newspapers;
exhibitions; seminar/symposia etc.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Solar Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5)
The Committee observe that the target under the Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission has been revised from 20,000 MW to 1,00,000 MW
to be achieved by 2022. Against the estimated potential of 7,50,000 MW
solar energy in the country, 6104.3 MW solar energy capacity has been
commissioned/installed as on 14th March, 2016. As such, the Ministry
has a huge task before them to achieve 93896 MW solar energy capacity
to meet the ambitious target of 1,00,000 MW solar energy capacity by
2022. The Committee note that the Ministry has drawn up a detailed
strategic plan to achieve the specified targets under the Mission. For the
year 2016-17, a physical target of 12,000 MW for Grid-interactive solar
power has been set with an outlay of Rs. 2350 crore. The Committee are
informed that the budget allocated will be less to achieve the specified
target set for 2016-17. The Committee are apprehensive that
implementation of the solar energy projects in the country may be
adversely affected due to the dearth of funds. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:—
i) The Ministry may make sustained efforts to initiate projects
through various schemes of the Union Government and State

13
Governments, so as to achieve the target of 12000 MW set
for the year 2016-17.
ii) The Ministry should play a proactive role in monitoring the
progress of various solar energy projects.
iii) The Ministry should also ensure that implementation of the
solar energy projects is not affected due to lack of adequate
financial resources.
Reply of the Government
Steps taken by the Government to achieve Solar Energy targets
include:—
(i) Tenders of around 20,000 MW are in pipeline for which PPAs
of projects of around 13,000 MW have been signed. We are
expecting to achieve the target of 100 GW for solar energy
by 2022. Ministry is taking various steps in this regard and
have launched the following schemes to achieve the target
of 100 GW:
• Scheme for Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega
Solar Power Projects.
• Scheme for Development of Solar PV Power Plants on
Canal Banks/Canal Tops.
• Scheme for setting up 300 MW of Grid connected Solar
PV Power Projects by Defense Establishments under
Ministry of Defence and Para Military Forces with
viability Gap Funding under Batch-IV of Phase-II/III of
JNNSM.
• Implementation of scheme of setting up 1000 MW of Grid-
Connected Solar PV Power Projects by CPSUs with
Viability Gap Funding under Batch-V of Phase-II of
JNNSM.
• Implementation of Scheme for Setting up of 15000 MW
of Grid connected Solar PV Power Projects under
Batch II of Phase II of National Solar Mission (by NTPC/
NVVN).

14
• Setting up of 2000 MW Grid connected solar power with
Viability Gap Funding through Solar Energy Corporation
of India (SECI).
• Scheme for Development of Solar Zones in the country.
With the implementation of above steps, an achievement of 12289
MW has been reported upto 31.03.2017.
ii) Ministry monitors the progress of solar energy projects
through meetings with various stakeholders e.g. Solar Power
Developers, Industry Associations, Solar Manufacturers etc.
Through concerted efforts, the cumulative Grid Connected
Solar capacity of 12289 MW has been installed in the country
as on 31.03.2017. Tenders of around 20,000 MW have been
issued.
iii) Ministry is making concerted efforts in this regard even
through raising extra budgetary resources by raising Green
Bonds with the help of IREDA and raising funds from
multilateral agencies e.g. World Bank, ADB, GIZ, New
Development Bank, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank etc.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Biomass and Bagasse Co-generation Power
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6)
The Committee find that the estimated potential for power
generation from Biomass/Bagasse Co-generation in the country is around
12754 MW. Against this, a cumulative capacity of 4626 MW has been
reportedly installed. The Committee also find the performance in this
sector during the last three years to be quite satisfactory. The physical
targets in all the three years could be achieved with full utilization of
the funds allocated. Against a physical target of 400 MW each in the last
three years, achievement was 412 MW, 405 MW and 400 MW, respectively.
The funds allocated was Rs. 32.50 crore, Rs. 25 crore and Rs. 29 crore,
respectively. For the year 2016-17, a physical target of 400 MW has been
fixed with an outlay of Rs. 20 crore, which is much lower than the previous
year’s allocation. That being so, the Committee are concerned about
achievement of target with the reduced allocation. The Committee note

15
that besides the Central Financial Assistance, fiscal incentives such as
concessional import duty, excise duty, tax holiday for 10 years, bank
loans up to Rs. 15 crore for biomass-based power generators, etc., are
available for Biomass power projects and that the benefits of concessional
custom duty and excise duty exemption are also available on equipment
required for the initial setting up of biomass projects. Hence, the
Committee recommend that:—
i) The Ministry may pursue with the Ministry of Finance for
additional funds at the RE stage, so as to ensure achievement
of the physical target for the year 2016-17.
Ans: The funds granted for 2016-17 were sufficient to meet
the CFA release for the projects that were in the pipeline at
the stage.
ii) More projects on Biomass/Bagasse Co-generation should be
encouraged, especially in those States with potential like
Karnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh.
Ans: Biomass/Bagasse cogeneration plants have been mainly
installed in the States of Karnataka, Maharashtra and U.P.
The Ministry’s scheme to promote Promotion of Grid
Interactive Biomass Power and Bagasse Cogeneration in Sugar
Mills’ during the 12th Plan Period is open to developers
from all over India including Karnataka, Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh.
iii) Proper internal check system be put in place to check non
transparency in biomass energy projects of Sugar Mills.
Ans: CFA is released only after due verification of all the
documents, successful commissioning and performance
assessment by independent agencies National Productivity
Council (NPC)/National Sugar Institute (NSI).
iv) Promotional and awareness programmes for stakeholders like
sugar mills, farmer associations and industry representatives
may be intensively organized.
v) The Ministry may also undertake adequate publicity for
the fiscal incentives and other benefits available to the
industry.

16
Ans (iv and v) : The suggestion of the Committee has been
noted. However, Programmes for creating awareness among
masses about the benefits of renewables including Biomass
and bagasse cogeneration is an integral part of Ministry’s
activities. Main objectives of the programme include:
(a) popularise and create awareness about Government of
India’s programmes, policies, fiscal and financial incentives
with respect to new and renewable energy; (b) create mass
awareness about technological developments and promotional
activities taking place in renewables from time to time in the
country; (c) make people aware about the availability of
renewables including their proper use, repair and maintenance
facilities, etc.; (d) expand and promote the market for
renewables systems and devices; and (e) raise awareness about
renewables amongst students, teachers, scientists and public
at large. These programmes are implemented with specific
focus on respective target groups. The mediums deployed
include electronic media such as radio, TV , spot films etc;
print media, newspapers; exhibitions; seminar/symposia etc.
vi) The technologies used in the sector may be upgraded and
improved, keeping in mind the cost effectiveness.
Ans: Ministry provides financial support for publication of
quarterly news magazine namely Industrial Cogeneration in
India. MNRE has also supported business meets and
awareness programmes under the Programme on Energy from
Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues during
12th Plan.
It depends upon the decision of the developer to use cost effective
technologies. Ministry creates awareness about the upgraded
technology available through cogen newsletter namely “Industrial
Cogeneration in India.”
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Biogas
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the Ministry has been supporting
programmes for the deployment of renewable energy systems and devices

17
such as biogas plants, photovoltaic systems, biomass gasifiers, solar
cookers and solar thermal systems, remote village electrification
programme and village energy security test projects. A scrutiny of the
data provided for the last three years reveals that the budgetary allocation
has been reduced at RE stages and the actual expenditure is much lesser.
Further, the physical achievement is very discouraging. Except in the
year 2013-14, none of the targets has been achieved. Regarding non-
achievement of biogas targets, the Committee are informed that it was
due to the high cost of installation of biogas plants and improved supply
of LPG of rural areas. The Committee note that for the year 2016-17,
Rs. 142 crore has been allocated for biogas programme with a physical
target for deployment of 1 lakh biogas plants. In view of the present
status, the Committee are doubtful about the successful implementation
of the biogas programme and apprehend that investment in the sector
could be a waste of valuable resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:—
i) The Ministry may critically review and evaluate the
implementation of the biogas programme in the rural areas
in terms of their feasibility, affordability and availability of
the technology, so as to ensure the investment in the sector
does not go in vain.
ii) The Ministry may also ensure that the operational system of
the already installed biogas plants are functioning well and
also as per plans.
Reply of the Government
As desired by the Committee, an Independent Evaluation Study
for the Central Sector Scheme, National Biogas and Manure Management
Programme (NBMMP) implemented during the 12th Five Year Plan Period
(2012-13 to 2016-17) has commenced in ten States namely Assam, Sikkim,
Odisha, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Telangana, Kerala, Chhattisgarh
and Punjab, which has been entrusted to a professional consultancy
organization M/s. Spectrum Planning (India) Limited, A-50, Ashoka
Enclave-II, Sector-37, Faridabad-121003. The suggestions/recommendations
as given by the Standing Committee has been incorporated in the objectives
and Terms of References (ToR) of the study. The survey work has been
completed. Report is awaited.
There are 8 Biogas Development and Training Centres (BDTCs)
functioning in the country in various IITs and Universities. They are also

18
entrusted with the task of inspection of Biogas plants in the States of their
jurisdiction. These centres inspect the already installed biogas plants on
random sample selection basis and prepare a report in the prescribed
format and send it to MNRE for monitoring the operational status of the
plants already installed. Based on the current years, 2016-17 inspections
and reports received up to 31.12.2016, an overall functionality of biogas
plants has been reported to be about 94%. In addition to the above, letters
have been written to all the programme implementing State Nodal
Agencies (SNAs)/State Nodal Departments (SNDs)/Khadi and Village
Industries Commission (KVIC) as well as Biogas Development and
Training Centres (BDTCs) to ensure 100 % functionality of the biogas
plants installed by them and also enforce the terms and conditions of
the post-installation operation and maintenance of the installed biogas
plants under the five year free warranty provisions. States have been also
asked to inspect the biogas plants on their own and maintain a database
of installed plant vis-à-vis operational plant. Action Taken Reports are
being sought from the States.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Renewable Energy for Urban, Industrial and Commercial Applications
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the MNRE has been promoting the use
of technologies for energy recovery from municipal, industrial and
commercial wastes and solar energy under renewable energy for urban,
industrial and commercial applications. The other programmes include:
(i) energy efficient solar/green building programme; (ii) energy recovery
from urban, industrial and agricultural wastes; and (iii) bioenergy and
cogeneration in Industry. On scrutiny of the data under the waste to
energy programme, the Committee find that the targets during the last
three years were never achieved, i.e. against a target of 30 MW each in
2013-14 and 2014-15, a capacity addition of 27.85 MW and 21.78 MW,
respectively could be achieved. During 2015-16, against a target of 20
MW, only 14.13 MW could be achieved (as on 29.02.2016). In the financial
front, although the entire amount of RE were spent, there was a consecutive
reduction of budget both at the BE and the RE stages. The BE of Rs. 33
crore in 2013-14 and Rs. 20.50 crore in 2014-15 has been reduced to
Rs. 10 crore and Rs. 9.07 crore, respectively, at RE stage. There was no
allocation of fund during the year 2015-16. The Committee have been

19
apprised that the activities and management of municipal solid waste to
energy are now under the Ministry of Urban Development and that
industrial waste is managed by the MNRE. The Committee are concerned
about the allocation of the municipal solid waste to energy management
programme to a less experienced Ministry, as they feel that the MNRE
being the nodal Ministry of the Government of India for all matters
relating to new and renewable energy would be more capable in handling
such projects. The Committee desire that the MNRE should play a
proactive role in supplementing the programmes under the waste to
energy. The Committee note that for the year 2016-17, the major schemes
of the Ministry include promotion of solar cities, green building
programmes and support to State programmes with and outlay of
Rs. 20.00 crore:
i) In view of the importance of the solid waste to energy
programme, the Committee recommend that there should be
an integrated strategy in managing the entire activities under
the waste to energy programme.
Ans: The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
However, the Ministry is already working closely with
Ministry of Urban Development and other stakeholders for
promoting Waste to Energy projects in the country.
ii) In view of rapid urbanization, resulting in extensive
construction activities, the Committee urge the Ministry to
give due importance to the activities under energy efficient
solar/green building programme, to facilitate promotion and
development of solar cities and green buildings.
Ans: The advice/recommendation of the Committee has been
noted. In this regard, it is to mention that the Ministry has
launched a Scheme on “Development of Solar Cities” under
which Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has
sanctioned/allocated 60 cities under Development of Solar
Cities Programme, against the target of 60 numbers of cities/
towns fixed for 12th Five-year Plan period. MNRE is
providing financial support up to of Rs. 50 lakh for each city
for preparation of the Master Plan alongwith few DPR (up
to Rs. 10 lakh), oversight of its implementation (up to
Rs. 10 lakh), setting up and functioning of Solar City Cell in the
city (up to Rs. 10 lakh) and organizing promotional activities

20
(up to Rs. 20 lakh). Besides this Ministry has been implementing
a Scheme on “Energy Efficient Solar/Green Buildings”
since, February, 2009 which aims to promote the
widespread construction of energy efficient solar/green
buildings in the country through a combination of financial
and promotional incentives mainly for capacity building,
awareness, seminar and workshops and other promotional
activities etc., under the “Energy Efficient Solar/Green
Buildings programme”. About 225 capacity building
programme including trainings, seminar, conferences,
workshops for Evaluators and Trainers on GRIHA Ratings
and awareness programmes on Green Buildings/GRIHA
Ratings/Green Architecture were organized across the country
by various technical institutions. So far, 850 buildings with
aggregate 32 million sq.m built up-areas have been covered
for acquiring GRIHA rating.
iii) The Committee also recommend enhanced publicity of the
financial assistance available under this sector.
Ans: Programmes for creating awareness among masses about
the benefits of renewables including waste to energy
programme, energy efficiency building, green building etc.
are integral part of Ministry’s activities. Main objectives of
the programme include: (a) popularise and create awareness
about Government of India’s programmes, policies, fiscal and
financial incentives about new and renewable energy; (b) create
mass awareness about technological developments and
promotional activities taking place in renewables from time
to time in the country; (c) make people aware about the
availability of renewables including their proper use, repair
and maintenance facilities, etc.; (d) expand and promote the
market for renewable systems and devices; and (e) raise
awareness about renewables amongst students, teachers,
scientists and public at large. These programmes are
implemented with specific focus on respective target groups.
The mediums deployed include electronic media such as
radio, TV , spot films etc; print media, newspapers; exhibitions;
seminar/symposia etc.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]

21
Research, Design, Demonstration and Development in New and
Renewable Energy (RDD&D)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the allocation under RDD&D for the years
2013-14 and 2014-15 was reduced at the RE stage i.e. in 2013-14 BE of
Rs. 158 crore was reduced to 148 at RE and in 2014-15 BE was Rs. 149.50
crore and RE was Rs. 128 crore. However, it is found that even the reduced
amount could not be fully spent. However, the Committee are happy to
note that during 2015-16, although a lesser amount was allocated at the
BE stage (Rs.90 crore), it has been enhanced at RE stage (Rs.106 crore).
Nonetheless, the actual expenditure as on 28.03.2016 was only Rs. 62.46
crore which is only 59 per cent of the R.E. Regarding the activities during
the last three years, the Committee are informed that RDD&D is being
supported in the field of solar, biogas, biofuels, Hydrogen Energy and
fuel cells and wind. For the year 2016-17, the Committee note that an
outlay of Rs 498.00 crore has been allocated under RDD&D which includes
Rs. 53 crore for MNRE Institutions, namely, the National Institute of
Solar Energy (NISE), Gurgaon, the National Institute of Wind Energy,
Chennai and the National Institute of Renewable Energy, Kapurthala.
The Committee appreciates the enhanced allocation for the current
financial year. However, keeping in view the previous year’s financial
performance, they are apprehensive about the optimal utilization of the
fund during 2016-17 as well. The Committee also note that for faster
development of technologies in the R&D sector, the MNRE have renamed
the technological institutions. While the motive in renaming the institution
is laudable, the Committee feel that outputs are more important for which
the Ministry should endeavor. The Committee, therefore recommend
that:—
i) The Ministry may ensure a coordinated approach for
successful collaboration among the technological institutions
and industries to achieve the goal of renewable energy
technology development.
ii) The Ministry should concentrate on development of materials
and technologies which are most efficient and cost effective.
Simultaneously constant and close monitoring of all the R&D
projects should be ensured with a view to evaluating their
functioning in a result-oriented manner.
iii) The Ministry should focus on full utilization of the allocated
funds, so that more funds may be sought at the RE stage.

22
Reply of the Government
(i, ii and iii) : The MNRE is in the process of review of
achievements of RDD&D Programme implemented in 12th Plan Period
for drawing up an action plan. An award scheme for encouraging innovation
in new and renewable energy has been launched in July 2017. The MNRE
is in the process of bringing out “Technology Development and Innovation
Policy” in furtherance of RDD&D effort aiming at promoting indigenous
technology development and manufacture, improving quality and
reliability of energy supply for large scale deployment of new and
renewable energy for various applications. A Lab Policy for Testing,
Standardization and Certification for RE Sector has been brought out for
quality control of new and renewable energy systems/devices/components.
The same is under consideration for release and implementation.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10)
The Committee note that the primary objective of the Research and
Development activities is resource assessment, technology development,
demonstration and commercialization for promoting large scale use of
new and renewable energy. For manufacturing indigenous renewable
energy devices and systems, new and renewable energy technologies,
processes, materials, sub-systems, production devices and standards are
to be supported and upgraded. The basic purpose of RDD&D is to make
this sector competitive and renewable energy generation/supply profitable/
self-sustainable. The Committee are of the considered view that the area
of research, design and development in the renewable energy sector has
not been given the required attention. Other areas of support in research,
development and demonstration are solar, bio-gas, bio-fuel, hydrogen
energy, fuel cells and wind. If due thrust is given to these areas with
sufficient funds and talent, the sector can be revolutionized. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that:
i) Due attention should be paid to research, design, development
and demonstration in the renewable energy sector with the
backing of sufficient funds and talent.
ii) The objective of these activities should be to tap the huge
potential in the areas of wind, solar and other renewable
energy sources.

23
iii) The industry should become competitive with the indigenous
manufacturing of renewable energy devices and systems.
Reply of the Government
(i, ii and iii) : As replied under recommendation No. 9 above.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy—
OM No. 8/7/2015, dated 16/8/2017]

24
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- NIL -

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4)
The Committee understand that the major activities to be undertaken
by the Ministry under the wind energy programme for the year 2016-17
include finalization of repowering policy, finalization of wind-solar
hybrid policy, finalization of the National Wind Energy Mission, etc. The
Committee welcome the initiatives taken in the wind-solar hybrid which
they feel is the need of the hour. In view of the much talked about global
warming and El Nino which are going to have impact the river water
system and the oceans, the Committee feel that the only way out is to
utilize the wind capacity as well as solar energy. The Committee are also
concerned about the delay in the finalization of the National Wind Energy
Mission. The Committee therefore, recommend that:—
i) The Ministry may prepare a roadmap for the hybrid system
to make optimum use of solar and wind energy for generation
of electricity.
ii) A pilot project on wind-solar hybrid system may be initiated
on priority basis.
iii) The Comm ittee may be apprised of the progress regarding
finalization of the repowering policy, the National Wind
Energy Mission and the wind-solar hybrid policy.
Reply of the Government
As suggested by the Committee, the Repowering Policy has been
finalized and issued in August 2016. The policy provides a facilitative
development and evolves a new policy regime which would encourage
retrofit and/or replacement of old projects.

26
Ministry has also issued draft National Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy
and got comments from the stakeholders. The main objective of the policy
is to optimally utilise resources such as land and transmission.
National Wind Energy Mission (NWEM) document was circulated
to related Ministries/Departments for comments and the document has
been finalised after suitably incorporating the comments. During last two
years various new initiatives have been taken for the wind sector and
the wind capacity has reached 32.75GW at the end of 2016-17. Considering
recent developments, it is felt that the need for NWEM may not be
required.
Comments of the Committee
(See Para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report.)

27
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL -
NEW DELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
5 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

28
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 15TH FEBRUARY, 2018
IN COMMITTEE ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT
LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh
10. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
12. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
15. Shri Oscar Fernandes

29
16. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
17. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
18. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
19. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised
them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on ‘Stressed/Non-performing Assets in
Electricity Sector’.
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Evaluation of
Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power Exchanges’.
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the
year 2016-17.
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power–
A Sustainable, Clean and Green Alternative’.
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Energy
Access in India – Review of Current Status and Role of
Renewable Energy’.
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2017-18.
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘National
Electricity Policy – A Review’.

30
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any change.
The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament
in the second part of the Budget Session.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** *** ***
8. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then adjourned.

31
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
16TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:—
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total : 09
Percentage : 90%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
-Nil-
Total : 00
Percentage : 00%
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the reply of the
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Sl. No. 4
Total : 01
Percentage : 10%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of
the Government are still awaited:
-Nil -
Total : 00
Percentage : 00%