THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔNational Electricity
PolicyÑA Review Õ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.03.2018
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 07.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 ( Saka)


COE No. 293
Price : R 94.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-2018) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 18
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies....................................................... 54
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government has not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration .................................................. 56
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the final replies of the Government are still
awaited ..................................................... 64
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
February 15, 2018 ............................................. 65
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ......................................... 68
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2017-2018)
Dr. Kambhampati Hari Babu Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T .K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
(iii)

(iv)
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh Ñ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Ñ Director
3. Ms. Deepika Ñ Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-fourth Report on action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the 30th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on the subject ÔNational Electricity Policy Ñ A
ReviewÕ.
2. The 30th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 10th August,
2017 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2017.
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in
this Report were received on 24th November, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on February 15, 2018.
4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 30th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARI BABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with Action
Taken by the Ministry of Power on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee (2016-17) on the subject ÔNational Electricity Policy Ñ A
ReviewÕ.
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 10th August,
2017 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 9th August,
2017. The Report contained 25 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:Ñ
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18,
21, 22, 23, 24 and 25
Total-20
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs replies:
Serial No. 19
Total-01
Chapter-III
(iii) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 2, 11, 16 and 20
Total-04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
6. The Committee had noted that the Electricity Policy stated that
the key development objective of the power sector was supply of
electricity to all areas including rural areas as mandated in section 6
of the Electricity Act. Both, the Central Government and the State
Governments would jointly endeavour to achieve this objective at the
earliest. Consumers, particularly those who were ready to pay a tariff
which reflects efficient costs have the right to get uninterrupted twenty
four hours supply of quality power. To achieve this Government of
India had launched Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana with the
objective of electrifying all the villages and households in the country.
However , the Committee had found that as per the extant definition
of an electrified village, a village with a mere 10% of the total number
of households in the village could be declared as electrified. Therefore,
despite having 90% un-electrified households, the Government could
assume a village to be electrified. However , when the Committee
raised this issue with the Ministry, they had stated that Ò24 x 7 Power
for AllÓ documents had been signed with all the States/UTs. Government
of India supported States with schemes such as Ujjwal DISCOM Assurance
Yojana (UDAY), Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) and Deen
Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) to help them to achieve
the objective of providing uninterrupted power supply to every
household. As the focus was then on Power for All, definition of
electrified village became irrelevant. However, the Committee were
not convinced by this plea of the Ministry. The Committee were aware
that the present definition of electrified village was slight improved
version of its earlier definitions wherein, a village was qualified to be
classified as electrified if electricity was being used within its revenue
area for any purpose whatsoever. Since, the Ministry had changed the
definition of the village electrification several times in a piecemeal
manner, there had been situations when a village once declared
electrified becomes un-electrified after change in definition, causing
a repetition of the entire work in the form of so called intensive
electrification to meet the criteria of the new definition. As per the

3
definition of village electrification, 99.4% villages were electrified but
at the same time more than 4 crore households in the country were
deprived of the electricity connection. It was apparent that rural
electrification was nothing but sheer formality to declare as many as
villages electrified. The Committee had believed that the definition
did not reflect the true picture of universal access to electricity status
in the country, therefore, had strongly recommended that the definition
of village electrification should be changed as such that a village
should be declared electrified only when all the households of the
village are electrified. They had further desired that a village shall not
get the tag of being electrified in any case when the household coverage
is less than 80%.
7. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe present definition of Village Electrification, though envisage
electrification of at least 10% households, does not restrict
households electrification beyond 10% and accordingly Deen Dayal
Upadhayaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) scheme provides for
creating access to electricity for all household.
Under the scheme, free service connection is provided to Below
Poverty Line (BPL) households, and access to electricity is also
provided to APL households to facilitate extension of service
connection by the respective State Power Utilities as per the extant
rules.
Further , substantial investment is being made in power infrastructure
strengthening. States have been advised to provide service
connection to all the un-electrified households.
All the states have signed the Ô24x7 Power for All Õ document, joint
initiative of Government of India and State Government, which
envisages providing access to all the households by 2019.
Recently, Government of India has launched ÔPradhan Mantri Sahaj
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana Ñ Saubhagya Õ to achieve universal household
electrification in the country. The scheme envisages providing last
mile connectivity and electricity connections to all remaining
un-electrified households in rural areas and poor households in
urban areas by 31st March 2019. The total outlay of the scheme
is Rs. 16320 crore including budgetary support of Rs. 12320 crore
from Government of India. Ó

4
8. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that the present definition of Village
Electrification, though envisage electrification of at least 10%
households, does not restrict households electrification beyond 10%
and accordingly Deen Dayal Upadhayaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
provides for creating access to electricity for all households. It has
also been stated that all the States have signed Ò24x7 Power for
AllÓ document and Saubhagya Scheme has been launched to achieve
universal household electrification in the country.
The Committee are of the view that despite the schemes like
DDUGJY, 24x7 Power for All and Saubhagya, the definition of
Electrified Villages has its own significance. Even those villages which
were declared electrified a decade ago under centrally sponsored
electrification schemes, are yet to achieve 100% household
electrification. The Committee are not convinced with the claim of
the Ministry that the definition of Electrified Villages has become
irrelevant as the focus is now on ÔPower for All Õ.
The Committee feel that the present definition of Electrified
Villages is nothing but sheer formality to declare maximum number
of villages as electrified with minimum effort and it does not reflect
true picture regarding electricity access in the country. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the
definition of Electrified Villages should be amended as such that a
village be declared electrified only when all the households of that
village are electrified.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
9. The Committee had recommended that every connection
irrespective of the purpose, type or category, provided for by the
DISCOMS should invariably be metered. The Committee had believed
that 100 % metering of all the connection will help in better energy
auditing and fixing accountability. The Committee were not averse to
providing electricity free of cost or at subsidized rate but they desired
that whatever electricity was supplied to anybody, should be metered.
10. In its reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under:Ñ
ÒSection 55 of the Electricity Act, 2003 stipulates that No licensee
shall supply electricity, after the expiry of two years from the
appointed date, except through installation of a correct meter in
accordance with the regulations to be made in this behalf by the
Authority. Further Central Electricity Authority has notified CEA

5
(Installation and operation of meter) Regulation, 2006 in June,
2006.In accordance with the above, the concerned utilities have to
take appropriate action for providing 100% metering of all the
connection for better energy auditing and fixing accountability.
To help the States achieve this objective of achieving 100% metering,
Government of India is also assisting State Governments/Distribution
Utilities under DDUGJY & IPDS by providing funds for achieving
100% metering of consumers, feeders, DTs etc. for about 2 crore
meters in the country.
Ministry of Power, Government of India has notified ÒIntegrated
Power Development Scheme (IPDS) Ó on 3rd December , 2014 with
following components:
(i) Strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution networks
in the urban areas;
(ii) Metering of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in
the urban areas;
(iii) IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening of
distribution network under R-APDRP for 12th and 13th Plans
by carrying forward the approved outlay for R-APDRP to
IPDS.
Metering of distribution transformers, feeders and consumers
is one of the core objectives of IPDS. Against the total of
Rs. 25,913 crore sanction, Rs. 1364 crore has been sanctioned for
consumer meters. As of date BoQ of 82,64,182 no. of consumers
meters has been sanctioned. Smart meters and Pre-paid meters
are also included in BoQ under IPDS.
Consumer meters have also been sanctioned by Ministry of Power,
Government of India under R-APDRP scheme notified in September,
2008 for 1227 towns under Part B. Ó
11. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has furnished that Metering of distribution transformers,
feeders and consumers is one of the core objectives of IPDS and
against the total allocation of Rs. 25,913 crore, Rs. 1364 crore has
been sanctioned for consumer meters. The Committee are satisfied
to note that the Government is assisting State Governments/
Distribution Utilities under DDUGJY & IPDS by providing funds for
achieving 100% metering of consumers, feeders, DTs etc. as 100%
metering of all the connection will help in better energy auditing
and fixing accountability.

6
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
12. The Committee had observed that initial higher tariff of the
hydro power was one the deterrents for retarded growth of this sector.
It was an established fact that hydro power plants had the longest life
span and was source of cheapest energy in the long run. The expected
life span of civil structure of a typical hydro power project could go
beyond 100 years, whereas, mechanical and electrical component lasted
for 25-50 years. However, banks and financial institutes provided loan
to hydro power project for the 10-12 years only. Therefore, higher
cash flow was required in the initial 10-12 years on account of repayment
of debt. To meet the increased cash flow requirement, a higher rate
of depreciation was allowed for the initial period of 12 years for the
purpose of determination of tariff. As a result, the tariff of hydro
power became front loaded and was quite high for the first 12 years.
The tariff then reduced and came down drastically once the loan had
been repaid and the plant was fully depreciated. The Committee with
a view to make hydro power tariff more levelized, had recommended
that appropriate provision be made to provide long tenure finances
i.e. upto 25 years, to hydro power projects.
13. The Ministry of Power , in its reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Government is considering a proposal for revival of hydro
power sector which, inter alia, includes mandate to engage with
bankers/financial institutions for modifying lending terms &
conditions and engaging Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) for rationalizing hydro power tariff.
High tariff of hydro power is main obstacle for the growth of hydro
power sector and beneficiaries are not coming forward for making
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) resulting into number of hydro
power projects unviable although having all clearances in hand.
The life span for hydro projects is quite long and extended debt
repayment will considerably lower the tariff.
The recommendation of the Committee for provision to be made
to provide long tenure finance to hydro projects is good for hydro
sector. Such loans should be made available to developers of hydro
projects without a corresponding increase in the interest cost on
account of tenure premium. Further, it is a fact that some CPSU
have large cash reserves which need to be utilized for the
development of the Nation. Such reserves could be gainfully
deployed as long term loans for developing the hydro sector of the
country while also earning good returns in the long run for the
CPSUs.

7
Para 5.8 of the revised Tariff Policy notified on 28.01.2016 already
provides that the Appropriate Commission should frame suitable
regulatory framework for incentivizing the developers of Hydro
Electric Projects (HEPs) for using long-term financial instruments
in order to reduce the tariff burden in the initial years. Also, in
the draft EFC Memo for revival of hydro power sector , it is proposed
to engage with bankers/financial institutions for modifying lending
terms and conditions for hydro power projects. It may be mentioned
that Financial Institutions such as PFC & REC have already started
giving long term debt upto 20 years.
Presently, Hydro power tariffs are front loaded due to repayment
of debt within essential 12 year period. The change in recovery of
depreciation from 12 to 25 years is in order provided the financing
is available for 25 years. In addition to above, there are other
issues also which increase the Hydro tariff and need attention for
its redressal. The major points are as below:Ñ
(i) The concept of 12% free power to home State which is not
applicable for other source of Energy.
(ii) In addition to free power , some States are imposing water
cess on non-consumptive use of water; it is also increasing
the tariff of Hydro power.
(iii) Normally, Hydro power Projects are located in remote/under
developed areas. In process of construction of Hydro power
Projects, lot of infrastructural work like construction of roads,
bridges, hospitals and schools etc. are to be done which is
ultimately added in the capital cost. In case, such facilities
are provided by State Government or Central Government,
as the case may be, the capital cost/tariff of Hydro power
Projects will drastically come down.
(iv) Due to increased security threat, Hydro generating companies
are making huge expenditure on security aspect or bearing
the total expenditure on para-military organizations, which
is increasing capital cost as well as Operational and
Maintenance cost of the Power Station. The provision of
security arrangements should be considered by respective
State Government/Central Government at their cost. Ó
14. In response to the recommendation of the Committee that
appropriate provision be made to provide long tenure finance to
the hydro power projects, the Ministry has stated that high tariff of
hydro power is the main obstacle for the growth of sector as

8
distribution companies are not coming forward for Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA) making a number of hydro power projects unviable
despite having all other clearances and as the life span of hydro
projects is quite long so extended debt repayment will considerably
lower the tariff.
It has also been stated that Para 5.8 of the revised Tariff Policy
provides that the Appropriate Commission should frame suitable
regulatory framework for incentivizing the developers of Hydro
Electric Projects (HEPs) for using long-term financial instruments in
order to reduce the tariff burden in the initial years. Also, in the
draft EFC Memo for revival of hydro power sector, it is proposed to
engage with bankers/financial institutions for modifying lending terms
and conditions for hydro power projects. It has been mentioned
that Financial Institutions such as PFC & REC have already started
giving long term debt upto 20 years.
The Committee would like to know about the steps taken by the
Appropriate Commission in accordance with the revised Tariff Policy
for incentivizing the developers of Hydro Electric Projects in order
to reduce the tariff burden in the initial years.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
15. The Committee had noted that there were various Central
PSUs which were engaged in development of hydro power like NHPC,
NEEPCO, THDC and SJVNL. These Undertakings had the required
infrastructure, expertise and manpower that were specialized in the
development of hydro projects. Since all these were reputed
organization with the proven track record in development and upkeep
of hydro projects, there was no issue of mobilization of funds for
them. Despite having huge hydro power potential that remained to be
harnessed these PSUs were not having many projects to develop. The
Committee had felt that under-utilization of Central PSUs was nothing
but sheer waste of available resources and expertise. The Committee
had believed that the participation of private players was a necessity
for speedy and optimal growth of the power sector. However, the
Committee had observed that the performance of private players unlike
in thermal sector, was not encouraging. Rather , the Committee had
found that many a projects which had been allocated to private players
with little or no experience of hydro power , were stuck due to inabilities
of the developers. Also, due to long gestation period of hydro power
projects and the extended period taken in getting the returns on the
investment, private players were reluctant to venture in this sector.

9
The Committee had recommended that Government should make a
policy so that Central PSUs get most of the hydro power projects. They
should also explore the idea to reserve hydro power sector exclusively
for PSUs or with the collaboration of PSUs until the sector was
adequately developed.
16. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:Ñ
ÒWater being a state subject, the allotment of hydro power projects
is being done by the respective State Governments. As on
31.08.2017, there are 40 existing power stations of Central PSUs
with a capacity of 14,547.72 MW. Further , 30 projects with aggregate
installed capacity of 16198 MW in the country have been allotted
to Central PSUs and these projects are at various stages of
development as given below:
Status of H.E. Projects allotted to CPSUs Nos. I.C.
(MW)
Under Construction 11 6125
H.E. Projects concurred by CEA and yet 12 8522
to be taken up for construction
H.E. Projects under Examination in CEA 2 318
DPR Returned by CEA to project authorities 1 130
for resubmission
H.E. Projects under S&I 4 1103
Total 30 16198
It is observed that apart from above, a large number of projects
have been allotted to private sector for implementation. However,
majority of these projects are yet to take off. Even, those projects
which are under construction are progressing at a slow pace. As
such, recommendation of the Committee in this regard may be
suitably considered.
The main reasons for the stagnant growth of the hydro sector are
on account of geological surprises, litigation, R&R issues, law and
order problems, poor infrastructural connectivity like roads, dispute
between beneficiary States, etc. These factors affect both public
and private sector projects. The Government is trying to fast track
the growth of the hydro sector by offering certain incentives.
These incentives are being examined in the Ministry.

10
However , given the fact of vital strategic importance of the Hydro
power Projects particularly storage based Hydro power Projects,
for the energy security and water security of the Country in the
coming years when water is projected to become a very scarce
resource, development of the Hydro power Projects has become a
need of the time. CPSEs like NHPC are committed to develop the
Hydro power Projects despite the various constraints being faced
by them on several fronts in getting the Projects cleared and
further during its execution. Thus, till such time when Hydro sector
gets adequately developed, PSUs should be incentivized through
various policy measures for taking up these Hydro Projects which
are located in far flung regions of the Country with extremely
inclement working conditions. Initiatives like continuing the present
cost plus tariff regime, providing single window clearance/speedier
clearances especially w.r.t. Environment/Forest and R&R aspects
etc. in case of the Hydro power Projects are expected to bring
some relief to the sector. Ó
17. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that Water being a state subject, the allotment
of Hydro Power Projects is being done by the respective State
Governments and as on 31.08.2017, there are 40 existing Hydro
power stations of Central PSUs with a capacity of 14,547.72 MW.
Further, 30 projects with aggregate installed capacity of 16198 MW
in the country have been allotted to Central PSUs and these projects
are at various stages of development. It has also been stated that
a large number of projects have been allotted to private sector for
implementation, however, majority of these projects are yet to
take off and even, those projects which are under construction are
progressing at a slow pace.
The Committee are of the view that the fact that Water is a
state subject, does not absolve the Ministry of its responsibility
towards development of Hydro Sector. The Committee agree with
the Ministry that in view of the vital strategic importance of the
Hydro power Projects particularly storage based Hydro power
Projects, for the energy security and water security of the Country
in the coming years, development of the Hydro power Projects has
become a need of the hour.
The Committee note that CPSEs like NHPC, THDC, NEEPCO,
SJVNL, etc., are committed to develop the Hydro power Projects
despite the various constraints being faced by them on several fronts
in getting the Projects cleared and executed. Thus, till such time

11
when Hydro sector gets adequately developed, PSUs should be
incentivized through various policy measures for taking up these
Hydro Projects which are located in far flung regions of the Country.
The Committee feel that the expertise of these CPSUs should be
utilized for development of Hydro Sector and the State Government
concerned should be consulted for the same. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Government
should make a policy to give most of the hydro power projects to
Central PSUs and should also explore the idea to reserve hydro
power sector exclusively for PSUs until the sector is adequately
developed.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
18. The Committee had observed that higher tariff was the main
suppressant of electricity demand. In view of the Committee, there
was latent demand of electricity in the system that would surface
once tariff is brought down to more affordable levels. The Committee,
therefore, had recommended the Government to make policy provision
that ensure reduction in power generation cost and electricity tariff.
The Committee had desired that with a view to decrease generation
cost, availability of cheaper indigenous coal be made available
inadequate quantity, rationalization of coal supply sources, super-critical
technology be adapted according to indigenous conditions, R&M
exercises for power plants be undertaken at the right time, etc. The
Committee had further observed that running of power plants at lower
PLF also escalate the generation cost. The Committee, therefore, had
further recommended that the Government should make necessary
provisions to increase the utilization of power plants.
19. The Ministry of Power, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:Ñ
ÒIn so far as Committee Õs recommendation in regard to increasing
the utilization of power plants i.e. increasing the Plant Load Factor
(PLF) of power plants is concerned, increase in electricity demand
may result in better utilization of power plants. Various policies &
developmental activities/programmes of the Government viz.
(i) Power for All initiative for providing 24x7 power to all (ii) Make
in India Initiative to encourage multi-national as well as national
companies to manufacture their products in India (iii) penetration
of Electric Vehicles in the system etc. would lead to increase in
electricity demand and this increase in electricity demand may
lead to better utilization of power plants.

12
In order to ensure reduction in power generation cost and electricity
tariff, the scheme of flexibility in utilization of domestic coal
amongst power generating stations of Central Sector , State Sector
as well as IPP Power Stations for reducing the cost of power
generation has been issued. The flexibility in utilization of domestic
coal scheme envisages transferring coal to more efficient generating
stations, leading to lower generation costs and ultimately lesser
cost of electricity for the consumers. Ó
20. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that increase in electricity demand may result
in increasing the Plant Load Factor (PLF) of power plants. It has also
been stated that to ensure reduction in power generation cost and
electricity tariff, a scheme of flexibility in utilization of domestic
coal amongst power generating stations has been launched.
The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry has come
up with the scheme of flexibility in utilization of domestic coal to
encourage efficiency in generating stations which is expected to
lead to lower generation costs and ultimately lesser cost of electricity
for the consumers. However, the Committee feel that transparency
should be ensured in implementation of this scheme as a genuine
generating station should not be harassed and deprived of coal
under this scheme under the garb of encouraging efficiency.
The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish the details and
outcomes/achievements of this scheme, as early as possible.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
21. The Committee had noted that the IPDS aimed at bringing
down AT&C losses to the level of 15%. The Committee had found that
the level of 15% losses was being targeted since 2002-03 when APDRP
was launched. After elapse of 15 years we were still far from that
target. The Committee had believed that once IPDS scheme was fully
implemented and the technological up-gradation and strengthening of
the system was done, there should not be any excuse left for not
containing AT&C losses barring its technical component. The Committee,
therefore, had desired that the targeted level of 15% AT&C losses need
to be lowered accordingly leaving little scope for inclusion of commercial
losses therein.

13
22. The Ministry of Power, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:Ñ
ÒThe audited AT&C losses of the last 11 financial years are tabulated
below:
  Year AT&C Losses*
2005-06 32.66
2006-07 30.47
2007-08 29.07
2008-09 27.34
2009-10 26.99
2010-11 26.35
2011-12 26.63
2012-13 25.48
2013-14 22.58
2014-15 24.62
2015-16 23.97
*As per PFC Õs report on performance of State Power Utilities.
Distribution of Electricity is done by the States and their licenced
DISCOMS. The Government of India handholds the States in improving
their infrastructure through financial assistance programmes and
schemes based on the needs expressed by them. Besides IPDS,
under Ujjwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana also, the participating States
have agreed to trajectories and measures to reduce the AT&C
losses to a level of 15% by FY 2019.
As per the table above, the DISCOMs have been able to manage
approximately 9% reduction in AT&C losses in the last 11 financial
years till 2015-16. Looking at the rate of reduction in AT&C losses,
in the present context, a target of 15% AT&C losses by FY 2019
seems appropriate. Ó
23. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that the DISCOMs have been able to manage
approximately 9% reduction in AT&C losses till 2015-16.
The Committee are dissatisfied to note that the DISCOMs have
been able to achieve only 9% reduction in AT&C losses in the last
11 financial years despite the claim of the Ministry that it has

14
handheld the States in improving their infrastructure through
financial assistance programs and schemes based on the needs
expressed by them.
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry Õs approach
towards reducing AT&C losses is lackadaisical which can be inferred
from the fact that the Ministry has been targeting the level of 15%
loss since 2002-03 and it is still far from that target. The Committee
feel that going by the rate of reduction of AT&C losses in the country,
DISCOMs will take lifetime to reach to the level of 15%, unless the
Ministry adopts a strict and uncompromising approach towards the
same.
The Committee are of the opinion that technological up-gradation
under IPDS will help the sector to bring down technical losses and
the Ministry should handhold the DISCOMs to bring down commercial
losses as AT&C losses in the country are unacceptably high.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the targeted level of 15% AT&C losses need to be lowered accordingly
leaving little scope for inclusion of commercial losses therein.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
24. The Committee had noted that Section 166 (2) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 provided that the Central Government shall constitute a
forum of regulators consisting of the Chairperson of the Central
Commission and Chairpersons of the State Commissions. It further
provided that the Chairperson of the Central Commission shall be the
Chairperson of the Forum of regulators. Accordingly, a Forum of
Regulators (FOR) was constituted vide Notification dated 16th February,
2005. The Committee had further noted that the objective of setting
up FOR was to provide a common platform to the electricity regulators
to share their experiences and best practices. The intent was also to
build synergy between various Electricity Regulatory Commissions and
to inter-alia bring about harmonization of regulation in power sector.
Important issues of the power sector (at inter-state level or intra-state
level) were discussed and consensus was evolved in FOR. The Forum
is a statutory body and does not have the power to enforce its
regulations or decisions on individual State Commissions. The Committee
had felt that FOR was good forum that can provide some kind of
uniformity in approaches of various State Regulators by discussing and
sharing best practices, success stories and implementation status of
various provisions of the Act. The Committee, however , felt that this

15
platform can be utilized in a more effective manner if some enforcing
power be provided to them. It would not only be helpful in bringing
in certain uniformity in regulations in the States but would also be
helpful in accelerating the various reforms measures aimed at proper
and fast development of power sector. The Committee, therefore, had
recommended that necessary provisions should be made so that the
decisions, taken by consensus at Forum of Regulators, become
enforceable.
25. The Ministry of Power, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:Ñ
ÒThe FOR constituted under Section 166(2) of the Electricity Act,
2003 by GOI, has been assigned the following functions:
(a) Analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of Central
Commission and State Commissions and compilation of data
arising out of the said orders, highlighting, especially the
efficiency improvements of the utilities;
(b) Harmonization of regulation in power sector;
(c) Laying of standards of performance of licensees as required
under the Act;
(d) Sharing of information among the members of the Forum on
various issues of common interest and also of common
approach;
(e) Undertaking research work in-house or through outsourcing
on issues relevant to power sector regulation;
(f) Evolving measures for protection of interest of consumers
and promotion of efficiency, economy and competition in
power sector; and
(g) Such other functions as the Central Government may assign
to it, from time to time.
It may be noted from the above that one of the functions assigned
to FOR is harmonization of regulations in power sector. As per the
recommendation of the Standing Committee, it is felt that FOR
will have to pursue this activity aggressively so that the concerns
of the Standing Committee about ensuring uniformity in regulations
in the States and accelerating the various reforms measures, are
addressed comprehensively.

16
Since the FOR comprises of Chairperson of CERC and Chairperson
of SERCs and Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of FOR, it is
expected to consider effective & timely implementation of the
decisions taken by consensus at FOR to accelerate the reform
measures for rapid development of power sector.
The State Commissions independently function in their respective
States/Union Territories, as the case may be, and the Forum of
Regulators (FOR) provides an interactive platform to the member
SERCs/JERCs to share their experiences.
It is evident from the active participation of the SERCs/JERCs
during the interactions held in the Forum, that the intent to build
synergy between the member organizations and to facilitate
harmonization of regulations among the States is received in the
right spirit by the Regulators. Such synergy has facilitated the
Forum to bring about Model Regulations on several important
subjects for benefit of SERCs/JERCs.
However , the State Commissions are independent to take their
own considered view despite the consensus arrived at the Forum
of Regulators. As is evident from the provisions of the Act and the
Rules framed thereunder , the Forum does not have the power to
enforce its regulations or decisions on individual State Commissions.Ó
26. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has stated that the State Regulatory Commissions are
independent to take their own considered view despite the consensus
arrived at the Forum of Regulators as according to the provisions of
the Electricity Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the Forum
does not have the power to enforce its regulations or decisions on
individual State Commissions.
The Committee understand that the rules framed under the Act,
do not assign FOR the power to enforce its regulations/decisions
and it was precisely because of this reason, the Committee had
recommended that the necessary Rules should be made/amended
so that the decision taken by consensus at Forum of Regulators
becomes enforceable.
The Committee note that the reply of the Government is self-
contradictory in stating that the State Commissions are independent
to take their own considered views despite the consensus arrived
at FOR. It altogether negates the relevance of FOR, what to say of
consensus. This is amusing and makes mockery of not only the

17
consensus, but also the deliberations done at FOR. The Committee
feel that during the meetings of FOR issues of electricity sector
hampering its growth are debated upon. The role and responsibilities
of regulators are to make the sector efficient, competitive and
consumer friendly. If consensus of such debate/discussion is not
honoured by the participating members, there is need to revisit the
purpose of such discussions.
The Committee feel that FOR can be utilized in a more effective
manner if it is provided with some enforcing power. It will not only
be helpful in bringing in certain uniformity in regulations of the
various States but will also be helpful in accelerating the various
reforms measures aimed at proper and fast development of power
sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation
and desire the Ministry to take some serious measures for the same.

18
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Thirtieth Report, under Direction 73A of the
ÔDirections by the Speaker Õ
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Committee note that Section 3 (1) of the Electricity Act, 2003
provides that the Central Government shall, from time to time, prepare
the National Electricity Policy. In compliance of this the Government
of India had notified the National Electricity Policy on 10th February,
2005. The National Electricity Policy aims at achieving the following
objectives:
➢Access to Electricity Ñ Available for all households in next
five years.
➢Availability of Power Ñ Demand to be fully met by year
2012. Energy and peaking shortages to be overcome and
adequate spinning reserve to be available.
➢Supply of Reliable and Quality Power of specified standards
in an efficient manner and at reasonable rates.
➢Per capita availability of electricity to be increased to over
1000 units by year 2012.
➢Minimum lifeline consumption of 1 unit/household/day as a
merit good by year 2012.
➢Financial Turnaround and Commercial Viability of Electricity
sector.
➢Protection of consumers Õ interests.
The scrutiny by the Committee, however , revealed that no objective
of the National Electricity Policy, 2005 could be achieved within
stipulated timeline. Most of the objectives are yet to be achieved. The
Committee note that there are still more than 4 crore households to
be electrified, there is adequate generation capacities but due to
affordability issue demand is not fully met, financial conditions of

19
DISCOMs have become bad to worse. Moreover, there are other issues
that are now putting challenges in proper development of electricity
sector of the country. The substantive fall in solar tariff and its very
low gestation period is posing a threat to economic viability of thermal
power plants. Presently, solar power is doing the same to thermal
power what thermal power did to hydro power. Though growth in Solar
energy is a good sign for the country, nonetheless, thermal power has
been the mainstay of power sector and due to various reasons its
importance is not going to end anytime soon. Therefore, the growth
of this sector needs to be done in more balanced manner wherein,
various sectors of electricity complement one another. We have built
enough generation capacity but due to affordability issue, demand is
being suppressed leading to lesser utilization of capacities. Electricity
being the Concurrent Subject, the key to proper and expeditious
development of this Sector largely depends on effective coordination
between the Centre and the States. A long time of 12 years has
elapsed since notification of the Electricity Policy, the Committee;
therefore, recommend that due to rapid changes in electricity scenario,
the National Electricity Policy, 2005 should be amended at earliest by
taking into account a holistic view of the sector. The Committee have
also made various observations/recommendations relating to Electricity
Policy in the succeeding paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
The National Electricity Policy was brought out in the year 2005.
Since then a number of changes have taken place in the Indian power
sector. Presently, adequate power is available in the country to meet
the demand of power of the consumers who are having access to
electricity.
Though some of the objectives of National Electricity Policy notified
in 2005 are yet to be achieved, considerable progress has been made,
like:
¥ Per capita consumption of electricity has increased to 1122
units in the year 2016-17 from 613 units in year 2005.
¥ Share of renewables in the installed Power Generation
capacity has increased from 3.2% as on 31.03.2005 to about
17.5% as on 31.03.2017.
¥ Further , about 1,35,000 ckt. kms of transmission lines have
been added in the last 10 years.
¥ Also, at present, there are only about 2457 villages remained
to be electrified.

20
¥ In 2005-06, the Electricity demand-supply gap in terms of
Energy and Peak stood at 8.4% and 12.3% respectively. This
came down to an all-time low gap of 0.7% and 1.6%
respectively in 2016-17. Further , this gap is on account of
factors other than inadequacy of power in the country. This
shortage is basically due to some of the State utilities not
purchasing costly power and some distribution bottlenecks.
Recently, Government of India has launched ÒPradhan Mantri Sahaj
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana Ñ Saubhagya Ó to achieve universal household
electrification in the country. The scheme envisages to provide last
mile connectivity and electricity connections to all remaining
un-electrified households in rural areas and poor households in urban
areas by 31st March, 2019. The total outlay of the scheme is Rs. 16320
crore including budgetary support of Rs. 12320 crore from Government
of India.
The fall in solar tariff has made solar power affordable but due to
the variability and uncertainty associated with solar power , Indian
power sector cannot rely solely on the solar power. Key Role of Thermal
Power in the Indian Power Sector is to be continued in the near future
since it is firm power, more economic and provides reliable power for
grid security.
Government has increased its focus on Renewable Energy (RE)
based Generation Capacity Addition and set a target of 175 GW of RE
Capacity by 2022. The Thermal power is not going to be partly replaced
by solar power and both the sources of generation will complement
each other during the entire load duration curve. However , Thermal
generation may be required to operate flexibly for accommodating RE
Generation.
Taking all this into account along with other factors, a new National
Electricity Policy covering all the aspects and factors associated with
future of Electricity Sector is already under finalization and will
supersede the National Electricity Policy, 2005. The observations made
in this para would be comprehensively covered in the new National
Electricity Policy.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
The Committee believes that the true spirit of the Electricity Act
and the National Electricity Policy is to electrify all the households.
However , the Committee are dismayed to find that so far the focus

21
was on electrification of all the villages and there was no talk on
electrifying each and every households of the country. Besides this
there was a condition of minimum population for a village to be
considered for electrification exercise. However , to the satisfaction of
the Committee, the Government have now removed these barriers and
aspiring to implement the universal access to electricity in its true
sense by setting a deadline to cover all the households for
electrification. Still the Committee find that there are provisions in
the electrification policy that may create obstacles or procrastinate
the full implementation of the scheme. The Committee note that
under DDUGJY , the Central Government fund electricity connections to
BPL households only. APL families have to pay charges in order to get
connections. Furthermore, the responsibility of providing connection
to APL families rest with Discoms. The Committee do understand that
it is a concurrent subject and the Centre and the States jointly have
to achieve the objective of providing universal access to electricity.
Nonetheless, this arrangement has created duality of jurisdiction and
approach leading to uncertainty in regard to electrification of villages.
Even those villages which were declared electrified a decade ago
under centrally sponsored electrification scheme, are yet to achieve
100% households electrification. This only highlights the lackadaisical
approach of Discoms to providing connections to remaining households
as per provisions of the scheme. Also, there are chances that some
APL families may not be capable of paying the connection charges in
one go due to various reasons. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the policy in regard to village electrification may be amended in
such manner that there should be provision to provide electricity
connection to all the families be it BPL or APL at the time of
electrification drive. The connection charges to APL families may also
be exempted as done by some States or it may be provided at discounted
rates. If this not being feasible then there must be provision of realizing
the connection charges in Equated Monthly Installments (EMI) instead
of paying it in one go.
Reply of the Government
Electricity is a concurrent subject and distribution of electricity
and management of associated functions is carried out by State Õs
Distribution Companies (Discoms). Releasing connections to consumers
fall in the domain of respective State distribution company or the
power department, as the case may be.
Under the joint initiative, all the States have signed of 24x7 Power
for All documents which envisages providing access to all the households.

22
Through various forums, States have been asked to take necessary
steps, including connection charge in Equated Monthly Installment (EMI),
to reduce entry barrier and enable electricity access to all households.
The recommendation that connection charges from the APL families
be recovered in the form of Equated Monthly Installments (EMI) may
be conveyed to the States for implementation.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
The Committee find that at present the village electrification
scheme aims only to provide electricity access to households limiting
to the purpose of illumination. This endeavors itself it so ambitious
that despite the concerted efforts of the Centre and the State
Governments, there are crores of households which are yet to be
electrified. However , the Committee feel that use of electricity for
illumination only serves the purpose to a certain extent as it does not
provide scope for the beneficiaries to carry out even small electricity
based commercial activities to earn livelihood or increase their income
leading to enhanced capacity to pay electricity bills. On the other
hand, Discoms who provide such connections perceive them as liability
having little or no scope for generation of revenue therefrom. The
Committee, therefore, believe that this situation is neither much helpful
in improving the prospect of earnings of beneficiaries nor encouraging
for Discoms to provide such electricity connections and adequate supply
of electricity to them. The Committee further note that presently the
per capita electricity consumption is around 1000 kWh which is way
below the world Õs average of 3030 kWh. When it developed countries,
it is not comparable which are having per capita electricity consumption
as high as 15,520 kWh. Due to massive addition in power generation
capacities in the country, there is no dearth of electricity. Moreover,
with the mammoth capacity addition planned from the renewable
energy as well as conventional source which is expected to be added
in the coming years, it is expected that there will not be any constrain
from supply side. The Committee believe that this is the high time
when we can promote more intensive usage of electricity for the
benefit of the people as well as for the electricity sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should aspire
to provide electricity connections in the rural areas that are capable
of carrying out some commercial activities. Simultaneously, provisions
in regard to supply of quality and reliable power for reasonable time
should also be made as mere electrification without adequate electricity
supply does not make sense.

23
Reply of the Government
Under Deen Dayal Upadhayaya Gram Jyoti Yojana, basic electricity
infrastructure viz. LT Line, HT Line, Distribution Transformer is provided
in the rural areas. Any commercial establishment can get service
connection by paying prescribed charges as per rules/norms of respective
State Power Utility.
Government of India has taken up a joint initiative with all States/
UTs for preparation of State specific documents for providing 24x7
power supply to all households/homes, industrial & commercial
consumers and adequate supply of power to agricultural consumers as
per State policy. This initiative aims at ensuring uninterrupted supply
of quality power to existing consumers and providing access to electricity
to all unconnected consumers.
As on date all State Governments and Union Territories have signed
the Ò24X7 Power for All Ó agreement with the Union Government.
Recently, Government of India has launched ÒPradhan Mantri Sahaj
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana Ñ Saubhagya Ó to achieve universal household
electrification in the country. The scheme envisages providing last
mile connectivity and electricity connections to all remaining un-
electrified households in rural areas and poor households in urban
areas by 31st March 2019. The total outlay of the scheme is Rs. 16320
crore including budgetary support of Rs. 12320 crore from Government
of India.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee further recommend that every connection
irrespective of the purpose, type or category, provided for by the
Discoms should invariably be metered. The Committee believe that
100 % metering of all the connections will help in better energy auditing
and fixing accountability. The Committee are not averse to providing
electricity free of cost or at subsidized rate but they desire that
whatever electricity is supplied to anybody, should be metered.
Reply of the Government
Section 55 of the Electricity Act, 2003 stipulates that No licensee
shall supply electricity, after the expiry of two years from the appointed
date, except through installation of a correct meter in accordance
with the regulations to be made in this behalf by the Authority. Further

24
Central Electricity Authority has notified CEA (Installation and operation
of meter) Regulation, 2006 in June, 2006. In accordance with the
above, the concerned utilities have to take appropriate action for
providing 100% metering of all the connection for better energy auditing
and fixing accountability.
To help the States achieve this objective of achieving 100% metering,
Government of India is also assisting State Governments/Distribution
Utilities under DDUGJY & IPDS by providing funds for achieving 100%
metering of consumers, feeders, DTs etc. for about 2 crores meters in
the country.
Ministry of Power, Government of India has notified ÒIntegrated
Power Development Scheme Ó (IPDS) on 3rd December, 2014 with
following components:
(i) Strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution networks
in the urban areas;
(ii) Metering of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in
the urban areas;
(iii) IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening of
distribution network under R-APDRP for 12th and 13th Plans
by carrying forward the approved outlay for R-APDRP to
IPDS.
Metering of distribution transformers, feeders and consumers is
one of the core objectives of IPDS. Against the total of Rs. 25,913
crore sanction, Rs. 1364 crore has been sanctioned for consumer meters.
As of date BoQ of 82,64,182 no. of consumers meters has been
sanctioned. Smart meters and Pre-paid meters are also included in
BoQ under IPDS.
Consumer meters have also been sanctioned by Ministry of Power,
Government of India under R-APDRP scheme notified in September,
2008 for 1227 towns under Part B.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee note that during the recent years, the country has
witnessed massive growth in generation capacities. The country at

25
present have 3,30,260 MW capacity of which 2,21,626 MW comes from
thermal power, 57,260 MW from renewable energy sources and only
44,594 MW from hydro power. The Committee further note that the
share of hydro power , in the total energy mix, is on constant decline
due to various reasons. The share of hydro in 2007-08, not long before,
was more than 25% which has now come down to a meagre 13.6%. The
Committee further note that as per the survey carried out in 1987,
total Hydro Electric Power potential in the country when fully developed
would result in an installed capacity of about 1,48,701 MW on the
basis of probable average load factor. Against this potential, the actual
capacity that could be harnessed as on 31.03.2017 is 44,478.42 MW
which is about 30% of the potential. The Committee believe that the
assessed potential could further increase if a new study is carried out
keeping in view the technological advancements, new techniques and
Pumped Storage Plants. The Committee further note that extant
Electricity Policy while considering hydro-electricity as a clean and
renewable source of energy envisages that maximum emphasis would
be laid on the full development of the feasible hydro potential in the
country. The Policy have also recognized that harnessing hydro potential
speedily will also facilitate economic development of States, particularly
North-Eastern States, Sikkim, Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh and J&K,
since a large proportion of our hydro power potential is located in
these States. These States with hydro potential need to focus on the
full development of hydro power potential at the earliest. Besides
generation of electricity, hydro power projects also have ingrained
benefits like supply of drinking water , flood and drought control, and
irrigation. Moreover, hydro plants especially, Pumped Storage Plants
can be used as electricity storage. The Committee also note that as
per the targets set by the Government, a capacity to the tune of
175 GW from renewable energy will be added in the system by the
year 2022. Since, generations from renewable energy sources are
intermittent in nature, therefore, a balancing power will be needed to
support the Grid and even out the fluctuations. The balancing power
could either be gas based power or hydro power. As there is scarcity
of gas, hydro power becomes Hobson Õs choice. Therefore, if hydro
power is not developed in the right proportion there is every chance
that PLF of thermal power which is already at the level of 64% may
fall to detrimental levels due to their possible use as balancing power.
The Committee are dismayed over the non-attention towards
development of hydro power despite having numerous advantages and
its necessity for harmonious functioning of the system. The Committee
feel that instead of taking corrective measures in a piecemeal manner
there is dire need of policy interventions taking into account the
holistic view of the sector. The Committee, therefore, in succeeding
paras have recommended various changes that should be made by the
Government to provide much needed push for development of hydro
power.

26
Reply of the Government
As per re-assessment studies of hydro-electric potential carried
out by the Central Electricity Authority during 1978-87, the hydro
power potential in terms of Installed Capacity (IC) was estimated at
148701 MW out of which 145320 MW of the potential consists of hydro-
electric schemes having Installed Capacity above 25 MW. Of the above
identified capacity 39867.8 MW (27.43%) has been developed as on
31.08.2017. In addition, against assessed potential of 96524 MW of
Pumped Storage Schemes, 4785.6 MW (4.95%) have also been developed.
Thus, the total hydro-electric installed capacity in the country as on
31.08.2017 is 44653.42 MW. The work for basin-wise review of hydro-
electric potential in the country & preparation of basin reports has
already been taken up by Central Electricity Authority in association
with WAPCOS Ltd. in March, 2017. It is likely to be completed in a
period of 30 months i.e. by September , 2019.
The benefits of hydro power are well recognized. Instantaneous
start and stop ability of hydro project makes it unparalleled in providing
peaking power to the Grid. In addition, it provides many benefits  viz.
flood moderation, drinking water , ground water table elevation,
navigation, recreation, irrigation, draught alleviation etc. Government
has initiated process for revival of hydro power sector. Ministry of
PowerÕs Office Memorandum dated 27.03.2017 on ÒProposal for EFC
consideration for revival of hydro power sector Ó is a step to encourage
development of hydro power sector.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
The Committee note that as per the present policy, hydro power
plants upto 25 MW capacities are considered as renewable energy
sources and are under the purview of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, whereas, hydro power plants having capacities more than
25 MW are considered conventional energy source and are dealt with
by the Ministry of Power. The Committee further find that as per
International Energy Agency (IEA) ÒRenewable energy is energy that is
derived from natural processes (e.g. sunlight and wind) that are
replenished at a higher rate than they are consumed. Solar , wind,
geothermal, hydro power, bio-energy and ocean power are sources of
renewable energy Ó. The Committee failed to comprehend as to why
hydro power in our country has been categories as a source of

27
conventional energy as there is no justified logic or reason. Instead,
if hydro power is declared as renewable energy, it will open new vistas
for this sector to receive various concessions and assistance not from
the Government but also from foreign countries and agencies. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the hydro power
in the country irrespective of their capacities should be considered as
renewable source of energy.
Reply of the Government
Renewable Energy is described as energy sources that are
replenished by natural processes on a sufficiently rapid time-scale so
that they can be used by humans more or less indefinitely, provided
the quantity taken per unit of time is not too great. In its various
forms, it derives directly from the sun or from heat generated deep
within the earth. It includes electricity and heat generated from Solar,
Wind, Ocean, Hydropower, Biomass, Geothermal resources, Biofuels
and Hydrogen derived from renewable resources.
Hydro power is considered a Renewable Energy resource because
it uses the Earth Õs water cycle to generate electricity. Hydro power is
a renewable resource as the water that is used to power the turbines
is not lost in the process. It can be reused over and over again to
produce electricity in cascade development. Also, water on the earth
is continually replenished by rain and snow.
All Hydro Power Projects, irrespective of size and capacity, are
traditionally clean, green and renewable sources of energy. However,
the small hydro projects upto 25 MW capacity and presently under the
purview of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy are extended certain
incentives. The Government is considering a proposal for revival of
hydro power sector which, inter alia, envisages declaring all hydro
power projects (irrespective of size) as Renewable Energy.
This will enable hydro projects, which are highly capital intensive
projects with large gestation period, receive greater assistance from
Government(s) and also attract investments from various institutions/
agencies, thereby giving this sector a much needed push. Further , this
may also help States to fulfil their Renewable Purchase Obligation
(RPO) objectives and may encourage State Government(s) to invest or
to attract investments in hydro projects.
Due to the recent provisions of environmental law, NPV of forest
product, measures to mitigate Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R)
issues etc. makes hydro power costly. Categorizing hydro power as

28
renewable power would make it eligible for concessions and assistance
available for renewable projects thereby making hydro power
commercially attractive and viable. With addition in more solar and
wind power in the Grid, the corresponding increase in Hydro power
capacity is essentially required for grid stability and meeting the peaking
requirement.
However , a separate policy decision is under consideration wherein
additional ÒHydro Power Obligation (HPO) Ó provisions are required to
be introduced in line with RPO provisions.
[Ministry of Power OM No.27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
The Committee observe that initial higher tariff of the hydro power
is one the deterrent for retarded growth of this sector. It is an
established fact that hydro power plants have the longest life span and
is source of cheapest energy in the long run. The expected life span
of civil structure of a typical hydro power project can go beyond 100
years, whereas, mechanical and electrical component last for 25-50
years. However, banks and financial institutes provide loan to hydro
power project for the 10-12 years only. Therefore, higher cash flow is
required in the initial 10-12 years on account of repayment of debt.
To meet the increased cash flow requirement, a higher rate of
depreciation is allowed for the initial period of 12 years for the purpose
of determination of tariff. As a result, the tariff of hydro power becomes
front loaded and is quite high for the first 12 years. The tariff then
reduces and comes down drastically once the loan is repaid and the
plant is fully depreciated. The Committee with a view to make hydro
power tariff more levelized, recommend appropriate provision be made
to provide long tenure finances i.e. upto 25 years, to hydro power
projects.
Reply of the Government
The Government is considering a proposal for revival of hydro
power sector which, inter alia,  includes mandate to engage with
bankers/financial institutions for modifying lending terms & conditions
and engaging Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) for
rationalizing hydro power tariff.
High tariff of hydro power is main obstacle for the growth of hydro
power sector and beneficiaries are not coming forward for making

29
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) resulting into number of hydro power
projects unviable although having all clearances in hand. The life span
for hydro projects is quite long and extended debt repayment will
considerably lower the tariff.
The recommendation of the Committee for provision to be made
to provide long tenure finance to hydro projects is good for hydro
sector. Such loans should be made available to developers of hydro
projects without a corresponding increase in the interest cost on account
of tenure premium. Further, it is a fact that some CPSU have large
cash reserves which need to be utilized for the development of the
Nation. Such reserves could be gainfully deployed as long term loans
for developing the hydro sector of the country while also earning good
returns in the long run for the CPSUs.
Para 5.8 of the revised Tariff Policy notified on 28.01.2016 already
provides that the Appropriate Commission should frame suitable
regulatory framework for incentivizing the developers of Hydro Electric
Projects (HEPs) for using long-term financial instruments in order to
reduce the tariff burden in the initial years. Also, in the draft EFC
Memo for revival of hydro power sector, it is proposed to engage with
bankers/financial institutions for modifying lending terms and conditions
for hydro power projects. It may be mentioned that Financial Institutions
such as PFC & REC have already started giving long term debt upto
20 years.
Presently, Hydro Power tariffs are front loaded due to repayment
of debt within essential 12 year Õs period. The change in recovery of
depreciation from 12 to 25 years is in order provided the financing is
available for 25 years. In addition to above, there are other issues also
which increase the Hydro tariff and need attention for its redressal.
The major points are as below:Ñ
(i) The concept of 12% free power to home State which is not
applicable for other source of Energy.
(ii) In addition to free power , some States are imposing water
cess on non-consumptive use of water , it is also increasing
the tariff of Hydro power.
(iii) Normally, Hydro Power Projects are located in remote/under
developed areas. In process of construction of Hydro Power
Projects, lot of infrastructural work like construction of roads,
bridges, hospitals and schools etc. are to be done which is
ultimately added in the capital cost. In case, such facilities

30
are provided by State Government or Central Government,
as the case may be, the capital cost/tariff of Hydro Power
Projects will drastically come down.
(iv) Due to increased security threat, Hydro generating companies
are making huge expenditure on security aspect or bearing
the total expenditure on para-military organizations, which
is increasing capital cost as well as Operational & Maintenance
cost of the Power Station. The provision of security
arrangements should be considered by respective State
Government/Central Government at their cost.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
The Committee are happy to observe that the Government is paying
sincere attention in promotion of solar power in the country. However,
they are surprised to find that hydro power which is also a source of
renewable energy and will be counted in meeting targets of global
commitments related to climate conditions, is not been given the due
attention. The solar power is receiving much support and assistance
from the Government and other agencies, is expected to become the
largest source of renewable energy. Nonetheless, its inherent limitation
owing to its variable generation potential capacity, corresponding hydro
power capabilities will be required to balance the grid. The Committee
feel that in absence of adequate hydro power as balancing power , the
massive addition of solar power in the network will pose a threat to
equilibrium of the power system. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that financial interventions viz. issuance of tax-free bonds, viability
funding, collateral loans from world Õs agencies and likewise, should be
made to promote hydro power sector on the lines of promoting solar
power.
Reply of the Government
In this connection a proposal for encouraging hydro power has
already been sent by the Ministry of Power for approval of the cabinet.
In the draft Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memo for revival
of Hydro Power Sector, it is proposed to create a Hydro Power

31
Development Fund (HPDF) from the Coal Cess/National Clean Energy
Fund (NCEF)/Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR)/or any
other source of fund. HPDF will be used to provide 4% interest
subvention during construction (maximum of 7 years) and 3 years post
Commercial Operation Date (COD) to all hydro power projects (both
public and private sector) above 25 MW, attaining COD within 5 years
after notification of the Policy. The Government could also introduce
an interest subvention mechanism for loans taken by Developers of
hydro projects which will help in reducing the tariff per unit and
making hydro energy competitive enough to attract investment in the
sector.
The power from hydro project can be fed to the grid in much
lesser time as compared to other forms of power which ultimately
ensures the stability of grid. Hence, promotion of hydro power sector
through financial interventions on the similar lines of promoting solar
power will certainly boost the hydro sector and there by much needed
grid stability.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee note that the establishment of hydro power projects
which in itself is a complicated and challenging task, is further made
onerous by the formalities of obtaining various clearances, the
cumbersome process of R&R and development of enabling infrastructure.
These things not only contribute in delaying of the project but also
escalate the cost of the project leading to higher tariff. The gestation
period of hydro power project, is quite longer as compared to thermal
and solar power plants. The Committee believe that unless the
formalities in regard to setting up hydro power projects are streamlined,
this sector cannot be developed expeditiously. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that instead of putting the onus of obtaining all
the clearances and undertaking R&R relating to hydro power projects
on the developers alone, the Government(s) should share the
responsibility. The Government agencies should undertake all the
formalities and R&R related to project on behalf of the developers to
shorten the time consumed in these processes. The developers should
be assigned only with the job what they do best i.e. development of
the projects. Since, the concept of river basin study has already been
introduced; the Government agencies may take it further by identifying
all the potential and suitable hydro power projects sites in a river
basin and developing the basic enabling infrastructure before its
allotment to developer.

32
Reply of the Government
Water being a State subject, the allotment of hydro power projects
is being done by the respective State Governments. The issues
highlighted above are mainly related to projects already allotted. Apart
from advising the State Governments to consider the above factors
before allotment of future projects, the Ministry on a regular basis
reviews and monitors all the existing projects to resolve the outstanding
issues such as inadequate infrastructure, R&R issues, law & order
problem, Inter-State issue, difficulty in land acquisition etc. to fast
track their implementation. Further , the Government is considering a
proposal for revival of hydro power sector which,  inter alia,  includes
sharing the cost of enabling infrastructure by the Central and State
Governments.
The Committee Õs recommendation for developing the basic
infrastructure by Government(s) before allotting hydro projects to the
developer is supported by this Ministry. In general, the hydro projects
get delayed due to hydrological surprises or R&R problems of land.
This will ensure speedy execution of the hydro project and will help
reduce the project cost leading to lower tariff.
As per reassessment study conducted by CEA, India has huge Hydro
potential of 145320 MW (above 25 MW capacity). The total installed
capacity of Hydro (above 25 MW), excluding pumped storage, of the
country as on 31.08.2017 is 39867.8 MW (as per CEA website). Hydro
power potential already developed is only about 27.43% and that under
development is about 7.34%. Thus the bulk of Hydro power potential
amounting to 65.22% remains to be developed.
[Ministry of Power OM No.27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
The Committee while examining the hydro sector found that lack
of coordination among the Ministries, State Governments, Departments,
and Agencies related with the development of hydro power , to be the
prime reason for sluggish growth of hydro sector. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that there should be a forum where the
representatives of the Ministries of Power; New and Renewable Energy;
Finance; Environment, Forest & Climate Change; Water Resources and
the concerned State Governments/Agencies should meet time to time
for the resolution of issue related to development of hydro power
projects. They further desire that deliberation should also take place

33
in regard to linking of future thermal and solar power projects with
hydro power projects till the sector get developed to it potential.
Reply of the Government
Clearance process will be faster if a forum of concerned Ministries/
Agencies is formed for resolving issues like single window clearance
system. Already under the initiative of CEA, consultation meetings are
held to discuss Detailed Project Report (DPR) preparation and clearance
process where Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Soil and
Materials Research Station (CSMRS) and Geological Survey of India (GSI)
also take part. This forum may suitably be extended to include Ministry
of Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Finance and
other concerned State Govt./Authorities. This will ensure a faster
pace to develop the hydro power sector in timely manner and also to
its full potential.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
The Committee observe that higher tariff is the main suppressant
of electricity demand. In view of the Committee, there is latent demand
of electricity in the system that will surface once tariff is brought
down to more affordable levels. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to make policy provision that ensure reduction in
power generation cost and electricity tariff. The Committee desire
that with a view to decrease generation cost availability of cheaper
indigenous coal be made available inadequate quantity, rationalization
of coal supply sources, super-critical technology be adapted according
to indigenous conditions, R&M exercises for power plants be undertaken
at the right time, etc. The Committee further observe that running of
power plants at lower PLF also escalate the generation cost. The
Committee, therefore, further recommend that the Government should
make necessary provisions to increase the utilization of power plants.
Reply of the Government
Insofar as Committee Õs recommendations in regard to increasing
the utilization of power plants i.e. increasing the Plant Load Factor
(PLF) of power plants is concerned, increase in electricity demand may
result in better utilization of power plants. Various policies &
developmental activities/programmes of the Government viz. (i) Power
for All initiative for providing 24x7 power to all; (ii) Make in India

34
Initiative to encourage multi-national as well as national companies to
manufacture their products in India; (iii) penetration of Electric Vehicles
in the system etc. would lead to increase in electricity demand and
this increase in electricity demand may lead to better utilization of
power plants.
In order to ensure reduction in power generation cost and electricity
tariff, the scheme of Flexibility in utilization of domestic coal amongst
power generating stations of Central Sector , State Sector as well as IPP
Power Stations for reducing the cost of power generation has been
issued. The flexibility in utilization of domestic coal scheme envisages
transferring coal to more efficient generating stations, leading to lower
generation costs and ultimately lesser cost of electricity for the
consumers.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
The Committee note that as per National Electricity Policy a well-
planned and strong transmission system will ensure not only optimal
utilization of transmission capacities but also of generation facilities
and would facilitate achieving ultimate objective of cost effective
delivery of power. The Committee find that transmission sector has
very well kept pace with the rapidly growing generation sector. In
belief of the Committee, there has not been any constraint owing to
lack of transmission capabilities. The Committee praise the excellent
work done in the transmission sector. The Committee hope that the
good work will continue in future also. The Committee further note
that there is planning of huge generation capacities from renewable
energy sources and integration of this into the system would pose a
great challenge due to its intermittent and variable nature. This will
require further strengthening and technological up-gradation of the
transmission system to optimally utilized generation capabilities. The
Committee note that there is planning in regard to integration of
upcoming renewable energy into the system by the way of constructing
Green Energy Corridor. There are other preparatory work and studies
going on in this regard. The Committee, however , feel that there is
need for greater coordination among the concerned agencies. The
Committee, also recommend that transmission sector which has so far

35
performed well, need to be taken to the next level by expeditious
implementation of Smart Grid project to cope up future challenges.
Reply of the Government
POWERGRID is playing a key role for integration of renewable
energy resources into the grid. The company has taken a lead initiative
and developed a comprehensive master plan for grid integration of
large scale renewable generation envisaged as ÔGreen Energy Corridors
(GEC). The Plan covers transmission infrastructure at Inter and Intra-
State level as well as control infrastructure to mitigate grid integration
challenges of renewables.
Green Energy Corridor-I Scheme: The scheme comprises
comprehensive transmission plan for intra-State and inter-State
transmission system strengthening along with the control infrastructure
such as establishment of Renewable Energy Management Centers (REMC)
etc. Intra-State Transmission system is being implemented by respective
State Transmission Utilities (STU) and Inter-State Transmission System
(ISTS) is being established by POWERGRID.Under GEC-I, a high capacity
GEC ( viz. Mundra - Bhuj - Banaskantha - Chittorgarh - Ajmer - Moga
high capacity lines) is under implementation, which will serve dual
purpose to facilitate interconnection of large scale renewables, into
the National grid as well as enlarging the balancing area to address
renewable volatility.
Further , establishment of Renewable Energy Management Centers
(REMC) at 11 (eleven) locations in various RE resource rich State viz.
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan, regional load dispatch centers at SR, WR, NR as
well as at National Load Dispatch Centre has been taken up. This
would enable forecasting of renewable resources and efficient
management of variable renewable generation ensuring grid stability
& security.
Green Energy Corridor-II Scheme: Under GEC-II, transmission
schemes for eight (8) nos. Ultra Mega Solar Power Parks (7200 MW) is
under implementation in various States.
To address intermittency and variability of renewable generation,
POWERGRID has established country Õs first grid interactive energy
storage pilot project with different battery technologies. The findings
of the energy storage project would be helpful in its large scale
deployment.

36
Towards smart transmission, the Company is implementing Phasor
Measurement Unit (PMU) based Unified Real Time Dynamic State
Measurement (URTDSM) project, integrating all State and Central grids
for Wide Area Measurements (WAMS). In addition, analytics using PMU
data are being developed in association with IIT Bombay. Synchronized
measurements integrated with high end analytics will facilitate improved
monitoring, visualization and enhanced situational awareness of the
grid events on real time towards grid reliability improvement.
Most of transmission sector is having SCADA/DMS, the basic
automation system which is required for moving towards smart
transmission system? The new components and developments taking
place in the Indian smart transmissions system are given below. With
reference to Smart Grid technologies for transmission sector , central
transmission utility (Power Grid) has already deployed Phasor
Measurement Units (PMUs) and Phasor Data Concentrators (PDC) on
pilot basis across the various regions for better visibility of grid. The
PMUs installations are being extended to cover all regional load dispatch
centres. The country is planning to add huge capacity of renewable
sources to the grid in the coming years. ÒRenewable Energy Management
Centres (REMCs)Ó is being planned at all regional load dispatch centres
by Government of India. Conventional approach of handling load dispatch
operation is based on assumption of guaranteed availability of generation
and fixed load (both peak and off peak). As the renewable energy
sources are highly intermittent and variable in nature, the load dispatch
operation requires additional information like meteorological data and
other information and hence there is requirement of REMC. Transmission
companies and other MoP organizations including CPRI are providing
support to state distribution companies in implementing various smart
grid activities.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)
The Committee observe that the economic viability of the whole
electricity sector hinges on the Distribution Sector , which happens to
be the most financially distressed in our country. The Committee note
that power is a concurrent subject and the responsibility for distribution
and supply of power to rural and urban consumers rests with the
States. The Committee further note that AT&C losses levels in the
country are still unacceptably high. In view of the Committee, the
high AT&C losses are the main reason behind the distressed conditions

37
of Discoms. The Ministry, with the aim to bring down AT&C losses to
the level of 15%, has introduced IPDS with R-APDRP being its component.
Newly launched scheme UDAY put emphasis on reducing AT&C losses
and set a trajectory to be conformed by Discoms. The Committee,
however, find the concept of AT&C losses flawed as it disguise the
commercial losses which unlike the technical losses, can be eliminated
completely. The Committee are also aware that commercial losses
which have the major chunk in AT&C losses can be reduced with the
managerial interventions. It is beyond doubt that technological up-
gradation as envisaged under the IPDS will help the sector in many
ways, nevertheless, the efforts to address the problem of commercial
losses can be started without waiting full implementation of IPDS, be
it feeder-wise metering and supervision, fixing of accountability, etc.
However , to act in this regard we first need to segregate the value of
commercial and technical losses in AT&C losses. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that provisions should be made in regard to
segregation of commercial and technical losses. So that all-out efforts
in regard to reduction of losses are made at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The losses as per existing procedure are calculated as ÔAggregate
Technical & Commercial (AT&C) Losses Õ. However , a pilot study for
segregation of Commercial Losses from overall AT&C losses in 10 capital/
large towns was carried out from Nov. 2015 to Feb. 2016 on the
direction of Standing Committee on Energy in its meeting held on
26 October 2015. The details of Technical and Commercial losses found
in the study are as tabulated below:
Sl.No. Name of Town State Annual Technical Commercial
AT&CLoss Loss Loss
1. Dehradun Uttarakhand 29.71% 6.70% 23.01%
2. Vishakhapatanam Andhra Pradesh 8.71% 4.15% 4.56%
3. Hyderabad UA Telangana 17.91% 5.75% 12.16%
4. Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 38.21% 7.71% 30.50%
5. Ahmedabad Gujarat 4.94% 3.80% 1.14%
6. Kolkata UA West Bengal 18.52% 2.62% 15.90%
7. Navi Mumbai Maharashtra 5.21% 4.05% 1.16%
8. Shimla Himachal Pradesh 40.07% 3.16% 36.91%
9. Panchkula Haryana 18.36% 6.27% 12.09%
10. Battapara Chhattisgarh 29.06% 2.68% 26.38%

38
Technical losses in above towns were calculated using GIS based
Network Analysis module of the IT system, which has been installed in
Distribution utilities of above States. Respective towns Õ Commercial
losses were calculated by subtracting technical losses from its AT&C
losses. To minimize the effect of seasonal variations, cumulative AT&C
losses figure was taken of past 12 months.
The Commercial loss figure might be slightly lesser than above
figures because the actual Technical loss would be slightly higher than
system generated figure as any loss due to joints or loose connections
are not captured in Network Analysis Module.
The study points out that the Commercial losses are dominating
portion of total AT&C losses in 7 out of 10 towns selected for study.
Once all 1405 towns under R-APDRP have been declared Go-Live,
it should be possible to segregate technical and commercial losses in
said towns. IT enablement of additional 2600 towns under IPDS shall
also pave way for segregation of technical and commercial losses in
said urban towns.
The methodology indicated above is only indicative and depends
on the granularity of the data entered into the Network analysis modules
and its consonance with the network and network connections available
on the ground. Thus, it is likely that the figures of commercial losses
thus computed could be at variance with that in reality. More so, the
same can only be done by the State Utilities in urban areas mapped
on the GIS modules. In view of the fact that the above methodology
is only an estimate, audited segregated figures of the Technical and
Commercial losses at a DISCOM/State level would not be possible.
Thus, while it would be difficult to establish correct and dependable
segregated figures of Commercial and Technical losses, the segregated
figures established thus by the DISCOMs in the Urban areas mapped on
IT enablement, can be used for monitoring trends of losses subject to
reasonable technical interpretation.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)
The Committee note that that poor financial health of India Õs
power distribution companies (Discoms) is reported to the biggest
concern in the Indian Power Sector. The total outstanding debt (during

39
2014-15) of the utilities selling power directly to consumers was to the
tune of Rs. 4,06,825 crore. The Committee note that Ujjawal Discoms
Assurance Yojana (UDAY) has been formulated and launched for a
sustainable financial and operational turnaround of Discoms which
provides permanent solutions to legacy debts and to address potential
future losses. The Committee are appreciative of the initiative of the
Government in the form of UDAY to turnaround the financial conditions
of Discoms. The key feature of the scheme is that unlike its predecessor
schemes, it envisages undertaking the herculean task without any outlay
from the Central Government. Through this scheme, the Central
Government have involved the whole machinery of the State to address
the issues responsible for financial losses to Discoms. Since, this scheme
provide to eliminate the gap between Average Cost of Supply (ASC)
and Average Revenue Realized (ARR), the Committee are hopeful that
this initiative will be able to settle the issues of distribution sector
once and for all. The Committee at the same time are also a bit
cautious as we have past experiences when the initiatives with identical
objective have failed due to one or the other reasons. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the initiative of UDAY should be
implemented with utmost sincerity and attention lest it become another
bitter experience. The Committee further desire that necessary need
based calibration may be done in the scheme as and when need arises
to address any new issue that crop up during its implementation.
Reply of the Government
An inter-ministerial Monitoring Committee has been constituted
under the chairmanship of Secretary (Power), Government of India for
close monitoring of performances made under Ujjwal Discom Assurance
Yojana (UDAY) and proper implementation of the scheme to prevent
any slippage. The Committee meets at regular interval to discuss &
resolve various issues which come up impediments for smooth
implementation of the scheme.
The Monitoring Committee constituted under UDAY reviews the
progress as well as issues/challenges faced by the States/Discoms in
connection with effective implementation of UDAY scheme. The
Monitoring Committee, in the process, takes up the various issues
raised by states with the appropriate agencies for resolving the same
for enabling the States/Discoms to achieve the targets envisaged under
the scheme.
Further, the Ministry of Power is also lending support to the States/
DISCOMs in identifying the areas where improvements are required
from time to time.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]

40
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18)
The Committee note that one of the key provisions of the Electricity
Act on competition in distribution is the concept of multiple licensees
in the same area of supply through their independent distribution
systems. The Committee further note that National Electricity Policy
states that the Government of India would notify within three months,
the requirements for compliance by applicant for second and subsequent
distribution licence as envisaged in Section 14 of the Act. With a view
to provide benefits of competition to all section of consumers, the
second and subsequent licensee for distribution in the same area shall
have obligation to supply to all consumers in accordance with provisions
of section 43 of the Electricity Act 2003. The Committee, however,
find that the concept of introduction of Open Access at distribution
level is still far from being implemented. In regard to its
implementation, the Ministry have stated that Discoms are not
comfortable with open access due to the fact that some sections of
the consumers are being supplied electricity at subsidized rates. The
Ministry has accepted that open access as a philosophy and policy, is
good. They have further stated that they are committed to promote
open access to the extent possible; however , the Discoms and the
States have to take a call because it directly affects the financial
position of the Distribution Companies. The Committee believe that
system of open access at distribution level can create a competitive
atmosphere which will help consumer get reliable and quality electricity
supply. The Committee do understand that there is genuine problem
in implementation of open access in the present scenario due to
existence of multiple tariffs for different segment of consumers.
Nonetheless, the Committee do not find the problem insurmountable
as some remedial measures can be taken which will address the issue.
One of the many options is the provision of direct transfer of subsidy
provided by the State Government to the account of the beneficiary.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government will take
recourse for effective implementation of open access at distribution
level.
Reply of the Government
A Committee was constituted by Ministry of Power under the
chairmanship of Member (E&C), Central Electricity Authority to address
the issues of Open Access. Based on the recommendations of the
Committee, Ministry of Power has issued a Consultation Paper for
obtaining views of the stakeholders on the relevant issue. The views
of the stakeholders received on the consultation paper are under
examination by Central Electricity Authority.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]

41
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21)
The Committee note that a strong research and development base
is essential for any sector to be effective, efficient and economical.
For electricity sector , R&D efforts and technological development holds
more good as it is primarily a technologically driven sector. With the
heralding in of supercritical technology into generation, watershed
transmission has been introduced though in a small scale. The
Committee believe that this will be the important milestone for the
energy sector of the country. However , the Committee feel that there
is a lot needs to be done for making Electricity affordable to common
man. Establishment of large size generating units with cost
effectiveness, development and deployment of technologies for
productive use of fly ash, a flawless transmission system and efficacious
distribution mechanism, effective grid code and efficient and
transparent load dispatch centres are the issues where advanced
technological intervention can bring the turnaround in the electricity
sector. Other areas which also need the technological intervention are
metering of electricity, functioning of transformers, advancement of
generators and other equipment essential for generation and
transmission of electricity. The Committee feel that other priority
areas can also be identified for research and modernization to achieve
higher efficiency levels. In this regard, some minimum acceptable
standards can also be fixed for performance which should be made
mandatory for all to comply with. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that due attention should also be paid to research and
development activities of the electricity sector in core areas so that
it can become economical and efficient.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power through its nodal research body Central Power
Research Institutes (CPRI) coordinates the research activities in the
Power Sector. These research activities are directed towards generation,
transmission & distribution areas in the Power Sector, including the
equipment used in these areas.
At present, Ministry of Power through CPRI is implementing three
R&D schemes to create strong research and development base in power
sector. Details of these schemes are:Ñ
(1) National Perspective Plan (NPP)
The projects under NPP aim to promote R&D in the power
sector in technological areas of importance to manufacturers,

42
power utilities and academia in collaborative mode. For
Projects directly taken by CPRI under this scheme, 50%
funding is by Ministry of Power and 50% funding by the
concerned manufacturer/power utilities/academia. A total
number of twenty projects under NPP were approved during
12th Plan period (2012-2017).
(2) Research Scheme on Power (RSoP)
RSoP schemes are fully funded by MOP and aims to carry out
need based research in power sector including research in
various operational problems encountered in power system.
The RSoP projects are undertaken by organizations including
academia such as IITs, NITs, etc. A total number of Thirty-
eight projects under RSoP were approved during the 12th
Plan period (2012-2017).
(3) In-House Research & Development (IHRD)
Under this Scheme, various Divisions and Units of the CPRI
take up Research Projects under the In-house R&D (IHRD)
scheme which is fully funded by Ministry of Power. A total
number of Thirty-Two projects under IHRD were approved
during 12th Plan period (2012-2017).
Besides, the Ministry of Power also participates in research projects
under Impacting Research Innovation and Technology (IMPRINT) and
Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) scheme/programme of Ministry of Human
Resource and Development (MHRD). Since the research projects under
UAY and IMPRINT are mainly collaborative in nature involving
participation of industry and the IITs, these are being considered as
R&D proposals/projects under National Perspective Plan (NPP) scheme.
The funding pattern under these schemes is as follows:Ñ
(1) Projects under IMPRINT- To be funded by MHRD and
participating Ministries/Donors/Industry partners/Alumni/any
other Agency ( i.e. max. sharing would be 50% funding by
MoP).
(2) Projects under UAY-50% funding by MHRD, 25% funding by
Industry/industries and 25% funding by participating Ministry
(i.e. max. sharing would be 25% funding by MoP).
CPRI has played crucial role in creation of a conducive environment
for R&D to flourish in the country by carrying out/coordinating various
research projects on identified thrust areas leading to new technology
development, evaluation studies for bringing out new standards and

43
process improvement, in a collaborative nature involving Utility, Industry,
Academia and Research Organizations.
In addition to the above, research in power sector is also being
undertaken by various PSUs (NTPC, PGCIL, THDC, NEEPCO, SJVN and
NHPC) under this Ministry in their domain fields.
Some of the broad research areas include:Ñ
¥ Material science, erosion studies of turbine and other power
equipment of thermal power plants, heat flow and
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Analysis.
¥ Cavitation and erosion/corrosion issues of hydraulic turbines
¥ Performance evaluation of insulating fluid and paper
insulation of transformer , Nano-materials for power
equipment, HVDC/FACTS devices, WAMS based system
security, material research for cables, Corona & partial
discharge studies, Transmission tower development/
characterization
¥ Smart Meters, Efficient Energy Management System, Power
quality & harmonics mitigation, Microgrid controllers, Energy
Storage, Solar integration to grid, LED packages and efficiency
¥ Pollution mapping and Fly Ash utilization.
Metering in Electricity sector
Following actions/initiatives have been taken so far for intervention
of advanced technology in Metering in electricity sector:Ñ
¥ Government of India has taken the initial steps for
introduction of automation and use of IT in Power sector
through R-APDRP during 11th plan period which was the first
step towards implementation of smart grid in the country.
SCADA projects now being undertaken by utilities in big
towns and Under R-APDRP , SCADA projects for 59 towns have
been approved by Government of India which are under
various stages of completion.
¥ To test the various smart grid technologies in India, 10 pilots
projects, with various functionalities of smart grid, are also
under various stages of implementation with 50% funding as
a grant by GOI.
¥ The Indian Standards for Smart Meters (IS 16444) have also
been published by BIS for facilitating the standardization of
smart meters in the country.

44
¥ Government of India has also approved National Smart Grid
Mission (NSGM) in 2015, for planning, monitoring and
implementation of policies and programs related to Smart
Grid activities in the country.
¥ For accelerating the process of implementation of Smart
Metering in the country, functional Requirements of Advanced
Metering Infrastructure including Technical Specifications of
Smart Meters have also been framed by CEA in August, 2016
which has been shared with all the utilities to serve as
guidelines for implementation of Smart Metering in States.
Smart Grid in distribution sector would be an integral part of
coming up smart cities in the country where bi-directional flow of
information from and to Central Control Centers would facilitate
reduction of peak demand by controlling consumer devices, consumer
participation, online availability of consumer load pattern &
disconnection and connection of consumer load in case of violations of
certain predefined conditions etc.
The Smart Metering solution (AMI) would enable two way
communication between smart energy meter and control centre (HES)
to enable remote reading, monitoring & control of electrical energy
meters to serve as repository of record for all raw, validated and
edited data. The sanitized data may also be used in other functions for
billing and collection analysis, planning etc.
Supercritical Technology: Efficiency improvement has led to
reduced fuel consumption and reduced Green House Gas (GHG) emissions
which have been the main focus for coal based power generation.
Supercritical technology has already been adopted to enhance the
efficiency of coal fired power generation. First Supercritical unit of
660 MW was commissioned in Dec., 2010. Upto June end, 62 nos. of
supercritical units of total capacity 42630 MW have been commissioned
and supercritical units (660/800 MW) aggregating to a capacity of
around 45,000 MW are under various stages of construction.
Ultra Supercritical and Advanced Ultra Supercritical Technologies
(A-USC): with steam pressure of around 270 kg/cm
2 and temperatures
of around 600/600 ¡C is also in the process of being adopted in the
country. The design efficiency of Ultra supercritical technology is around
42%.
High Level committee for assessment and review of R&D activities
of organizations/PSU under the Ministry of Power
In order to have a coordinated approach and proper monitoring of
R&D activities being carried in the power sector by Organisations/PSUs

45
of the Ministry of Power, a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Power) has been constituted by the Ministry vide Order
dated 25th Nov, 2016.
Subsequently, in the first meeting of the High Level Committee
held on 19th January 2017, it was resolved to constitute a Sub-
Committee to carry out the following terms of reference:Ñ
(i) To list out all major R&D activities being undertaken by
Organizations/PSUs under the Ministry of Power
(ii) To identify areas where there is an overlap and possibility
for collaboration
(iii) To identify areas of importance for the power sector and
focus areas for research in the next 4 years
The final report of the sub-committee has been submitted to the
Ministry of Power and the same has been deliberated upon during the
second meeting of the High Level Committee held on 19th September,
2017. It includes a number of areas focusing on measures to achieve
higher efficiency levels in all the domains of the power sector. It is
agreed that some minimum acceptable standards need to be fixed for
performance in research areas and it should be made mandatory for
all to comply.
[Ministry of Power OM No.27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22)
The Committee note that adequate funds are not being made
available for R&D activities of the electricity sector. If research and
development activities are to be promoted for the sector , then a
suitable and institutional funding mechanism will have to be put in
place. There is no dearth of talent in our country and various technical
institutions can be roped in for this purpose. The Committee feel that
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) is a body which can diversify
its activities in the research areas as well and it can be funded
separately for its research activities. Targets in priority areas of research
should be fixed for CPRI and other technical bodies like IITs and IISCs
etc. for improving the sector and their activities can be funded from
institutional funding mechanism. The Committee feel that on the lines
of CSR, a fund can be created out of the profits of energy sector PSUs
solely for research activities. Based on the needs of the sector and
performance of these institutions, this fund can be appropriately

46
increased also if so required. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that a separate pool of fund for research activities in the
power sector be established on the lines of CSR from the profits of the
PSUs of the energy sector. This will give impetus to the research and
make them financially autonomous as well.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Power had approved an outlay of Rs. 80 crore to
CPRI for the ÒResearch and Development Schemes of Ministry of Power Ó
under 12th Plan (2012-17). The scheme-wise break-up of the approved
outlay is furnished below:Ñ
Sl.No. Scheme 12th Plan Sanctioned Amount
(Rs. in Lakhs)
1. R&D under NPP 4500
2. RSoP 2000
3. IHRD 1500
CPRI has funded 20 projects under the NPP scheme, 38 projects
under RSoP scheme and 32 projects under the IHRD scheme. The total
outlay of the 90 projects under the ÒResearch and Development Schemes
of CPRI Ó amounts to Rs. 60 crores (approx.)
These funds are being utilized as a part of institutional arrangement
comprising of CEA and CPRI to allocate funds for the research proposals.
This arrangement includes four Technical Committees (TCRD) for review,
recommendation and monitoring of R&D proposals under the Schemes
of the MoP , namely Technical Committee on Thermal Research, Technical
Committee on Hydro Research, Technical Committee on Transmission
Research and Technical Committee on Grid, Distribution & Energy
Conservation Research. Further the projects with cost exceeding 50
lakhs have to get the approval of the standing committee on research
& Development (R&D) headed by the chairperson, CEA. These
committees work together to bring about an institutional arrangement
to the funding mechanisms of the Ministry of Power for the research
schemes.
India has a pool of young talented people which can be harnessed
to give impetus to the research activities carried out by different
organizations with the involvement of institutions such as IITs and IISCs
etc. The involvement of young talented people in research will make
them more capable for the future.

47
The idea of creation of common pool on the lines of the CSR
(Corporate Social Responsibility) will be a welcome step which will
coordinate the research schemes of the PSU Õs thus avoiding duplication
and overlap in research activities. One of the functions of the sub-
committee as mentioned under the point No.21was to find the overlap
of research works between the different research groups engaged in
the research works. Overlapping can be avoided to a large extent with
the creation of the common pool. Moreover , recent deliberation on the
Òroadmap of New Ñ India 2022 Óalso advocate the utilization of the
funds of PSUs in the same sector together to enhance cooperation and
make research financially autonomous.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23)
The Committee note that the core functioning of the CPRI is
certification of rating and performance to ensure availability of
equipment of adequate quality for use in the power sector. Its activities
revolve around power system studies covering Load Flow, Short Circuit
and Relay Coordination, Condition Monitoring and Diagnostics Services,
Energy Audit, Communication Protocol Testing, Third Party Inspection
Services, Seismic Qualification of Power Equipment, Customized Training
Programmes and Protection Audit. The Committee find that these
activities mostly concentrate into post operational scenario and thus
lack the penetration of research efficiency and innovation. There can
be inferences based on these activities for improvement and rectification
of the system, but it is a back-hand drive. The institute like CPRI
should take a lead in real innovation and research to make the sector
vibrant, self-reliant, efficient and economical. The country is witnessing
a boom in renewables. CPRI should concentrate on improving the quality,
life and efficiency of the solar , thermal and solar photovoltaic system
so as to enable the solar system to become more sustainable for the
people. Battery storage, inverters and other devices of storaging
electricity are the challenge areas for which CPRI should pick up the
cudgels. Similarly, NPTI is also a body of Government which is engaged
in modernizing the electricity sector through its training programmes.
Its programme on generation stimulators has improved PLF of generating
units and has also increased the viability of transmission and distribution.
Its training programmes are vital for the sector. While applauding the
efforts of the NPTI for the electricity sector , the Committee lay emphasis
that it should venture into other areas of research through its trained
manpower. Specialised classes in research can be conducted, interactive

48
sessions can be organized, and demonstration series on achievement
can also be organized by NPTI in areas which will have positive impact
on the sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the bodies like CPRI and NPTI should diversify their activities and also
concentrate on the research segment of the electricity sector for the
benefit of the people.
Reply of the Government
As observed, Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) is mostly
concentrating on post operational and testing activities. Moreover most
of the research projects being undertaken currently by CPRI are of
study and simulation types. CPRI is the only approved testing centre
for solar lighting system and related equipment in Southern part of
India.
Solar Photovoltaic Lab at ERED, CPRI has been accredited for testing
solar operated CFL and LED based Lighting systems as per MNRE
Specifications. CPRI is testing these equipment successfully since one
& half decades as per MNRE Standards.
Effective testing mechanism of CPRI ensures the quality, life and
efficiency of solar Equipment which reaches the consumers. Also, CPRI
is establishing a full-fledged Module testing facility to test PV modules
as per the relevant IEC standard.
The research focus is now on the growing renewable energy systems
in the power sector and the research needs to be on these areas to
better integrate these devices and provide a sustainable growth
trajectory. We agree that CPRI should take a lead in all research needs
and innovation in the power. CEA has taken initiative to ensure that
the project areas are identified and research is done according to the
need of the power sector currently. This was done by constituting a
sub-committee to identify major thrust areas for the power sector
whose report has been finalized and will be implemented in due course
of time.
In the area of thermal research, CPRI has designed and fabricated
an innovative draft tube reactor for NTPC-NETRA which will be highly
beneficial for optimizing power plant parameters and design of
supercritical and ultra-critical boilers.
In the area of energy storage, CPRI has undertaken an R&D project
related to development of flow battery (soluble lead redox flow battery)
including electrode materials development, electrode fabrication, cell

49
design and fabrication. Under this project, currently, one single cell
has been fabricated and performance analysis studies of the cell are
under progress.
CPRI has also provided a platform for conducting research &
experiments on Solar PV Panels upto 500 W and Solar inverters 500
kVA. CPRI has created facilities for simulating the various environmental
conditions on solar panels and measure their performance.
In addition, CPRI has encouraged various academic institutions like
IIT , NIT etc. to take up research projects on various challenges faced
in the Power Sector. CPRI has funded 20 projects under the ÒR&D
under NPP Ó scheme, 38 projects under Research Scheme on Power
(RSoP). Some of the projects aim at design and development of
indigenous technologies with the objective of cost reduction, import
substitution and employment generation. The projects when successfully
completed will aid to Government of India Õs vision of ÒMake in India Ó,
ÒSkill India Ó and ÒStart-up India Ó.
NPTI conducts many industry-interfaced academic programmes with
the objective to create a pool of committed and competent professionals
equipped with appropriate technical skills to steer the Indian Power
Sector. NPTI has also been catering to the Training Needs of Power
Sector Organizations and Process Industries such as Steel, Cement,
Aluminium, Fertilizers and Refineries.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24)
The Committee note that National Electricity Policy lays due
emphasis on energy efficiency through demand side management
measures. Making energy audit compulsory for power intensified
industries, encouraging other industries for energy audits and energy
conservation measures, adoption of conservation measures in all
Government buildings, labelling of appliances, regulatory approach for
setting standards are some of the measure which have been enunciated
through Energy Conservation Act. In agricultural sector , promotion of
high efficiency in pump-sets and water delivery system, energy
efficiency, technologies in industrial sector are also measures to enhance
energy conservation. For industries, commercial and domestic
establishments, energy efficiency lighting system has been encouraged.
In addition, suitable load management technique are being encouraged
to coordinate the electrical power demand during peak period and off

50
peak period and regulatory commissions have also been advised to
ensure adherence to energy efficiency standard of utilities. The
Committee welcome the measures introduced by the Government for
energy conservation as these measures will help in meeting the energy
needs and providing adequate and varied energy of desired quality in
a sustainable manner at reasonable cost. Environmental and health
issues have also been taken care of in energy efficiency and clean
energy systems. The aspect of energy conservation through energy
efficiency is such that it has to be encouraged at all cost and there
can be no second opinion about it. While appreciating the measures
taken by the Government, the Committee recommend that certain
targets should be set for achieving energy savings through strengthening
of existing policies/schemes and also by expanding to new areas like
utility demand side management, human resource development
programme, capacity building in Discoms, promoting energy efficiency
in buildings, programme for small and medium enterprises and
strengthening institutional capacity of State designated agencies etc.
Reply of the Government
Energy efficiency measures has been vigorously pursued by
Government especially the UJALA (Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for
All) scheme with a target of replacing 77 crore incandescent lamps
with LED bulbs. Presently, more than 26 crores LED bulbs have been
distributed to masses. The Government has also started distributing
Energy efficient fans and LED tubelights under this scheme.
To promote the development of Smart Grid in the country,
Government of India has launched ÔNational Smart Grid Mission (NSGM)Õ
for planning, monitoring and implementation of policies & programmes
related to development of Smart Grid in India. Government is also
giving attention to the penetration of Smart Meters in several areas.
India has also committed to reduce the emissions intensity of its
GDP by 33 to 35 percent by 2030 from 2005 levels. India has also
committed for achieving a share of more than 40% in Installed Capacity
of RE based sources. These commitments demonstrate the inclination
of Government to achieve energy security in an environmental friendly
and sustainable manner.
Ministry of Power , through Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), has
initiated a number of energy efficiency initiatives in the areas of
household lighting, commercial buildings, standards and labelling of
appliances, demand side management in agriculture/municipalities,

51
SMEÕs and large industries including the initiation of the process for
development of energy consumption norms for industrial sub sectors,
capacity building of State Designated Agency (SDA), etc. These initiatives
have resulted in an avoided capacity generation of 36,323 MW during
the period 2006-2014.
The National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE) aims
to strengthen the market for energy efficiency by creating conducive
regulatory and policy regime and has envisaged fostering innovative
and sustainable business models to the energy efficiency sector.
The NMEEE spelt out four initiatives to enhance energy efficiency
in energy intensive industries which are as follows:
¥ Perform, Achieve and Trade Scheme (PAT), a regulatory
instrument to reduce specific energy consumption in energy
intensive industries, with an associated market based
mechanism to enhance the cost effectiveness through
certification of excess energy saving which can be traded.
¥ Market Transformation for Energy Efficiency (MTEE), for
accelerating the shift to energy efficient appliances in
designated sectors through innovative measures to make the
products more affordable.
¥ Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEFP), for creation of
mechanisms that would help finance Demand Side
Management (DSM) programmes in all sectors by capturing
future energy savings.
¥ Framework for Energy Efficient Economic Development
(FEEED), for development of fiscal instruments to promote
energy efficiency.
The Mission seeks to upscale the efforts to unlock the market for
energy efficiency which is estimated to be around Rs. 74,000 crores
and help achieve total avoided capacity addition of 19,598 MW, fuel
savings of around 23 million tonnes per year and greenhouse gas emission
reductions of 98.55 million tonnes per year at its full implementation
stage. Continuation of NMEEE was approved by Cabinet on 6th August,
2014 with a total outlay of Rs. 775 crores.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]

52
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25)
The Committee note that National Electricity Policy provides for
ensuring quality of power supply based on pre-determined indexes of
utilities. The parameters set in this regard inter alia include frequency
and duration of interruption, voltage parameters, transformer failure
rates, waiting time for restoration of supply, percentage of defective
meters and waiting list of new connections. It has been provided that
appropriate commission would specify expected standards of
performance. The Committee note that reliability indexes of supply of
power to consumers has also been prescribed for distribution licensee.
However , the reliability index is yet to be declared for cities and
towns upto District Headquarter level, not to say of the rural areas of
the country. State Regulatory Commissions have a greater role to be
played in this regard. The setting up of grievances redressal forum is
another important area for redressal of the grievances of the consumers.
The Committee feel that the interest of the consumer can be protected
by capacity building of consumer groups and their effective
representation before the regulatory commissions. This will help in
enhancing the efficacy of regulatory process also. In the modern era,
consumer care centres are the places for better consumer connect
with a view to improve the customer service through resolving consumer
queries/complaints in a time-bound manner. This is a single window
service to consumer and can be of great help. The Committee are of
the opinion that these measures should duly be institutionalized in a
proper manner with adequate manpower, systemic role, fund
arrangements, technical know-how and transparency as they are the
indicators of the health of the energy sector. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that for protection of the interests of consumers,
every effort should be made in a transparent and honest manner and
the power related grievances should be resolved within a definite
time-frame failing which the responsibility should be fixed of the
concerned official with the provisions of the compensation to the
consumer.
Reply of the Government
To protect the interest of consumers, SERCs have notified Standard
of Performance to be followed by distribution utilities in the States.
Standard of Performance are being monitored for implementation by
respective SERCs and also enforcing penalty in case the utilities fails
to perform as per rules and regulations of Standard of Performance.
Government of India, under IPDS scheme, has facilitated the States/
UTs for setting up of call centre with phone No. 1912 to address the
power supply related complaints on a proactive basis and provide

53
effective, assured and timely services to the customers in power
distribution companies/Electricity Department. These call centres work
round the clock to receive customer complaints through several channels
such as telephone, fax, email, etc. The telephone number 1912 is
specifically allotted to Electricity Call Centres for handling power supply
related complaints. At present, 47 Govt. Utilities and 10 private utilities
established electricity call centres associated with Phone No. 1912.
Customer Care Centres (CCC) are providing a centralized customer
friendly channel for receiving & resolving consumer requests/queries/
complaints like No-Supply complaints related to supply of electricity,
forwarding of receipted complaints, receipt of resolution of complaints
and intimation of the same to the Consumer over the phone on 24x7
basis.
Consumer protection under Standards of performance has been
specifically dealt in the Electricity Act, 2003. As per Section 42 of
Electricity Act, 2003 Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum and
Ombudsman are in place in the States to protect the interest of
consumers.
[Ministry of Power OM No.27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]

54
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
The Committee note that Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003
empowers the appropriate Commission to specify the terms and
conditions for determination of tariff in accordance with the provision
of the said section and National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policies.
Besides, the Commission shall also advise the Union Government on all
or any of the matters, i.e., (i) formation of National Electricity Policy
and tariff policy; (ii) promotion of competition, efficiency and economy
in activities of the electricity industry; (iii) promotion of investment
in electricity industry; (iv) any other matter referred to the Central
Commission by that Government. The Committee observe that the
Regulators have been entrusted with the important assignment that is
capable of determining the shape and future of the sector. However,
when the Committee analyze the present situation, they find that
though there has been noteworthy development in the sector, but the
various issues that have been affecting the sector adversely for long
are yet to be addressed  viz. high AT&C losses, bad financial conditions
of Discoms, environmental issues, problems of end consumers, etc.
Moreover, over the period of time some more new problems have
surfaced, like falling of hydro power in energy mix, low PLF of thermal
power plants leading to their economic un-viability, issue of affordability
of electricity, etc. Since Regulators have been entrusted with the
power to regulate the sector for attaining the goals and objectives of
Electricity Policy, the Committee feel that there should be some kind
of performance appraisal of regulators and the impact of formulated
regulations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that apart from
giving adequate resources and authority, the Regulators accountability
should also be ensured by making necessary provisions in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Standing Committee on Energy has cited the various issues
which have been affecting the power sector adversely over a period
of time. In this context, it would be pertinent to mention that the
problems being faced by the power sector as duly noted by the Standing
Committee would require a comprehensive administrative, policy and
regulatory intervention. Coordinated effort of the Government and
Regulators can reasonably address these issues.

55
It has pointed out a very important aspect regarding the impact
assessment of formulated regulations. In this context, it may be
mentioned that Government of India/MoP have constituted the Forum
of Regulators (FOR) vide Notification dated 16th February, 2005 in
pursuance of the provision under Section 166(2) of the Electricity Act,
2003. The FOR consists of Chairperson of Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) and Chairpersons of State Electricity Regulatory
Commission (SERCs). The Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of
the FOR. While the various functions of the FOR have been stipulated
in the notification, it also mentions about such other functions as the
Central Government may assign to it from time-to-time.
It has also suggested for accountability by means of some kind of
performance appraisal of Regulators. The Commission is accountable
to the Parliament and the Parliament through its Committees keeps
reviewing the functioning of the Commission at intervals. The
Regulations notified by the Commission are also laid on the Table of
the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Annual Report and Annual Accounts
of the CERC are laid on the Table of both the Houses of the Parliament.
In this context, it may also be seen that the intent of the Act
provides for Government to maintain distance from regulating the
sector. The responsibilities of the Regulators have expanded from the
tariff setting in the initial days to licensing, grid security, market
development, promotion of renewable energy etc. The initiatives taken
by the regulators have also resulted in flow of investments into the
sector , which is evident through the increasing generation capacity,
increased volumes of power under long term, medium term open access
and short term transactions, decreasing short term power prices,
increased renewable energy generation capacity etc.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]

56
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee note that the Electricity Policy states that the key
development objective of the power sector is supply of electricity to
all areas including rural areas as mandated in section 6 of the Electricity
Act. Both, the Central Government and the State Governments would
jointly endeavour to achieve this objective at the earliest. Consumers,
particularly those who are ready to pay a tariff which reflects efficient
costs have the right to get uninterrupted twenty four hours supply of
quality power. To achieve this, Government of India have launched
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana with the objective of
electrifying all the villages and households in the country. However,
the Committee find that as per the extant definition of an electrified
village, a village with a mere 10% of the total number of households
in the village can be declared as electrified. Therefore, despite having
90% un-electrified households, the Government can assume a village to
be electrified. However , when the Committee raised this issue with
the Ministry, they have stated that Ò24 x 7 Power for All Ó documents
have been signed with all the States/UTs. Government of India supports
States with schemes such as Ujjwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY),
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) to help them to achieve the objective of
providing uninterrupted power supply to every household. As the focus
is now on Power for All, definition of electrified village becomes
irrelevant. However , the Committee are not convinced by this plea of
the Ministry. The Committee are aware that the present definition of
electrified village is slight improved version of its earlier definitions
wherein, a village was qualified to be classified as electrified if
electricity is being used within its revenue area for any purpose
whatsoever. Since, the Ministry have changed the definition of the
village electrification several times in a piecemeal manner , there have
been situations when a village once declared electrified becomes un-
electrified after change in definition, causing a repetition of the entire
work in the form of so called intensive electrification to meet the
criteria of the new definition. As per the present definition of village

57
electrification 99.4% village are electrified but at the same time more
than 4 crore households in the country are still deprived of the
electricity connection. It is apparent that by present measures
electrification is nothing but sheer formality to declare as many as
villages electrified. The Committee believe that the present definition
does not reflect the true picture of universal access to electricity
status in the country, therefore, strongly recommend that the definition
of village electrification should be changed as such that a village
should be declared electrified only when all the households of the
village are electrified. They further desire that a village shall not get
the tag of being electrified in any case when the household coverage
is less than 80%.
Reply of the Government
The present definition of Village Electrification, though envisage
electrification of at least 10% households, does not restrict households
electrification beyond 10% and accordingly Deen Dayal Upadhayaya
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) scheme provides for creating access to
electricity for all household.
Under the scheme, free service connection is provided to Below
Poverty Line (BPL) households, and access to electricity is also provided
to APL households to facilitate extension of service connection by the
respective State Power Utilities as per the extant rules.
Further , substantial investment is being made in power infrastructure
strengthening. States have been advised to provide service connection
to all the un-electrified households.
All the states have signed the Ò24x7 Power for AllÓ document, joint
initiative of Government of India and State Government, which envisages
providing access to all the households by 2019.
Recently, Government of India has launched ÒPradhan Mantri Sahaj
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana Ñ ÒSaubhagyaÓ to achieve universal household
electrification in the country. The scheme envisages providing last
mile connectivity and electricity connections to all remaining
un-electrified households in rural areas and poor households in urban
areas by 31st March 2019. The total outlay of the scheme is Rs. 16320
crore including budgetary support of Rs. 12320 crore from Government
of India.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)

58
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
The Committee note that there are various Central PSUs which are
engaged in development of hydro power like NHPC, NEEPCO, THDC and
SJVNL. These Undertakings have the required infrastructure, expertise
and manpower that are specialized in the development of hydro
projects. Since all these are reputed organization with the proven
track record in development and upkeep of hydro projects, there is no
issue of mobilization of funds for them. Despite having huge hydro
power potential that remains to be harnessed these PSUs are not
having many projects to develop. The Committee feel that under-
utilization of Central PSUs is nothing but sheer waste of available
resources and expertise. The Committee believe that the participation
of private player is a necessity for speedy and optimal growth of the
power sector. However, the Committee observe that the performance
of private players unlike in thermal sector , is not encouraging. Rather,
the Committee find that many a projects which have been allocated
to private players with little or no experience of hydro power , are
stuck due to inabilities of the developers. Also, due to long gestation
period of hydro power projects and the extended period taken in
getting the returns on the investment, private players are reluctant to
venture in this sector. The Committee recommend that Government
should make a policy so that Central PSUs get most of the hydro power
projects. They should also explore the idea to reserve hydro power
sector exclusively for PSUs or with the collaboration of PSUs until the
sector is adequately developed.
Reply of the Government
Water being a state subject, the allotment of hydropower projects
is being done by the respective State Governments. As on 31.08.2017,
there are 40 existing power stations of Central PSUs with a capacity
of 14,547.72 MW. Further , 30 projects with aggregate installed capacity
of 16198 MW in the country have been allotted to Central PSUs and
these projects are at various stages of development as given below:
Status of H.E. Projects allotted to CPSUs Nos. I.C. (MW)
Under Construction 11 6125
H.E. Projects concurred by CEA and yet to 12 8522
be taken up for construction
H.E. Projects under Examination in CEA 2 318
DPR Returned by CEA to project authorities 1 130
for resubmission
H.E. Projects under S&I 4 1103
Total 30 16198

59
It is observed that apart from above, a large number of projects
have been allotted to private sector for implementation. However,
majority of these projects are yet to take off. Even, those projects
which are under construction are progressing at a slow pace. As such,
recommendation of the Committee in this regard may be suitably
considered.
The main reasons for the stagnant growth of the hydro sector are
on account of geological surprises, litigation, R&R issues, law and
order problems, poor infrastructural connectivity like roads, dispute
between beneficiary States, etc. These factors affect both public and
private sector projects. The Government is trying to fast track the
growth of the hydro sector by offering certain incentives. These
incentives are being examined in the Ministry.
However , given the fact of vital strategic importance of the
Hydropower Projects particularly storage based Hydropower Projects,
for the energy security and water security of the Country in the coming
years when water is projected to become a very scarce resource,
development of the Hydropower Projects has become a need of the
time. CPSEs like NHPC are committed to develop the Hydropower
Projects despite the various constraints being faced by them on several
fronts in getting the Projects cleared and further during its execution.
Thus, till such time when Hydro sector gets adequately developed,
PSUs should be incentivized through various policy measures for taking
up these Hydro Projects which are located in far flung regions of the
Country with extremely inclement working conditions. Initiatives like
continuing the present cost plus tariff regime, providing single window
clearance/speedier clearances especially w.r.t. Environment/Forest and
R&R aspects etc. in case of the Hydropower Projects are expected to
bring some relief to the sector.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
The Committee note that the IPDS aims at bringing down AT&C
losses to the level of 15%. The Committee find that the level of 15%
losses is being targeted since 2002-03 when APDRP was launched. After
elapse of 15 years we are still far from that target. The Committee

60
believe that once IPDS scheme is fully implemented and the
technological up-gradation and strengthening of the system is done,
there should not be any excuse left for not containing AT&C losses
barring its technical component. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the targeted level of 15% AT&C losses need to be lowered
accordingly leaving little scope for inclusion of commercial losses
therein.
Reply of the Government
The audited AT&C losses of the last 11 financial years are tabulated
below:
Year AT&C Losses*
2005-06 32.66
2006-07 30.47
2007-08 29.07
2008-09 27.34
2009-10 26.99
2010-11 26.35
2011-12 26.63
2012-13 25.48
2013-14 22.58
2014-15 24.62
2015-16 23.97
*As per PFC Õs report on performance of State Power Utilities.
Distribution of Electricity is done by the States and their licenced
DISCOMS. The Government of India handholds the States in improving
their infrastructure through financial assistance programmes and
schemes based on the needs expressed by them. Besides IPDS, under
Ujjwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana also, the participating States have
agreed to trajectories and measures to reduce the AT&C losses to a
level of 15% by FY 2019.
As per the table above, the DISCOMs have been able to manage
approximately 9% reduction in AT&C losses in the last 11 financial
years till 2015-16. Looking at the rate of reduction in AT&C losses, in

61
the present context, a target of 15% AT&C losses by FY 2019 seems
appropriate.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
The Committee note that Section 166 (2) of the Electricity Act,
2003 provides that the Central Government shall constitute a forum of
regulators consisting of the Chairperson of the Central Commission and
Chairpersons of the State Commissions. It further provides that the
Chairperson of the Central Commission shall be the Chairperson of the
Forum of regulators. Accordingly, a Forum of Regulators (FOR) was
constituted vide Notification dated 16th February, 2005.The Committee
further note that the objective of setting up FOR is to provide a
common platform to the electricity regulators to share their experiences
and best practices. The intent is also to build synergy between various
Electricity Regulatory Commissions and to inter alia bring about
harmonization of regulation in power sector. Important issues of the
power sector (at inter-state level or intra-state level) are discussed
and consensus is evolved in FOR. The Forum is a statutory body and
does not have the power to enforce its regulations or decisions on
individual State Commissions. The Committee feel that FOR is good
forum that can provide some kind of uniformity in approaches of
various State Regulators by discussing and sharing best practices, success
stories and implementation status of various provisions of the Act. The
Committee, however , feel that this platform can be utilized in a more
effective manner if some enforcing power be provided to them. It will
not only be helpful in bringing in certain uniformity in regulations in
the States but will also be helpful in accelerating the various reforms
measures aimed at proper and fast development of power sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary provisions should be
made so that the decision, taken by consensus at Forum of Regulators,
becomes enforceable.
Reply of the Government
The FOR constituted under Section 166(2) of the Electricity Act,
2003 by GoI, has been assigned the following functions:
(a) Analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of Central
Commission and State Commissions and compilation of data
arising out of the said orders, highlighting, especially the
efficiency improvements of the utilities;

62
(b) Harmonization of regulation in power sector;
(c) Laying of standards of performance of licensees as required
under the Act.
(d) Sharing of information among the members of the Forum on
various issues of common interest and also of common
approach.
(e) Undertaking research work in-house or through outsourcing
on issues relevant to power sector regulation;
(f) Evolving measures for protection of interest of consumers
and promotion of efficiency, economy and competition in
power sector; and
(g) Such other functions as the Central Government may assign
to it, from time to time.
It may be noted from the above that one of the functions assigned
to FOR is harmonization of regulations in power sector. As per the
recommendation of the Standing Committee, it is felt that FOR will
have to pursue this activity aggressively so that the concerns of the
Standing Committee about ensuring uniformity in regulations in the
States and accelerating the various reforms measures, are addressed
comprehensively.
Since the FOR comprises of Chairperson of CERC and Chairperson
of SERCs and Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of FOR, it is
expected to consider effective & timely implementation of the decisions
taken by consensus at FOR to accelerate the reform measures for rapid
development of power sector.
The State Commissions independently function in their respective
States/Union Territories, as the case may be, and the Forum of
Regulators (FOR) provides an interactive platform to the member SERCs/
JERCs to share their experiences.
It is evident from the active participation of the SERCs/JERCs
during the interactions held in the Forum, that the intent to build
synergy between the member organizations and to facilitate
harmonization of regulations among the States is received in the right
spirit by the Regulators. Such synergy has facilitated the Forum to
bring about Model Regulations on several important subjects for benefit
of SERCs/JERCs.
However , the State Commissions are independent to take their
own considered view despite the consensus arrived at the Forum of
Regulators. As is evident from the provisions of the Act and the Rules

63
framed thereunder , the Forum does not have the power to enforce its
regulations or decisions on individual State Commissions.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/08/2017-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated: 24.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report)

64
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Nil
   N EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARI BABU,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

65
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 15th FEBRUARY , 2018 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Hari Babu Ñ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh
10. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
12. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri T .K.S. Elangovan
15. Shri Oscar Fernandes
16. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
17. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
18. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
19. Smt. Viplove Thakur

66
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh Ñ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey Ñ Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip Ñ Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised
them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:Ñ
(i) Draft Report on ÔStressed/Non-performing Assets in Electricity
SectorÕ.
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔEvaluation of
Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power Exchanges Õ.
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the
year 2016-17 Õ.
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔHydro Power-
A Sustainable, Clean and Green Alternative Õ.
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔEnergy
Access in India Ñ Review of Current Status and Role of
Renewable Energy Õ.
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2017-18 Õ.
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔNational
Electricity Policy Ñ A Review Õ.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
change. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the
above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the second part of the Budget Session.
4. *** *** *** *** ***

67
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** *** ***
8. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

68
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTIETH REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 25
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15,
17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25
Total: 20
Percentage 80%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:
Sl. No. 19
Total: 01
Percentage 4%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2, 11, 16 and 20
Total: 04
Percentage 16%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%