TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Reort
(16th Lok Sabha) on Development and Status of Small Hydro Sector]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.08.2016
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 05.08.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 276
Price : R  40.00
© 2016 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2015-2016) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 3
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ....................................................... 18
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 19
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ..................................................... 20
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
03.08.2016 ....................................................... 22
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
13th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Energy ........................................................ 24
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2015-16)
Dr. Kirit Somaiya —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri M. Chandrakasi
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Saumitra Khan
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Dr. Arun Kumar
11. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
12. Dr. (Smt.) Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15.
#Smt. Krishna Raj
16. Shri M.B. Rajesh
17. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
18. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
19.
@Shri P .A. Sangma
20. Shri Devender Singh alias Bhole Singh
21. Shri Malyadri Sriram
22. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
(iii)
#Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 05.07.2016.
@Expired on 04.03.2016.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
23. @@Shri V.P . Singh Badnore
24. Shri Oscar Fernandes
25. ##Shri Ram Jethmalani
26. ^Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
27. Shri Javed Ali Khan
28. ^^Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
29. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
30. *Dr. K.P . Ramalingam
31. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
32. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
33. **Dr. Vinay P . Sahasrabuddhe
34. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary — Joint Secretary
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
@@ Retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016.
## Resigned from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 08.06.2016.
^ Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016.
^^ Retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 01.07.2016.
* Retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.06.2016.
** Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.07.2016.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-first Report on the action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in Thirteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on ‘Development and Status of Small Hydro
Sector’.
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
14th March, 2016 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report
were received on 9th June, 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 3rd August, 2016.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee
is given at Appendix-II.
5. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have accepted all
the recommendations of the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
03 August, 2016 Chairperson,
12 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Development and Status of Small Hydro Sector ’.
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
14th March, 2016 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same day. The Report contained 15 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 15
Total-14
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Nil
Total–00
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial No. 11
Total–01
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have accepted
all the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee however,
desire and expect the Ministry to implement the recommendations
of the Committee in letter and spirit, in a time-bound manner. They
further desire that Action Taken Notes on implementation of the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report may be
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation
of this Report.

3
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Thirteenth Report, under Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker ’
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1)
The Committee note that the Government of India ’s ambitious
renewable power mission of 1,75,000 MW (hydro 5,000 MW; biomass
10,000 MW; solar 100,000 MW; wind 60,000 MW) by 2022 need to be
balanced by supplementary power projects to balance the generation/
supply of power with the solar/renewable power generation. As the
renewable/solar power will be available for 8+ hours, the power supply
for balancing 8 to 16 hours will have to be done by a power technology
like hydro power projects. The thermal power and the nuclear power
are required to be run round the clock. Hydro power can be stopped/
closed when solar power is available. The balance to solar power can
be generated with the help of hydro projects; small hydro/mini hydro
power projects. On the background of the above, the Committee feel
that there is a need to give greater importance/priority to mini/small
hydro power projects. The Committee observe that mini hydro power
projects momentum got lost in the so called mini hydro power projects
scam/non-transparency which got attracted in major regions like
Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim. The
Committee recommend that:
(i) Government may appoint a task force/committee to have an
action plan along with time-bound programme to settle down
the issues of mini hydro projects.
(ii) Priority may be given to mini hydro power projects which
are being planned to take up on the river/dam back water.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Ministry has
been assigned to achieve the target of 5000 MW by 2022
through SHP in 24X7 Power for All.

4
ii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted. Ministry
implement SHP programme as per the provisions contained
in the administrative approval No. 14 (03) 2014-SHP dated
2nd July 2014. Projects are considered for allotment
irrespective of capacity on first come first basis there is no
provision of priority or priority scheme. Ministry is of opinion
that keeping priority for the river/dam back water projects
may lead to objection by developers.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2)
The Bhakra Beas Management Board briefed the Committee that
28 mini hydro power projects may be developed/planned on such
river/dam back water , but the projects could not be taken up due to
lack of attention/coordination between the State Governments/BBMB/
Ministry of MNRE/Power etc. The committee recommend that:
(i) Top priority be given to these projects and the problems/
issues should be sorted out at the earliest.
(ii) The past performance on the implementation of mini hydro
projects demands attention.
(iii) Government of India must take initiative/coordinate/motivate
and encourage State Governments/PSUs in this regard as the
efficient performance on implementation of mini hydro is
very important.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Ministry deals
with projects in uniform manner. Ministry tries to restore
problems/issues associated in implementation of SHP project.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
iii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Ministry
implement SHP programme as per the provisions contained
in the SHP scheme announced vide Administrative Approval
No.14 (03) 2014-SHP dated 2nd July 2014. There is a separate
sub scheme for implementation of SHP projects by state
government which is open to include state owned PSUs also
Most of the SHP project are implemented by State government
or their PSUs.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]

5
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3)
The Committee note that the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
has been entrusted with the responsibility of developing small, micro
and mini hydro power upto 25 MW capacity. Water being a subject in
the State List gives the States a decisive say in matters of small hydro
power projects. As the State Governments do not involve themselves
directly in the development of small hydro power projects, the
participation of private developers becomes essential for the
development of the sector. The involvement of multiple agencies is a
kind of barrier for the expeditious development of the available small
hydro potential. Within the given situation, a well coordinated
mechanism needs to be evolved with the participation of all the stake
holders concerned. The Government of India do not set up small hydro
power projects as such and they act only as a catalyst by providing
Central financial assistance to the State Governments and to private
entrepreneurs. In addition, the Ministry may organize technical support
towards survey and investigation, preparation of DPRs, project
monitoring and training through the Alternate Hydro Energy Centre.
The small hydro power sector is primarily private investment driven
and projects are allocated by the State Government for implementation.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) Steps should be taken to attract more investment in the
small hydro power sector from private entrepreneurs and
State Governments.
(ii) The incentive schemes for the sector should be made more
attractive involving single window clearances for such
projects. Identification of sites, preparation of DPRs,
obtaining of clearances, survey and investigation, etc. should
be a pre- requisite before allocation of a small hydro power
project to an interested developer.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Private sector
don’t find SHP as attractive preposition as the tariff of power
generated from SHP projects, low rate of average pool power
purchase rate in Himachal Pradesh and non-sale of REC in
open market.
ii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]

6
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4)
The Committee note that small hydro power projects usually do
not encounter the problems associated with the large hydro power
projects like land acquisition, deforestation and re-settlement. These
projects have the potential to meet the power requirements of remote
and isolated areas. The sector has the added advantage to make the
small hydro as an renewable source of grid quality power generation.
For this to happen, the policy framework requires to be reoriented and
made uniform all across. The reliability and quality of projects is
another important factor. For the purpose, state-of-the-art technology
may be developed and adopted while setting up the projects. Priority
should be given for development of efficient designs of water mills for
mechanical as well as electrical generation. The Committee observe
that for accelerating the pace of hydro development, public and private
sector participation for commercial projects and decentralized micro
hydel in remote villages electrification are essential. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:
(i) Small hydro power projects should have smaller gestation
period as they are free from problems like deforestation and
resettlement.
(ii) To achieve faster pace of small hydro development, public
and private sector participation should be encouraged.
(iii) To improve reliability and quality of small hydro power
projects, their annual energy audit should be made
mandatory. This should also include the quality of the
machinery of the power project.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. SHP projects
upto 25 MW station capacity are placed in “White category ”
and do not attract environmental clearance. However, all
other statutory clearances under Forest Right Act (FRA) from
State Government and Forest Clearances are necessary for
implementation of project.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. This observed
that Private sector don ’t find SHP as attractive preposition
as the tariff of power generated from SHP projects, low rate
of average pool power purchase rate in Himachal Pradesh
and non-sale of REC in open market.

7
iii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The reliability
and quality of project most of the time depend on availability
of design discharge.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Small/Mini Hydel potential
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5)
The Committee note that the estimated potential for power
generation in the country from small hydro projects (upto 25 MW
capacity) is 19749 MW from 6474 identified sites, and as on
31st August, 2015, a cumulative capacity of 4146.905 MW has been set
up from 1047 project sites and projects of about 591.71 MW are in
various stages of implementation. The Committee find that only
20 per cent of the estimated potential in the country has been exploited
so far. A scrutiny of the State-wise data reveals that the performance
of the States with maximum potential has been far from satisfactory.
Thus, against the identified potential of 1341.38 MW in Arunachal
Pradesh, only 104.605 MW capacity (7.8%) has been installed. Likewise,
in Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand,
against estimated potential of 1107.15 MW, 2397.91 MW, 1430.67 MW
and 1707.87 MW, the installed capacity is 52 MW (4.69%), 754.81 MW
(31.4%), 156.53 MW (10.94%) and 156.53 MW (10.94%), respectively.
The Committee have taken note of the cumulative capacity addition
target of 4700 MW from small hydro projects by the end of the
12th Plan. To achieve this target, the Ministry needs to achieve about
500 MW during the year 2016-17. Even if the projected figure of
4700 MW of cumulative capacity of SHP projects is to be achieved by
the end of the 12th Plan, the total installed capacity would be only
about 23 per cent of the identified potential. The Committee also note
the constraints involved in the construction of small hydro projects
and the limited role of the Ministry. However, the Ministry is playing
the role of catalyst by way of facilitating and guiding the States,
providing subsidy to the projects to improve their economic viability
and create technical support services. In the light of these, the
Committee observe/recommend that:
(i) The development of the small hydro potential in the country
has been less than satisfactory, and by the end of the
12th Plan, it will only be 23 percent of the identified SHP
potential.
(ii) The Ministry should step up its efforts by closely monitoring
the projects and their performance.

8
(iii) Interaction with the States who are developing SHPs
themselves and private developers should be direct more
frequent and result-oriented.
(iv) Besides monitoring the ongoing projects, new sites having
potential should also be identified.
(v) The Ministry should come out with a concrete plan of action
to expedite the huge untapped potential at a faster pace
and in a time-bound manner.
Reply of the Government
i. Noted. Ministry has assigned to achieve target of 5000 MW
by 2022 through SHP in 24X7 Power for All.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Ministry have
vigorously monitored the progress of Small Hydro projects
by (1) holding frequent meetings with State Governments
and SHP developers, (2) visits by MNRE officers for onsite
monitoring of the SHP projects, and (3) visit by technical
team of Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC), established
in Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Roorkee, to provide on
the spot technical advice to SHP developers.
Ministry makes progress linked releases of sanctioned CFA
for project. In addition to this ministry have general
instruction for project developer that the progress report of
the work on the project will be maintained on quarterly
basis including photographs and submitted to ministry. The
expenditure on this account may be charged to the project
account under head “contingencies”. The progress report
will be reviewed/monitored quarterly as well as once in a
year by the ministry. Ministry may also designate Scientist/
experts for periodical visits to the project.
iii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
iv. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
v. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
11th and 12th Five Year Plans performance
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6)
The Committee appreciate the overall achievement under the small
hydro during the 11th Plan. Against the targeted capacity addition of
1400 MW for the 11th Plan, 1419 MW was achieved, which is more than

9
the targeted capacity. Reportedly, the achievement so far under the
12th Plan is very discouraging, i.e. against a capacity addition target
of 1300 MW, as on December, 2015, only 781.55 MW could be achieved
(forming only 60.11 per cent of the target), leaving a daunting task
ahead to achieve about 40 per cent of the total target of the 12th Plan
in less than one and a half years. Keeping in view the performance so
far during the current Plan period (except 2014-15), the Committee
feel that the task ahead is certainly challenging and the Ministry do
not have any other option but to tighten their monitoring and
coordination mechanism in order to get the desired results from the
developers and the State Nodal Agencies. No doubt, a cohesive, well
coordinated and dynamic management would be required to achieve
the objectives. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) Reasons for non-achievement of targets during the 12th Plan
period should be ascertained.
(ii) Strategy should be redrawn to achieve the outstanding targets
in the remaining time-frame of the 12th Plan period.
(iii) Fiscal and financial targets should correspond with each other.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Generic
constraints being faced in implementation of SHP project in
States includes delays in obtaining the statuary clearances
from State Governments, forest clearance from MOEFCC which
in turn causes not only delay in implantation of the project
but also escalates the cost of the projects. To overcome
such delays, MNRE has time and again approached/requested
State Governments and MOEFC to set up a time line for
providing all statuary clearances. A meeting has also been
held with Additional Secretary, MOEFC and MNRE submitted
its requested again. Till now during XII Plan following
achievement have been made:
Sl.No. Year Target (MW) Achievement (MW)
1. 2012-13 250 236
2. 2013-14 250 171
3. 2014-15 250 251
4. 2015-16 250 218.6
Total 1000 640.6

10
ii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted. Ministry is
pursuing with the implementation Agency of States to
expedite completion/commissioning of SHP projects.
iii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7)
The Committee note that the planned target of 1,300 MW of the
12th Plan seems unattainable. The delay in announcing the SHP scheme
and slow pace of implementation of projects have been attributed as
reasons for the same. The Committee further note that the Ministry is
in touch with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
for solving issues related to various clearances for SHP Projects and
also with the State Governments to ease the process of obtaining
statutory clearances. Low progress has also been attributed to difficult
locations of the project, slow working sessions in hilly areas and
involvement of private and forest land in setting up the projects. The
risk of natural calamities, resistance from local residents and delay in
allotment of sites have also been cited as reasons for the delay. The
Committee note that these reasons are extremely routine in nature
and unless they are addressed, no SHP can be set up. Hence, they are
not convinced with the reasons attributed for the delay in achieving
the targets. The Committee also would like to know about the role of
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate change in setting up
of SHPs. In the light of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that:
(i) The Ministry should not proffer routine excuses for non-
performance;
(ii) Budgetary allocation should be adequate to ensure that a
project does not stop midway for want of funds;
(iii) Process of clearances should be streamlined and made time-
bound.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The financial
allocation for the small hydro programme for the 12th Plan
is of Rs. 825 crore.

11
Sl. Components     Budget in Rs. Crore
No. 12th 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Plan
1. Grid connected 750 141 135 140 160 170
DSI & DPR 20 - 4 5 5 6
State Projects 300 72 50 50 60 68
Private Projects 385 59 73.5 81 86.5 85
R&M 40 10 7 7 7 9
Monitoring 5 - 0.5 1 1.5 2
2. Off Grid
Water Mills/Micro Hydel 40 10 7 7 7 9
3. R&D 35 8 10 5 6 6
Total 825 159 152 152 176 185
Whereas year-wise details of funds provided during the Plan Period,
has been as follows:—
Period Target (RE) (Rs. in Crore)
12th Plan
2012-13 159.00
2013-14 123.18
2014-15 108.00
2015-16 105.05
2016-17 125.00 (BE including Rs. 27 Crore for North East)
Total 620.23
iii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Micro Hydel Projects and Water Mills
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8)
The Committee note that there is a significant potential for
development and upgradation of water mills and micro hydro projects
(up to 100 kW) in the country and that water mills and micro hydro
projects lead to micro entrepreneurship development which would

12
further meet the power requirements of remote areas, particularly
hilly and mountain areas, in a decentralized manner. The Committee
are informed that new designs of water mills have been developed
which are 2 to 3 times more efficient than the traditional water mills.
The Committee do appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry to promote
production of scientifically improved designs of the water mills with
better efficiency, longer life and diversified uses. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:—
(i) The cost of installation of improved designs of water mills
and Central Financial Assistance be managed in a realistic
manner , keeping in mind the affordability for the end-users.
(ii) The production of the improved version of water mills in
large scale may also be linked with their maintenance, so
that spare parts and technical/mechanical services are easily
available at reasonable cost.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Cost of
installation of water mills of all designs and Central Financial
Assistance are well managed. Ministry is in receipt of request
for allocation of target regularly.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Private
entrepreneurs are involved in production. Production depends
on demand. Maintenance/AMC is prerogative of user.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9)
The Committee observe that besides lighting, water mills are
providing income generating opportunity to the villagers as it is used
for grinding, wool carding, as oil expeller and for small cottage
industries. The Committee feel that the mechanical and electrical
uses of the water mills and their socio-economic value make it a
significant tool in enhancement of the economic activities and
betterment of the opportunities of livelihood for the people of remote
and inaccessible areas where grid connectivity is not feasible. The
Committee are informed that to encourage and accelerate the
development of water mills and Micro Hydel Projects in the remote
and hilly areas, the Ministry is providing Central Financial Assistance.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—
(i) The promotional programmes and financial assistance for
water mills be spread on a large scale and implemented in
potential areas by involving local bodies, NGOs, Associations
etc.

13
(ii) Appropriate mechanism be developed to ensure that the
financial assistance is reaching the intended beneficiary and
result achieved on desired lines.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The SHP scheme
contains provision to consider allocation of target for water
mills to local bodies/Co-operatives/NGOs etc.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
SHP incentive schemes
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10)
The Committee note that to develop the SHP sector, the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy have been providing financial support/
subsidy for the activities related with Research & Development, capacity
building, Resource Assessment, Detailed survey & investigation, DPR
preparation and perspective plan for States, capital subsidy to State
sector projects, subsidy for commercial projects, Renovation &
modernization of old SHP projects (State Sector) and water mills/
micro hydel projects. The Committee are aware that the Government
is providing financial assistance to States, private entrepreneurs, etc.
to boost the sector. The Committee observe that during the year
2014-15, financial support/subsidy provided for development of SHP
amounts to Rs. 10.5 crore. Considering the huge gap in the potential
and the installed capacity, the present level of targets in this regard
for achievement is not very encouraging. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the incentives and subsidies extended as financial
assistance for development of the hydro sector may be reviewed and
all out efforts should be made to encourage entrepreneurs.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Implementation
of SHP programme during 10th Plan as well as 11th Plan has
been evaluated.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]

14
Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12)
The Committee note that the ‘Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative ’
project was approved on 23 April, 2010 with a projected cost of Rs.473
crore, envisaging setting up of small hydro power projects, solar
photovoltaic and solar thermal systems. The project was originally
approved for implementation in three and a half years beginning from
1 June, 2010. The Committee are surprised to find that after 5 years,
the project has not been commissioned till now due to site constraints,
and the Committee are informed that the project duration has been
extended till December, 2017. The slow progress has been attributed
to limited working seasons, remoteness and cut off of the region. The
Committee feel that these hurdles are a known fact in an area like
Ladakh and the initiative had been taken up knowing all the probable
hurdles. These problems could be tackled by proper planning, monitoring
and concerted efforts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should review the feasibility and accessibility of the various
renewable energy sources, other than small hydro, in the Ladakh area
and make all out efforts for their implementation, by evolving a proper
coordination mechanism with the State Government.
Reply of the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted to Prime Minister ’s
announced programme i.e. “Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative ”
includes installations of following:—
Sl.No. Activity
1. Small/Micro Hydro Projects
2. SPV Power plants and Lighting systems
3. Solar water heating/Cooking/Solar passive heating/
Green house/Solar dryers
4. Capacity building, Training, Consultancy etc.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
National Mission on Small Hydro
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13)
The Committee note that the objective of the National Mission on
Small Hydro is to address issues responsible for the decline of the SHP
sector in the country and to regenerate interest among the government,
the community and the private sector to develop and make investment

15
in this renewable energy sector. The target of the Mission is to achieve
500 MW of capacity in the next two years and aim towards adding
4500 MW in the subsequent three years. The Committee are informed
that an investment of Rs. 50,000 crore is being infused primarily in the
rural economy and about Rs. 5,000 crore as support from the
Government of India. The Mission also aims to set up 1000 MW SHP
projects on canal drops, dam outlets, spillways and water outfall
structures and to renovate old SHP projects to improve their capacity
and efficiency. The Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry,
the objective of which is to revamp the small hydro sector. The
Committee are, however , concerned to find that under the Mission, no
year-wise/phase-wise physical targets have been set; it merely envisages
total installation of 5000 MW SHP capacity by 2022. Similarly, there is
no budgetary allocation despite the fact that substantial investment
will be required to achieve the targets. The Committee feel that in
the absence of year-wise or phase-wise target, achievement cannot be
targeted which will consequently affect the overall targets of the
Mission. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) year-wise/phase-wise target may be set under the Mission.
(ii) Appropriate policy framework for long term sustainable
growth in small hydro sector may be prepared in consultation
with the Ministry of Power and the States.
(iii) R equisite budgetary allocation be made to ensure the
implementation of the project.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. No year-wise/
phase-wise targets have been fixed. However, Ministry has
been assigned to achieve the target of 5000 MW by 2022
through SHP . The Mission would target to achieve 500 MW of
capacity in next two years and aim towards adding 4500 MW
in the subsequent three years, for which preparation including
appropriate policy interventions will be done in the first two
years of the mission.
ii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
iii. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. This is
estimated that an investment of Rs. 50,000 crore is expected
to be infused primarily in rural economy and about Rs. 5,000
crore may be required as support from Govt. of India.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]

16
Policy for SHP development & Private Sector SHP projects
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14)
The Committee note that development of SHP projects through
private sector investments has been the thrust of the Ministry ’s SHP
programme since 1993. Out of the 1047 SHP projects commissioned in
the country, 395 SHP projects with total capacity of 2227.60 MW have
reportedly been set up through private sector participation so far. The
Committee also note that a large part of capacity addition is being
achieved through private investment where the State Nodal Agencies
provide assistance for obtaining necessary clearances, in allotment of
land and potential sites. The Committee have been informed that the
policy for Small Hydro Power (SHP) and private sector participation
therein is governed by the Electricity Act of 2003, the National
Electricity Policy of 2005 and the Tariff Policy of 2006 announced by
the Government of India. The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) have issued guidelines to determine tariff for all renewable
energy technologies, including small hydro projects. They are also
informed that the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs)
have been empowered to decide on various components of the policy
such as tariff, wheeling, banking and third party sale for grid interactive
renewable energy based power projects. Reportedly, 23 State
Governments have so far announced policy for private sector
participation for the development of SHP projects in their respective
States. However , it has been stated that some of these States have
imposed restrictions/levies like Entry Tax on SHP equipment, sale of
power outside the State, water royalty even for non-consumptive use
of water, etc., which are seen as hindrances by the private developers
in taking up SHP projects. The Committee therefore, recommend that:
(i) Grievances Redressal mechanism be put in place to redress
grievances of developers/investors.
(ii) There should be uniform policies on the development of the
small hydro power.
(iii) Restrictions in the form of taxes, levies on water and sale
of electricity outside States be reasonable and practical,
which only would facilitate unhindered growth of the sector.
(iv) State Regulatory Commissions should also look into the aspects
of proper growth of the sector before determining the tariff.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. A meeting
under the Chairmanship of Hon ’ble MoS (IC) Coal, Power &
NRE was held on 06.04.2016 where Ministers of State
Government, Implementing Agencies of State Government,
CERC, CEA as well as private developers were invited.

17
ii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted. The rate of
centarl financial assistance varies with respect to government
sector , private sector , special category States like North
Eastern States, J&K and Uttarakhand.
iii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted.
iv. Suggestion of the committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
Alternate Hydro Energy Centre, IIT Roorkee
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15)
The Committee note that the Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC)
at the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, has been providing
professional support in the field of Small Hydro power Development
covering planning, Detailed Project Reports, Detailed Engineering Designs
and Construction drawings, Technical Specifications of Turn Key
execution/equipment Supply, Renovation and Modernization of SHP
Stations, and Techno-Economic Appraisal. It has been imparting training
to the field engineers and technologists through short-term training
courses. The Committee are informed that real time digital simulator
for small hydro power plants has been set up with support from the
Ministry for providing efficient initial and advanced training to operators
and engineering staff of different types of small hydroelectric plants.
Standards, manuals and guidelines for various aspects of small
hydropower development are being prepared by AHEC through
consultative process with the sponsorship of MNRE. A project to set up
a small hydro hydraulic turbine R&D laboratory at AHEC with an
objective of creating international level facilities for testing, design
and R&D in the area of hydraulic turbines, hydro mechanical equipment,
control and instrumentation of small hydro electric power plants has
been sanctioned. The Committee feel that AHEC, IIT Roorkee, is a
premier institution in the development of small hydro technology in
the country paving the way for economic and efficient development of
the technology and hence should be provided all support in encouraging
it to boost research and development activities in the small hydro
sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Institution
may be strengthened with regard to their capacities and resources,
both human and financial, and it should be made a guiding star for the
sector with sufficient technical, financial and functional support and
autonomy.
Reply of the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]

18
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-Nil-

19
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-Nil-

20
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Electrification/illumination of all Villages along the State border of
Arunachal Pradesh
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11)
The Committee note that the project for electrification/illumination
of all the villages along the State border of Arunachal Pradesh had
been launched in December, 2008 with a financial package of Rs. 550
crore. Part–II of the project is being implemented by MNRE with the
physical target for electrification/illumination of 1058 villages from
small/micro hydel projects and solar photovoltaic systems with a total
cost of Rs. 275.58 crore. The Committee find that as on December,
2015, 976 villages have been electrified/illuminated, including 523
villages by Solar PV home lighting systems. The Committee are informed
that to complete the remaining project, an additional fund of
Rs. 25.38 crore is required and the project could be taken up by the
State Government only after availability of this additional fund. The
Committee observe that the project had been initiated way back in
December , 2008 with a target to complete it in three years, i.e., by
the end of 2011. However , it was extended up to 31 March, 2015 as
the targets could not be achieved within the time frame. The extended
period has already expired, and there are 82 villages yet to be covered
under this project, due to lack of funds, as reported. The Committee
note that there is an absolute need for better coordination between
the Union Government and the State Government in the implementation
of this strategically important programme. Out of the earmarked total
amount of Rs. 275.58 crore, Rs. 240 crore has already been sanctioned
for the implementation of the project and a shortfall of Rs. 25 crore
is hampering its completion, leaving 82 villages unelectrified. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) There should be clarity on the issue of physical and financial
target. Allocation of a sum of Rs. 25 crore has delayed the
completion of the project by more than 5 years.
(ii) The Ministry should initiate action to mobilize the additional
fund requirement and make it available to the State

21
Government, so that the targets for electrification/
illumination of all villages along the State border of Arunachal
Pradesh is achieved without any further delay. There should
be immediate release of funds for the project from the SHP
or other heads of the Ministry.
(iii) The physical verification of the electrified villages/audit of
the result achieved under the programme be done and
reported to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
i. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. There is no
provision of separate funds for Prime Minister ’s announced
package/programme. Ministry is meeting the funds
requirement out of regular allocation of funds available
towards implementation of SHP programme/head. As per
SHP scheme releases are made with respect to progress
achieved. Sometimes funds in the division have been
exhausted while implementing the SHP programme, by the
time demand letter has been submitted by implementing
agency to Ministry.
ii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted. Request for
allocation of additional funds in SHP head had been made
for 2015-16 at RE stage though request was not granted.
iii. Suggestion of the committee has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
File No. 1/4/2015-SHP , dated: 09.06.2016]
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
03 August, 2016 Chairperson,
12 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

22
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2015-16) HELD ON 3RD AUGUST , 2016
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri M. Chandrakasi
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi
5. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
6. Dr. Arun Kumar
7. Dr. (Smt.) Pritam Gopinath Munde
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
11. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
12. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
14. Shri Javed Ali Khan
15. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
16. Dr. Vinay P . Sahasrabuddhe
17. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

23
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised
them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) 20th Report on ‘Power Generation from Solid Waste ’.
(ii) 21st Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 13th Report (16th Lok
Sabha) on ‘Development and status of Small Hydro Sector ’.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
changes. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize
the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

24
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTEENTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13,
14 and 15
Total: 14
Percentage 93%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 0%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl.No. 11
Total: 01
Percentage 7%