STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2016-2017)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for
 the year 2017-18]
29
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)


TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for
 the year 2017-18]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.08.2017
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  09.08.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)


COE No. 228
Price : Rs. 94.00
© 2017 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset
New Delhi 110 064.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2016-17)...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report .................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Governmen t................................. 8
CHAPTER III Observati ons/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .................................................................. 51
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration........... 52
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited..... 57
ANNEXURE
Station wise % PLF of COAL based stations for 2016-17
and 2015-16................................................................... 58
APPENDICES
  I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 4th August,
2017................................................................................. 66
  II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 26th
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Energy......................................................................... 68

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2016-17)
Lok Sabha
Dr. Virendra Kumar  —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
6. Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
9. Dr. Arun Kumar
10. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
11. Shri Malyadri Sriram
12. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa
13. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
14. Shri Jagdambika Pal
15. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
16. Shri M.B. Rajesh
17. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
18. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
19. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
20. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh
21. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes

(iv)
24. Shri Ram Jethmalani
25. Shri La. Ganesan
26. Shri Javed Ali Khan
27. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
28. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
29. Shri S.Muthukaruppan
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Twenty-Ninth Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Twenty-Sixth Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on Demands for Grant (2017-18) of the Ministry of
Power.
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
10th March, 2017 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report
were received on 7th June, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 4th August, 2017.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report of the Committee
is given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
 N EW D ELHI; DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
04 August, 2017 Chairperson,
13 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Twenty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2017-18.
2. The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 10th
March, 2017 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.
The Report contained 21 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19,
20 and 21 Total -18
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil Total - 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 14, 15 and 18 Total-03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil Total - 00
Chapter-V
1

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations/Comments contained in Chapter-I of
the Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months
of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration or
merit comments.
Development of Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
6. The Committee have noted a massive power capacity addition
in the recent years due to which it was on the verge of becoming a power
surplus country. The Ministry had also assured that considering the power
projects in pipeline, they were expecting the demand of 2021-22 would be
fully met. The Committee had also noted that against the requirement of
864.9 BU, the availability of power remained 858.8 during the year 2016-
17 (upto Dec. 2016) leaving a shortage of 0.7%. In respect of peak
demand, 1,56,934 MW was met against the demand of 1,59,542 MW
leading to a shortage of 1.6%. The Committee were surprised that even
after the massive capacity addition and huge present generation capacity,
there was still shortages, though their quantum is not so significant. Secondly,
in addition to these power demands there exists the latent demand that is
not being taken into calculation. These figures do not include the demand
that several financially distressed DISCOMs do not post due to their inability
to purchase electricity at higher rates and instead of incurring further losses
they opt for power outages. The demand calculation has also not taken into
account the demands of households which do not have electricity access.
While appreciating the power generation sector as it has come a long way
and now is in a position to cater the demand of power of the country, the
Committee had desired that the momentum of growing generation should
be maintained to cater the increased future demand as well as the latent
demand of electricity of country which is going to surface sooner than
later. The Committee had also recommended that the Government should
encourage installation of power generation projects which are clean and
green, strategically important and capable of providing electricity at lower
tariff.

3
7. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated
as under:—
“It may be submitted that 0.7% shortage in terms of energy in the
country is not due to non-availability of power in the country. A
number of thermal power plants in the country are under reserve
shutdown and those in operation are running at low PLF due to less
requisition of power by the DISCOMs in a few states. Therefore,
adequate power is available in the country but it is learnt that
DISCOMs give less requisition of power as they are unable to supply
additional power to their consumers due to constraints in their
transmission/distribution network. Some DISCOMs are unable to
purchase additional power due to financial constraints. Even in those
states, where there are no such constraints, forced outage of a
transmission line/distribution feeder/distribution transformer leads to
load-shedding in some areas until restoration of such elements. The
quantum of electricity which could not be supplied to the consumers
due to such instances also reflects in power supply position as
shortage, which actually is the demand-supply gap due to forced
outage of transmission/distribution element and not due to shortage
of power.”
8. The Committee are informed that adequate power is
available in the country and is not short of power. However, DISCOMs
give less requisition of power as they are unable to supply additional
power to their consumers due to constraints in their transmission/
distribution network and some DISCOMs are unable to purchase
additional power due to financial constraints. The reply of the
Government suggest that adequate power is available in the country
and forced outage of the transmission line/distribution feeder/
distribution transformer leads to load-shedding in some areas. The
quantum of electricity which could not be supplied to consumers due
to such instances also reflects power supply position as ‘shortage’.
The recommendation of the Committee focuses on the latent demands
of electricity which is not being taken into calculation, non-requisition
of electricity due to financial reasons by the DISCOMs, un-electrified
households and possible increase in the future demands, etc. The

4
recommendation of the Committee is different from the reasons
given by the Government regarding situation of power generation.
Therefore, the Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation
that the Government should encourage installation of power generation
projects which are clean and green, strategically important and capable
of providing electricity at lower tariff.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No.2.15)
9. The Committee have noted that the plant load factors (PLF)
of thermal power plants had touched a record low and dipped below 60%
during the previous year 2016-17. The Committee have also noted that
there were several power plants that are running at 0-40% of PLF. They
were also informed that due to huge upcoming renewable energy capacity,
it is possible that the PLF of thermal power plants could go as low as 50%
or even below. Since solar energy will be available in the day time so
thermal power plants will have to be shut down or run at low capacity at
that time. The committee felt that this is not the desired scenario as it is
known that underutilization of power plant will only lead to higher tariff
rates. The committee do understand that setting up power stations is a
de licensed activity, so everybody is free to install power stations as per
their need or business prospect. In a free business model, it is also
understood that only those power plants will survive which will be able to
sell electricity at cheaper rate and thus bringing competitiveness in the
market. The Committee were astonished that despite abundance of power
generation capacity in the country, the tariff rates have not gone down,
rather there is a increasing trend in this regard. Even the technological
advancement of machinery, use of super critical technology, ease in supply
constraints of coal have failed to lower tariff rates. The Committee were
of the opinion that the prime reason for higher tariff is lower PLF. The
Committee have been apprised that though the tariff is higher for long term
PPA, electricity is available in power exchanges at much lower price. This
situation encourages Discoms not to go for a long term PPA, but fulfil their
demand by short term power purchases as much as possible. The Committee
felt that prima facie the situation might appear beneficial for Discoms/
power sector but may have long term adverse consequences. The power
sector seems to be trapped in a vicious cycle of low PLF causing high

5
tariff and high tariff suppressing the demand. The Committee were concerned
that if this situation persist this may lead to plethora of problems viz.
Shutting down of power plants due to economical un-viability, loans turning
bad and further investment in the sector may be discouraged due to low
returns. As such, the Committee were in favour of promoting competition
in the sector that should lead to availability of cheaper power, those who
will be able to do this will survive while rest will perish. The Committee
had however, desired that the Ministry should ensure that this transition
should take place without harming and discouraging further investment in
the power sector.
10. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken Reply, has
stated:—
“At present, majority of the power procured by Discoms is on the
basis of long term PPAs with two-part tariff and only small part of
the power requirement is being procured through market. Thus,
payment of fixed charges to a power station under long-term PPA
depends on availability and not on actual energy generated. A system
in which entire wholesale market for electricity is based on competition
would require major changes in legal and regulatory framework.”
11. The Committee note that the response of the Government
is not as per the spirit of the recommendation. The Committee
highlighted that power sector seems to be trapped in a vicious cycle
of low PLF causing high tariff and high tariff suppressing demand.
This situation will lead to problems like shutting down of power
plants, loans turning bad and a discouraging atmosphere for investment
due to low return. The reply of the Government revolves around
payment and its analysis under long-term PPA. The Committee further
emphasis for promotion of competition in the sector that may lead to
availability of cheaper power and also that transition should happen
without harming and discouraging further investment in the power
sector. As the response of the Government is evasive, the Committee
would like to reiterate its recommendation that the Ministry should
ensure that this transition should take place without harming and
discouraging further investment in the power sector.

6
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
12. The Committee have noted that there are two most prevalent
methods for discovering the tariff in the power sector (i) cost Plus Tariff
and (ii) tariff by competitive Bidding of which Cost plus system is
pre-dominant. The committee were aware that in this method coal charges
consists around 70 per cent of the total cost of power for tariff determination.
They are termed as energy charges whereas rest of the tariff consist of
fixed charges and other miscellaneous ingredients. The Tariff Policy as
announced by the government of India aims at promoting competitive
bidding for all acquisitions in power plants and also for tariff determination
through competitive bidding. Competitive bidding process ensures that the
tariff determination process is reasonable, rational and competitive without
any scope for latent maneuvering. The process also ensures that all the
expenditure are taken into account and this is beneficial to consumer as
well as to the generator. The transparency in the system also forms part
of this process and thus leaving no scope for any extraneous consideration.
The committee were unable to apprehend as to why hydro sector has been
kept out of its ambit particularly when the tariff policy aims to make entire
system in the electricity sector completion based. There may be good
reasons to exclude the hydro sector from the competitive bidding process,
but there are equally genuine reasons for including it within the competitive
ambit to make it efficient, transparent and delivery oriented. Several countries
like United Kingdom and Brazil have taken hydro into the competitive fold
and are doing excellent. The committee, had therefore, recommended that
the price discovery for any kind of electricity whether thermal, hydro,
renewable, etc., should be done through process of competitive bidding
only.
13. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken reply, has stated
as under:—
“The Tariff Policy 2016 provides that barring certain exceptions, all
future requirement of power should continue to be procured
competitively by distribution licensees. As far as Renewable is
concerned, solar parks are already being set up through competitive

7
bidding and this process has started for wind generation also.
However, tariff for waste-to-energy plants shall be determined on
cost-plus basis.
The hydro-electric power plants face significant uncertainty during
construction, particularly in the Himalayan region. In addition, the
problem of R&R, law & order, land acquisition etc. are much more
severe in case of hydro-electric projects as compared to other type
of projects. In spite of necessary investigations prior to
commencement of construction, many a times geological surprises
are encountered which often lead to delay as well as increase in
project costs. In view of this, bidders may not be able to assess their
costs and resulting tariff with reasonable certainty. If hydro projects
are subjected to competitive bidding, bidders would factor-in a risk
premium in the tariff quoted, leading to discovery of higher tariff.
In view of this, hydro projects have been granted exemption from
competitive bidding subject to certain conditions in the Tariff Policy,
2016."
14. The Committee note that the development of hydro sector
is a bit lengthy and cumbersome. Problems afflicting the sector are
also manifold. While recommending that price discovery for all kinds
of electricity should be done through process of competitive bidding,
the Committee were well aware about the reasons which have been
cited for risk premium in the tariff to be quoted during the bidding.
Another aspect which should be taken into account is that if the
route of competitive bidding for hydro sector is taken recourse to, all
the factors hampering expeditious growth of hydro in the country will
be addressed beforehand by the Government or the other concerned
agencies. This will force the Government machinery to take all
necessary measures to put in place the solutions to the problems
(whether virtual or real). Only thereafter, any serious and necessary
bidding can take place for the hydro sector. This will also eliminate
the future uncertainties like R&R, law & order, etc. The Committee,
therefore, would like to reiterate its recommendation that the price
discovery for any kind of electricity whether thermal, hydro,
renewable, etc., should be done through process of competitive bidding
only.

8
CHAPTER II
OBSERV A TIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee contained in Twenty sixth Report, under Direction 73A of
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
Annual Plan Outlay
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power had sought
Rs. 22,769.39 crore from the Ministry of Finance for the year 2017-18,
however, it has been allocated Rs.13,881 crore. Against the demand of
Rs. 6,010.11 crore, Indian Power Development Scheme (IPDS) has been
allocated Rs. 5,821.22 crore. Energy Conservation has been allocated only
Rs. 50.54 crore against the demand of Rs.332.86 crore. Similarly, Central
Power Research Institute (CPRI)’s demand of Rs.250 crore has been
reduced to Rs.150 crore. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana
(DDUGJY), the most important scheme of the Ministry of Power, has
suffered the most severe cut and allocated only Rs.4,841 crore against the
demand of Rs.12,602 crore. The Committee are concerned over the severe
budgetary cut in important programmes of the Ministry of Power in general
and DDUGJY in particular. When the Government is committed to provide
electricity access to all the households of the country and 24x7 uninterrupted
power supply, these huge budgetary cuts appear neither logical nor justified.
The Committee do understand the constraints of limited finance resources
of the Government, nonetheless, important sector should get adequate
fund. At present, power sector is most crucial sector, which is slowly but
surely passing through transition period of energy deficiency to energy
sufficiency and universal electricity access. However, when the Committee
scrutinized the current year’s demand, it found that in previous year also
the Ministry of power had posted a demand of Rs.31,519.84 crore, which
was reduced to Rs. 12,200 crore by the Ministry of Finance. However,
even this truncated allocation was reduced at the stage of RE Rs. 10,413.66.
crore And finally, only Rs. 7,259.32 crore were utilized till 30.01.2017. The
reduction of budget at RE stage indicates that the Ministry was not prepared

9
to utilize even the fund that was allocated to them. The Committee, therefore,
infer that the budgetary cut by the Ministry of Power was based on the
previous year’s utilization of fund by the Ministry of Power and not on any
priority. Nonetheless, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry
of Finance should allocate additional fund at the stage of RE, if the Ministry
of Power demands so. Simultaneously, the Committee also recommend the
Ministry of Power to try and utilize the fund allocated as per their original
demand and schedule so that not only the funds are fully utilized but targets
under various schemes are also achieved.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power appreciates and is thankful to the Hon’ble
Committee for their concern over the budgetary cut in important programmes
of MOP and their recommendation that the Ministry of Finance should
allocate additional funds at the RE stage, if MOP demands so.
In this regard it is submitted that against the RE (2016-17) plan
allocation of Rs. 10,413.65 crore during FY 2016-17, an amount of
Rs.9463.93 crore has been disbursed as on 31.03.2017. It is further submitted
that out of BE 2017-18 allocation of Rs. 13881.14 crore a sum of
Rs. 884.30 crore has already been disbursed as on 31.05.2017. A detailed
assessment of utilisation of funds under various schemes and additional
requirements, if any, will be made at the time of discussion on Revised
Estimates and demands for additional funds will accordingly be placed
before the Ministry of Finance.
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No.10/2/2017-Budget, Dated 7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No.2.2)
The Committee note that during the year 2016-17, some important
heads have very poor utilization of fund. NEEPCO, against their budgetary
estimation of Rs.166.13 crore, they could spend nothing. Similarly, no fund
could be utilized under the head of strengthening transmission system in the
States of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim and Power System Improvement
Project in North-East Region. Very less utilization of fund took place under
the Heads of CPRI, Energy Conversation, Integrated Power Development
Scheme and PSDF. The poor utilization of fund by NEEPCO, a CPSU

10
engaged in development of hydro-power projects, is also a cause for
concern despite the fact that for the 12th Plan period they have exceeded
the target. CPRI Energy Conservation and Efficiency Programme help in
mitigating the burden of higher tariff by lowering electricity consumption
through technological advancements and other methods. IPDS, PSDF
Transmission System and Power System Improvement are equally important.
The Committee, therefore, express their concern over the poor utilization
of fund under these heads during the current year. Considering the
importance of these programmes, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry should ensure that the fund allocated to them this year, i.e.,
2017-18 are not only fully utilized but efforts should be made to clear
backlog of previous year.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of Committee has been noted for compliance.
As stated in reply to para number 2.1 above, the additional demand of
funds would be assessed at the RE stage during the current financial year.
Further, the Ministry will also ensure that the backlog of previous year, if
any, is cleared and funds allocated to the Ministry is fully utilized.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Dated 7/6/2017]
12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.2.3)
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 4,40,795.84 crore was
allocated for the 12th Plan Period. Rs. 3,86,516.68 crore were Internal and
Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) from the above allocation. The IEBR
was to be raised by CPSUs themselves. The 12th Plan period is on its way
out and the performances of the most of the CPSUs have been very poor
in achieving their financial targets. The NTPC could achieve only Rs.1,10,232
crore against the target of Rs.2,19,612 crore. Similarly, the performance of
NHPC was only Rs.13,853 crore against the target of Rs.29,368 crore.
The THDC could achieve Rs.3,464 crore against the target of Rs.7,298
crore, whereas, SJVNL achieved Rs.3,372 crore against the target of
Rs.10,400 crore. Only the performance of Power Grid is praise-worthy as
they not only achieved the financial target, but also exceeded it. Similarly,

11
the performance of NEEPCO has also been commendable. In all, the
CPSUs are the best equipped organization in the electricity sector. This kind
of performance from them cannot be justified for any reasons whatsoever.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that:—
(i) The reasons for failure of CPSUs in achieving the assigned
targets during the 12th Five Year Plan should be explained
PSU-wise.
(ii) Steps should be taken to avoid recurrence of reasons
responsible for decline in the performance of the CPSUs.
(iii) Responsibility for non-achieving the target should also be fixed
as the entire tenure of five years is a sufficient period for
showing results and any laxity in performance in a year can
be overcome during the next year with dedication and sincerity.
Reply of the Government
(I) The reasons for shortfall in achieving the assigned targets
during the 12th Five Year Plan, are given below:—
(A) NTPC
The reasons, project wise, for shortfall are:
   Projects Reasons
Gas Not Available               Shortfall of Rs. 9,316 crore
Gandhar Gas- II The plants are gas based projects and due to the
(2x 650 MW) problems of availability of gas in required measure,
these projects had to be kept on hold till the situation
Kawas Gas -II improved. To revive and improve utilization of the
(2x 650 MW) Stranded/stressed gas based power projects in the
country, Government of India has approved a policy
Rajiv Gandhi mechanism to use Imported Re-gasified Liquified
CCPP-II National Gas for supply to such gas based plants.
(3x 350 MW) [please add the current status of the availability of
gas. The original response stopped at placing the
ball in Ministry’s court without saying why the
ministry did so and what steps have been taken
after 2016 in the execution of the project.]

12
Investment Approval Shortfall of Rs. 28,119 crore
Delayed
12
Bulk Tendering-I NIT for the package issued on 23.06.10
(660 MW-SG) and Bidding documents were on sale from
Mauda-II (2x 660MW), 28.06.2010 to 30.07.2010. Bid Opening for
Solapur (2x 660 MW), Stage-I (T echno-Commercial) was held on
Nabinagar (3x 660 MW), 25.08.10. Stage-I (Techno-Commercial)
Meja (2x 660 MW) & Evaluation Report approved on 05.01.2011.
Raghunathpur (2x 660
MW) (of DVC) One of the bidder M/s Ansaldo Caldaie Boilers
India Pvt Ltd. who was not considered
qualified, filed a writ petition in the High Court
of Delhi. Subsequent to the hearings in the
matter, the court passed its order on
01.03.2011 against NTPC wherein High Court
(HC) ordered NTPC to allow Ansaldo in
accordance with the terms of the bid
documents, not only to proceed to the next
stage i.e., Stage-II (Price) Bid, but also permit
it to participate in the technical discussions.
Special Leave Petition (SLP) was filed by
NTPC in Supreme Court (SC) on 09.03.2011.
After various hearings and postponement the
Hon’ble Supreme Court delivered its judgment
on 16.02.2012 in NTPC’s favour.
The Stage-II (Price) bids were opened on
29.02.2012.
The Award of Steam Generator (SG) Package
of were progressively done from 30.03.2012
onwards.
Bulk Tendering-I NIT was issued on 16.10.2009 & Stage-I
(660 MW-STG) OBD done on 12.02.2010.

13
12
Mauda-II (2x 660MW), Invitation for Stage-II bids sent on 18.08.2010
Solapur (2x 660 MW), (Delay was due to evaluation  of L&T for
Nabinagar (3x 660 MW), which legal opinion was sought. Legal opinion
Meja (2x 660MW) & received on 13.05.2010. Based on legal opinion
Raghunathpur (2x further documents sought from L&T. L&T
660MW) (of DVC) Bid was rejected due to modifications in Joint
Deed of Undertaking (JDU)). Stage-I
Evaluation approved on 16.08.2010.
L&T filed a Writ Petition on 5th September,
2010 before Hon’ble High Court of Delhi and
subsequently filed a Special Leave Petition
(SLP) which was taken up for hearing on
7th October, 2010 in Hon’ble Supreme Court
against their rejection. However, their
application filed for interim relief in the Writ
and the SLP were dismissed by the Hon’ble
High Court of Delhi and Hon’ble Supreme
Court on 14th September, 2010 and 25th
October, 2010 respectively.
Stage-II OBD was done on 08.10.2010.
Due to the delay in finalization of SG Package,
the Investment Approval could not be
accorded.
The Award of Steam Turbine Generator (STG)
Package was progressively done from
23.04.2012 onwards.
Bulk Tendering -II NIT for the package was issued on 04.02.2011
(800 MW) SG Package and Bidding documents were on sale from
Darlipalli (2x 800 MW), 07.02.2011 to 07.03.2011.
Gadarwara (2x 800 MW), Bid Opening for Stage-I (Techno-Commercial)
Lara (2x 800 MW), Kudgi was scheduled to be opened on 20.04.2011.
(2x 800 MW) However,   based   on  the  requests  from
prospective bidders, the last date for receipt
of bids and Bid opening was extended twice
and bids were opened on 01.06.2011.

14
12
Stage-I (Techno-Commercial) Evaluation
Report approved on 24.08.2011. Stage-II
(Price) Bid opened on 14.09.11 and subsequent
to evaluation of Stage-II (Price) Bid discussion
for price matching and various post-bid
tie-ups was done.
Award Recommendation for subject package
was approved on 29.11.2011 & Notification
of award was to be placed after receipt of
Investment Approval subsequent to
Environment Clearance (EC) and physical
possession of Land for Main Plant.
NOA for Kudgi Project was placed on
17.02.2012 (Environment Clearance was
received on 25.01.2012 and Land for Main
Plant was also available).
NOA for Lara Project placed on 13.12.2012
for SG package. (Environment Clearance
received on 13.12.2012 and Land for Main
Plant was available).
NOA for Gadarwara project placed on BHEL
on 22.03.2013 in substitution of Gajmara
project.
NOA for SG package for Darlipalli project
was placed to BHEL on 17.02.2014
(Environment Clearance was received on
17.02.2014 and Land for Main Plant was also
available).
Bulk Tendering -II NIT issued on 04.02.2011, Stage-I OBD
(800 MW) STG done on 03.06.2011. Stage-II Invitation issued
Package on 25.08.2011 & Stage-II OBD done on
Darlipalli 15.09.2011.
(2x 800 MW), Gadarwara Stage-II Report put up on 21.09.2011 and
(2x 800 MW), Lara approved on 27.10.2011

15
12
(2x 800 MW), Kudgi Award of STG Package for Lara and Darlipalli
(2x 800 MW) on BGR, STG Package for Gajmara on BHEL
and STG Package for Kudgi on Toshiba JSW
Turbine & Generator Private Limited on
29.11.2011 was finalised subject to Investment
approval subsequent to Environmental
clearance and physical possession of land for
Main Plant of respective Projects.
Environmental Clearance for Kudgi issued on
25.01.2012 (Award to be placed along with
SG as per approval). NOA placed on
17.02.2012.
Environmental Clearance for Lara issued on
13.12.2012. NOA placed on 13.12.2012.
NTPC Board on 28.12.2012 approved the
proposal for substitution of Gajmara to
Gadarwara subject to clearance from Member
(Energy), Planning Commission. Approval
from Planning Commission received through
Ministry of Power vide  letter dated
18.02.2013. Environmental clearance received
vide letter dated 22.03.2013. NOA placed on
22.03.2013.
NOA for Darlipalli project could not be issued
in absence of Investment Approval,
Environment Clearance and physical
possession of Land for Main Plant. BGR
refused to extend validity of their bid beyond
09.03.2013. NTPC on 25.06.2013 resolved
the proposal for invitation of fresh bids for
STG Package for Darlipalli.
Fresh bids invited on 18.09.2013 and award
placed on 17.02.2014 on Toshiba JSW.

16
Projects Not awarded yet    Shortfall of Rs. 57,174 crore
Barethi Super Thermal Captive Coal block (Banai) allocated in
Power Station (4x 660 Mar’15. Since the block was unexplored, the
MW +2x 660 MW) EC & FC for the project could not be taken
up by MoEF. NTPC had sought bridge linkage
for the project. Standard Linkage Committee
has recommended the same in its meeting
dated 18.03.2016. Formal linkage awaited.
Gajmara Super Thermal Coal linkage was not available. Further signed
Power Station PPA for the project not yet received. Hence
(2x 800 MW) project not being pursued.
Katwa Thermal Power Coal Linkage for the project was not available.
Project (2x 660 MW) Govt. of West Bengal offered coal from its
share of Deocha Pachami coal block and
sought approval from MoC, which is awaited.
Lalam Koduru (Previously NTPC   proposed  use  of  imported  coal.
Pudimadaka) Environmental clearance got delayed as various
Vishakapatnam TPS inputs were sought. Delay also in finalizing
(4x 1000 MW) the site by the State Government. Project
further delayed since State Government has
sought views on developing the project with
domestic Coal instead of imported coal.
Projects Scrapped     Shortfall of Rs. 26,646 crore
Badarpur Exp (3x350 MW) Gas Projects were kept under hold in line
with the communication issued by MoP dated
14th March, 2012 stating that “Developers
are advised not to plan projects based on
domestic gas till 2015-16". Project cannot be
taken up without gas availability.
Dhuvran Thermal Power NTPC wanted to develop project on imported
Station (2 x 660 MW + coal   considering   in  long  transportation
(1 x 660 MW) requirements for domestic coal. The same was
not agreed to Govt. of Gujarat and they

17
       1                 2
conveyed that the project shall be developed
by them.
Gidderbaha Thermal Project could not be taken forward due to
Power Station non-availability of coal. Further, the cost would
(4x 660 MW) be very high, since it would involve coal
transportation over long distance.
Khasiabara HEPP Forest clearance was not accorded and the
(3 x 87 MW) project had to be scrapped.
(B) THDC
The reasons, project wise, for shortfall are:
(i) Tehri PSP (1000 MW)
In 1000 MW Tehri PSP, progress of the Project initially hampered
due to non finalization of lay out of power house by the EPC Contractor
and due to poor geology encountered near the farthest end of Power
House. Subsequently stoppage of works by the villagers at Asena Quarry
and dumping area in Chopra Village stalled the works. Progress had been
slow due to poor geology being encountered which was in variance to GBR
(Geotechnical Baseline Report) made in beginning. Ban imposed by the
Distt. Administration on quarrying from Asena Quarry and dumping area
being main reasons for delay:
Other factors include:—
• Regular hindrances in Chopra dumping area by the local
population.
• Delay in diversion case of 4.668 Ha. Forest Land for dumping
area at Village Chopra.
• Variation in geological conditions (Class IV & V rocks)
encountered at Site from the GBR provided in the contract,
stabilization measures and construction methodology had to
be changed, requiring extensive support system in structures.
• Slow progress coupled with monthly contractual recovery of
advances led to poor fund flow of the Civil Works contractor
M/SHCC.

18
(ii) V ishnugad Pipalkoti HEP (444 MW)
In 444 MW Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project in Uttarakhand;
due to delay in Stage-II Forest Clearance (non transfer of 80.507 ha Forest
Land), Contract for the main works could not be awarded. After issuance
of G.O. by GoUK on 6th Dec, 2013, the main Civil Works could be
awarded on 19.12.2013.
Other factors include:—
• Law and Order Problem: The work progress at various fronts
hampered due to frequent stoppage of works by the local
pressure groups demanding employment and petty contracts.
Since award of the work in Jan, 2014, the work was stopped
at various occasions at very close intervals.
• Geological Variations: Poor geological conditions encountered
at modified sites for Main Access Tunnel (MAT) and V entilation
Tunnel (Adit to the Power House top).
• Cash Crunch with the civil contractor M/s HCC and old
machine & equipments deployed at project.
(iii) Dhukwan SHEP (24 MW)
Civil works of Dhukwan SHEP , which was planned to be awarded
in July, 14 could not be awarded due to delay in clearance of forest land
by GoUP. It could be awarded on 30t Oct, 14 and delay in cutting of trees
by Forest Department. Due to this delay the activities and corresponding
funds flow has to be shifted to F.Y . 2015-16.
(iv) Others (New Projects)
Hon’ble Supreme Court has passed order on 13th August, 2013
directing MoEF and State of Uttarakhand not to grant any Environmental
clearance or Forest clearance for any new hydro electric project in the
State of Uttarakhand until further orders. Five Projects to THDCIL namely
Jhelam Tamak HEP (108 MW), Malari Jhelam HEP (114 MW), Karmoli
(140 NW), Jadganga (50 MW) and Gohana Tal HEP (50 MW) are affected
due to this. Karmoli and Jadganga HEPs fall in Eco Sensitive Zone which
may have to be abandoned.

19
(C) NHPC
The reasons, project wise, for shortfall are given below.
(i) Subansiri Lower: Construction works of Subansiri Lower
(2000 MW) HEP of NHPC, located on the border of Arunachal
Pradesh and Assam are stand still since 16.12.2011 due to
local agitation by various protesting groups and stay on
resumption of work by NGT, Kolkata vide order dated
11.12.2015. At present, preparatory works as required for the
resumption of construction activities are going on. Downstream
protection & developmental works and CSR works are also in
progress. Further, in line with NGT order dated 11.12.2015,
the project is also carrying out emergent protection works as
required for safety of partially constructed dam blocks as well
as the Power House and Water Conductor structures including
execution of COW (Cut Off Wall) work.
(ii) Parbati-II: Broad reasons which have contributed in extension
of completion date of the projects are as given below:
• Initial delay in start of Dam works due to delay in
Revised Forest clearance.
• Back hill slope failure of Power House three times
• Burial of TBM due to heavy ingress of water
with silt from TBM face.
• Ban on use of aggregates by Hon’ble High Court,
Shimla.
• Flash flood in Jigrai Nallah four times.
• Encountering of Poor Geological conditions during
excavation of HRT by TBM.
(iii) Kishanganga: Work has been delayed due to restriction
imposed by the International Court of Arbitration for works in
river bed, agitation by project effected people and adverse law
& order problem in the Kashmir valley since 09.07.2016.
(iv) Uri-II, Nimmo Bazgo, Chutak: Planned expenditure in these

20
projects could not be utilized due to delay in tendering and
ongoing bandh/strikes in valley.
(v) Projects under clearances and S&I stage: Less utilization
on account of delay in clearances from MoEF for Teesta-IV,
Twang-I&II, Dibang projects and Implementation stay from
Hon’ble Supreme Court for Kotli Bhe-IA project.
(vi) Delay in award of major works in Pakal Dul HE Project (1000
MW) by CVPPL.
SJVNL
The reasons project-wise, for shortfall are given below:—
(i) Kholongchhu HEP: Formation of Joint Venture (JV) was
under process.
(ii) Wangchhu HEP: Detailed Project Report (DPR) approval and
finalization of Share Holders Agreement (SHA) was awaited.
Project could not take off due to non-finalization of Share
Holders Agreement (SHA) by Druk Green Power Corporation
(DGPC).
(iii) Rampur HEP: One of the main reasons for under-utilization
of budget in respect of Electro-Mechanical Works of Rampur
Hydro Power Station was because of non-submission of
invoices by Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) for the
supply and works already completed.
(iv) Uttarakhand Projects: Environment and Forest Clearance
for Devsari HEP and Naitwar Mori HEP were awaited from
MoEF&CC, GoI for want of Hon’ble Supreme Court verdict.
Embargo was lifted in November, 2015. For Jakhol Sankri
HEP, National Board of Wild Life (NBWL) Clearance was
awaited.
(v) Dhaulasidh HEP: PIB Clearance was awaited. SJVN was
asked to find ways and means to reduce the tariff in view of
high cost of the project.

21
(vi) Luhri HEP: Project re-planned as staged development. Stage-
III (Sunni Dam) was allocated to Himachal Pradesh Power
Corporation Limited (HPPCL) by Government of Himachal
Pradesh (GoHP) on 10.06.16. Stage-II was within
submergence of proposed Sunni Dam of HPPCL, so
investigations of Stage-II & Stage-III could not be taken up.
However, Sunni Dam HEP has now been reallocated to SJVN
vide GoHP letter dated 23.01.17 and process for survey and
investigation has now been initiated.
(vii) Devsari HEP: Environment Clearance/Forest Clearance is
awaited, delaying the project to progress into construction
phase. Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) recommended the
diversion of forest land subject to fulfillment of certain
conditions.
(viii) Jakhol Sankri HEP: No objection from National Board of
Wild Life (NBWL) was accorded on 23.08.16. Techno
Economic Clearance (TEC), Environment Clearance and Forest
Clearance are awaited.
(ix) Arun-3 HEP: Delay in acquisition of private land and diversion
of forest land by Government of Nepal resulting delay in
access for the Project. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) approval accorded on 22.02.17.
(x) Buxar Thermal Power Project: Infrastructure work delayed
due to pending Environment Clearance. Environment Clearance
accorded on 28.02.17. Coal block de-allocated and as a result
alternative coal block will be required for which fresh
application has been made to Ministry of Coal and matter is
being examined by Ministry of Coal, Government of India.
The variations in actual expenditure are attributed to the delay in
scheme finalization (DPR Clearance), statutory clearances etc. Currently
Investment Decisions for Main works in respect of Buxar Thermal Power
Project, Naitwar Mori HEP, Dhaulasidh HEP and Devsari HEP while for
Pre-construction activities of Luhri Stage-I & II, Sunni Dam HEP and
Jakhol Sankri HEP are in pipeline.

22
(II) The following measures have been taken for effective
monitoring and improving the performance.
Ministry Level
(i) A Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up by
the Ministry of Power for monitoring of on-going projects.
(ii) Regular reviews are also undertaken by Ministry of Power,
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Cabinet Secretariat to identify
the constraint areas and facilitate faster resolution of inter-
ministerial and other outstanding issues.
(iii) Central Electricity Authority (CEA) monitors the progress of
under construction power projects through frequent site visits
and interaction with the developers and equipment suppliers.
CEA holds review meetings periodically with the developers
and other stakeholders and identify issues critical for
commissioning of projects and help in resolving them.
(iv) In case of Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSUs)
Projects, the project implementation parameters/milestones are
incorporated in the annual MoU signed between respective
CPSUs and MoP and the same are monitored during the
quarterly performance review meeting of CPSU’s and other
meetings held in MoP/CEA.
(v) Matters are being taken up with State Government/District
Administration and they are extending help to the project
implementing agencies in resolving ROW issues.
(vi) Issues are also raised in PRAGATI, for proactive governance
and timely implementation, as and when required.
(vii) The progress of the projects is regularly uploaded on the
Government websites for online monitoring.
(viii) Form year 2015-16, target of CAPEX has been made mandatory
in the MoU to be signed between Ministry of Power and
CPSUs.

23
Organisation Level
(i) Apart from the periodical site visits, Project Review Team
(PRT) meetings and Project Review Meeting (PRM) are held
by the Project Monitoring department.
(ii) Project Review Meetings are periodically held with the
Contractor to evaluate performance and resolve the issues to
expedite progress.
(iii) In addition to above, an external Project Review Panel (PRP)/
Technical Advisory Committee is also invited as and when
required to review the project progress and advise on technical
matters.
(III) It may be observed from the above that majority of the factors/
reasons are external which are beyond the control of CPSUs and therefore
it may not be possible to place the responsibility for delay(s) on any
particular officer /official of the CPSUs Review of the monitoring mechanisms
is a continuous process at both the Ministry and organization level and
efforts are to ensue for better monitoring and control so that the timelines
set for execution of the projects are adhered to.
[Ministry of Power F. No.10/2/2017, Budget Date7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.2.4)
The Committee note that a target of 88,537 MW has been fixed for
capacity addition during the 12th Plan Period. The Committee are glad to
note that against this target, a generation capacity to the tune of 93,535.47
MW, have already been installed in the country. Due to this massive capacity
addition and overachieving of targets, the country has moved from power
deficiency to power sufficiency. However, the fact that disturbs the
Committee are the poor performance of CPSUs and non-achievement of
targets by them. For the entire Plan, they had been assigned the target
26,182 MW, however, they could add only 17,047.62 MW capacity during
the period. Their poor performance becomes more conspicuous when we
juxtapose it with that of States and Private Sector which have done
exceptionally well. Both the sectors have exceeded their targets by big
margins. The Committee believe that for the proper development of power

24
sector, the contribution of all the three sectors i.e. Central, State and
Private Sectors should be as assigned and they should compete with one
another in outdoing. The role of Central Sector in providing electricity at
lower tariff is still indispensable. In view of this the justification that it does
not matter as long as overall capacity addition targets are achieved, is not
convincing. The Committee feel that the present crisis of higher tariff and
low PLF of thermal plants could be attributed to imbalance in the share of
capacity addition among the three sectors. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the performances of CPSUs be improved by making all
the possible efforts. It is not the first time that the Central Sector has
performed poorly. Their performance even during the 11th Plan has equally
been poor, which led to slippage of projects of 21,654 MW capacity into
12th Plan. Therefore, the Central Sector, during the 12th Plan period, could
not complete even their projects that slipped from 11th to 12th Plan.
Despite the advantage of technical expertise, resources and manpower
recurrence of non-performance by CPSUs during the last two plan periods
is a cause of serious concern and Government should seriously introspect
about it for effective remedial measures.
Reply of the Government
The generation capacity addition target set for the 12th Plan was
88,537 MW from conventional sources of energy. Against the target, a
capacity addition of 99,209 MW has been achieved. The sector-wise and
fuel-wise generation capacity addition achievement vis-a-vis target is given
below:
Sector Thermal Hydro Nuclear T otal
Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach.
Central 14878 15868.6 6004 2584.02 5300 2000 26182 20452.62
State 13922 22201.35 1608 2276 0 0 15530 24477.35
Private 43540 53660.5 3285 619 0 0 46825 54279.5
All India 72340 91730.45 10897 5479.02 5300 2000 88537 99209.47
It is true that overall achievement of the Central Sector during the
12th Plan period was 78% of the target. As can be seen from above that,
against the target of 26,182 MW, a capacity addition of 20453 MW (78%)

25
has been achieved by the Central Sector comprising of 15,867 MW thermal,
2584 MW hydro and 2000 MW nuclear.
However, the capacity addition achieved by the Central Sector in
thermal has been 15,867 MW against the target of 14878 MW, which is
107% of the target. The gap between the overall target and achievement
in case of central sector can be attributed to the slippage in capacity
addition on account of hydro and nuclear. In case of nuclear, against the
capacity addition target of 5300 MW, only 2000 MW has been achieved
which is only 37.7% of the target.
In case of hydro, there has been an overall slippage of capacity
addition. Against the capacity addition target of 10897 MW in the 12th
Plan, only 5479 MW has been achieved. This is approximately 50.3% of
the target. Capacity addition achieved from Central Sector is 2584.02 MW
against the target of 6004 MW. This is around 43 % of the target. Private
Sector could achieve 18.8% of the target.
The Hydro Sector is plagued by a number of factors which have
affected its development and is reflected in the shortfall in capacity
achievement. The various reasons for slipping of the projects are geological
uncertainties, delay in land acquisition, R&R issues, forest and environment
issues, contractual issues, inter-state issues, funds constraints, local issues,
poor infrastructure, natural calamities, inter-state issues, court cases etc.
Further, to improve the capacity addition performance of the power
sector public undertakings, and to ensure that the projects are commissioned
on time, the Government has taken the following steps:—
(i) The project implementation parameters / milestones are
incorporated in the annual MoU signed between respective
CPSU’s and MoP and the same are monitored during the
quarterly performance review meetings of CPSU’s and other
meetings held in MoP/CEA.
(ii) The issues related to erection and supply of Electro-Mechanical
equipment is expedited with BHEL in various meetings held in
CEA/MoP and other local issues affecting the progress of
works are taken up with respective State Governments by the
Concerned CPSU/MoP.

26
(iii) Further, the following monitoring mechanism is in place in
Ministry of Power to coordinate country’s hydro capacity
addition programme and to ensure that it proceeds smoothly:—
(a) Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the
under construction hydro power projects (above 25
MW) in pursuance of Section 73 (f) of Electricity Act,
2003. The progress of each project is monitored
continuously through site visits, interaction with the
developers & other stake holders. Chairperson, CEA
holds review meetings with the Power Projects
Monitoring Panel (PPMP) and monitoring divisions of
CEA.
(b) Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP), set up by the
Ministry of Power, independently follow up and monitors
the progress of the hydro projects.
(c) Ministry of Power also reviews the progress of ongoing
hydroelectric projects regularly with the concerned
officers of CEA, equipment manufacturers, State Utilities/
CPSUs/Project developers, etc.
[Ministry of Power F. No.10/2/2017 Budget Date7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No.2.5)
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
The Committee note that the Government has approved DDUGJY
with a total investment of rupees 43,033 crores in the country for feeder
separation and strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution network.
Rural electrification is the core activity under the scheme. Projects worth
rupees 15,596 crores have been approved by the Government of India for
feeder separation. As on 1st April, 2015, there were 18,452 un-electrified
villages in the country. Till 31st January, 2017, 11,941 villages have been
electrified and the electrification of the remaining villages is targeted by
May, 2018. The Committee have been apprised that projects for rural
electrification have been sanctioned irrespective of the population criteria.
The Committee feel that the figures regarding electrification of villages need

27
to be rechecked as far as the number of un-electrified villages are concerned.
It is not a question of census villages only. As per the guidelines of the
DDUGJY, all the habitations irrespective of number of population are to be
electrified under the scheme. Hence, the criteria of census villages does not
go well. The Committee are apprised that figures regarding electrification
of un-electrified villages are given by the State Government and in federal
structure, we have to act accordingly. The Committee are aware of the
Constitutional and administrative limitations. However, these limitations cannot
be roadblock for depriving the people from their legitimate rights. Some
mechanism will have to be evolved in consultation with the States or
through suo moto action to ascertain accurate number of electrified villages.
Taking the basic criteria into account of the scheme, a joint mechanism can
also be thought of leaving no scope for any ambiguity with regard to
number of un-electrified villages. If the status quo remains regarding
electrification under the scheme, then in all likelihoods, it will become a
tailspin. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a fresh thinking
should be given by all concerned with regard to the number of un-electrified
villages in the country so that the measures under the scheme could be
taken us to electrify them.
Reply of the Government
In order to electrify all the un-electrified villages in the country,
States were requested to provide the list of un-electrified villages as on
01.04.2015 duly identified by their census code. Accordingly, States submitted
list of 18,452 un-electrified census villages in the country and all the un-
electrified has been sanctioned under DDUGJY. Thereafter, during execution
States have informed some additional un-electrified villages for which in
principal approval has already been given to electrify these villages with in
sanctioned cost. Notwithstanding, States have once again been requested
to include all the un-electrified census villages under ongoing DDUGJY
scheme within the total sanctioned cost.
As regard to electrification of habitations is concerned, based on the
information available with REC, it is estimated that there are total 16.07
Lakh habitations in the country, of these 5.38 Lakh habitations are 100%
electrified and 5.84 lakh habitations are having DT capacity for 100%
household electrification. The States have been requested to give priority to

28
provide 100% electricity access in all the habitations under DDUGJY
projects.
[Ministry of Power F. No.10/2/2017, Budget, Date7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that as per the census of India, the lowest
primary administrative unit is a village. However, the villages are of different
sizes in terms of population depending upon the geography of area, availability
of land and water, etc. Under the scheme, a village is declared as electrified
if (i) basic infrastructure such as Distribution Transformer and Distribution
Lines are provided in the inhabited locality as well as the Dalit Basti/ hamlet
where it exists (For electrification through Non-Conventional Energy Sources
a Distribution Transformer may not be necessary), (ii) electricity is provided
to public places like school Panchayat Office, Health Centres, Dispensaries,
Community Centres, etc., and (iii) the number of household electrified
should be at least 10% of the total number of households in the village.
Under DDUGJY , all Census villages are eligible to be covered for
electrification. Although present definition envisages electrification of at
least 10% households, DDUGJY scheme provides for creating access to
electricity for all households. The Committee feel that the definition of the
electrified village need a revisit as only 10 per cent electrification of a
village makes it eligible to be declared as electrified village. Most of the
small villages in the country do not have public places like schools, Panchayat
Office, Health Centres, Dispensaries, Community Centre, etc. and hence
are out of the ambit of the definition of electrified village. This kind of
approach does not serve the purpose as the scheme aims at electrification
of smallest of the village. The need for intensive electrification of partial
electrified villages arises due to such discrepancies only. The repeat exercise
of identical nature in the same village is nothing but wastage of time and
resources. Electrification of a village should be electrification of the entire
village and be not categorized as partial or intensive electrification. This
kind of approach belies the basic objective of the scheme as out of 7,60,967
partial electrified villages, 4,14,487 villages have been intensively electrified
during the last 3 years and thus leaving huge number of villages for
intensive electrification. The Committee feel that this kind of approach
should be avoided as far as definition of electrified villages are concerned.

29
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the definition of
electrified village should be amended and a village should be treated as
electrified only after the 100 percent electrification of the entire village is
done. Also, the Government should contemplate to provide three phase line
in the villages which are nearing completion or yet to be electrified under
the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view, the objective of scheme to provide access to
electricity to all rural households, it is envisaged to create rural electricity
infrastructure in un-electrified villages as well as in already electrified villages.
Creation of rural electricity infrastructure in already electrified villages for
providing access to electricity to remaining un-electrified households and
providing free electricity connections to BPL households has been termed
as ‘Intensive Electrification of Villages’ under this scheme. Under Intensive
Electrification (IE) mainly lines are erected and capacity of distribution
transformer is enhanced.
Notwithstanding the current definition of electrification of villages,
the emphasis of the Government of India is to provide 100% household
electricity connection in the country. State Power Utilities are being pursued
to provide 100% household’s connectivity in un-electrified villages as well
as electrified villages on priority.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017, Budget, Date7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)
The Committee note that power sector has been reeling under huge
financial losses and it has placed massive burden on Union and the State
Governments. Power distribution is a vital link in chain of power generation
and supply. The financial health of the entire power sector depends on the
financial viability of power distribution sector. With a view to affect
turnaround in the sector, Government launched various schemes since
2000 and 2001 onwards. Restructured Accelerated Power Development
and Reform Programme (R-APDRP) was launched in the year 2008 with
a view to establish IT system for baseline data acquisition and for actual,

30
demonstrable performance in terms of AT&C losses reduction below
15 per cent on sustainable basis. This was implemented in towns with
population of more than 30,000. IPDS scheme was launched by the
Government in the year 2014 to extend financial assistance against the
capital expenditure to address the gap in sub-transmission and distribution
network and metering in urban areas to supplement the resources of
DISCOMs. The component of IPDS inter alia include (i) strengthening of
sub-transmission and distribution network in the urban areas; (ii) metering
of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in the urban areas and
(iii) IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening of distribution
network under R-APDRP for 12th and 13th Plans by carrying forward the
approved outlay of R-APDRP to IPDS. All DISCOMs including private and
State Power Departments will be eligible for financial assistance under the
scheme. The Committee have been apprised that achievements under IPDS
are on expected line and in-line with the annual targets. The Committee also
note that funding under IPDS shall also be for completion of optical fiber
missing links to connect all the 33 KV or 66 KV grid sub-stations under
the establishment of National Optical Fibre Network, establishment of
National Power Data hub at CEA and installation of solar panels. In the
opinion of the Committee, the scheme of IPDS should have resulted in
tangible AT&C loss reduction but it is yet to become a reality. As of now,
the various structures of IPDS may be in course of stabilization but the
areas where the network under IPDS is in place and where the experiment
process is over (particularly in Go-Live towns), result should be started
flowing in on a sustainable basis. The Committee believe that the data of
the IPDS may be available in Go-Live Towns and in the process of collection
and analysis. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the scheme of
IPDS as amended hitherto should be evaluated with regard to its performance
and corrective measures may be taken if the desired results are yet to
come.
Reply of the Government
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS), launched in December
2014 is designed to produce results of AT&C loss reduction by 2019-20.
As per scheme guidelines, 60% of Scheme Cost (85% for Special Category
States) is provided as grant and additional 15% of Scheme Cost (5% for
special category States) can be provided as grant only on achieving other

31
milestones including reduction of AT&C losses at Utility level as per agreed
AT&C loss reduction trajectory by 2019-20. Till date, award has already
been placed in 223 out of 538 circles for which the scheme has been
sanctioned. It is envisaged that State Utilities/Power Departments will place
award for most of the remaining circles by FY 2017-18 and implement the
project within next two years. As such, the impact of the scheme may
partially be visible from 2018-19 onwards. As suggested by the Committee,
a Third Party Concurrent Evaluation of the scheme would be carried out
for the Scheme. The Nodal agency is in process of appointing an agency
for the same.
It is submitted that a third party evaluation was conducted under
Restructured Accelerated Power Development & Reforms Programme
(R-APDRP) notified in September 2008 and presently subsumed under
IPDS. Further, Go-Live (i.e. IT enablement) has been reported in 1346 out
of 1405 towns with declaration of 100% towns as Go-Live reported in 23
out of 30 States. Utilities upload Post Go-Live reports on IPDS web portal
every month. Various Post Go-live parameters like AT&C loss reduction,
Consumer Grievance redressal, New Connection release, High loss feeders,
power reliability indices (SAIFI/SAIDI) and Feeder meter communication
etc. for Go-Live towns are being monitored on monthly basis and States
are being ranked based on improvement on these parameters. These
parameters are being shared in monthly RPM/Regional review meetings and
are available even in open platform through an URJA App developed by
PFC/MoP. As per Post Go-Live reports received online for 1248 towns for
February 2017, town-wise AT&C losses have been reported to have reduced
vis-a-vis baseline values in 1024 towns. As such, the results are on expected
lines.
An Impact Assessment Study of R-APDRP Go-Live towns conducted
through independent agencies appointed by MoP, GoI also revealed AT&C
loss reduction in 65 out of 76 sample Go-Live towns, where the study was
conducted. In view of above, it can be inferred that desired results are
being achieved through R-APDRP, now subsumed under IPDS.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017, Budget, Date7/6/2017]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that under that IPDS scheme Projects worth
Rs. 25,880 crore have been sanctioned for 3,597 towns in 537 circles.
Power Utilities have placed award for 189 circles and all circles are likely
to be awarded by March, 2018 and the execution is likely to be completed
within 24 months of the award. The Committee have also been apprised
that there has been immense improvement in urban areas including metering
progressively and AT&C losses are likely to reduce from financial year
2019-20. It has also been stated that reduction of  AT&C losses in different
utilities are likely to be different due to terrain, nature of loan and consumer
mix. Utilities have signed tripartite agreement with Central and State
Governments and 44 utilities have appointed Project Management Agencies.
Standard bidding document for implementing the IPDS project has also
been released. Under IPDS, the aim of reduction of DISCOM-wise AT&C
losses is to be achieved by 2021-22 as per trajectory and the loss reduction
trajectory has been finalised in consultation with all the State Governments.
The Committee find the timeline for reduction in AT&C losses very flexible.
The Committee are unable to comprehend about the flexibility in timeline
for loss reduction. The IT equipped network established under IPDS enables
us to identify the points of leakages and weaknesses. The towns which
have got the network have started showing the reasons for losses. In such
a situation, granting huge leverage in terms of time for loss reduction
appears to be unreasonable. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all
the States should be convinced to take follow up measures urgently to plug
the loopholes responsible for AT&C losses as identified by the IPDS scheme
and bring it to the desired level as early as possible.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power, Government of India and Power Finance
Corporation, the designated Nodal Agency for operationalization of Integrated
Power Development Scheme(IPDS), regularly impress upon State Utilities/
Power Departments to take follow up measures to plug loopholes as
identified through IT enabled system established in various towns under
Restructured Accelerated Power Development & Reforms Programme
(R-APDRP), presently subsumed under IPDS. As on 31st March’17, IT

33
enabled system has been reported to be established in 1346 towns out of
a total of 1405 towns, where the same was sanctioned under R-APDRP.
Various Post Go-live parameters like AT&C loss reduction, Consumer
Grievance redressal, New Connection release, High loss feeders, power
reliability indices (SAIFI/SAIDI) and Feeder meter communication etc. are
being monitored on monthly basis on IPDS portal and URJA App for Go-
Live towns and States are being ranked based on improvement on these
parameters. The performance of State Utilities based on said parameters is
discussed in monthly Review Planning and Monitoring meetings (Chaired
by Union Secretary (Power) that are attended by State Energy Secretaries
and/or heads of various DISCOMs, etc. apart from representatives from
MoP, GoI. As per Post Go-Live reports received online for 1248 towns for
February 2017, AT&C losses have been reported to be reduced vis-a-vis
baseline values in 1024 towns.
Ministry of Power, GoI has also started an ‘Online Feeder Monitoring
System (OFMS)’ for online porting of feeder data from Go-Live towns of
various State utilities on National Power Portal. Data from 24395 of about
32000 feeders in R-APDRP towns is being ported online on NPP. Monthly
reports based on said data are being generated online and are being sent
regularly to MDs of respective Discoms to enable them to initiate necessary
administrative actions for reduction of AT&C losses. Data from cumulative
of 31147 feeders is targeted for online porting by March’18.
MoP/PFC officials also regularly advise Utility officials in this regard.
However, in line with the recommendations of the Committee, a revised
trajectory for AT&C losses has been issued recently for the States keeping
in view the commitments under UDAY and IPDS.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date7/6/2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that an impact assessment study has been carried
out to assess the benefit of IT implementation under IPDS. The study was
conducted in 76 towns across 14 States where most of the towns have
been declared Go-Live covering 10 per cent of the Go-Live towns and
15 per cent feeders in the selected towns. The finding has suggested AT&C

34
loss reduction in 85% of these towns and the IT system identified the
pockets for corrective measures. In addition, the reliability of power and
improved consumer services are also the outcome of the newly placed
system. The Committee find that as far as the reliability of power and
improved consumer services are concerned, they are welcome steps, but
reduction in AT&C losses its vital component of the scheme. If this is
achieved early, other steps will automatically be taken care of. It is a fact
that positive impact of the scheme is beneficial to consumers as well as to
Discoms. The study also suggested that improvement in AT&C losses over
Baseline value in the sample 76 towns yielded annual monetary benefits of
rupees 185 crores. The proportionate annual monetary benefits extrapolated
on the basis of energy consumed in all towns are estimated to be about
5,000 crores. This is very significant development as the study has been
carried out only in 10 per cent of Go-live towns and 15 per cent of the
feeders in selected towns. If this is taken to be the trend and basis for
computation, then the results will be phenomenal. The Committee have also
been apprised that a study has been taken up on segregation of commercial
losses from overall AT&C losses in 10 pilot towns. The Committee are
aware that electricity is in concurrent domain and a lot needs to be done
by the States in this sector. Nonetheless, it is also a fact that loss reduction
trajectory has been decided in consultation with the State and towns which
has been declared Go-live and where IT enabled system is being established
spreading all across the country. Hence, no laxity can be permitted in the
name of governance issue as far as IPDS is concerned. The system once
established is capable of giving accurate data regarding leakages and losses
and hence there is no scope whatsoever for any complacency in this
regard. Segregation of commercial losses from overall AT&C losses will
give a further fillip to our efforts in fixing the loopholes. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that there should be no letup in our efforts
as far as implementation of the IPDS is concerned. Concerted and
coordinated efforts from all the concerned should be the hallmark for
fulfilment of the objectives under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power, GoI and PFC are striving to make concerted and
coordinated efforts with stakeholders for fulfilment of objectives under
Integrated Power Development Scheme.

35
Major efforts in the direction are as follows:
(i) Targeting Go-Live of balance 59 out of 1405 towns sanctioned
under R-APDRP by March 2018.
(ii) Tar geting completion of system strengthening works in
additional 400 towns under R-APDRP Part-B by March 2018.
(iii) Tar geting data from over 31000 feeders on National Power
Portal by March 2018.
(iv) Tar geting sanctions of IT enablement under IPDS in all States
by June 2017 for coverage of balance towns as per Census
2011 in the ambit of IT enabled energy audit.
(v) Targeting award under IPDS for over 473 Circles by March
2018.
(vi) Monthly Review, Planning and Monitoring meetings with all
stakeholders for discussing critical issues affecting
implementation and enabling their resolution, sharing of best
practices and discussions regarding Post Go-Live reports.
(vii) Sending regular reports based on Feeder data from 11KV
feeders on National Power Portal to Managing Directors of
respective Discoms to enable them to initiate administrative
and technical interventions for reduction of AT&C losses.
(viii) Ranking of various States/DISCOMs/Towns on various
parameters like A T&C losses, SAIDI, SAIFI, Pending Consumer
Complaints, Pending Connections, E-Payment etc. based on
Town-wise Post Go-Live reports received online from various
Utilities. This enables creation of positive competitiveness
among various Discoms and facilitates improvement. Said
rankings are also discussed in monthly RPMs and are available
in public domain also on URJA App and web portal
urjaindia.co.in, both developed by PFC under the aegis of
MoP.
(ix) Coordination for adoption 1912, the short code for electricity
complaints, by all Utilities on pan-India basis and on toll-free

36
basis to ensure consumer connect. As on date 1912 has already
been implemented in 45/49 Government DISCOMs (41 with
all service providers) and has been implemented as Toll free
facility in 37 DISCOMs.
[Ministry of Power F. No. 10/2/2017- Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No.2.10)
Ujjawal DISCOMs Assurance Yojana (UDAY)
The Committee note that UDAY has been launched with the objective
to provide a sustainable financial and operational turnaround of Discoms
making available permanent solutions to legacy debts and also to address
potential future losses. It aims at empowering distribution companies with
the opportunity to achieve breakeven in the next few years through certain
initiatives. The initiatives inter alia include operational efficiency, importance
to reduce average AT&C losses and elimination of gap between ACS and
ARR by 2018-19. It also envisages increased supply of cheaper domestic
coal, rationalizing coal linkages, liberal coal sweeping, coal price
rationalization based on GCV, supply of washed and crushed coal, etc. The
Committee feel that these are the welcome measures and will greatly enhance
the efficiency of the power sector. The Committee are also aware that
power is a Concurrent Subject and it is the States which have to shoulder
the responsibility with sincerity to offset their regulatory assets.
Union Government can only be the Friend, Philosopher and Guide in pursuit
of their goal for liquidity of arrears accumulated over the years by the
DISCOMs. The Government of India have devised a strategy after careful
consideration of every aspect involved in the process. It is for the State
Government to cooperate and seek guidance of the Union Government in
case of any difficulties in implementing such an emancipating scheme, i.e.,
UDAY . The Committee, therefore, recommend that every effort should be
made to prompt the States to show the results by performing as per the
structure of the scheme so that the electricity sector as a whole is brought
out from the present dire state of affairs.
Reply of the Government
An inter-ministerial Monitoring Committee, headed by Secretary
(Power) takes review of the Scheme at regular intervals to assess the

37
progress as well as to find the solutions of various difficulties faced by the
States/UTs during the implementation of the Scheme. So far, Seven Meetings
of the Monitoring Committee have taken place.
A web-portal and a mobile App have also been developed and are
operational now. Data on a wide range of performance parameters is
captured in the system which provides useful insights to States as well as
Central Government and also enables to initiate timely action and to avoid
any slippages.
One to one discussions with States for evaluating Discom performance
has also been initiated and the first such meeting with the four focussed
States of Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab and Bihar was held on 06.02.2017.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that the financial turnaround of the distribution
companies under UDAY has been envisaged after careful consideration of
the nitty-gritty involved therein. Under the scheme, States will take over 75
per cent of the Discom debt as on 30 September, 2015 over two years of
which 50 per cent will be taken over in the year 2015-16 and 25 per cent
in the year 2016-17 respectively. It will also entail the reduction of interest
on the debt taken over by the States to around 8-9 per cent from 14 to
15 per cent. There are provisions for spreading the financial burden on
States over 3 years to give flexibility in managing interest payments and
incentives/ disincentives for future financial performance for the participating
States. States are also to take over and fund at least 50 per cent of the
future losses of Discoms in a graded manner. Such States shall also be
supported with additional coal at notified price and in case of availability
through higher capacity utilization, low cost power from NTPC and other
Central sector PSUs. In addition, the debt of Discoms not taken over by
the States shall be converted by the banks, financial institutions into loans
or bond with interest rate not more than banks base rates plus 0.1 per cent.
Alternately, this debt may be fully or partly issued by the Discoms as State
Guaranteed Discom Bonds at the prevailing market prices which shall be
equal to or less than the bank base rate plus 0.1 per cent. While lauding

38
the concept of the scheme, the Committee also appreciate the limited scope
of maneuverability available for evolving an effective strategy. Within the
given limitations, the ways suggested in the scheme for financial turnaround
will be helpful, if implemented with the required urgency, true spirit and
genuine intention. At some stage, the servicing of bonds will have to be
done and it can only be done in a comfortable financial situation. Financial
comforts can be achieved by the Discoms through rigorous discipline,
sincere efforts, targeted timelines and strict implementation of the strategy.
All the stakeholders will also have to display an exemplary resilience jointly
and severally in fulfillment of the target. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend and call upon all the stakeholders, i.e., State Government,
Distribution Companies, Banks, Financial Institutions, Consumers, etc. to
take up the issues as a mission so that the scheme become a success and
distribution companies are out of woods.
Reply of the Government
Every effort is being made to ensure that with the support of all the
stakeholders, the objectives of UDAY Scheme are achieved within the
stipulated timelines.
[Ministry of Power F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date7.6.2017]
Recommendations (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that so far 20 States and one Union Territory
have signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Government
of India under UDAY . In addition, discussions on UDAY are also underway
with some other States who have shown interest to join the scheme. The
Committee feel that the response of the States is encouraging as even they
perceive it to be a genuine effort to rectify the problem plaguing the
electricity sector. Despite the fact that there is no specific budgetary
provision under the scheme, yet the response of the States shows that they
are looking forward to this scheme to better their prospects in the energy
sector. However, there are provisions under schemes like IPDS, DDUGJY,
PSDF, etc. which may act as a catalyst to perform the obligations of the
UDAY . Under the scheme, the provision of States borrowing against the 75
per cent outstanding debt would be outside FRBM limits is a great incentive.
In addition, Discoms debts have been identified as the contingent liability

39
of the States. In all, all the factors prima facie make the scheme a recipe
for sustainable, financial and operational turnaround. Finding the scheme
attractive, most of the States/Discoms have submitted their action plan and
all the States have appointed Nodal Officers for better and smooth
coordination of all the activities under the scheme. There is three-tier
monetary mechanism in addition to the one being done on monthly basis
at the Ministerial level. The Committee find the participation of States
overwhelming which is a testimony of the scheme being acceptable to
them for a smooth sailing to the desired conclusion. While commending the
efforts, the Committee recommend that there should be some interactive
mechanism which may suggest redressal of difficulties during the course
of its implementation. This interactive mechanism may consist of
stakeholders and corrective course of action, if required, may be taken
based on their input while implementing the scheme. However, the timelines
in this regard are of great essence and it should be ensured that they are
adhered to religiously and it should not go on like DDUGJY in which case
it will lose its sheen and relevance.
Reply of the Government
The progress of all major Operational and Financial parameters are
being monitored through Inter-Ministerial Monitoring committee headed by
the Secretary (Power), GoI. Any deviation/slippages on the part of any
Utility are also being brought to the notice of concerned State/DISCOM
through quarterly detailed analysis reports and one-to-one focussed meeting
with them.
The implementation and progress monitoring framework of UDAY
has been planned as under:
(i) For overall monitoring of the Scheme, three tier monitoring
committees at DISCOMs level, State level & Central level
have been constituted with defined roles & responsibilities;
(a) Level-1: DISCOM level Monitoring Committee —
Headed by CMD/MD of Discoms. It is envisaged that
activities and the progress under the scheme shall closely
be monitored by the head of Discoms in detail atleast
once in a month and ensure resolving the Discoms
specific and local issues, if any;

40
(b) Level-2: State level Monitoring Committee — Headed
by CS/ ACS/ Principal Secretary-Energy/Power. Most
of the states have already constituted the State level
committees under the scheme. This committee is
expected to conduct monthly meeting to monitor the
implementation of the scheme in the state as a whole
and to resolve state specific issues, if any, including the
state GENCOs & TRANSCOs;
(c) Level-3: Central level Monitoring Committee (Monitoring
Committee) — Consisting of inter-ministerial/
organisational representative and headed by the
Secretary(Power), GoI. The constituted committee has
been meeting at reasonable intervals to discuss & resolve
various issues comes up related to implementation of
the scheme. So far 7 meetings of the Monitoring
Committee have been held under the chairmanship of
the Secretary (Power), Government of India.
(ii) S tate/Discoms have to prepare the detailed Action Plan, showing
the activity wise comprehensive roadmap for achieving the
objectives. All the states except J&K and Uttarakhand have
submitted the action plan.
(iii) Similarly, every DISCOM/ State has to appoint a nodal officer
under the scheme for better and smooth co-ordination of all
the activities of the scheme. All the states have already
appointed the nodal officers.
(iv) In addition to the above monitoring mechanism, the scheme
is also being periodically monitored in the monthly RPMs, by
the Hon'ble Minister of State (I/C) for Power/Coal /New and
Renewable Energy and Mines as well as at the PMO level.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee are happy to note that States have already taken over
the Discoms debt of around 1,84,000 crores under UDAY . This has led to

41
some relief to Discoms by way of savings in interest and increase in cash
flow. This can be attributed as a positive outcome of the scheme. Certain
other important features of the scheme like Feeder Metering, Domestic
Connections, UJALA, Rural Feeder (Audit), etc. are showing encouraging
results. However, there are other parameters like Feeder Segregation, DT
Metering (Urban), Feeder improvement, Feeder Metering (Rural) are areas
which need greater concentration as they are very vital for the success of
the scheme. There are also States whose outstanding dues as on
31st March, 2015 are extremely high. In this category, UP has the dues of
more than 21,000 crores, Maharashtra 17,952 crores, Karnataka
11,518 crores, Telangana 7,470 crores, Tamil Nadu 7,462 crores, Haryana
6,197 crores, etc. The Committee, however, have not been apprised of the
latest figure for the year 2016. The Committee feel that despite dues
amounting to lakhs of crores of rupees, a beginning was required to
address the issue and it has been made. If implemented with sincerity,
UDAY will give desired results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the pace of the scheme need to be maintained at all costs and State
Governments be alerted from time to time regarding their obligations under
the scheme. Awareness campaign should also be launched about the
objectives of this scheme among the masses to enable them to understand
the scheme in the proper perspective and benefits which will flow from it
in due course of time.
Reply of the Government
Twenty Six States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh & Uttarakhand) and one Union Territory
(Puducherry) have signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
the Government of India under UDAY.
As on date, Bonds to the tune of Rs.2,08,641 crore have been issued
by 15 States. Apart from this, Discoms have also issued Bonds worth
Rs. 23,859 crore as on date under the scheme.
Awareness to masses is being carried out through a dedicated Web
Portal and App. REC is sending out regular tweets on social media on the

42
progress of UDAY . Further, the Ministry is also undertaking efforts to
publicize the benefits of UDAY and dispel myths pertaining to UDAY through
periodic media and analyst meets.
[Ministry of Power F. No.10/2/2017-Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that as per reassessment studies of
hydro-electric potential carried out by the Central Electricity Authority during
1978–87, the country have the hydro power potential to the tune of 1,48,701
MW. Against this, at present, hydro power installed capacity is 44,189
MW. The ministry have informed that hydro power projects of 12,217 MW
area under construction whereas, projects having capacity of 26,160 MW
have been concurred by Central Electricity Authority (CEA). The committee
also note that the development of hydro power projects have been very
slow in the country and a total capacity addition of just about 5181 MW
has only been achieved during the 12th Plan so far. The Ministry have
admitted that over the years, the hydro projects are becoming increasingly
costlier mainly due to increased costs associated with environment and
Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R). The Committee are aware of the
numerous benefits of hydro power and have been advocating for their
speedy development so that their development cost could be kept to the
lowest possible. The prime deterrence in development of hydro power as
stated by the Ministry is initial high tariff. Apart from this environmental
issue, local protest and difficult terrains have also been enumerated as the
reasons behind their slow growth. The Committee are dismayed by these
excuses for not developing hydro power sector at desired pace. All these
problems were also there in the development of solar sector — be its
higher tariff, requirement of vast land, etc. However, when the Government
is determined to develop the sector, most of the problems got resolved. The
latest tariff of solar power has now come down to below 3 levels.
Considering the benefit of hydro power for the entire power sector, the
committee are astonished as why the sector has not been given the due
attention so far. Apart from being a clean and green source of energy, it
can be used as a balancing power for intermittent renewable power and
peaking power. The committee strongly believe that merely focusing on

43
solar energy without hydro power will create disturbances in power sector
by adversely affecting optimum utilization of thermal power stations. The
committee, therefore, strongly recommend that every efforts should be
made to develop hydro power sector expeditiously. Instead of isolated
efforts there is an urgent need for a comprehensive plan for alleviating the
concerns of this sector by providing long term finances at lower rate, grant
of clearances in a time bound manner, development of enabling infrastructure,
improving law and order situation and sensitization of local people about the
benefits of projects development.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation for expeditious development of hydro sector
has been noted for compliance. In order to provide impetus to development
of hydro sector, a revival scheme/programme formulated by the Ministry
of Power has been circulated to the appraisal agencies. Salient features of
the proposed scheme are:
(i) Declaring all hydropower (irrespective of size) as Renewable
Energy.
(ii) Provide Hydropower Purchase Obligation (HPO) within
currently mandated Non-Solar RPOs to qualify for dispatch
priority to such > 25 MW HEPs which attain COD within
05 years after notification of the scheme.
(iii) Providing 4% interest subvention during construction
(maximum of 7 years) and 3 years post COD to all hydropower
projects (both public and private sector) above 25 MW, attaining
COD within 5 years after notification of this policy with
funding from Coal Cess/ NCEF/ DONER (NLCPR) or any
other source of fund. This tentatively involves a Financial
Implication of Rs. 16,709 crs. for an illustrative list of 40
projects of 11,639 MW.
(iv) Excluding cost of enabling infrastructure from project cost
for tariff calculations and reimbursement of the same from
appropriate funds of the concerned department/entities of the
GoI/State Governments.

44
(v) Create a Hydro Power Development Fund (HPDF) from the
Coal Cess/ NCEF/ DoNER (NLCPR) or any other source to
meet the cost of rolling out hydro policy.
(vi) Mandate to engage with bankers/ financial institutions for
modifying lending terms and conditions for hydropower
projects including Long term lending at affordable interest rate
by banks and FIs including PFC/REC.
To expedite appraisal of DPRs of hydro power projects, the process
of according concurrence has been reviewed and revised Guidelines have
been issued. Further, Online system for submission and examination of
DPRs has been made operational.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that the per capita power consumption of our
country at present is 1,133 kwh which is much lower than the world
average of 3,026 kwh and incomparable when it comes to developed
countries which have per capita power consumption as high as 12,947
kWh. Per capita power consumption is an indicator of overall social-
economic development of a country. The reason for low per capita power
consumption in our country could be attributed to absence of electricity
access to millions of households in the country and suppressed demand
due to high tariff. The Committee, however, has been apprised by the
Ministry that it is expected that the per capita power consumption will
increase to 1,669 kwh by the year 2021-22. The Committee, considering
the tremendous growth made in generation capacity, feel that now we can
conveniently move in the direction of increased electricity consumption in
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
should make all the efforts that can boost the demand of power by providing
electricity access to all households, bringing down tariff of electricity, etc.
Reply of the Government
The joint initiative for providing 24x7 Power For All (PFA) documents
for various States and UTs started during 2014 and completed by end of
2016 (Except for Uttar Pradesh which was signed in 2017). This initiative

45
aims at ensuring uninterrupted supply of quality power to existing consumers
and providing access to electricity to all unconnected consumers by 2019
in a phased manner. The Roll out plan identified in these action plan
documents are at various stage of implementation by States and UTs.
Under RE component of DDUGJY Scheme, provision for electricity
connection to BPL households at the rate of Rs. 3000/- per connection in
villages and habitation with population of 100 is available. However, the
responsibility to provide electricity connection to APL above poverty level
households by following the norms and procedure given in the standard of
performance (SOP) lies with respective DISCOM/State power utility.
Further, a Committee formed by MoP under Chairmanship of
Chairperson, CEA on “Power Demand—States/UTs to initiate innovating
schemes to enhance electricity consumption” has recommended various
measures (long term/medium term /short term) to increase the consumption
level across various categories including electrification of households. The
report is under examination.
Various measures taken by the Government for reduction of tariff
are as under:
(i) UDAY Scheme has been launched by Central Government for
improving operational and financial efficiency of Discoms. So
far 27 States/UTs have joined the Scheme. This scheme would
bring down the cost of supply.
(ii) All the future procurement of power is being done through
competitive bidding.
(iii) Operational efficiency in generation, transmission and
distribution are enhanced progressively in cost plus tariff
regime through performance based regulation mandated in the
Tariff Policy.
(iv) Rationalisation of coal linkage to thermal generating stations to
reduce the cost of transportation of coal.
(v) Flexibility in the usage of domestic coal at relatively more
efficient thermal generating stations.

46
(vi) Specific provisions have been made in the Tariff Policy, 2016
regarding lower tariff for poorer section of the society.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No.2.19)
The Committee note that technological advancements are ushering in
into the electricity sector to achieve higher output. The introduction of
super critical technology into thermal is being considered on large scale.
This is a welcome step and it is expected that it will revolutionize the power
sector of our country. However the Committee, in this regard, would like
to be circumspect. Our ground realities should be taken into account before
introducing this move. The availability of indigenous coal and its quality, its
heat and ash content, gross calorific value and washing infrastructure
should be the guidelines for introduction of super critical technology. If this
is not taken into account, the price or the tariff of the electricity may be
beyond the reach of the common consumers. The power sector in our
country has not grown in a balanced manner and variance in pricing of
electricity has led to distortion in development of the power market. Instead
of demand supply gap or mismatch, it has resulted into supply-demand
imbalance. Despite shortage of power in the country, demand is not being
raised for electricity due to its unreasonable and unpalatable prices. Hence,
the super critical technology should focus more on reasonable and
competitive tariff so as to make it viable rather than introducing it with
indiscretion and without evaluating the consequences. If this technology
remains alien to our conditions, this will become NPA of the power sector
involving huge public money and resources. The core issue for technology
should be its competitive pricing in the Indian context so as to right size
the electricity sector from tariff view point as well as balanced growth.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that there should be advent
of latest technology in the electricity sector but such technology be akin
to Indian conditions with regard to availability of resources/fuel and also
for competitive power tariff.
Reply of the Government
The Indian coal quality, ambient and operating conditions and design
practices have been considered in adoption of supercritical technology. The

47
expert Committee constituted by CEA viz. – “Committee to Recommend
Next Higher Unit Size For Coal Fired Thermal Power Stations”, considered
these aspects in recommending supercritical steam parameters and unit
sizes. CEA has also brought out a document on “Standard Technical features
of supercritical units” which brings out salient design and sizing practices
to be adopted with Indian coal and other operating conditions, for the
guidance of developers.
Efforts have also been made for creation of indigenous manufacturing
facilities for supercritical units with a view to ensure long term service
support and problem solving. As a result, BHEL and several other International
manufacturers through Joint V entures with Indian companies have set up
manufacturing facilities for manufacturing of supercritical power equipment
- boilers and turbine generators.
Presence of several indigenous manufacturers through Indigenous
manufacturing, progressive import reduction and competitive pricing would
also lead to cost reduction of supercritical units.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Coal for Power Plants
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 2.20)
The Committee note that the Ministry have reported a loss of 484
MU generation loss during the year 2016-17 (till Dec. 2016) due to shortage
of coal. They have also stated that 15.3 MT have been imported during the
year 2016-17 (till Dec. 2016) for blending with the domestic coal. The
Ministry have further stated that with the concerted efforts of Ministry of
Power/Ministry of Coal, domestic coal availability in the power plants has
been improved. As a result, the import of coal by power plants required for
blending with domestic coal has declined since 2014-15. In regard to
improving the quality of indigenous coal they have stated that in order to
address quality issues of the coal supplied to power plants, it has been
decided by the Ministry of Power on 28th October, 2015 that coal samples
shall be collected and prepared by a Single Third Party Agency appointed
by power utilities and coal companies. It has also been decided on 16 May,
2016 by the Ministry of Power that the Third Party Sampling at unloading

48
– end may also be carried out by Central Institute of Mining and Fuel
Research (CIMFR). To comply with the guidelines issued by the Ministry
of Environment & Forests dated 2 January, 2014 regarding transportation
of coal to the power plants located beyond 500 kms, coals is washed to
reduce the ash content below 34%. The Committee are surprised by
generation loss due to shortage of coal. The Committee believe that the era
of coal shortages are thing of past and with the new development in coal
sector the coal is available in abundance. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that it should be ensured that adequate coal is available to
power plants so that no generation loss is there due to shortage of coal.
Moreover, to improve the quality of indigenous coal to lessen the dependency
on imported coal, the measures as decided by the Ministry of Power should
be strictly adhered to.
Reply of the Government
Coal is supplied to the power plants based on their estimated
requirements. There was substantial loss of generation due to shortage of
coal in the past. However, during 2015-16 the loss became NIL. Also,
during 2016-17 (Apr.' 16-Feb.' 17), the power utilities have reported
generation loss of 0.4 Billion Unit (BU) only, due to shortage of coal against
total coal based generation of 827 BU during the same period. The loss is
mainly due to production problems at few coal mines during rainy season.
Regular monitoring of coal stock at power stations is being carried
out by CEA on daily basis to avoid any shortage of coal. In addition to this,
coal supply to Power utilities is monitored regularly by an Inter-Ministerial
Sub-Group of the Infrastructure Constraints Review Committee, comprising
of representatives from Ministry of Power, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of
Railways, CEA & CIL, constituted by the Infrastructure Review Committee
of the Cabinet Secretariat. This Sub-Group takes various operational decisions
for meeting any contingent situations relating to supply of coal to Power
sector including critical coal stock position for power plants.
[Ministry of Power, F. No. 10/2/2017- Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee note that 6 captive coal mines have been allocated
to NTPC. In regard to delay in the development of these mines, the

49
Committee have been apprised that there was no delay on part of NTPC.
NTPC, as a coal block allottee, has taken all required actions, in time, for
undertaking various block development activities. Statutory approvals from
various agencies, site specific studies, and activities, which were in NTPC’s
control, progressed well in all coal mining projects. Statutory clearance /
approvals e.g. Environment and Forest Clearances, Mining Plan approval,
land acquisition notifications and verification / certification process, Approval
of R&R plan, etc., which are beyond NTPC’s control, took longer time.
These captive coal mines are very important for NTPC as the production
from same would ensure the reliable and sufficient coal supply to its power
plants resulting in sustained growth of generation and capacity addition
programme. Moreover, expeditious development of captive coal mines may
also result in reduction in cost of power generation thus paving the way
to offer tariff at lower rates. Issues involved in the entire process of coal
block allocation to mining should be addressed in a time bound manner. If
necessary, a Project Monitoring Group may be constituted consisting of all
the concerned agencies and a periodic meeting may be held so as to
address the various issues responsible of delay in mining the coal from
allocated blocks. The Committee, therefore, recommend that every effort
should be made to develop these captive coal mines. The Ministry may also
coordinate with the concerned agencies, if the need arises.
Reply of the Government
As regards NTPC, coal production has started from its first captive
mine, e.g., Pakri-Barwadih. So far, more than 1 lakh MT coal has already
been despatched. Further, the Contract for Mine Development cum operation
has been awarded for Dulanga Coal mine, mining yet to be started. All this
was possible with the help and support of PMO, Ministry of Power,
Ministry of Coal, Government of Jharkhand etc.
In case of Pakri-Barwadih coal block (located in Hazaribagh District,
Jharkhand), the start of mining operations, block development activities /
work progress were hampered mainly because of the following :
(i) Adverse law & order situation at project site.
(ii) Slow disbursement of private land compensation under LA act
and slow processing of proposals for land acquisition /
Government land transfer by District Administration.

50
(iii) Absence of policy of State Government regarding squatters
on forest land and on Government land for less than 30 years
(iv) Non-performance of the MDO contract, awarded earlier to
M/s. Thiess Mines for development and operation of this coal
block. Ultimately, NTPC had to terminate the contract and has
appointed a new MDO.
However, with the support of State Government and Hazaribagh
District Administration, situation is presently under control and mining
operations are under progress.
MDO appointment is expected shortly for Chatti-Bariatu and Talaipalli
Coal Mines. Development activities are in progress for other mines. These
Mines are proposed to be developed progressively based on availability of
all statutory clearances, appointment of MDO and as per the stipulations.
The coal production from Chatti-Bariatu, Kerandari, Dulanga and Talaipalli
is expected to start by Nov. 2019.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017-Budget, Date7.6.2017]

51
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that at present the country has total installed
power capacity of 3,14,642.32 MW. They further note that as per draft
19th Electric Power Survey (EPS), the peak demand and energy demand
during 2021-22 have been estimated as 225 GW and 1566 BU respectively.
The country has witnessed a massive capacity addition in the recent years
and due to that it is on the verge of becoming a power surplus country.
The Ministry have further assured that considering the power projects in
pipeline, it is expected that the demand of 2021-22 would be fully met. The
Committee also note that against the requirement of 864.9 BU, the availability
of power remained 858.8 during the year 2016-17 (upto Dec. 2016) leaving
a shortage of 0.7%. In respect of peak demand, 1,56,934 MW was met
against the demand of 1,59,542 MW leading to a shortage of 1.6%. The
Committee are surprised that even after the massive capacity addition and
huge present generation capacity, there are still shortages, though their
quantum is not so significant. Secondly, in addition to these power demands
there exists the latent demand that is not being taken into calculation. These
figures do not include the demand that several financially distressed
DISCOMs do not post due to their inability to purchase electricity at higher
rates and instead of incurring further losses they opt for power outages.
The demand calculation also does not take into account the demands of
households which do not have electricity access. The Committee, therefore,
while appreciating the fact that power generation sector has come a long
way and now it is in a position to cater the demand of power of the
country, desire that the momentum of growing generation should be
maintained to cater the increased future demand as well as the latent
52

demand of electricity of country which is going to surface sooner than
later. The Committee also recommend that the Government should encourage
installation of power generation projects which are clean and green,
strategically important a capable of providing electricity at lower tariff.
Reply of the Government
It may be submitted that 0.7% shortage in terms of energy in the
country is not due to non-availability of power in the country. A number
of thermal power plants in the country are under reserve shutdown and
those in operation are running at low PLF due to less requisition of power
by the DISCOMs in a few states. Therefore, adequate power is available
in the country but it is learnt that DISCOMs give less requisition of power
as they are unable to supply additional power to their consumers due to
constraints in their transmission/distribution network. Some DISCOMs are
unable to purchase additional power due to financial constraints. Even in
those states, where there are no such constraints, forced outage of a
transmission line/distribution feeder/distribution transformer leads to load-
shedding in some areas until restoration of such elements. The quantum of
electricity which could not be supplied to the consumers due to such
instances also reflects in power supply position as shortage, which actually
is the demand-supply gap due to forced outage of transmission/distribution
element and not due to shortage of power.
[F. No.10/2/2017-Budget Date7/6/2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter - I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No.2.15)
The Committee are distressed to note that the Plant Load Factors
(PLF) of thermal power plants touched a record low and dipped below
60% during the previous year. The Committee also note that there are
several power plants that are running at 0-40% of PLF. The ministry have
tied to alleviate the concern of the committee by stating that today we have
a scenario where we have got sufficient capacity, so PLF per se cannot
be the indicating factor of the health of the power sector. One can always
53

debate whether this excess capacity available in the system is good or not.
They have further stated that due to huge upcoming renewable energy
capacity, it is possible that the PLF of thermal power plants could go as
low as 50% or even below. Since solar energy will be available in the day
time so thermal power plants will have to be shut down or run at low
capacity at that time. The Committee feel that this is not the desired
scenario as it is known that underutilization of power plant will only lead
to higher tariff rates. The Committee do understand that setting up power
stations is a delicensed activity, so everybody is free to install power
stations as per their need or business prospect. In a free business model,
it is also understood that only those power plants will survive which will
be able to sell electricity at cheaper rate and thus bringing competitiveness
in the market. Considering all this the Committee are astonished that despite
abundance of power generation capacity in the country at present, the tariff
rates have not gone down, rather there is a increasing trend in this regard.
Even the technological advancement of machinery, use of super critical
technology, ease in supply constraints of coal have failed to lower tariff
rates. The Committee are of definite opinion that the prime reason for
higher tariff is lower PLF. The Committee have been apprised that though
the tariff is higher for long term PPA, electricity is available in power
exchanges at much lower price. This situation encourages DISCOMs not
to go for a long term PPA, but fulfil their demand by short term power
purchases as much as possible. The Committee feel that prima facie the
situation might appear beneficial for DISCOMs/power sector but may have
long term adverse consequences. The power sector seems to be trapped
in a vicious cycle of low PLF causing high tariff and high tariff suppressing
the demand. The Committee are concerned that if this situation persist this
may lead to plethora of problems viz. Shutting down of power plants due
to economical un-viability, loans turning bad and further investment in the
sector may be discouraged due to low returns. The committee are in
favour of promoting Competition in the sector that should lead to availability
of cheaper power, those who will be able to do this will survive while rest
will perish. However, the Committee also desire that the Ministry should
ensure that this transition should take place without harming and discouraging
further investment in the power sector.
54

Reply of the Government
At present, majority of the power procured by Discoms is on the
basis of long term PPAs with two-part tariff and only small part of the
power requirement is being procured through market. Thus, payment of
fixed charges to a power station under long-term PPA depends on availability
and not on actual energy generated. A system in which entire wholesale
market for electricity is based on competition would require major changes
in legal and regulatory framework.
Station-wise % PLF of Coal based stations for 2016-17 and 2015-
16 are given at Annexure.
[F .No.10/2/2017-Budget Date 7/6/2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter - I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee feel that the issues which are of vital importance and
have been discussed in several meetings of the Committee also require
specific response of the government for the balanced and sustainable growth
of the power sector in the country. The Committee note that as of now
there are two most prevalent methods for discovering the tariff in the
power sector (i) cost Plus Tariff and (ii) tariff by competitive Bidding of
which Cost plus system is pre-dominant. The committee are aware that in
this method coal charges consists around 70 per cent of the total cost of
power for tariff determination. They are termed as energy charges whereas
rest of the tariff consist of fixed charges and other miscellaneous ingredients.
The Tariff Policy as announced by the government of India aims at promoting
competitive bidding for all acquisitions in power plants and also for tariff
determination through competitive bidding. Competitive bidding process
ensures that the tariff determination process is reasonable, rational and
competitive without any scope for latent manoeuvring. The process also
ensures that all the expenditure are taken into account and this is beneficial
to consumer as well as to the generator. The transparency in the system
also forms part of this process and thus leaving no scope for any extraneous
consideration. The committee are unable to apprehend as to why hydro
55

sector has been kept out of its ambit particularly when the tariff policy
aims to make entire system in the electricity sector completion based.
There may be good reasons to exclude the hydro sector from the competitive
bidding process, but there are equally genuine reasons for including it
within the competitive ambit to make it efficient, transparent and delivery
oriented. Several countries like United Kingdom and Brazil have taken hydro
into the competitive fold and are doing excellent. The committee, therefore,
recommend that the price discovery for any kind of electricity whether
thermal, hydro, renewable, etc., should be done through process of
competitive bidding only.
Reply of the Government
The Tariff Policy 2016 provides that barring certain exceptions, all
future requirement of power should continue to be procured competitively
by distribution licensees. As far as Renewables is concerned, solar parks
are already being set up through competitive bidding and this process has
started for wind generation also. However, tariff for waste-to-energy plants
shall be determined on cost-plus basis.
The hydro-electric power plants face significant uncertainty during
construction, particularly in the Himalayan region. In addition, the problem
of R&R, law & order, land acquisition etc. are much more severe in case
of hydro-electric projects as compared to other type of projects. In spite
of necessary investigations prior to commencement of construction, many
a times geological surprises are encountered which often lead to delay as
well as increase in project costs. In view of this, bidders may not be able
to assess their costs and resulting tariff with reasonable certainty. If hydro
projects are subjected to competitive bidding, bidders would factor-in a risk
premium in the tariff quoted, leading to discovery of higher tariff. In view
of this, hydro projects have been granted exemption from competitive
bidding subject to certain conditions in the Tariff Policy, 2016.
[Ministry of Power, F. No.10/2/2017- Budget, Date 7.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter - I of the Report)
56

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE
STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
 N EW D ELHI; DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR,
04 August, 2017 Chairperson,
13 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.
57

ANNEXURE
Station wise % PLF of COAL based stations for
2016-17 and 2015-16
Sector Region Name of the Station Monitored      % PLF
Capacity
as on
31.03.2017 2016-17 2015-16
MW
1 234 5 6
Central NR Badarpur TPS 705 27.61 36.19
Dadri (NCTPP) 1820 54.98 62.85
Indira Gandhi STPP 1500 41.66 44.01
Rihand STPS 3000 83.56 79.9
Singrauli STPS 2000 86.87 92.61
Tanda TPS 440 84.1 80.88
Unchahar TPS 1550 76.03 76.04
WR Bhilai TPS 500 83.36 80.82
Korba STPS 2600 89.41 89.45
Mauda TPS 2320 42.13 21.31
Sipat STPS 2980 91.09 85.14
Vindhyachal STPS 4760 77.24 79.46
SR Kudgi STPP 1600 0
Ramagundem STPS 2600 86.04 88.67
Simhadri 2000 80.9 82.36
Tuticorin (JV) TPP 1000 71.37 56.18
Vallur TPP 1500 70.1 58.57
58

1 234 5 6
ER Barh II 1320 66.09 67.74
Bokaro ‘B’ TPS 630 26.39 33.61
Bokaro TPS ‘A ’ Exp 500 55.91 0
Chandrapura (DVC) TPS 760 74.13 64.96
Durgapur Steel TPS 1000 75.98 50.55
Durgapur TPS 210 23.64 30.28
Farakka STPS 2100 74.71 67.01
Kahalgaon TPS 2340 77.8 74.32
Kodarma TPP 1000 43.4 37.87
Mejia TPS 2340 63.11 58.31
Muzaffarpur TPS 610 39.04 40.31
Nabi Nagar TPP 250 0 0
Patratu TPS 455 7.86 8.78
Raghunathpur TPP 1200 19.18 0
Talcher (Old) TPS 460 93.3 92.33
Talcher STPS 3000 86.94 90.95
NER Bongaigaon TPP 500 75.64 0
State NR Anpara TPS 2630 71.62 83.78
Chhabra TPP 1000 77.93 45.44
Gh TPS (Leh.Moh.) 920 33.95 38.83
Gnd TPS (Bhatinda) 440 18.12 23.76
Harduaganj TPS 665 65.66 64.82
Kalisindh TPS 1200 56.55 67.28
Kota TPS 1240 68.92 71.52
59

1 234 5 6
Obra TPS 1278 34.32 35.27
Panipat TPS 920 27.37 14.27
Panki TPS 210 41.45 29.06
Parichha TPS 1140 61.47 67.58
Rajghat TPS 135 0 3.93
Rajiv Gandhi TPS 1200 36.69 43.97
Ropar TPS 1260 25.15 35.77
Suratgarh TPS 1500 34.06 45.18
Yamuna Nagar TPS 600 65.15 76.97
WR Amarkantak Ext TPS 210 80.51 61.6
Bhusawal TPS 1420 49.2 64.83
Chandrapur (Maharashtra) 2920 64.64 59.18
DSPM TPS 500 90.92 90.74
Gandhi Nagar TPS 630 29.83 35.75
Khaparkheda TPS 1340 65.72 69.3
Koradi TPS 2600 35.84 20.2
Korba-II 200 51.01 45.22
Korba-III 240 66.45 68.51
Korba-West TPS 1340 78.68 76.85
Marwa TPS 1000 32.42 0
Nasik TPS 630 60.32 78.21
Paras TPS 500 68.24 79.97
Parli TPS 1170 17.22 13.3
Sanjay Gandhi TPS 1340 58.3 59.92
60

1 234 5 6
Satpura TPS 1330 31.28 47.15
Shri Singhaji TPP 1200 23.54 40.32
Sikka Rep. TPS 740 33.14 17.29
Ukai TPS 1350 44.78 46.84
Wanakbori TPS 1470 30.52 43.86
SR Bellary TPS 1700 67.22 69.55
Damodaram Sanjeevaiah 1600 62.82 41.59
TPS
Dr. N. Tata Rao TPS 1760 75.58 78.09
Ennore TPS 340 5.07 11.19
Kakatiya TPS 1 100 68.27 72.96
Kothagudem TPS 720 62.85 70.1
Kothagudem TPS (New) 1000 75.18 75.55
Mettur TPS 1440 72.75 78.3
North Chennai TPS 1830 62.96 68.1
Raichur TPS 1720 76.3 75.61
Ramagundem - B TPS 62.5 82.87 72.75
Rayalaseema TPS 1050 72.97 79.07
Singareni TPP 1200 80.67 0
Tuticorin TPS 1050 60.31 76.79
Yermarus TPP 1600 0 0
ER Bakreswar TPS 1050 76.65 72.31
Bandel TPS 450 47.82 28.03
Barauni TPS 210 7.14 0
61

1 234 5 6
D.P.L. TPS 660 37.07 21.68
IB Valley TPS 420 87.94 84.5
Kolaghat TPS 1260 54.7 52.1
Sagardighi TPS 1600 71.78 51.52
Santaldih TPS 500 51 42.95
Tenughat TPS 420 38.69 71.47
Pvt NR Anpara C TPS 1200 80.4 81.95
Barkhera TPS 90 49.71 43.05
Goindwal Sahib TPP 540 4.32 0
Kawai TPS 1320 71.69 74.9
Khambarkhera TPS 90 47.6 40.58
Kundarki TPS 90 58.45 47.36
Lalitpur TPS 1980 37.83 0
Mahatma Gandhi TPS 1320 25.04 42.71
Maqsoodpur TPS 90 52.92 39.54
Prayagraj TPP 1320 48.89 17.99
Rajpura TPP 1400 76.99 62.64
Rosa TPP Ph-I 1200 75.28 66.97
Talwandi Sabo TPP 1980 46.55 39.62
Utraula TPS 90 52.64 52.04
WR Akaltara TPS 1200 64.05 60.41
Amaravati TPS 1350 15.85 52.11
Anuppur TPP 1200 35.77 61.51
Avantha Bhandar 600 53.64 20.01
62

1 234 5 6
Balco TPS 600 60.76 72.83
Bandakhar TPP 300 53.48 0
Baradarha TPS 1200 68.38 45.25
Bela TPS 270 0 0
Bina TPS 500 18.56 29.78
Butibori TPP 600 71.2 76.47
Chakabura TPP 30 92.44 91.47
Dahanu TPS 500 85.45 87.09
Dhariwal TPP 600 29.33 7
Emco Warora TPS 600 70.46 76.02
Gepl TPP Ph-I 120 0 0
JSW Ratnagiri TPP 1200 63.56 79.64
Kasaipalli TPP 270 85.08 80.38
Katghora TPP 35 0 0
Mahan TPP 600 50.02 0
Mihan TPS 246 0 0
Mundra TPS 4620 74.86 81.3
Mundra Um TP P 4000 78.37 73.09
Nasik (P) TPS 540 0 0
Nawapara TPP 300 44.57 –
Nigri TPP 1320 62.85 0
Niwari TPP 45 60.19 35.91
Op Jindal TPS 1000 51.17 58.59
Pathadi TPP 600 84.64 56.63
63

1 234 5 6
Raikheda TPP 1370 9.62 12.98
Ratija TPS 100 72.15 62.08
Sabarmati (C-Station) 60 0 9.83
Sabarmati (D-F Stations) 362 87.01 75.52
Salaya TPP 1200 49.59 47.3
Salora TPP 135 0 0
Sasan UMTPP 3960 84.79 90.84
Seioni TPP 600 5.4 0
SVPL TPP 63 54.91 10.67
Swastik Korba TPP 25 0 0
Tamnar TPP 2400 29.77 27.86
Tirora TPS 3300 61.03 68.36
Trombay TPS 1250 41.33 44.15
Uchpinda TPP 720 2.18 4.52
Wardha Warora TPP 540 29.49 39.16
SR ITPCL TPP 1200 49.29 0
Muthiara TPP 1200 35.66 0
Painampuram TPP 1320 78.35 75.11
SGPL TPP 1320 62.7
Simhapuri TPS 600 30.78 75.66
Thamminapatnam TPS 300 52.27 64.48
Torangallu TPS (Sbu-I) 260 75.3 95.66
Torangallu TPS (Sbu-II) 600 51.38 86.74
Tuticorin (P) TPP 300 0.9 30.37
64

1 234 5 6
Udupi TPP 1200 74.92 76.72
Vizag TPP 1040 38.61 37.21
ER Budge Budge TPS 750 82.36 87.94
Chinakuri TPS 30 0 0
Derang TPP 1200 61.98 59.23
Haldia TPP 600 76.4 68.94
Jojobera TPS 360 49.57 79.68
Kamalanga TPS 1050 64.5 67.6
Mahadev Prasad STPP 540 68.86 61.68
Maithon Rb TPP 1050 79.98 78.13
Southern Repl. TPS 135 34.73 44.8
Sterlite TPP 1200 11.63 38.31
Titagarh TPS 240 11.07 31.49
Utkal TPP (IND. Barath) 350 0 0
Coal Total 184846.5 59.64 62.01
Note: PLF for Thermal Stations of 25 MW and above only after declaration of COD.
65

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY HELD ON 4TH AUGUST, 2017 AT 1030
HOURS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO ‘1’, BLOCK A,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION
BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1030 hours to 1100 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Virendra Kumar —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri M. Chandrakasi
4. Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
5. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
6. Dr. Arun Kumar
7. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
11. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
12. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh
13. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Oscar Fernandes
15. Shri La. Ganesan
16. Shri Javed Ali Khan
66

17. Shri S.Muthukaruppan
18. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Pandey – Director
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip – Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members who made it
convenient to attend the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee
considered the Draft Reports on:
(i) Electricity Policy — A Review
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Power for the year 2017-18.
2. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
reports. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports
and present the same to Lok Sabha/ lay in Rajya Sabha.
Thereafter, the Committee adjourned with a vote
of thanks by the Chair.
67

APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDA TIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 21
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17,
19, 20 and 21
Total: 18
Percentage 86%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 14,15, and 18
Total: 03
Percentage 14%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%
68

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (T el. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The
said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."