THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Forty-First Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Implementation
of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2014
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 255
Price : R  39.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE S TANDING C OMMITTEE ON E NERGY (2014-2015)...... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 26
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ................................................ 27
C
HAPTER V Observation/Recommendation in respect of
which the final reply of the Government is still
awaited ................................................... 29
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
17th December, 2014 .................................. 30
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the 41st Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................. 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15)
*Dr. Kirit Somaiya —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri M. Chandrakasi
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
5. Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
#6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Saumitra Khan
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Dr. Arun Kumar
11. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
12. Shri Jagdambika Pal
13. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
14. Shrimati Krishna Raj
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
18. Shri Purno Agitok Sangma
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
20. Shri Malyadri Sriram
21. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
(iii)
* Appointed as Chairman of the Committee  w.e.f. 12th November, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv
Pratap Rudy.
# Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th November , 2014.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V.P . Singh Badnore
^23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Ram Jethmalani
25. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
26. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
27. Dr. K.P . Ramalingam
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
29. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi
31. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Additional Director
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant
^Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09.12.2014 vice Shri Rajiv Shukla.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Third Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in Forty-First Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of Rajeev
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana ’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Power.
2. The Forty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 13th December , 2013. Replies of the Government to all
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
11th March, 2014.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 17th December, 2014.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 41st Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-ll.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
19 December, 2014 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana ’.
2. The Forty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
13th December , 2013 and was laid same day on the Table of
Rajya Sabha. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and
16
Total-15
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply
of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial No. 1
Total-01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Scope and Implementation of RGGVY
Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee inter-alia had noted that the motto of RGGVY
was to provide access to electricity to all by 2009. The Committee had
also noted that ideally the objective of the scheme is to provide
electricity access to each and every household and village of the
Country. However for the purpose of implementation of the programme
villages having population more than 300 were considered for
electrification under the programme in the 10th and the 11th Five
Year Plans. Recently, the Government has decided to broaden the
scope of the scheme and cover all census villages and habitations with
population of above 100. The Committee had inferred that it amounts
to non consideration of villages/hamlets having population of less than
100 under the scheme. The Committee had further noted that it has
been envisaged that the RGGVY will run through 12th Plan (2012-17)
and there is possibility of extending it to the 13th Plan also to complete
left out works, if any. It is clear that even by 2017, villages having
population less than 100 will not be considered for electrification
under RGGVY scheme, and therefore, another extension of the
programme will be required to achieve the actual goal of this programme
i.e. electricity access to all households in the Country. The Committee
being aware of the resource/fund constraints in achievement of the
real objective of the scheme, nonetheless, had strongly recommended
that the Government should come up with a blue print for the
implementation of the scheme in letter and spirit so that electrification
of all villages irrespective of the number of households and free
connections to all BPL households can be provided.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“Government of India has approved continuation of RGGVY under
12th Five Year Plan to cover remaining villages/habitations having
population more than 100 and to provide free electricity connection
to BPL households in these villages.

3
As per the extant policy, villages and habitations having population
of less than 100 are covered by the Ministry of New & Renewable
Energy (MNRE) under their Remote Villages Electrification (RVE)
programme.
List of BPL households to be covered under the scheme is provided
by the concerned State. Under 12th Plan, the State Level Standing
Committee, headed by the Chief Secretary shall vet the
district-wise list of villages, habitations and also BPL households to
be covered under the scheme and recommend the project proposals
formulated by the implementing agency. ”
8. The Committee are not enthused with the reply that as per
the extant policy, villages and habitations having population of less
than 100 are covered by the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
(MNRE) under their Remote Villages Electrification (RVE) programme.
The Committee expect the Government to collect, collate and
compile the requisite data having a bearing an electrification, of all
households in the country to realize the objective of RGGVY. The
Committee reiterate the need for electrification of all small
villages/rural habitations so as to realize the goal of RGGVY, to
electrify all villages and habitations and provide access to electricity
to all households in 5 years. Unfortunately, even after elapse of
more than 9 years, the Government focus seems to be fragmented
and the Committee therefore recommend that wholistic and
comprehensive blue print of rural electrification be prepared and
submitted to the Committee within six months of the presentation
of this report indicating rural electrification done during last three
years and the number of left out villages which would be electrified
during the next two years.
B. Electrification of Villages under RGGVY
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
9. The Committee have since long been raising the issue of
installation of inadequate capacity transformers under RGGVY . So far,
transformers having capacity of only 16 kV or 25 kV , depending on the
size of village, have been installed under RGGVY which are highly
inadequate considering the actual load of that village. Due to their
inadequate capacity the transformers do not withstand the load and
ultimately get burnt leading to blackout in the village. The Committee,
considering the importance of the matter, have time and again
recommended to increase the capacity of the transformers in

4
commensurate with the demand of the village. In their original Report
the Committee was pleased to note that the Ministry in principle has
accepted the suggestion of the Committee for increasing the capacity
of transformers and agreed to install transformers having capacity of
63 kV and 100 kV, if required, during the 12th Plan Period. The
Committee while welcoming the decision were of the view that it was
a step in right direction as the decision to increase the load provided
under RGGVY from 60W for BPL families to 250W and 500W from 250W
for APL families had also made it obligatory to install the transformers
of matching capacities. The Committee had recommended that the
provision of installation of transformers of higher capacities should not
be limited to the new projects under 12th Plan but ways and means
should be found out to replace the earlier transformers installed in the
10th and 11th Five Year Plan projects.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“The requirement of installation of higher size transformers was
mainly felt mainly in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and parts of
Uttar Pradesh. REC has sought necessary information regarding
replacement of transformers installed in 10th and 11th Plan from
concerned States. Based on input received from Bihar , the Monitoring
Committee on RGGVY has recently allowed the State of Bihar for
installation of 63 KVA Distribution Transformers in place of 25 KVA
transformers under 11 ongoing projects of 11th Plan. ”
11. The Committee note with the satisfaction that the installation
of 63 KVA Distribution Transformers in place of 25 KVA transformers
under 11 ongoing projects of 11th Plan has been allowed in the
State of Bihar. However, the reply of the Government is silent with
regard to States of Jharkhand and U.P. which are the other States
demanding the higher capacity transmissions. The similar demand
may also come up from other States as well. The Committee would
therefore like the statistics of the demands from the States and the
action taken or proposed in each case state-wise with respect to
installation of distribution transformers of higher capacity.
C. Supply of electricity to village covered under RGGVY
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
12. The Committee had noted that RGGVY endeavours to provide
access to electricity to all households. The scheme also envisages that
no discrimination in hours of supply of electricity between rural and
urban households shall be there. It is expected that the villages

5
electrified under RGGVY will be provided a minimum 6-8 hours of
electricity daily. The Committee had further noted that the State
Governments/DISCOMS have been assigned the job of providing
electricity supply to the villages electrified under RGGVY . However,
the Committee were of the view that though Central Government is
not specifically responsible for supply of electricity under the scheme,
nonetheless, the matter is so interrelated that it cannot escape from
its responsibility of ensuring 6-8 hours supply of electricity in the
villages electrified under the scheme as electrification infrastructure
alone would be meaningless without the supply of electricity to these
villages. The Committee were concerned with the findings of a survey,
carried out in 20 States of the Country in the year 2011-12, where 42
out of 80 villages in Bihar and 15 out of 75 villages in Jharkhand were
getting electricity supply for less than 6 hours. The Committee strongly
believe that the real objective of RGGVY is to provide electricity and
illuminate the households rather to just erect poles and install
transformers. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the
Central Government should tie up with the States/DISCOMS at the time
of sanctioning of DPR etc. to ensure the adequate or prescribed hours
of electricity supply for the electrified villages. Further , the Committee
had found that the adequacy of electricity supply to the villages covered
under the scheme cannot be measured merely in number of hours as
the same can be misleading. The timing of the electricity supply is
equally important. The use of electricity for the households electrified
under the scheme is mostly limited to illumination; therefore, the real
need for electricity is felt during the evening time. However , it has
been found that in most of the cases the electricity supply is not there
in the evening but in the day time, making the whole exercise of the
scheme irrelevant. The Committee, therefore, had also recommended
the Government to take up the issue with the concerned States and
discuss it at appropriate level to find an effective solution.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“To address the issue, a provision has been made that each State
Government shall set up a State Level Standing Committee, headed
by the Chief Secretary to recommend the project proposals
formulated by the implementing agency. The State Committee,
while considering project proposals for its recommendations, shall
ensure availability of adequate power supply to cater to the load
demand of project area including evening hours.
Further , under 12th Plan, provision of DDG has been extended to
grid connected areas also to supplement the availability of power
in areas where power supply is less than six hours a day. ”

6
14. The Committee are pleased to note that a provision has
been made to set up Standing Committee in each state, headed by
the Chief Secretary of the State for more effective implementation
of RGGVY. The Committee hope that the provision so made is
rigorously implemented and has the potential to resolve most of the
issues that arise due to lack of coordination/cooperation between
Central and State Governments. The Committee therefore, desire
the Union Government to play a proactive role so that all the State
Governments form such Standing Committees at the earliest so as
to resolve the issue of supply of electricity, its duration and timings
in the villages.
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
15. The Committee had noted that requirement of power , taking
into account the revised load of 250W and 500W for BPL and APL
families respectively under RGGVY , for all rural households i.e.
16.78 crore (as per 2011 census) will be as high as 61,536 MW. The
Committee were surprised that though the scheme objective is to
provide electricity access to all the households of the Country and
thousands of crore are being spent to erect infrastructure for the
same, there is no talk about the production of the additional electricity
required for the villages electrified under the scheme. The matter of
arrangement of electricity for supply to these villages has been left
solely to the State Governments/DISCOMS which are already facing
acute power shortage and have been unable in arranging adequate
electricity supply even for the existing users. Therefore, the, situation
raises questions over the success of the programme. There is no
justification for incurring huge sum on the infrastructure alone when
it cannot be taken to its logical end i.e. supply of electricity to the
households covered under the scheme. In this scenario the fund spent
on RGGV would be mere expenditure rather capital investment. Since
the scheme is a flagship programme of the Central Government,
assuming that work relating to electricity generation and supply rest
solely on the States would be oversimplification of the issue. The
Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Central Government
for effective implementation of RGGVY should play a role of a flag
bearer for guiding and providing assistance — physical and monitory—
for augmentation of the generation capacity by the States which enables
them to meet the additional demand of electricity created by the
implementation of RGGVY . Simultaneously, the Committee desire that
for the time being the Central Government shall also increase the
allocation of electricity from the central pool to the financially weaker
States to meet their demands for the purpose of implementing the
scheme.

7
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“The major initiatives undertaken to improve power situation in
the country include de-licensing of generation, introduction of Ultra
Mega Power Projects (UMPP), investors friendly New Hydro Policy,
2008, initiatives for augmentation of domestic manufacturing
capacity of power plant equipment, adoption of super-critical
technologies, liberalization of mega power policy, enhancing
availability of skilled and trained manpower, etc.
The following measures have been taken/are being taken by the
Government to improve power generation with a view to reduce
the demand supply gap in the country:
(i) Acceleration in generating capacity addition during 12th Plan
with a proposed target of 88,537 MW (excluding 30,000 MW
renewable) against an achievement of 54,964 MW during
11th Plan.
(ii) Rigorous monitoring of capacity addition of the on-going
generation projects.
(iii) Development of Ultra Mega Power Projects of 4000 MW each
to reap benefits of economies of scale.
(iv) Renovation, modernization and life extension of old and
inefficient generation units.
(v) Power Finance Corporation has sanctioned a cumulative loan
amount of Rs. 3.15 lakh crore so far for generation
component whereas Rural Electrification Corporation has
sanctioned Rs. 2.06 lakh crore cumulatively so far for the
same purpose.
In addition to the above, Central Government is also considering
the allocation of electricity from the central pool to meet the
demands of the States on case to case basis. ”
17. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government
is considering the allocation of electricity from the central pool to
meet the demands of the States on case to case basis. The Committee
believe that it is a step in the right direction as the Central
Government owe the responsibility of proper implementation of its
flagship programme — RGGVY. Needless to say the allocation of
more electricity from central pool to States, which are facing hardship
in implementing the programme due to shortage of electricity, will
give a significant boost to the implementation of the RGGVY. However

8
Committee would like to be apprised of the action as prepared by
the State Governments for augmentation of their electricity
generation capacity which will enable them to meet the additional
demand of electricity needed for implementation of the RGGVY.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
behalf within six months of the presentation of this report.

9
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that as per latest definition, a village is
considered to be electrified under RGGVY if 10% of the total number
of households, apart from the basic infrastructure and, of certain
public centers in the village has been electrified. Capacity of the
infrastructure provided under the programme is being decided
accordingly. In this scenario, it is possible that a village which has
been electrified under the scheme may have households upto 90%
which do not have electricity connections. The Ministry has stated that
once a village is declared electrified, it is up to State DISCOMS to
expand the distribution system to accommodate the rest of 90% of the
households. However, in practice it is likely that the DISCOMS may fail
to augment the capacity for various reasons leading to overloading of
the system provided under the scheme or denial of electricity
connections to 90% households of the village. The infrastructure being
provided under the Scheme is highly inadequate therefore, unreliable
and unsustainable. The Committee are of firm opinion that the provision
of 10% of electrification of households is largely responsible for
malfunctioning of the scheme leading to dissatisfaction among the
people. Since, the Central Government alone cannot bear the burden
of full electrification; therefore, the cooperation of the State
Government/DISCOMS is imperative. However, at the same time, the
Committee are also of the view that as this is the flagship programme
of the Central Government, the onus of coordination with the other
involved agencies lies on them, The Committee have observed that
root cause of all the problems is unsatisfactory coordination between
the Central and State Governments. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all out efforts should be made to ensure better
coordination mechanism between them. The actual electrification
requirement of the entire village should be assessed and it should be
ensured that the State/DISCOMS fulfill their responsibility of providing
electricity to the remaining households as and when required.
Reply of the Government
Though the definition of existing village electrification under RGGVY
provides that a village will be considered as electrified if at least 10%
households have been electrified, however; 10% is not the upper limit

10
to cover households in a village. The rural electricity infrastructure is
created to provide access to all the households in covered villages/
habitations considering a load of 250 Watts for BPL households,
500 Watts for APL households and load growth @5% for next 10 years.
Further , 100% BPL households are provided electricity connection free
of cost under the scheme and APL households are required to obtain
electricity connections from the respective DISCOM/State Power Utility
as per the procedure by paying applicable connection charges.
To ensure enhanced involvement of States, under 12th Plan, a
provision has been made that each State Government shall set up a
State Level Standing Committee, headed by the Chief Secretary and
consisting of Secretaries of Energy, Rural Development, Finance,
Panchayat Raj, Forest, Revenue and a representative of REC etc. The
Committee shall vet the district-wise list of villages, habitations, BPL
households to be covered under the scheme and recommend the project
proposals formulated by the implementing agency. The State Committee,
while considering project proposals for its recommendations, shall
ensure adequacy of upstream network commensurating with the
proposed distribution network and availability of adequate power supply
to cater to the load demand of project area. The Committee shall also
monitor progress, quality control and resolve issues relating to
implementation of sanctioned projects viz. allocation of land for
sub-stations, right of way, forest clearance, railway clearance, safety
clearance etc.
To assess actual requirement of villages/habitations, it has been
made mandatory in 12th Plan to prepare the DPRs by the State DISCOMS
base on actual field survey.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee have since long been raising the issue of installation
of inadequate capacity transformers. So far, transformers having capacity
of only 16 kV or 25 kV , depending on the size of village, have been
installed under RGGVY which are highly inadequate considering the
actual load of that village. Due to their inadequate capacity the
transformers do not withstand the load and ultimately get burnt leading
to blackout in the village. Reportedly, there are cases where there is
difference of opinion between REC and DISCOMS in regard to prompt
repair or replacements of the malfunctioning transformers leading to
delay of several months. This situation lead to decay and theft of the
infrastructure provided under the scheme, defeating the very purpose

11
of the scheme. The Committee, considering the importance of the
matter, have time and again recommended to increase the capacity of
the transformers to commensurate the demand of the village. The
Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry in principle, has
accepted the suggestion of the Committee for increasing the capacity
of transformers and agreed to install transformers having capacity of
63 kV and 100 kV , if required, during the 12th Plan period. The
Committee while welcoming the decision are of the view that it is a
step in right direction as the decision to increase the load provided
under RGGVY from 60W for BPL families to 250 W and 500 W from
250 W for APL families has made it obligatory to install the transformers
of matching capacities. The Committee also recommend that the
provision of installation of transformers of higher capacities should not
be limited to the new projects under 12th Plan but ways and means
should be found out to replace the earlier transformers installed in the
10th and 11th Five Year Plan projects.
Reply of the Government
The requirement of installation of higher size transformers was
mainly felt mainly in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and parts of
Uttar Pradesh. REC has sought necessary information regarding
replacement of transformers installed in 10th and 11th Plan from
concerned States. Based on input received from Bihar , the Monitoring
Committee on RGGVY has recently allowed the State of Bihar for
installation of 63 KVA Distribution Transformers in place of 25 KVA
transformers under 11 ongoing projects of 11th Plan.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the pace of the implementation of RGGVY
in the Naxal affected areas has been rather slow due to various reasons.
The Ministry has enumerated various factors that are hindering the
work under the RGGVY . The Committee understand the difficulties in
the execution of work in such areas; nevertheless, feel that these
areas should be given utmost priority in terms of early implementation
of the scheme. The Committee are, of the view that implementation
of the scheme would definitely bring positivity in these areas by
improving the lives of the people. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that as these areas are different and more difficult to
execute the scheme than other areas of the country, the Government
should make utmost efforts to find out the ways and means, to
implement the programme at earliest through a tailor made plan.

12
Reply of the Government
To expedite implementation of RGGVY , State-wise task force
comprising of senior officials of Ministry of Power , REC, State/DISCOMS
and Implementing Agencies have been constituted for selected States
including the above Naxal Affected States for monitoring and resolving
the issues impeding the progress. The task force meets at least once
in a month to review the progress and a monthly review of all task
force is conducted by the Ministry of Power also.
In addition, REC has also deputed officers from Corporate Office
to focused States i.e. Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, and North-East States
to closely monitor the progress of RGGVY in the field.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that RGGVY endeavors to provide access to
electricity to all households. The scheme also endeavours that no
discrimination in hours of supply of electricity between rural and urban
households shall be there, It is expected that the villages electrified,
under RGGVY will be provided a minimum 6-8 hours of electricity
daily. The Committee note that the State Governments/DISCOMS have
been assigned the job of providing electricity supply to the villages
electrified under RGGVY . However , the Committee feel that though
Central Government is not specifically responsible for supply of
electricity under the scheme, nonetheless, the “matter is so interrelated
that it cannot escape from its responsibility of ensuring 6-8 hours
supply of electricity in the villages electrified under the scheme as
electrification infrastructure alone would be meaningless without the
supply of electricity to the villages ”. The Committee are concerned to
find out that according to a survey carried out in 20 States of the
Country in the year 2011-12, 42 out of 80 villages in Bihar and 15 out
of 75 villages in Jharkhand were getting electricity supply for less than
6 hours. The Committee strongly believe that the real objective of
RGGVY is to provide electricity and illuminate the households rather
to just erect poles and install transformers. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Central Government should tie up with the States/
DISCOMS at the time of sanctioning of DPR etc. to ensure the adequate
or prescribed hours of electricity supply for the electrified villages.
Further , the Committee find that the adequacy of electricity supply to
the villages covered under the scheme cannot be measured merely in
number of hours as the same can be misleading. The timing of the
electricity supply is equally important. The use of electricity for the
households electrified under the scheme is mostly limited to
illumination, therefore, the real need for electricity is felt during the
evening time. However , it has been found that in most of the cases the
electricity supply is not there in the evening but in the day time,
making the whole exercise of the scheme irrelevant. The Committee,

13
therefore, also recommend that the Government should take up the
issue with the concerned States and discuss it at appropriate level to
find an effective solution.
Reply of the Government
To address the issue, a provision has been made that each
State Government shall set up a State Level Standing Committee,
headed by the Chief Secretary to recommend the project proposals
formulated by the implementing agency. The State Committee, while
considering project proposals for its recommendations, shall ensure
availability of adequate power supply to cater to the load demand of
project area including evening hours.
Further , under 12th Plan, provision of DDG has been extended to
grid connected areas also to supplement the availability of power in
areas where power supply is less than six hours a day.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee further note that requirement of power considering
the revised load of 250W and 500W for BPL and APL families respectively,
for all rural households i.e. 16.78 crore (as per 2011 census) will be
as high as 61,536 MW. The Committee are surprised that though scheme
endeavour to provide electricity access to all the households of the
Country and thousands of crore are being spent to erect infrastructure
for the same, there is no talk about the production of the additional
electricity required for the villages electrified under the scheme The
matter of arrangement of electricity for supply to these villages has
been left Solely to the State Governments/DISCOMS which are already
facing acute power shortage and have been unable in arranging adequate
electricity supply even for the existing users. Therefore, the situation
raises questions over the success of the programme. There is no
justification for incurring huge sum on the infrastructure alone when
it cannot be taken to its logical end i.e. supply of electricity to the
households covered under the scheme. In this scenario the fund spent
on RGGV will be mere expenditure rather capital investment. Since
the scheme is a flagship programme of the Central Government,
assuming that work relating to electricity generation and supply rest
solely on the States will be oversimplification of the issue. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Central Government for
effective implementation of RGGVY should play a role of a flag bearer
for guiding and providing assistance — physical and monitory — for
augmentation of the generation capacity by the States which enables
them to meet the additional demand of electricity created by the
implementation of RGGVY . Simultaneously, the Committee desire that
for the time being the Central Government shall also increase the
allocation of electricity from the central pool to the financially weaker
States to meet their demands for the purpose of implementing the
scheme.

14
Reply of the Government
The major initiatives undertaken to improve power situation in the
country include de-licensing of generation, introduction of Ultra-Mega
Power Projects (UMPP), investors friendly New Hydro Policy, 2008,
initiatives for augmentation of domestic manufacturing capacity of
power plant equipment, adoption of super-critical technologies,
liberalization of mega power policy, enhancing availability of skilled
and trained manpower , etc.
The following measures have been taken/are being taken by the
Government to improve power generation with a view to reduce the
demand supply gap in the country:
(i) Acceleration in generating capacity addition during 12th Plan
with a proposed target of 88,537 MW (excluding 30,000 MW
renewable) against an achievement of 54,964 MW during
11th Plan.
(ii) Rigorous monitoring of capacity addition of the ongoing
generation projects.
(iii) Development of Ultra Mega Power Projects of 4000 MW each
to reap benefits of economies of scale.
(vi) Renovation, modernization and life extension of old and
inefficient generation units.
(vii) Power Finance Corporation has sanctioned a cumulative loan
amount of Rs. 3.15 lakh crore so far for generation
component whereas Rural Electrification Corporation has
sanctioned Rs. 2.06 lakh crore cumulatively so far for the
same purpose.
In addition to the above, Central Government is also considering
the allocation of electricity from the central pool to meet the demands
of the States on case to case basis.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee have observed many irregularities in regard to
implementation of the Yojana viz. poor quality of work, inadequate
capacity of transformers and infrastructure, no electricity connection
to most of the households/nearby habitations despite being declared
electrified under the scheme, incomplete/poor execution of work due
to faulty DPR owing to poor field survey etc. The Ministry has apprised
the Committee that to ensure qualitative execution of rural
electrification work under RGGVY they have Three Tier. Quality Control
Mechanism which has now been made more stringent under 12th Five
Year Plan. The Committee, however, are concerned as despite these
mechanisms in place, several issues are being reported necessitating
the need for making them more stringent and effective. The Committee

15
feel that there are areas in planning and execution of the scheme as
well as in identification and redressal of the same. The Committee,
therefore, believe that there is genuine and urgent need to strengthen
the quality control mechanism through extensive ground survey. The
Committee trust that the steps taken by the Ministry in regard to
making quality control mechanism in the 12th Plan to address the
problem to some extent and address the existing loopholes in monitoring
mechanism. Needless, to emphasize that the Government would bring
need based more changes in the mechanism assessing the outcome of
the new quality control mechanism put in place for the 12th Plan to
enhance its efficacy and effectiveness.
Reply of the Government
To address the issues it is made mandatory in 12th Plan to prepare
the DPRs by the State DISCOMs based on actual field survey.
Further , the Quality Control Mechanism (QCM) have been made
more stringent at Tier-II by increasing the sample size of villages to
20% and BPL households to 100% in all inspected villages covered under
11th Plan projects as detailed below:
Inspection Scope for 11th Plan Projects
Particulars Agency Scope for inspection
Tier-I Implementing Agencies have
engaged third party
inspection agencies
Tier-II REC has engaged independent
inspection agencies
Tier-III MoP through REC has engaged
independent agencies
• 50% of villages covered
• 100% BPL Connections in 10% of the villages inspected
and Minimum 5 BPL connections in remaining inspected
villages
• 100% of new sub-stations and 50% of augmented sub-
stations
• 1% of villages covered
• 100% BPL connections in 50% of the villages inspected
and minimum 5 BPL connections in remaining inspected
villages
• At least one new sub-stations and one augmented sub-
station
Old
• 10% of villages covered
• 100% BPL in 25% of the
inspected villages and
minimum 5 connections in
the remaining inspected
villages
• Inspection of 25% new sub-
stations.
Revised
• 20% of villages covered
• 100% BPL connections in
all inspected villages
• Inspection of 100% new
sub-stations and also
augmented sub-stations
• Verification of
energisation status of
electrified villages.

16
Scope of inspection for 12th Plan Projects is as detailed below:
Quality Control T ier-I Tier-II Tier-III
Mechanism
Responsible Agency Third Party REC Quality National Quality
Inspecting Agency Monitor (RQM) Monitor (NQM)
(TPIA)
Village Inspection 50% villages 20% villages 1% villages
Material inspection 10% of all important At least one type Review of test
materials of REDB of all important records
(14) and VEI (11) materials of REDB
[A sample of (14) and VEI (11)
material can be [A sample of
picked from site material can be
for testing] picked from site
for testing]
Sub-station 100% of all New 100% of all New At least one new
inspection and Augmented and Augmented sub-station and
one augmentation
of sub-station
BPL Connections 100% BPL 100% BPL 100% BPL
Connections in all Connections in all Connections in all
inspected villages inspected villages inspected villages
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that there are District Committees/District
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (DVMCs), which have been set up
in all the States to monitor the progress of rural development schemes.
Henceforth, these Committees would also monitor the progress of
RGGVY works. The Member of the Parliaments have also been made
part of these Committees. The Committee would keenly watch the
working of these Committees w.r.t. expediting completing RGGVY works.
Reply of the Government
The feedback provided by these Committees (District Vigilance and
Monitoring Committee/District Committees) would be considered
appropriately from time to time.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]

17
Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee during their on-the-spot study tour visited Nimgaon
Vadi village in Maharashtra to see work done under RGGVY . During the
visit, the Committee felt that it would be better if any marking on the
electric poles/infrastructure provided under the scheme to distinguish
it from regular electrification infrastructure. Also there is need to put
helpline numbers and name of concerned officials in local language for
the benefit of the common man. It would be helpful in easy
identification for the purpose of survey/repairing/replacement purpose.
The Committee would await follow up action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Provisions have been made under Standard Bidding Document for
12th Plan to identify the assets created under RGGVY through
appropriate sign boards at Distribution Sub-stations (Distribution
Transformers) & Power Sub-stations and identification of all support
structures like Single Pole (SP), Double Pole (DP), DTRSS (Distribution
Transformer Substation Structures) etc. through unique identification
code. REC has been advised to issue necessary instructions to the
Implementing Agencies/State Power Utilities in reference to the
recommendation of Committee regarding providing helpline nos. etc.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee also strongly recommend that the Government
should promote the use of LED bulbs under RGGVY by providing it to
all the beneficiaries of the scheme at subsidized rates. Due to long life
and low consumption of electricity, LED bulbs will be beneficial to end
users. The Committee believe that use of only LED bulbs under the
scheme has the potential to save several hundred Mega Watt of
electricity in comparison to conventional incandescent bulbs.
Reply of the Government
Under 12th Plan projects of RGGVY , LED bulbs would be provided
to BPL households instead of CFL bulbs
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that the Ministry have identified 5-6 Focus
States wherein the progress of RGGVY has been slow. The Committee

18
have been informed that the Ministry has constituted a task force
consisting of an officer of the Ministry of Power , a State Government
Officer and an officer from the implementing agency. The Task Force
will meet every month to review the execution of the work sanctioned
in the 11th Plan and to plan and review the work under the scheme
in the 12th Plan. The Committee would like to be apprised conclusive
action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Regular Meetings of Task Force are being regularly held to monitor
the progress of RGGVY . Further, monthly review of all task force
members is also taken by the Ministry of Power.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that requirement of the fund for the
implementation of RGGVY has been assessed on the basis of Rs. 6.50 lakh
per village. Further the cost for providing free electricity connection
per BPL household under the scheme has initially been calculated to
Rs. 1,500. Subsequently, it was revised to Rs. 2,200 and now in the
12th Plan it is Rs. 3,000. The Committee find the standard cost per
village and per household inadequate as the actual cost if assessed
may be higher. Due to low fixation of standard cost the quantity and
the quality of work under RGGVY is being forced to be compromised
leading to curtailed and shoddy implementation of the scheme. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to revisit the standard cost
provided under the scheme with a view to increase and making it
reasonable. The revision of cost also becomes necessary due to the
decision to enhance the electricity load being provided under the
scheme. The Committee also find that the projects under RGGVY are
not being prepared on the basis of actual field survey, due to which
they suffers from inaccuracies leading to frequent cost revision. This
often lead to delay in completion of the projects. The Committee,
therefore, also recommend to prepare projects and calculate cost on
the basis of actual field Survey. Simultaneously, the Committee also
desire that the field survey should be prepared by actually visiting and
doing extensive survey of the area only rather on the basis of the
available or received reports/data/information.

19
Reply of the Government
The benchmark costs have been revised regularly as per details
indicated below:
Electrification of 10th Plan 11th Plan 12th Plan
un-electrified village (Rs. Lakhs) (Rs. Lakhs) (Rs. Lakhs)
(a) In normal terrain
6.5
13 19
(b) In hilly areas 18 22.5
Intensive electrification of
already electrified villages
(a) In normal terrain
1
48
(b) In hilly areas 6 10.5
Further, all DPRs under 12th Plan are being prepared by the
implementing agencies of the States based on actual field survey.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that against the approved outlay of Rs. 3,544
crore and Rs. 2,492 crore for the year. 2011-12 and 2012-13 only
Rs. 2,237 crore and Rs. 698 crore respectively was utilized. Also, for
the year 2013-14, against the outlay of Rs. 4,500 crore only Rs. 1,914
crore (as on 30.09.2013) have been spent. The Committee believe that
at the beginning of the programme there may be possibility of saving
of funds due to inaccuracies in various assessments. As the scheme
progresses and matures, the things get clearer with regard to its cost
and other requirements. The Committee are surprised to find that as
the scheme is maturing, instead of efficient utilization of allocated
fund, there have been unspent funds from year 2011-12. The Committee
believe that failure in utilization of the fund under the scheme is not
justified and is cause for concern as the scheme is yet to achieve its
objective fully i.e. to provide electricity access to all households of
the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that utmost efforts
should be made to ensure full utilization of the allocated funds for
RGGVY henceforth.
Reply of the Government
During 2013-14, against the Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 3200
crore allocated for RGGVY , an amount of Rs. 2801.17 crore has been
⎫
⎬
⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭

20
already released by Ministry of Power as on 15.02.2014 and it is expected
that the entire budget of Rs. 3200 crore would be utilized by
31st March 2014.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that the scheme of RGGVY has been extended
to the 12th Five Year Plan as not only the remaining work of the
11th Plan is to be completed but additional work generated through
revision of guidelines which inter-alia provides for bringing down
population criteria from 300 to 100 and upgradation of load for BPL
and APL households. For this purpose, a corpus of Rs. 35,447 crore has
been allocated. The first two years of the 12th Plan are about to
complete. The expenditure pattern under the scheme for these years
is disappointing. Out of the allocated fund of Rs. 2492 crore for the
first year of the 12th Plan, only Rs. 698 crore could be spent. Similarly,
for the year 2013-14 i.e. second year of the Plan, out of Rs. 4500
crore, only Rs. 1900 crore could be spent till 30.09.2013. If this trend
of expenditure continues the writing can be seen on the wall regarding
targets achievements. Since, it is not a newly conceived scheme so as
to justify lesser expenditure as the scheme may take some time to
settle. This is very unhappy situation and for this precise reason it has
been extended even to the 13th Plan  i.e.  up to year 2022. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a very serious appraisal
needs to be done for the reasons as to why the financial and physical
targets of the scheme in the 12th Plan are not coming as expected and
effective remedial measure are needed for avoiding this kind of non-
performance in remaining year of the Plan.
Reply of the Government
Most of the projects sanctioned under 10th and 11th Plan are in
final stage of completion and continuation of scheme in 12th Plan has
been approved by CCEA in mid of 2013-14 and new projects are now
being sanctioned for implementation. After the CCEA approval, 273
projects worth Rs. 23594 crore have been sanctioned. Release of funds
against these projects would commence as soon as the implementing
agencies are ready for award of projects.
Keeping in view the difficulties/bottlenecks experienced during
10th and 11th Plan the following remedial measures have been
incorporated for 12th Plan of RGGVY .
• DPRs based on actual field survey and no cost revisions on
account of quantity variation to be considered.

21
• State-level Standing Committee under the chairmanship of
Chief Secretary to monitor and resolve implementation issues/
bottlenecks.
• Dedicated project management structure for each project.
Payment of agency charges linked with the deployment of
such dedicated project management unit.
• Load for BPL and APL household enhanced to 250 Watt and
500 Watt respectively for determination of transformation
capacity.
• Condition of deployment of franchisees relaxed. However,
States should mention the alternative arrangement that would
be adopted by them to ensure maintenance of the assets
created and revenue sustainability at the Discom level.
• Charges for BPL connections have been enhanced to
Rs. 3000/- from Rs. 2200/- with LED bulb.
• Monitoring system have been made more stringent.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that initial target at the inception of RGGVY
was to electrify 1,25,000 villages, intensive electrification of 4.62 lakh
partially electrified villages and providing free electricity connection
to 2.34 crore BPL households in 5 years i.e. by the year 2009. However,
the targets could not be achieved within the stipulated time and the
scheme has to be extended with a revised target to cover 4,96,450 Un-
electrified villages (UEV)/Partially electrified villages (PEV) and to
provide free connections to 2.76 crore BPL households. Against this
backdrop the achievement under the scheme so far (as on 15.09.2013)
is coverage of 4,08,835. UEV/PEV and free electricity connection to
2.12 lakh BPL households. The scrutiny of the Committee has also
revealed that except for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11, the scheme
has miserably failed to achieve the yearly targets. Furthermore, the
Committee are pained to note that yearly targets in the first two years
of the 12th Plan which were lower than previous years have been
missed by big margins. The Committee are anguished to note that
despite funds being no constraint for the scheme, the annual targets
have more than often been missed. Also, as the Ministry has provision
to complete the left out work of the 12th Plan & the 13th Plan, it not
certain that the even existing targets would be achieved at the terminal
year of the 12th Plan i.e. 2017. The Committee, therefore, recommend

22
that every effort should be made to achieve, the yearly as well as
overall targets, as the sooner than later the scheme will have to
consider the remaining households/villages that have yet not been
covered under the scheme due to restriction of minimum population
of 100.
Reply of the Government
Under RGGVY , 648 projects have been sanctioned during 10th &
11th Plan covering electrification of about 1.12 lakh un/de-electrified
villages, intensive electrification of 3.82 lakh partially electrified villages
and release of free electricity service connections to 2.76 crore BPL
households in the country. Cumulatively, as on 15.02.2014, the
electrification works in 1,08,121 un/de-electrified villages, intensive
electrification of 3,05,926 partially electrified villages have been
completed and free electricity connections to 2.15 crore BPL households
have been released in the country under the scheme.
179 projects have been sanctioned under RGGVY during 12th Plan
(As on 15.02.2014) covering 10574 un-electrified villages, 161367
partially electrified villages and to provide free electricity connections
to 1.11 crore BPL households. The electrification works are yet to be
commenced in these projects.
The progress of scheme is regularly being monitored and reviewed
by the Ministry of Power and the nodal agency (Rural Electrification
Corporation Limited) with all stakeholders i.e. State Government, State
Power Utilities, Implementing Agencies etc.
(a) Government of India has set up an Inter-Ministerial Monitoring
Committee headed by Secretary (Power), Government of
India, which periodically meets to review the progress of
implementation, resolve the issues impeding the progress,
issue necessary directions for effective implementation and
sanction of projects.
(b) Review of progress by the Ministry of Power in Focused States
at central level and also at Regional level.
(c) Review of progress by the Ministry of Power at State level
with Chief Secretary and Secretary (Power/Energy) of the
State.
(d) Review of progress by the Ministry of Power with Central
Power Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) involved in implementation
of RGGVY .

23
(e) Field visits by the officials of Ministry of Power.
(f) Monitoring and review of progress by the nodal agency.
- At Central level with all the implementing agencies.
- At State level with State Government and concerned.
implementing agencies.
- Field visits by the officials of Project Offices located in
various States and Corporate Office of REC.
In addition to above, following steps have been taken for effective
monitoring of RGGVY:
(i) On the request of Hon ’ble Minister of Power, Ministry of
Rural Development expanded the scope of District level
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (VMC) to include “Review
of RGGVY” as one of the agenda items and issued directives
to all States in this regard.
(ii) State-wise task force in identified States have been
constituted with representative from Ministry of Power, REC,
Project Implementing Agency, CPSUs (if involved) & State
Government. The task force meet at least once in a month
either at State Headquarter or field offices of the State to
resolve major issues impeding progress. The task force, in
addition to expediting the balance works of 10th/11th Plan,
also monitors progress of preparation of DPRs, issue of NITs
& award of contracts etc. in order to ensure speedy
implementation of 12th Plan projects.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that the Government has decided to continue
RGGVY with an outlay of Rs. 35447 crore consisting of Rs. 22,396 crore
for the 12th Plan and about Rs. 13,000 crore for the I3th Plan. The
Committee have been informed that all remaining un-electrified villages,
partially electrified villages and habitations (with population more
than 100) are to be considered under the 12th Plan of RGGVY . Left
over BPL households, in these villages and habitations which could not
be covered earlier shall be eligible to be considered for electrification
under the 12th Plan. The Committee, however , have been given to
understand that due to resource crunch, the villages having population
less than 100 will not be considered even in the 12th Plan. As per the

24
target of the Ministry for the 12th Plan period; a total of 2.53 lakh
villages/habitations and 2.73 crore BPL households are to be covered
under the scheme. The Committee have been informed that they have
taken several steps to address the issue that has been affecting the
pace of implementation of the programme. Further, the monitoring
and auditing of the scheme has been strengthened. However , the
achievement for the two years of the 12th Plan so far , has failed to
vindicate the claims of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to come up with a definite plan to ensure the
speedy implementation of the programme. As the programme has been
continuing since long, the Ministry should learn from the mistakes of
the past and refrain from repeating the same in the 12th Plan. The
Committee, would like to be apprised of the perceptible improvements
done and target achieved under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power conducted evaluation of RGGVY scheme engaging
4 independent agencies involving 1000 villages in 150 districts of
20 RGGVY States and suggested measures for improvement of the
scheme. Keeping in view the difficulties/bottlenecks experienced during
10th and 11th Plan the following remedial measures have been
incorporated for 12th Plan of RGGVY:
• DPRs based on actual field survey and no cost revisions on
account of quantity variation to be considered.
• State-level Standing Committee under the chairmanship of
Chief Secretary to monitor and resolve implementation issues/
bottlenecks.
• Dedicated project management structure for each project.
Payment of agency charges linked with the deployment of
such dedicated project management unit.
• Load for BPL and APL household enhanced to 250 Watt and
500 Watt respectively for determination of transformation
capacity.
• Condition of deployment of franchisees relaxed. However,
States should mention the alternative arrangement that would
be adopted by them to ensure maintenance of the assets
created and revenue sustainability at the Discom level.
• Charges for BPL connections have been enhanced to
Rs. 3000/- from Rs. 2200/-with LED bulb.
• Monitoring system have been made more stringent.

25
Under 12th Plan RGGVY , 179 projects have been sanctioned under
RGGVY during 12th Plan (As on 15.02.2014) covering 10574 un-electrified
villages, 161367 partially electrified villages and to provide free
electricity connections to 1.11 crore BPL households. The electrification
works are yet to be commenced in these projects.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]

26
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE  COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLY
—Nil—

27
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No. 2.2.)
The Committee note that the motto of RGGVY was to provide
access to electricity to all by 2009. The Committee also note that
ideally the objective of the scheme is to provide electricity access to
each and every household and village of the Country. However for the
purpose of implementation of the programme villages having population
more than 300 were considered for electrification under the programme
in the 10th and the 11th Five Year Plans. Recently, the Government
has decided to broaden the scope of the scheme and cover all census
villages and habitations with population of above 100. It amounts to
non consideration of villages/hamlets having population of less than
100. It has been envisaged that the programme will run through 12th
Plan (2012-17) and there is possibility of extending it to the 13th Plan
to complete left out works, if any. It is clear that even by 2017,
villages having population less than 100 will not be considered for
electrification under RGGVY scheme, and therefore, another extension
of the programme will be required to achieve the actual goal of this
programme i.e. electricity access to all households in the Country.
Furthermore, the Committee in regard to providing free electricity
connections to BPL households, note that at the initial stage of the
programme, the provision to providing free connection was limited to
only 10% of the BPL households in the 10th Plan. This restriction was
however removed for 11th and 12th Plan Projects. The Ministry has
now, however , decided to cap the number of households limits indicated
by the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee are aware of the
resource/fund constraints in achievement of the real objective of the
scheme, nonetheless, it strongly recommend that the Government should
come up with a blue print for the implementation of the scheme in
letter and spirit so that electrification of all villages irrespective of
the number of households and free connections to all BPL households
can be provided. For this the Government should first identify the
total number of BPL households and villages/habitations irrespective
of the number of households as early as possible so that the exact task
of providing electricity access to all and the resultant resources and

28
funds required can be assessed, otherwise the programme will not
achieve its real objectives. The Committee also recommend that it
should also be ensured that no genuine BPL family should be deprived
of the free electricity connections under the scheme on account of
discrepancies, if any, in BPL lists of the States and the Ministry of Rural
Development.
Reply of the Government
Government of India has approved continuation of RGGVY under
12th Five Year Plan to cover remaining villages/habitations having
population more than 100 and to provide free electricity connection to
BPL households in these villages.
As per the extant policy, villages and habitations having population
of less than 100 are covered by the Ministry of New & Renewable
Energy (MNRE) under their Remote Villages Electrification (RVE)
programme.
List of BPL households to be covered under the scheme is provided
by the concerned State. Under 12th Plan, the State Level Standing
Committee, headed by-the Chief Secretary shall vet the district-wise
list of villages, habitations and also BPL households to be covered
under the scheme and recommend the project proposals formulated by
the implementing agency.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 44/8/2013-Vol. 8, Dated: 11.03.2014]

29
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
19 December, 2014 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

30
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2014 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri M. Chandrakasi
4. Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
5. Shri Saumitra Khan
6. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
7. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
8. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
11. Shrimati Krishna Raj
12. Shri M.B. Rajesh
13. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
14. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
15. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V.P . Singh Badnore
17. Shri Oscar Fernandes
18. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
19. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
20. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
21. Shri Mohammad Shafi

31
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Additional Director
3. Smt. L.N. Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then
took up for consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) 1st Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power
for the year 2014-15.
(ii) 2nd Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2014-15.
(iii) 3rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 41st Report (15th Lok
Sabha) on Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
change. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
4. ** ** ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**

32
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FORTY-FIRST REPORT (15th LOK SABHA) OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by the Government:
SI. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15 and 16
Total: 15
Percentage 93.75%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
reply:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in  respect  of  which
the replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
SI. No. 1
Total: 01
Percentage 6.25%
(v) Observation/Recommendation  in  respect of which
final reply of the Government is still awaited:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%