STANDING COMMITTEE
4 ON ENERGY

(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER
ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

FOURTH REPORT

प्रत्यक्ष eh

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)


FOURTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2014-2015)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.05.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7,05.2015

cuba wet

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)


Price : % 310,00

© 2015 By Lox Sastia Secretaaur

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
ainco Art India, New Dethi-110 005,


CONTENTS

Coweosmion of THe Commirree (2014-2015) .................««-«२२०«०००-
WEMRODUCTION 65.55. ०२६०००००००००६३८०००००८८०५«»+-> woainsdabevveds ७०७०४६००७३०००००००
1]

Cuarter 4 See
CHAPTER II] Grid SECUFIEY ,...«««७३७००७«०००«०००००००००३२५०१७००७००००००रू०

Cuarter VI Provisions relating to Regulatory Commissions &
Appellate Tribunals

Crwerer Vill Rationalization of Tariff Determination ............

1, The corrections/improvements in the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2014 accepted by the Ministry
of Power based on deliberations/ discussions during
the Committee meetings

2. Notes of Dissent submitted by some
Members ..

Annecunes.

1. List of Organizations/Experts/Individuals who
submitted written MEMOFANda .........- | ०००५०००००+५««

2. Copy of the Bill as introduced in Lok Sabha .....

3. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
OM 22.01.2015 ..........«२००००७००७६००३००००००९०००००५०००००००

109
123
127
134
140



tii)

10.

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
जाू-0602:2018-5८-००००६४०-००३३७६०००५६४५७६००००७०७ ७०५७७

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
RE TBA IONS <,८७८००७०७००७२००४२७७०/७/०३०७४०१७००६०४६००५७०

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 11.03.2015 ... ९९%

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
॥७147.09,301$ ,.,....,.....६«««««««०६०७०७७६००३७०७००+००००९०

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
OM 17.04.2015 ........ ९«००१०००७ ५०७०० ००७०७५०७७ ७३५ ७७०००» ४०

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
OM: 28.04.2015 sescnsesisnarrsinsicovessvesresesvnesvesese

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
१ QRZ ,...६७-८८६३६७६८६६६६६२०००७०७००३४००७००००३४००२५७

Past

276

295


- aes ee
SSeseR FRESE RS S

~eenereye हज

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15)

Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Om Birta

Shri M. Chandrakasi

Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey

Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
Shri Deepender Singh Hooda

Shri Saumitra Khan

Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shrimati Krishna Raj

Shri M.B. Rajesh

Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

Shri Purno Agitok Sangma

Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
Shri Matyadri Sriram

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

(iff)


23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

29.

31,

{iv)

Rajya Sabha
Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri Ram Jethmalani
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri 5. Muthukaruppan
‘Shri Javed Ali Khan
Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
Shrimati Viplove Thakur

‘Secretasur
1, Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey ~ Director

3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Additional Director
4. Shri Surender Chaudhary — Senior Committee Assistant


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do
present this Report on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014. The
Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
19th December, 2014 and referred on 22nd December, 2014 to the
Standing Committee on Energy for Examination.

2. The Committee had extensive consultation with various
Stakeholders viz. Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Metro, Ministry
of Railways (Railway Board), Consumer Forums (PRAYAS), Industry Forums
(Ctl, ASSOCHAM, IPPAI, APP, FICCI), CPUs of the Ministry of Power,
Electricity Regulators, State Governments besides study visit to Mumbai,
Bhuj and Bhubaneswar,

3. After the series of discussion and consultation, the Power
Ministry has accepted that few improvements/corrections are necessary
in the draft Amendment Bill submitted to the Lok Sabha which was
referred to the Committee. The observations/recommendations,
suggested by the Committee are given in following chapters.

4. The Committee feels that the above corrections {in the
Amendment Bill) & necessary. The Ministry is suggested to move the
corrected amended bill/amendments to the Bill in the Lok Sabha.

5. Undoubtedly, there is an imperative need that the third
generation reforms/improvements in the electricity/energy sector be
initiated. The correction/reforms in power generation, transmission,
separation of transmission and distribution, the regulatory system are
in place.

6. It is felt that now concentration is required to be given on:

{i) Separation of commercial losses 1.6. theft, correction/
leakages.

(ii) More transparency, affectivity and accountability in the
regulatory system,

(iff) Separation of carriage and content in phases.
(iv) Energy efficiency.

(v)


(v) Clean and green power.
ivi) Choice to customer to select the supplier.
(vii) Healthy tariff poticy,

7. The Committee feel while moving forward towards the
improvement/reforms, the need to include the flexibility clauses in

the legislation proposed is important,

8. As electricity is a concurrent subject, the Committee has
suggested that the views and suggestions of the States be given equal
weightage and consideration,

9. | am happy that most of the suggestions which have come up
during the discussions have been wholeheartedly accepted by the
Ministry of Power.

10. The Committee feel that all the stakeholders including State
Governments, Government of India, and regulators have to take serious
note of the commercial losses/leakages, Though good improvements
are reflected to bring down the ATEC losses to near about 20 per cent,
we have to go one step further to bring it down to 10 per cent.

11. A point is debated about the functioning and accountability
about the regulators, ‘Regulators are accountable to whom’. Now we
have more than 10 years experience of regulatory system in energy
sector, There is a need for evaluation. The Parliament and the
Government has to think about the same.

12. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 5th May, 2015.

13. The Committee wishes to express their thanks to the officers
of the Ministry of Power for valuable assistance.

New Dewi; KIRIT SOMAIYA,
5 May, 2015 __ Chairperson,
3 Vaisakha, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee an Eneray.

(vi)


REPORT

NARRATION ANALYSIS
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

The Electricity Act, 2003 was enacted by the Parliament to
consolidate the earlier Electricity Laws, namely, the Indian Electricity
Act, 1910, the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory
Commissions Act, 1998, Besides, consolidating the previous Electricity
Laws, the Electricity Act, 2003 made some significant departure from
the earlier dispensation.

2. The Committee after examining the challenges in the Power
Sector which emerged during the past 8-10 years, had recommended to
the Government through 5 Reports on more than one occasion, to
amend the Electricity Act, 2003 to further strengthen some of the
concepts and also make changes to enable smoother implementation of
the Act. The Government while accepting the recommendations took
Prompt action in the matter. Accordingly, the Planning Commission
formed a Working Group on Power for the formulation of 12th Five year
Plan which also suggested certain changes in the Act. The Government
after following the established procedure, introduced this Bill In
Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2014.

3. The Bill was referred to this Committee by the Hon'ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2014 for detailed examination and Report
thereon. A copy of the Bill, as introduced in Lok Sabha, is placed at
Annexure-B, The Committee started its examination immediately and
all the relevant documents/papers were sought from the Ministry of
Power. A press communique Inviting suggestions of the public including
experts on the Bill was issued on 2 February, 2015. In response to the
press communique, a large number of memoranda comprising of
thousands of suggestions were received. The suggestions received were
compiled, tabulated and forwarded to the Ministry of Power for their
comments. A list of Organizations/institutions/experts/other individuals
who submitted written memoranda to the Committee is placed at
Annexure-A. A comprehensive questionnaire comprising both general
Issues and clause wise points was also sent to the Ministry for their
response.


4, During the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee held
a number of sittings which included briefing/oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Power, oral hearing of the representatives
of different stake holders like Central Public Sector undertakings, Industry
Associations, Power producers, private electric appliances manufacturers
and power departments of all State Governments. The Committee also
heard the views of the representatives of central electricity regulatory
commission along with all the State Regulatory Commissions. The
Committee also visited Solar plants and Wind farms at Bhuj and held
discussions with various stake holders at Mumbai, Bhuj and Bhubaneshwar
during their study visit from 6 January to 9 January, 2015. Subsequently,
the Committee concluded their examination of the Bill after taking
Cclause-by-clause oral evidence of the Ministry of Power.

5. The proposed amendments seek to usher in changes inter-alia
relating to Grid Security, promotion of Renewable Energy, open access,
Rationalization of Tariff determination process, Strengthening of
Regulatory Commissions, Separation of Carriage and Content in the
distribution sector, enabling provisions for self certification of Electrical
Installations and definitions. In this regard, the Government has stated
in the statement of objects and reasons as under:

+ “The amendments to the said Act have been proposed to
segregate the carriage (distribution sector/network) from
the content (electricity supply business) in the power sector
by introducing multiple supply licensees in the content
based on market principles and continuing with the carriage
(distribution network) as a regulated activity. The proposed
amendments also provide for recovery of revenue by
licensees without any revenue gap, timely filing of tariff
petitions by utilities and disposal of the same by the
Appropriate Commission within a specified time period and
empowering the Appropriate Commissions for initiating
suo-motu proceedings for determination of tariff in case
the utility or generating companies do not file their petitions
in time.

+ Moreover, it is felt necessary to improve accountability and
transparency in the working of the Appropriate Commissions
without affecting their functional autonomy and to bring
clarity in the provisions pertaining to the Central Electricity
Authority. Further, granting deemed licensee status to
companies notified by the Central Government, the provision
of composite electricity bills, installation of smart meters


beyond a consumption level to be prescribed by the Central
Government, dedicated transmission lines and certain
modifications in the composition of the Selection
Committees at Central and State level for selection of the
Chairperson and Members of the regulatory Commissions
are some of the other amendments proposed in the said
Act."

6. The clause wise details of the proposed amendments along with

the reasons and explanation are as under:

aL Number of Details of amendment ॥ the clause Reasons for such

No. Causes! sub ‘including addition, deletion and amendments along with the
clauses in the insertion explanation
Principal Act

1 2 3 4

1 Section 2 2, In section 2 of the Electricity Act, Clause 2.- This clause seeks
Sub-section (1) to 2003 (hereinafter referred as the to amend section 2 of the
(™ principal Act}— Priscipal Act to amend

Certain definitions and to
{after clause [1), the following clause Insert the new definitions
Shall be ‘wserted, namely:~ Telating to “ancillary
Services", “area of
(1A) “ancillary services", in relation to distribution’, “decentratised
power system or grid operation, means distributed generation”,
the services necessary to support the “Electricity Distribution
Power system or grid operation for Code™, “incumbent-supply
maintaining power quailty, retiability ficensee", “Intermediary
and security of the pri’; compari”, “obligated entity”,
“renewable energy sources",
(i) after clause (2), the following “renewable energy service
clause Suall be inserted, namely: company", “smart arid" and
“provider of last resort”.
१3) “ares of distribution” means the
area within which a distribution
licensee ॥$ authorived by his licence to
distribute electricity;’;

(til) fm clause (3), for the words
“distribution licensee", the words
“supply licensee” shall be substituted:



3

(iv) in clause (8), after the words “or
essociation” occurring at the end, the
words “in terms and conditions a5 may
be prescribed by the Central
Goversment from time to time;” shall
be inserted;

कै) im clause (12), after the words and
brackets “wseful energy {including
electricity)” occurring at the end, the
words “as specified by the Authority’
shall be inserted;

(vi) after clause (15), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(15A) “decentralised distributed
generation” means electricity
generation from wind, small hydro,
solar, biomass, biogas, bio-fuel,
generation from any kind of waste
including municipal and sotid waste,
geothermal, hybrid power system or
such other sources as may be notified
by the Central Government for end:
use at or near the place of generation;’;

(vil) for clause (16), the following
cause shall be substituted, namely: ~

*(16) “dedicated transmission lines”
means any radial electric supply-tine
for point to point transmission which
is required for the purpose of
cormecting 2 captive generating plant
or generating station to any
transmission line or substation or
switching station or generating station,
of the load centre, as the case may
be, subject to the condition that such


3

tine shall not form a loop with the grid
and shall not be shared except with
the prior approval af the Appropriate
Commision;

(ix) after clause (17), the following
clause shal, be inserted, mamely;—

‘(17A) “distribution” means the
conveyance of electricity by use of
distribution system;”;

(x) in clause (23), in sub-clause (a),
for the word “supptied", the words
“distributed, supplied” shall be
substituted;

(xl) after clauve (23), the following
clause shall be teserted, namely:

10) in clause (24), for the figures *50"
ocouring at the end, the figures and
letter "516" shall be substituted;

(lif) ॥ clause (25), after sub-clause
(), the following sub-clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

+ {ba} distribution system; or;

(viv) ॥ clause (31), for the words and
figures “section 617 of the Companies
44,1956", the words, brackets and
figures “sab-section (6) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013" shall be
substituted;


3

(ay) ॥ clause (25), flor the words “high
voltage line”, the words “high voltage
line or high pressure cables” shalt be
substitured;

(evi) after clause (95), the following
Clauses shal be inserted, namely:—

*(35A) “incumbent supply licensee”
means the entity to which the supply
functions and undertakings, ether than
those vested In the intermediary
company, is vested under sub-section
(4A) of section 131;

{35B) "intermediary company” means
the entity succeeding to the existing
power purchase agreements and
procurement arrangements of the
relevant distribution licensees on
reorganisation as per sub-section (4A)
of section 131;';

txvil) for clause (41), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“{41) “local authority” means any urban
local. body or rura. local body or body
‘of port commissioners or other
suthority entrusted by the Union or
ary State Government with the control
‘of management of any area or 02०
fund;

(0) after clause (45), the following
clause shall be inserted, samely:—

‘(46A) “obligated entity’ means the
distribution licensee or the consumer
‘owning the captive power plant or the
‘open access consumer, as the case may


3

be, which is mandated under section
86 of the Act in order to procure
electricity from or any market
‘etrument representing the renewable
energy sources;";

(10 after (७७९ (37), the following
clause shall be inserted, namety:—

“{S7A) “renewable energy sources” for
the purposes of this Act, means the
small tydro, wind, solar, bio-mass, bio-
fuel, bio-gas, co-generation from these
sources, waste including municipal and
solid waste, geo-thermal, tidal, forms
of oceamic energy end such other
sources as may be notified by the
Central Government from time to time.

Explanation For the purposes of this
clause, the expression “small hydro”
means hydro generating stations of
Capacity not exceeding the capacity
notified by the Central Goverment for
this: purpose

(578) “Renewable Energy Service
Company" means an energy service
company which provides renewable
energy to the consumers in the form
‘of electricity for the purposes of this
Acts";

ox) after clause (61), the following
0906 shalh be inserted, namely:

"610 “Smart Grid” means an electricity
network that uses information and
communication technology to gather
Information and act intelligentiy in
automated fashion to improve the

~


3

Section 3
Sab {1} to 15)

efficiency, reliability, economics, and
sustainability of — generation,
transmission and distribution of
electricity and such other isformation
5 may be specified by the Authority;';

(xxi) after cause (70), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

*{7OA) “supply licensee” means a person
authorised under section 14 to supply
electricity to consumers and shall
‘include, incumbent supply licensee;

(70B} “provider of last resort” means
the supply licensee who, from time to
time, is designated so by the
Appropriate Commission;’;

(ool) in clause (74), the following
proviso shall Se inserted, namety:—

“Provided that sharing and use of power
system for telecommunication shall not
be construed as trading for the purpose
cof this Act;";

esti) ॥ clause (72), after the words
“from @ generating station”, the words
“or a substation” shall be inserted.

3, For section 3 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

“4.(1) The Central Government shall,
from time to time, prepare, review and
notify the National Electricity Poticy,
Tanff Policy and National Renewable

Clause 3.~ This clause seeks
to amend section 3 of the
principal Act to provide for a
separate National Renewable
Energy Policy for the
promotion of renewable
sources of energy and for
measures to promote smart


Energy Poticy, in consultation with the grid, ancillary services and
State Govermments and the Authority decentralised distribution
for development of the power system generation, etc.

based on optimal utitisation of resources

such as coal, natural gas, nuclear

substances or materials, hydro and
renewable sources of energy and for
separation of distribution and supply
functions and measures to promote

Smart Grid, ancillary services and

decentralised distributed generation,

etc.

(2) The Authority shall prepare a
National Blectricity Plan in accordance
with the Hational Electricity Poticy and
notify such plan once in five years:

Provided that the Authority while
preparing the National Electricity Plan
shall publish the draft National
Electricity Pian and invite suggestions
and objections thereon from ticensees,
generating companies and the public
within such time as may be prescribed:

Provided further that the Authority
shall-

(a) notify the plan after obtaining the
approval of the Central Government;

{b} revise the plan incorporating
therein the directions, if any, given by
the Central Government weile granting
approval under clause ja}.

(3) The Authority may review or revise
the National Electricity Plan in
accordance with the National

Electricity Policy,



3 4

w

(4) The Central Gaverrment may, after
such consultation with the State
Governments a5 may be considered
necessary, notify policies and adopt
measures for promotion of Renewable
Energy Generation inctudteg through tax
rebates, generation linked incentive,
creation of national renewable energy
fund, development of renewable
industry and for effective
implementation and enforcement of
such measures.

4. क section 4 of the principal Act, for Clause 4.- This clause seeks
the words “notify a national policy to amend section 4 of the
permitting stand-alone systems", the principal Act to provide for
words “notify a national policy for harnessing solar power and
harnessing solar power and other forms renewable sources included
of renewable energy to ensure as a part of the National
electricity to un-electrified rural Polky in the context of the
Fousehoids and permitting stand-alone stand-alone system.
systems” shall be substituted.

5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for Clause 5.- This clause sweks

the word “areas” the words “parts of to amend section 6 of the

the country” shall be substituted. Principal Act so as to
substitute the expression
“area” with the expression
“parts of the Country",

6. For section 7 of the principal Act, Clause 6.- This clause socks
the following section shall be to substitute section 7 of the
substituted, namety:— principal Act to provide for

maintenance of spinning
“7, (1) Any generating company may reserve af certain capacity by
establish, operate and maintain a the generating company and
generating station without cbtainig a further provide that any
cence under this Act, #f it complies generating company

10


3 4

with the technical standards retating establishing a coal and lignite

to connectivity with the grid referred based thermal generating

to in clause 0) of section 73: station after a date and in a
‘manner to be notified shail be

Provided that any generating company required to establish a

establishing may de required by the Renewable Energy Generation

system operator to build and maintain capacity as prescribed by the

३ spinning reserve of such capacity as Central Government from

may be notified by the Central time to time waich shall not

Government from time to time: be less than ten per cent. of
the thermal power installed

Provided further that any generating capacity,

Company before establishing or

expanding the capacity of a generating

station shall submit a detailed project

report wid duly inform about the same

to the Authority.

Explanation.For the purposes of sub-
section (1), the expressien “spinning
reserve” means the backup capacity of
3 generating station which shall be
made avaitabie on the directions of
the system operator, within 2 time limit
‘& may be notified by the Central
Gowernmesit, to maintain grid safety
and seautity,

12) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (1), any generating
company estabkishing 2 coal and lignite
based thermal generating station after
3 date and in 2 manner to be notified
shall be required to establish a
Renewable Energy Generation capacity
as prescribed by the Central
Government from time to time which
stall not be tess than ten per cent. of
the thermal power installed capacity.

(3) In cave any existing coal and lignite
based thermal power generating station,



12

Section 8

Section 12

3

‘with the concurrence of power procurers:
under the existing Power Purchase
Agreements, chooses for setting up
additional renewable energy generating
capacity, the energy produced from
there shall be allowed to be bundled
‘and pass through shall be allowed in
such cases by the Appropriate
Commission and the Obtigated Entities
who finally buy such power shail
account the same towards their
renewable purchase obligations.”,

7. In section 8 of the principal Act.—

(2) के sub-section (1), after the words
“hydro generating station”, the words
“inchading multipurpose hydro facitities
with power generation" shall be
inserted;

(0) in sub-section (2), after clause (0),
the following clause shall be inserted,
namety:—

“(6} project should maintain: minimum
ecological flow in the siver;".

8. For section 12 of the principal Act,
the foltowing shall be substituted,
namely:~

“$2, (1) No person shall~

{al traremt electricity; of

(b) distribute electricity; or

(cj undertake trading in electricity; or
(a) supply of electricity to consumer,
unless he is authorised to do so by 3
ticence issued under section 14, or ७
exempt under section 13:

Clause 7.- This clause seeks
to amend section है of the
principal Act to provide that
the multipurpose hydro power
with power generation shall
be included as a part of
hydroelectric generation.
Further, ft is provided that
the Central Electricity
Authority while giving
concurrence to the hydro
stations should take into
account the maintenance of
minimum ecological flow के
the river.

Clause 8.~ This clause seeks
to amend section 12 of the
principal Act so as to
‘frtroduce the provision of a
sapply licensee and also to
make other consequential
changes due to the
searegation of catriage and
content.


Section 14

Provided that no licence shall be
required by a generating company, @
captive generating plant and a trading
licensee for supply of electricity to open
access consumer in any place:

Provided further that no licence shall
be required for the activities assigned

‘to the intenmediary company under the
Act.

(2) The Appropriate Commission shall
fot grant licence to more than one
distibution licensee im any area of
distribution:

Provided that where two of more
istribution licensees within the same
area of distribution are existing on the
Gate of the commencement of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014,
they stall continwe their operation till
such period as specified in their
licence,

(3) Without prejudice to sub-section
(2}, the Central Government in
Consultation with the Appropriate
Commission may, in public interest,
permit more then one distribution
Ucersee to operate in any area, if it is
considered necessary. 7.

9. For saction 14 of the principal Act,
the following shall be substituted,
hamely:~

“14. The Appropriate Commission may,
on an application made to it under

13


14

3

section 15, grant a licence to any
person—

(a) ७ transmit electricity as 3
transmission licensee: of

{b) to distribute electricity as a
distribution licensee:

Provided that the Developer of a
Special Economic Zone notified under
sub-section (1} of section 4 of the
Special Economic Zones Act,2005, shall
be deemed to be a licensee for the
purpose of this cause, with effect from
the date of notification of such Special
Economic Zone:

Provided further that the decentralised
Gistributed generation networks nat
connected to the distribution system
may continue to operate without

{Cl to undertake trading In electricity
as an electricity trader, or

(0 to supply electricity as 2 supply
licensee, in any area as may be
specified in the licence:

Provided that any person engaged in
the business of transmission or supply
of electricity under the provisions of
the repealed laws or any Act specified
॥ the Schedule on or before the
appoinked date shall be deemed to be
a ticensee under this Act for such


perlod as may be stipulated in the
(kence, clearance or approval granted
to him under the repealed Laws ar such
Act specified in the Schedule, and the
provisions of the repealed laws or such
‘Act specified in the Schedule In respect
of such ticence shall apply for 2 period
of one year from the date of the
commencement of this Act or such
earlier period as may be specified, at
the request of the licensee, by the
‘Appropeiate Commission and thereafter
tthe provisions of this Act shall. apply
to such business:

Provided further that any person
engaged in the business of distribution
of electricity om or before the
Commencement of the Electricity
{Amendment} Act, 2014 shall be deemed
to have authorisation to undertake
distribution of the electricity as a
dstribution licensee and also to supply
electricity as ३ supply licensee ti the
‘transfer scheme under clauses {a} and
(b) of sub-section (4A) of section 131
is effective in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, where upon the
distribution business and the supply
business shall be undertaken in the
manner as stipulated in the sald
transfer scheme:

Provided also that the Central
Transmission Utility or the State
Traremission Utiity shal be deemed
to be ३ transmission ficensee under this
xb

Provided also that in case an
Appropriate Government transmits

15


16

electricity of distributes or supplies
electricity or undertakes trading in
electricity, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, such
Government shall be deemed to be ३
licensee under this Act, but shall not
be required to cbtain a ticence under
this Act:

Provided also that the Railways as
defined under the Indian Raflways Act,
1989 and the Metro Rail Corporation
established under the Metro Railways
(Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002
be deemed to be a licensee under this
Act, aed shall not be required to obtain
a fikence under this Act:

Provided also that the Damodar Valley
Corporation, established under sub-
section {1) of section 3 of the Damodar
Valley Corporation Act, 1948, shall be
deemed to be a licensee under this
‘Act but shall not be required to obtain
a licence under this Act and the
provisions of the Damodar Valley
Corporation Act, 1948, # so far as they
‘are mek inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, shall continue to apply to
that Comporation:

Provided also that the Government
company or the company referred to
{in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) or
sub-section (4A) of section 131 of this
Act and the company or companies
Created in pursuance of the Acts
spectfied in the Schedule or any
company oF companies as may be
notified by the Central Government,
shall be deemed to be a licensee under
this Act:


Provided aiso that the Appropriate
Commission may grant a ficence to two
‘or more persons for supply of electricity
within the seme area of supply, subject
to the conditions that the applicant for
grant of supply licence within the same
area shall, without prejudice to the
other conditions or requirements under
this Act, comply with the additional
Tequirements {relating to the capitel
adequacy, Credit worthiness or code of
conduct} as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, and no such
‘appticant, who complies with all the
requirements for graet of licence, shall
be refused grant of licence on the
found that there already exists a
licensee in the same area for the same
purpose:

Provided also that at least one of the
supply ticensee shall be a Government
company or Government Controlled
Company:

Provided also that where @ person
intends to generate, distribute and
supply electricity in a rural area to be
notified by the State Government, such
person shall not require any licence tor
‘such generation, distribution and supply
of electricity, but he shall comply with
‘the measures which may be specified
by the Authority under section $3:

Provided also that where a person
intends to generate and supply



3 4

10... Section #5

electricity from renewable energy
sources, gach person shall not require
any licence for such generation and
supply of electricity, but he shall comply
with the measures which may be
specified by the Authority under
sections 53 and 73:

Provided atso that a supply licensee
shell not require a licence to undertake
trading in electricity:

Provided also that 2 distribution
licensee, after effective date of
transfer under sub-section (4A) of
section 13, shall not engage in trading
or supply of electricity:

Provided also that in 2 case where a
distribution licensee was undertaking
the distribution of electricity, prior to
the commencement of the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2014, for a specified
area within his area of distribution
through a franchisee such franchisee
shall not be required to obtain any
separate licence from the State
Commission concerned and such
distribution licensee shall remain
responsible for distribution and supply
of electricity in that area of
distribution till the expiry of the
existing agreement with the
distribution and supply teense of that
area”.

10. In section 15 of the principal Act, Clause 10.~ This clause seeks
for sub-section {8), the following sub- to amend section 15 of the
section shall be substituted, namely: principal Act so as to clarity

that the period of licerse

18


1 2 3 4
eee

“(8) A Aicence shail continue to be in shall be specified by the
force for a period of twenty-five years Appropriate Commission.
क्ष more as may be specified in the

licence, unless such licence is revoked

or renewed.”
11... Section 20 11, In section 20 af the principal Act, Clause 11.— This clause seeks
to amend section 20 of the
(a) in sub-section (1),- principal Act to bring charity

in respect of provistons
(Fh in cpening portion, after the words pertaining to expiry,
“icence of ary licensee”, the words “or revocation of licence and
when the duration of any licence regarding purchase price of
expires” shall be inserted; wtitity.

(if) in clause (a), after the words
“Hicence bas been revoked”, the words
and brackets “or expires (hereinafter
referred to as the cutgoing tense)”
shail be inserted;

(itt) # clause (८), after the words
"revocation of licence", the words “or
expiry of the period of the licence or”
shall be inserted;

७) for sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted,
namely.—"

(2) Where a utility ॥ sold under sub-
section (1), the purchaser shall pay to
the licensee the purchase price of the
जज in such manner 2s may be agreed
upon between the parties."';

10 in sub-section (3), for the words
“the licence” wherever they ocow, the
‘words “outgoing licence” shall be
substiteted.

19


3 4

12. For section 24 of the principal Act, Clause 12.— This clause seeks
the following section shall be to substitute section 24 of the
‘substituted, namely:~ principal Act so as to enable

the Appropriate Commission
“24. (1) # at any time the Appropriate to suspend the bicence of the
Commission is of the opinion that a distribution licensee or a
distribution licensee or a supply supply licensee and appoint
licensee— ‘an administrator to discharge

the functions of the
(a) has persistently failed to maintain distribution licensee or a
uninterrupted distribution or supply of supply licensee in accordance
electricity conforming to standards with the terms and conditions
regarding quality of electricity to the of the ticence.
consumers; OF

(b) $ unable to Gischarge the functions
or perform the duties imposed on it by
or under the provisions of this Act: or

(ch has persistently defaulted in
comeiiying with any direction given by
the Appropriate Commissian under this
et oF

(d) has broken the terms and conditions
of licence, and circumstances exist
which render it necessery for it in
public interest so to do, the
Appropriate Commission may, for
feasons to be recorded in writing,
suspend, for 2 period not exceeding
‘one year, the licence of the distribution
licensee of a supply licensee and
appoint. an Administrator to discharge
the functions of the distribution
licensee or a supply ficensee in
accordance with the terms and
conditions of the ticence:

Provided that before suspending a
licence under this section, the
Appropriate Commission shall give 8



1 i 3 4
ee eee) «न कके

Teasonable opportunity to the
distribution licensee or a supply licensee
to make representations against the
proposed suspension of ticence and shall
‘consider the representations, if any, af
the distribution licensee or a supply
ticensee,

{2} Upon suspension of ticence under
sub-section (1), the utilities of the
distribution licensee or a supply
licensee shall vest in the Administrator
for a period not enceedieg one year or
up to the date on which such utility is
sold in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 20, whichever 6
later.

(3) The Appropriate Commission shall,
within one year of appointment of the
Administrator under sub-section (1),
either revoke the licence in accordance
with the provisions contained in section
19 oF revoke sapension of the llomce
and restore the utility to the
distribution licensee or a supply
licensee whose licence had been
suspended, as the case may be,

(4) In & case where the Appropriate
Commission revokes the licence under
sub-section (3), the utility of the
distribution licensee of a supply
licensee shall be sold within 2 98106
of ome year fram the date of revocation
Of the licence in accordance with the
provisions of section 20 and the price
after deducting the administrative and
other expenses on sale of utilities and
such other amounts as may be due from

val


13.

“4.

Section 29

Section 33

3

the licensee shall be remitted to the
distribution licensee or a supply

13, bn section 29 of the principal Act,
for sub-section (6), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—

(6) If any licensee fails to comply
with the directions issued under
sub-section (20 sub-section 3], he
shall be liable to 2 penalty not
exceeding ten crore rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance
of the directions issued under
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), by a
generating company for generating
renewable energy, such generating
company for generating renewable
energy shall be liable to 2 penalty not
exceeding one crore rupees.”

14. In section 33 of the principal Act,
foe sub-section (5), the fatlowing sud-
section shall be substituted, namely:—

"15) If any ticensee fails to comply with
the directions ‘ssued under sub-section
{1}, he shall be lable to ३ penaity not
exceeding one crore rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance
of the directions issued under

sub-section (1), by @ generating
company for generating renewable
energy, such generating company for
generating renewable energy shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding ten
lakh rupees.”

Clause 13,- This clause seeks
to amend section 29 of the
principal Act to increase the
quantum of penalty for
violation of directions by the
Regional Load Despatch
Centres.

Clause 14.- This clause seeks
to amend section 33 of the
principal Act to increase the
quantum of penalty for
violation of directions by the
State Load Despatch Centres.



z

3 4

_ a

15.

16.

7,

खाता अ

Section 37

Section 38

15, For section 34 of the principal Act, Clause 15.- This clause seeks
the following section shall be to substitute section 34 of the
substituted, namety:— Principal Act to provide for
compliance of Grid Standards
“H, Every licensee or generating as specified by the Central
company, person owning and Electricity Authority by any
maintaining dedicated transmission licensee or a generating
tines and any other person whose system company or any person
‘5 conmected to the gid shall comply maintaining a dedicated
with such technical standards of transmission tive or any other
Operation and maintenance of person whose system is
transmission lines, in accordance with connected to the Grid.
08 Grid Standards, as may be specified
by the Authority”.

16. In section 37 of the principal Act, Clause 16.~ This clause seeks
after the words “necessary for, the to amend section 37 of the
words "grid security and safety and for* principal Act to empower the
shall be inserted, Appropriate Government to
issue directions for Grid
security and safety,

17. In section 38 of the principal Act, Clause 17.- This clause socks
in sub-sectlon (2), in clause (d), for 10 amend section 18 of the
sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause principal Act to provide that
shall be substituted, namely:— 3 consumer getting electricity
through open access shall be
“{ii) any consumer as and when such subject to payment of
Open access Is provided by the State surcharge in addition to the
Commission under sub-section (2) of transmission charges. Further,
section 42, on payment of the it has been clarified that the
transmission charges, as may be surcharge shall be as specified
specified by the Central Commission by the Appropriate State
and surcharge # any determined by Commission instead of the
the Appropriate Commission of the Central Commission as itis the
State in which the premises of the State Commission which deais
Consumer 8 located," with the cross subsidy and not
the Central Commission,

-——————— —

23



1

1

3 4

OO

18.

19.

Section 39

Section 40

Section 42

18, # section 39 of the principal Act, Clause 18,- This clause seeks
in sub-section (2}, in clause [0), ॥ to amend section 39 of the
sub<lause {It}, — principal Act to provide that
{a) for the words “as may be specified a consumer getting electricity
by the State Commission”, the words through open access shall be
“if ayy determined by the Aopropriate subject to payment of
Commission of the State” shall be surcharge ॥ addition to the
substituted; transmission charges.

(b) in the second proviso, for the words
“State Commission", the words
“appropriate Commission” shali be
substituted;

{c) in third proviso, for the words “State
Commission", the words “Appropriate
Commission” shall be substituted,

19, In section 40 of the principal Act, Clause 19.~ This clause seeks
# clause (c), in sub-clause (li), for the to amend section 40 of the
words “3s may be specified by the State principal Act to clarify that
Commission”, the words “as may be the quantum of surcharge to
specified by the Appropriate Commission be paid as specified by the
of the State in which the premises of Appropriate Commission of
the consumer ठ located” shall be the State where the end-use
substituted. premise of the consumer 8
located

20, For section 42 of the principal Act, Clause 20,— This clause seeks
the following section shall be to substitute section 42 of the
sxbstituted, namely:~ principal Act so as to specify

the duties of distribution
“42. (1) It shall be the duty of a licensee and also provide
distribution Licensee to~ certain provisions relating to

{ab develop and maintain an efficient, °°"

coordinated and economical
distribution system in his area of
distribution and to enable supply
electricity in accordance with the
provisions containe’ in this Act;

24


3

{b) provide noe-discriminatory open
access to Its distribution system as
specified by the Appropriate
Commission;

10 perform such other functions, aot
‘Seconsistent with the Act 2s may be
specified by the Appropriate
Commission.

{2} The State Commission shall
introduce open access for use of
stribution system in such phases and
subject to such conditions, including
the cross subsidies, and other
operational constraints) as may be
specified within one year of the
appointed date by it and in specttying
the extent of open access in successive
phases and in determining the charges
for Weeeling, it shall have due regard
‘to all relevant factors including such
cross subsidies, and other operational
constraints,

9) The open access shall be allowed
on payment of a surcharge which shall
96 Im addition to the wheeling and
other charges payable to the
distribution licensee, & compensatory
charges determined by the State
‘Comenission to meet the requirement
‘of crows subsidy tn the area of supply:

Provided that the surcharge and cross
subsidies referred to sub-section (2)
and sub-section (3) shall be
progressively reduced in the manner
as may be specified by the State
Commission:



ri

26

Section 43

3 4

Provided further that such surcharge
shall not be lestable in case open access
is provided to a person who has
established a captive generating plant
for carrying the electricity to the
Gestination of his own use.

(4) The open access consumers
procuring electricity from renewable
‘energy sources shall not be required to
pay the surcharge for open access for
gach period as may be presonbed by
‘the Central Government,

{5) Notwithstanding anything contained
‘in this section, the open access
consumer shall mot switch over to any
otter supplier except by giving the
notice of minimum time period as may
be specified by the Appropriate
‘Commission...

21, For section 43 of the principal Act, Clause 21,— This clause seeks
‘the following section shall be to substitute section 43 of the
sastituted, namey:— principak Act so as to provide

that every distribution
“43, (1) Sawe as otherwise provided in licensee, shall, on an
this Act, every distribution 4९६९९, application by the owner or
shall, on an application by the owner occupier of any premises in
or occupier of any premises in the are® the area of distribution, give
of distribution, give conmection to such connection to such premises
premises to enable supply of to enable supply of
electricity, within fifteen days after electricity, within fifteen days
receipt of the application requiring after receipt of the
such supply: application requiring such

Provided that where sach connectivity sony
to the premises requires extession of
Gstribution muins, or commissioning of
few sub-stations, the distribution
licensee shall give connection to enable


Section 44

3

supply of electricity to sach premises
immediately after such extension or
commissioning or within such period as
may be specified by the Agpropriate
Commission:

Provided further that क case of a village
oF hamlet or area wherein no provision
for supply of electricity exists, the
Appropriate Comeitsion may extend the
said period as ॥ may consider necessary
for electrification of such village or
hamlet or area

Explanation.For the purposes of this
sub-section, the expression
“application” means the apptication
complete in all respects in the
‘Appropriate form, as required by the
distribution licensee, along with
documents showing payment of
necessary charges and other
compliznces.

(2) ॥ shall be the duty of every
distribution licensee to provide, if
required, electric plant or electric line
for connectivity and enabling electric
supply to the premises specified in
sub-section {1}.

43) ॥ a distribution ficensee falls to
give connection to the premises in the
area of distribution within a period
specified in sub-section (1), he shall
be liable to 2 penalty which may
extend to one thousand rupees for each
day of default,’

72, In section 44 of the principal Act, Clauses 22,~ This clause seeks
for the words “licensee to give supply”, to amend section 44 of the

27


3

roa

Section 454
New Section

the words “licensee to distribute principal Act so as to

electricity” shall be substituted.

23, Far section 45 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be

substituted, namely: —

“&. (1) Subject to the provisions of
this section, the prices to be charged
by @ distribution licensee for the
distribution of electricity by him in
pursuance of section 43 shall be in
accordance with such tariffs
determined by the Appropriate
Commission and such charges
authorised by the Appropriate
Commission of otherwise fixed from
time-to-time and conditions of his

\kence,

(2) Subject to the provisions of section
62, fn determining charges under this
section a @stribution licensee shall not
shaw undue preference to any person
क class of persons or discrimination
against any person or class of persons."

substitute the words “\icence
to give supply” with the words
“licence to distribute
electricity,”

Clauses 23.—This clause seeks
10 substitute section 45 of the
principal Act so & to provide
that the prices to be charged

by him in pursuance of
section 43 shall be in
accordance with such tariffs

24, After section 45 of the principle Clause 24,~ This clause seeks

Act, the following section shall be

inserted, namety:—

"458, The Appropriate Government
may, in conswitation with the
Appropriate Commission and the
concerned authorities, prescribe the
manner of collection and reakisation of
any dues under the relevant laws for

to insert 3 new section 454

Government may, in
Consultation with the
Appropriate Commission and
the concerned authorities,
prescribe the manner of
collection and realisation of



3

Section 46

Section 47

the time being in force in the State ary dues under the relevant

along with the electricity dues.”.

135, In section 45 of the principal Act,—

{i) for the words “requiring a supply of
electricity”, the words “requiring
connectivity to the distritaion system”

shall. be substituted;

(tH) for the words “giving and supply”,
the words “giving and maintaining the
connection for enabling supply of

electricity” shall be substituted.

26, In section 47 of the principal Act,—

laws for the time being in
force in that State, along with
the electricity dues,

Clause 25.— This clause seeks
to amend section 46 of the
principal Act so as to
substitute the = words
“requiring a supply of
electricity’, with the words
“requiring connectivity to the
distribution system” and the
words “giving and supply”,
with the words "giving and
maintaining the connection
for enabling supply of

Clause 25.~ This clause seeks
to amend section 47 of the

{8} for sub-section (1), the following principal Act sa as to provide
sub-section shall be substituted, that 2 distribution licersee in

namely:—

(1) Subject to the provisions of this

regulations, for the payment to him of
all monies which may become due to

him-

(a) in respect of the electricity

distributed to such person; oF

the area of distribution may
require any person, who
requires connectivity to the
distribution system = in
pursuance of section SA, to
give him reasonable security,
for the paymeet to him of all
monies which may become
due to him \nrespect of the
electricity distributed to such
person or where any electric
line ७ electrical plant or
electric meter is to be
provided for distributing
@lectricity to such person, in
respect of the provision of

|) where any electric line or electrical such line or plant or meter,
plant or electric meter is to be and if that person fails to give

29


Section 48

3

provided for distributing electricity to
such person, ॥ respect of the provision
of such line or plant or meter, and if
that person fails to give such security,
the distribution licensee may, if he
‘thinks fit, refuse to distribute electricity
‘oF to provide the tine or plant or meter
for the period during which the failure
continues.";

की in sab-section (2), for the words
“supply of electricity”, the words
“distribution of electricity” shall be
substituted;

(ii) i sub-section (3), for the words
“supply of electricity", the words
“éstribution of electricity” shall be
substituted,

77. im section 48 of the principal Act, —

{i} in the opening portion, for the words
“supply of electricity’, the words
“distribution oF electricity” shall be
substituted;

(ti) ip clause (0), for the word “supplied”
occurring at the end, the word
“fistrituted™ shall be substituted,”,

2B. For section 49 of the princigal Act,
the following section shall be

substiuted, namely:~

“49. (1) With effect from the
commencement of the Electricity
{Amendment} Act, 2014, all consumers
having @ connected load of 1 Mega Watt
and above with the pawer system, may

4

such secunty, the distribution
tcensee may, if he thinks fit,
refuse to distribute electricity
or to provide the line or plant
cor meter for the pericd during
woich the failure continues,

Clause 27.— This clause seeks
to amend section 48 of the
principal Act so as to
substitute the words “supply
cof electricity’, with the words
“distribution of electricity”
and the word “supplied” with
the word “distributed”,

Clause 28.— This clause seeks
to substitute section 49 of the
Principal Act so a5 provide
that with effect from the
Commencement of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act,
2014, all consumers having a
connected load of 1 Maga
Watt and adove may enter



3 4

s

procure at their option electricity eto an agreement with any
‘through open 30:65 under bilateral persan for supply ar purchase
arrangement from any generating of electricity on such terms
company, trading licensee, or fram any and conditions(including tariff)
‘other source. 35 may be agreed upon by
them.
12) Notwithstanding anything contained
in clause (6) of sub-section (1) of
section 62, the consumers mentioned
jn sab-section (1), may enter into an

29. For section 50 of the principal Act, Clause 29,~ This clause seeks
the following section shall be to substitute section 50 of the
substituted, namely:— principal Act so as to provide

that the State Commission
“30. The State Commission shall specify shall specify an electricity
an Electricity Distribution Code to distribution code to provide
provide for recovery of electricity for recovery of electricity
charges, letervals for billing of charges, intervals for béting
electricity charges, disconnection of of electricity charges,
Connectivity of electricity for nom- disconnection of connectivity
payment thereof, restoration of supply of electricity for non-payment
of electricity, measures for preventing thereof, restoration of supply
tampering, distress or damage to of electricity, measures for
Gectrical plant or electrical line or preventing tampering,
meter, entry of distribution ticensee distress or damage to
OF any person acting on Ms behalf for electrical plant or electrical
disconnecting connection and removing {ine or meter, entry of
the meter, entry for replacing, altering distribution ticensee or any
‘or maintaining electric lines or person acting on his behalf
electrical plants or meter and such for disconnecting connection
other mafters.”, and removing the meter,


3

4

PART 0७
Section 514 to
HG

(New Part)

30, After Part M1 of the principal Act,
the following Part and sections shall be
‘inserted, namely:—

‘PART ५७
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY

S1A, (1) ॥ shall be the duty of the
supply licensees to supply electricity #
the concerned area of supply In
accordance with the provisions of the
Act:

Provided that 0॥ the transfer of the
‘obligation to supply to the Incumbent
supply licensee, the existing
distribution licensee shall have the
obligations to continue to supply
electricity ॥ the area of supply in
accordance with the provisions of the
‘Act with the same rights, privileges and
duties of the supply licensee,

(2) The Appropriate State Government
all, within a period of ane year from
‘the commencement of the Electricity
{Amendment} Act, 2014 or within such
period 25 the Appropriate State
Government may decide in consultation
with the Central Goverment, provide
for separation of distribution and
supply of electricity and for such
purpose issue appropriate transfer
scheme and vest the supply functions
fn the incumbent supply licensee and
the existing power purchase
agreements and procurement
arrangement in the intermediary
Company respectively as per the
provision of section 131,

Clause 30,~ This cause seeks
to insert a new Part VIA in
the principal Act containing
sections 94 to 51G to deal
with the supply of electricity
as distinct from the
distribution of electricity.


3

‘518. (1) The supply licensee as selected
by the Consumer shall, on an application
of the owner or occupier of any
premises within fifteen days of the
connection being given to the premises
by the distribution licensee in terms of
section 43 commence supply of
electricity as required by the person:

Provided that ॥ supply licensee other

supply licensees for supply of
electricity to the premises owned or
cctupied by him,

Explanation.For the purposes of this
sub-section, “application” means the
application complete in all respects in
the appropriate form, as required by
the supply licensee, along with
documents showing payment of
necessary charges and other
‘compliances:

Provided that the provider of last
resort shall have the obligation to
supply electricity to the consumers in
the area of supply in case the supply
licensee chosen by the consumer
ceases to be a supply licensee or

8


3

otherwise his supply licence is
suspended for any reason whatsoever,

(3) It shall be the duty of every supply
licensee to arrange for the purchase of
electricity including by procurement of
electricity from the intermediary
‘company with the adjective of providing
reliable and uninterrupted electricity
supply.

(4 ॥ a supply licensee fails to give
supply of electricity within ३ period as
mentioned in sub-section (1), he shall
be liable to a penaity which may
‘extend to one thousand rupees for each
Gay of default,

SC. Nothing contained in section 518,
shall be taken क requiring a supply
tioensee to give supply of etectricny
to any premises in its area of supply,
if be is prevented from so doing by
cyclone, floods, storms or other
occurrences beyond his control.

51D, (1) Subject to the provisions af
this section, the prices to be charged
by a supply licensee for the supply of
electricity by bim in pursuance of
section 51B shall be in accordance with
such tariffs fined from time-to-time and
conditions of his licence,

{2} The charges for electricity supplied
by a supply licensee # the area of
supply shall be~

{a) fixed In accordance with the
methods and the principles as may be
specified by the concerned State
Commission;



{b) published in such manner so 3s to
ive adequate publicity for such charges
and prices,

(3) The charges for electricity supplied
by a supply licensee in the area of
supply may include a fixed charge in
addition to the charge for the actual
electricity supplied,

(4) Subject to the provisions af section
(62, In fitcing charges under this section
३ supply thensee shall not show undue
preference to any person or class of
persons of discrimination against any
person or class of persons.

(5) The charges fixed by a supply
licensee shall be market determined:

Provided that the Appropriate
Commission shall determine a ceiting
charge based on the normative casts
and standards of performance, subject
to sub-section (3) and sub-section (4)
of section 62:

Provided further that the supply
Skensee shall not charge any amount
higher than the ceiling charge as
applicable to all consumers in a
category.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act the supply licensee may,
with the prior approval of the

as may be mutually agreed with any
consumer,

&


3

SHE. (1) Subject to the provisions of
this section, a supply licensee may
fequire any person, who requires a
supply of electricity in pursuance of
section 518, to give him reasonable
security, as may be determined by
regulations, for the payment to him of
all monies which may become due to
him in respect of the electricity suppiied
to such person; and if that person fails
to give such security, the supply licensee
in the area of supply may, if he thinks
fit, refuse to give the supply of
electricity for the periad during which
the failure contieues,

(2) Where any person has not given
such security as is mentioned in
sub-section (1) or the security given by
any person has become invalid or
insufficient, the supply licensee may,
by notice, require that person, within
thirty days after the service of the
notice, to give him reasonable security
for the payment of all monies which
may become due to him in respect of
the supply of electricity.

(3) Hf the 90508 referred to in
sub-section (2) fails to give such
security, the supply licensee may, if he
thinks fit, discontinue the supply of
electricity for the pertod during which
tthe fatiure continues,

(4) The supply ticensee shaft pay interest
with reference to the bank rate, as may
be specified by the State Commission,
on the security referred to in
sub-section (1), and refund such security
on the request of the person who gave
such security.


3

e—-_-- _+++ऊ- फ फ:फ> फसकफकफसककककसकलजं--न्न्

अं.

PART VIB
Section StH

(New Part}

(5) A supply licensee shall not be
entitled te require security in purszance
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) if the
person requiring the supply is prepared
to take the supply through a pre-
payment meter,

SIF, A supply licensee may require any
person who requires a supply of
electricity in purwance of section 518
to accept

{a} any restrictions which may be
imposed for the purpose of enabking
‘the supply licensee to comply with the
regulations made under section 53;

{b) any terms restricting any tiabitity
of the supply licensee for economic
loss resulting from negligence of the
person to whom the electricity is
supplied.

916. The State Commission shall specify
an Electricity Supply Code to provide
for recovery of electricity charges,
intervals for billing of electricity
charges, disconnection of supply of
electricity for non-payment thereof,
assessment for unauthorised use and
theft of electricity, restoration af supply
of etectricity and such other matters.”,

31. Alter Part WA of the principal Act,
as $0 inserted, the following Part and
section shall be inserted, namely:~

“PART WB

Clause 31.- This clause seeks
to insert 2 new Part VIB in the
principal Act containing
section S1H to deal with the
common proviskies applicable

7


Section 54

3 4

OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO to both the distribution and
DISTRIBUTION AND SUPPLY OF supply function.
ELECTRICITY

51H. (1) Every distribution ticensee or
supply licensee, as the case may be
having the obligation to supply in the
area of supply, shall, within sic months
from the appointed date or date of
grant of licence, whichever % earlier,
establish a forum for redressal of
gtievances of the consumers in
accordance with the guidelines as may
be specified by the State Commission,

(2) Any consumer, who is aggrieved by
non-redressal of his grievances under
sub-section (1), may make @
representation for the redressal of fis
sfiewance to an authority to be known
2s Ombudsman to be appointed or
designated by the State Commission.

(3) The Ombudsman shall settle the
grievance of the consumer within such
time and in such manner as may be
specified by the State Commission,

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3) shall be without prejudice
to right which the consumer may have
apart from the rights conferred upon
him by the those sub-sections.".

32. In section 54 of the principal Act, Clause 32,—This clause seeks
h sub-section (1), in the proviso, after to amend section 54 of the
the words and figures “the Railways principal Act whereby the
det, 198%", the words, brackets and metro railway under the
figures “or metro railway under the Metro Railways (Operation
Metro Railways (Operation and maintenance) Act, 2002 has



i 4

पास: सच बअ कफ कक स+फ:्_____...............

33, Secthon 55
WU Section 56
%. Section S84

New Section

Maintenance) Act, 2002" shall be been added In addition to
irserted, Railways in view of the
Necessity to treat both alike,

33, # section 55 of the principal Act, Clause 33,—This clause seeks

{n sub-section (2), the following proviso to amend section 55 of the

shall be inverted, namely;— principal Act whereby
additions have been made for

“Provided that smart meters, as proper energy accounting at

specified by the Authority, shall be various stages through an

Installed at each stage for proper appropriate meter.

accounting and measwement for the

purpose of metering and consumption

from the point of generation up to such

consumers who consume more than the

quantity of electricity in 3 month as

prescribed by the Central

Government."

34. In section % of the principal Act, Clause 34,~ This clause seeks

after sub-section (1), the following sub- to amend section ५6 of the

section shall be inserted, namely: principal Act and a provision
has been made in regard to

“(1A) Nothing contained in this section pre-paid meters, wherein the

shall require the supply licensee to concept of notice for

disconnect electricity in case of disconnection shall not be

prepayment meter in excess of the required.

Quantum of electricity pre-paid by the

Consumer.”,

35, After section 59 of the principal Clause 15,- This clause seeks
‘Act, the following section shal! be to insert a new section 59A
Inserted, namety:— ‘n the principal Act to enable
‘the Appropriate Goverment
“59A. In case any complaint fs fileé to recommend for revocation
before the Appropriate Government of licence due to noa-
and if the Appropetate Government is compliance of standard of
Satisfied that any licensee has not performance by the licensee,
discharged any of the functions
assigned to him by the Act, including



36, ‘Section ही

3 4

the standards of performance specifled
by the Appropriate Commission, the
Appropriate Government may
recommend for the revocation of licence
of the said licensee,”,

३6. Section 61 of the principal Act shall Clause 34.~ This clause seeks

be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof to amend section 61 of the

tnd, ~ Principal Act whereby certain
additional guidelines have

(a) In sub-section (1) as so numbered been added in regard to tariff
determination. It has been

i) foe clause (0), the following clause specifically provides that the

shail be substituted, namety:— provisioes of the Tariff Policy
shall be followed by the

(6) safeguarding of consumers’ interest Appropriate Commission in

and at the same time, recovery of the the tariff determination,

cost of electricity by the licensees

without any revenue deficit ॥ the

context of the tariff determined under

section 62:

Provided that the revenue deticit, if
any, prior to the commencement of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014,
shall be recovered in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Appropriate
Goverment.”;

(8) for clause (h), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

"(hi the promotion of co-generation and
कलश of electricity fram renewable
sources of energy and hydro power";

का) i clause (i), the words “and tariff
policy” shah be omitted,

[b) after sub-section (1) as so



Section 60

3 4

numbered the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act, the provisions of Tariff Poticy
shall be followed by the Appropriate
Commission for the purpose of Tariff

37, For section 62 of the principal Act, Clause 37,—This clause seats
the following section shall be to substitute section 62 of the
substituted, namely:— principal Act so as 10 provide
the determination of taritf by
“62. (1) The Appropriate Commission the Appropriate Commission
‘Shall determine the tariff in accordance for the reasons mentioned in
with the provisions of this Act for— the sub-section (1) of the said
section, It ts further provided
(2) supply of electricity ty 2 generating that the tariff determined by
company to a suppty licensee including the Appropriate Commission
supply of electricity under a back to for a licensee shall provide
back arrangement involving an for recovery of all prudent
intermediary company, electricity costs of the licensee approved
trader or any other licensee: by =the «= Appropriate
Commission in the monthly
Provided that the Appropriate bills during the tartff period
Commission emay, in case of shortage through an appropriate price
of supply of electricity, fix the adjustment formula including
minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff wherever applicable the fuel,
for sale or purchase of electricity in power purchase and
pursuance of an agreement, entered procurement price surcharge
into between @ generating company formAe as may be specified
and a ticensee or between licensees, in the Tariff Policy, it Is also
for a period not exceeding one year to provided that the Appropriate
ensure reasonable prices of electricity: Commission may require a
licensee of a generating
Provided further that there shall be compary to fumish separate
10 such determination of tariff by the details, as may be specified
Appropriate Commission under this in respect of generation,
Clause (a) to the extent the Central transmission, distribution and
Government specifies that the supply for determination of
Procurement of electricity from the tanff,

4



&

3

sources identified for the purpase ty
the supply licensee shall be done only
by competitive bidding as per section
63;

(b) purchase of electricity by the suppty
licensee from the intermediary
ceempany;

(0 transmasion of electricity;
(d) wheeting of electricity;
(e) retail sale of electricity:

Provided that the tariff determined for
retail sale of electricity shall be the
ceiling tariff for the respective
Categories of consumers, the supply
licensee shall be entitied to charge any
‘consumer category at an amount lesser
than the ceiling tariff, subject to sub:
section (3) and 350, without i any
way affecting the obligation of a supply
licensee to pay the intermediary
Companys, the transmission ticensee, the
distribution licensee and generating
Company, as the case may be.

(2) The tariff determined by the
Appropriate Commission for 2 licensee
shall provide for recovery of all prudent
costs of the licensee approved by the
Appropriate Commission in the monthly
bills during the tariff period through
2n appropriate price adjustment
formi2 icluding wherever applicable
the fuel, power purchase and
procurement price surcharge formula
85 may be specified in the Tariff Policy,


1 2 3 4
SS ee: ऋऋ%+६-+८

(3) The Appropriate Comenission may
require 3 licensee or & generating
‘company to furnish separate details, as
may be specified in respect of
‘Seneration, transmission, distribution
and supply for determination of tariff,

(4) The Appropriate Commission shall
not, weile determining the tariff under
this Act, show undue preference to amy
consumer of electricity but may
Gifferentiate according to the
consumer's load factor, power factor,
voltage, total consumption of electricity
during any specified period or the time
at Which the supply 5 required of the
Seographical postion of any area, the
‘nature of supply and the purpose for
which the supply ts required.

(5) No tariff or part of any tariff may
ordinarily be amended, more
frequently than nce im any financial
year, except in respact of fuel and
Dower purchase price adjustment which
Shall be permitted under the terms of
the fuel and power purchase price
adjustment formula as may be
specified by the Appropriate
Conmmission,

{6) The Commission may require a
licensee or 2 generating company to
comply with such procedure as may be
specified for calculating the expected
revenues from the tariff and charges
which he or it 5 permitted to recover,

(7) ॥ any licensee or a generating
Company recovers 3 price or charge



Section 64

3

exceeding the tariff determined under
this section, the ences amount shall
be recoverable by the person who has
paid such price or charge along with
interest equivalent to the bank rate
without prejudice to any other liability
incurred by the ticensee.”.

38, In section 64 of the principal Act, —

{i) after subsection (1), the following
sab-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

(1A) Mf the application is net filed in
time the Appropriate Commission shall,
fot later than thirty days of the last
date specified for such filieg. on its
own Initiate proceedings for
determination of tartf and call for such
information, 0038 and document as
the Appropriate Commission may
require for such determination,

(18) The Appropriate Commission may’
draw adverse inference against the
generating company or licensee for the
failure to provide any information,
details and document required to be
filed before the Appropriate
‘Commission.”;

{ii) in sub-section (3), in the opening
portion, for the words "one hundred and
twenty days from receipt of an
application", the words ‘ninety days
from receipt of application or initiation
of proceedings, as the case may be,”
shall, be substituted,

Clause 38.— This clause seeks
to amend section 44 of the
principal Act so 2s to provide
the consequences of tariff
petition not being filed in
time by the Utilities and
enables the Appropriate
Commission to proceed ahead
in view of the importance of
timely tariff revision for
viability of the power sector,


Section 67

Section 68

3 4

३9. For section &6 of the principal Act, Clause 39.—This clause seeks
the following section shall be to substitute section 66 of the
substituted, namely: ~ principal Act so % to provide
thet the Appropriate
“oh. The Appropriate Commission shall Commission shall endeavour to
‘endeavour 10 promote the development promate the development of
of @ market (inctuding trading and a» market (including trading
forward and futures contract) in power and forward and futures
and a market for encouraging energy contract} in power and 3
efficiency in power i such manner 2s market for encouraging
may be specified and shail be guided energy efficiency in power in
by the National Electricity Policy, such manner as may be
referred to i section 3, and other specified and shall be guided
directions issued by the Central by the National Electricity
Government in the public interest fram Policy, referred to in section
time to time.”, 3, and other directions Issued
by the Central Government in
the public interest from time
to time,

40. In section 67 of the principal Act, Clause 40,— This clause seeks

in sub-section (1), for the words "supply to amend section 67 of the

‘of tranemission’, the words “distribation principal Act so as to mate

‘of traramission’” shall be substituted. certain consequential
amendments on account of
the segregation of distribution
and supply functions.

41, In section 68 of the principal Act,— Clause 41.- This clause seeks

जलन to amend section 68 of the
), after |,
(2856 हट Pacis

certain amendments in the
‘the words and figures “of section 67"
shall be ‘oserted; said section which are

consequential in nature,
(i) ७ subsection (5), after the words
application of the licensee”, the words
“or the generating company” shall be
substituted;

(til) ॥ sub-section (6), and before the
Explanation, after the words “from the

45



3 4

AL Section 694
New Section
43, Section 70

teense, the words “or the generating
company” shall be inserted,

42, After section 69 of the princpal Clause 40.- This clause seeks

Act, the following section shall be to insert 2 mew section 694

inserted, ramety:— in the principal Aet for taking
price consent of the existing

“65. Whenever any person is carrying licensee while carrying on any

out any activity within the area of any activity in the area of

transmission or distribution ficensee or ticensee. This is to protect

within the area of any other person the interest of the existing

‘operating and maitaining any system licensee and 10 avoid

for comeeyance of electricity and such Interruptions in the power

activity is Ukely to have any implication system,

on the transmission system or

Gstributions system of such licensee or

of such ether person, such person shali

obtain the prior consent of such licensee

or such other person, as the case may

be, in such manner a5 may be specified

by the Appropriate: Commission,”,

43. For section 70 of the principal Act, Clause 41.- This clause seeks

the following section shall be to amend section 70 of the

substituted, namely:— principal Act so as to bring
clarity in the provisions

"70. (1) There shall be a body relating the Central

constituted by the Central Government Electricity Authority.

to be called the Central Electricity

Authority to exercise such functions

tnd perform such duties as are assigned

to It under this Act,

{2) The Central Electricity Authority,
established under section 3 of the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and
functioning 2s such immediately befnre
the date of commencement of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014,
shall be deemed to be the Central



Electricity Authority for the purposes
of this Act and the Chairperson,
Members, Secretary and other officers
and employees thereof shall be deemed
‘to have been appointed under this Act
and they shall continue to bold office
om the same terms ond condkions on
which they were appointed under the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1946,

(3) The Autherity shall consist. of nat
more than fourteen Meters jinciutieg
‘ts Chairperson) af whers not more than
eight all be full-time embers to be
appointed by the Central Government.

(4) (a) The Central Government may
appoint the Chairperson and Members
‘of the Authority from amongst persons
cof ability, काश) and standing who
have knowledge of, and adequate

finance, commerce, economics ot
industrial matters, and at least one
Member shall be appointed from each
of the following categories, namey:—

(i) engineering with speciatisation in
design, construction, operation and
mainterance of generating stations;

(iW) engiveering with spectalsation tn
tranamission and. supply of electricity;

18) applied research in the fleld of
electricity;

(tv) applied economics, accounting,
commerce or firance;

a



(b) The terms and conditions, including
the elipbility and experience of the
Chairperson and Members to be
appointed by the Central Government
shall be such क may be prescribed.

(5) The Chairperson shall be the Chief
Executive of the Authority,

{6) The headquarters of the Authority
shall be at Delhi.

(7) The Authority shall meet at the head
office or any other place at such time
4s the Chairperson may direct, and shall
observe such rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of business at
its meetings (including the quorum at
its meetings) as it may specify

10) The Chairperson, or tf he 8 unable
to attend @ meeting of the Authority,
any other Member nominated by the
Chairperson in this behalf and in the
absence of such nomination or where
there is no Chairperson, any Member
chosen by the Members present from
among themselves shall preside at the
meeting.

(9) All questions which come up before
any meeting of the Authority shall be
decided by a majority of votes of the
Members present and voting, and in
the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or the person presiding
shall have the right to exercise a
second of casting vate.


Section 78

(10) AML orders and decisions of the
‘Authority shall be authenticated by the
Secretary or any other officer of the
Authority duly authorised by the
Chairperson in this behatf.

(tt) No act or proceeding of the
Authority shalt be questioned or shall
be invalidated merely on the ground of
existence of any vacancy in, or any
Gefect in, the constitution of, the
Authority,

{12} The Chairperson of the Authority
and ather full-time Members shail
receive such salary and allowances as
may be determined by the Central
Govemment and other Members stall
receive such allowances and fees for
attending the meetings of the Authonty,
a may De prescribed by the Central
Government”,

44. ॥ section 78 of the principal Act,

fa) for sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted,
pamely;—

“{1) The Cesttral Goverement shall, for
‘the purposes of selecting the Members
of the Appellate Tribunal and the
Chairperson and Members of the
Central Commission, constitute a
Selection Committee corsisting of —

{a} Gaairperson of the Public Enterprises:
Selection Board..... Chairperson,
ex-officio;

Classe 44,- This clause seeks
ए amend section 78 of the
principal Act so as to make
certain amendments in the
provisions of the Selection
Committee to select Members
of the Central Commission,



3

1]

॥ि Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry
of the Central Government dealing with
the Department of Consumer Affairs
sssstsaeseenadhember, ex-afficlo;

(0 Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry
of the Central Goverament dealing with
the Department of Legal Affairs—
Member, ex-officio;

(41 a person to be sominated by the
Central Goverment in accordance with
SUD-SECTION ().................... Member,
ex-officio;

{e} 4 person to be nominated by the
Central Government in accordance with
SUD-SECTION ()]................... अर क
Member.”

॥ Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry
of the Central Government dealing with
#0बश,........ ३#०+*«०० voeeddember,

ex-officio,

७] in sub-section (2), for the words
and figures “the Companies Act, 1956",
the words and figures “the Companies
‘Act, 2013" shall be substituted.

45. ॥ section 79 of the principal Act,
in Subsection (1), for clause (0, the
following clause shall be substituted,
nasal:

“(c} to regulate the inter-State
tvansmission of electricity inctuding
oromation and development of Smart
Grid, ancillary services आएं
decentralised distributed generation,”

Clause 45.~ This clause seeks
to amend section 79 of the
principal Act so as to include
३ new clause In sub-section
[1 ofthe said section relating
to functions of the Central
Commission.



3 4

4%. Section 85

4४. Im section 85 of the principal Act, Clause 46,- This clause sacks
(a) for sub-section (1}, the following to amend section 85 of the
sub-section shail be substituted, principal Act so as to make
namely:— Certain amendments in the
provisions of the Selection
31) The State Government shall, for Committee to select Members
the purposes of selecting the Members of the State Commission,
of the State Commission, constitute a
Selection Committee: consisting of—

(2) ३ person who has been a Judge of
the High Cout..... Chairperson;

{b) the Chief Secretary af the concerned

10 the Chairperson of the

{d) the Chairperson of the Central
Commission or a Member af the Centval
Commission to be nominated by the

fe} 3 person to be nominated by the
State Goverment in accordance with
SUD-SECHION (७॥............. Member;

(b) after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inverted, namely:

“(2A) For the purposes of clause (९ of
sub-section (1), the State Government
Sail nominate from amongst persons
holding the post of Chairperson or
managing director, by whatever name
call, of any public financial institution
specified in the Companies Act, 2013,"

51



3

a

(0) after sub-section (9), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:~

"{5A\ In case of delay in the constitution
of the selection committee for more
than two months or in appointment of
the Chairperson or Members of the State
Commission for more than five months,
the Central Government shall be
entitled to nominate one officer from
the Central Electricity Authority not
below the rank of Chief Engineer as
exoffice member of that Comission
and to discharge the functions of the
member UM such time the member is
appointed in terms of this section and
the meerber assumes the charge.”.

47. ॥ section B6 of the principal Act,
for sub-section (1), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:

“(1) The State Commission shall
discharge the following functions,
namety-—

{a} determine the tariff for generation,
supply, transmission and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail,
as the case may be, within the State:

Provided that where open access has
been permitted to a category of
consumers under section 42, the State
Comenission shall determine only the
wheeling charges and surcharge
thereon, if any, for the said category
of consumers;

Clause 47.— This clause seeks
to amend section 86 of the

discharged by the State
Commission,



3

(D) regulate electricity purchase and
procurement process of supply licensees
including the price at which electricity
shall be procured from the generating
Companies of licensees or fram other
sources through agreements for
purchase of pawer for supply within the
State;

a

10 facilitate intra-State trareméssion
and wheeling of electricity and promote
Smart Grid, net metering, ancillary
services and decentralised distributed
generation;

॥7) issue ticenses to persons seeking to
act as transmission licensees,
istribution licensees, supply licensees
and electricity traders with respect to
their operations within the State;

(९ promote cogeneration from
Tenewable sources of energy and
generation of electricity from
remewable sources of energy by
providing suitable measures for
connectivity with the gid and sale of
electricity to any person, and also
specify, for purchase of electricity from
‘such sources, a percentage of the tatal
congamption of electricity in the area
of a supply licensee;

(F} promote cogeneration from sources
other than renewable sources and
hydropower generation by providing
suitable measures for connectivity with
the grid and sale of electricity to the,
licensee having the cbligation to supply
to consumers in the area of supply;

53


Section 89

3 4

(g) adjudicate upon the disputes
amongst the licensees, generating
companies, intermediary company oF
between any of them, as the case may
be, and to refer any dispute for
arbitration;

(h) levy fee for the purposes of this
Mt;

(i) specify State Grid Code consistent
with the Gri¢ Code specified under
clause की) of sub-section (1) of section
7

10 soecify or enforce standards with
respect to quality, continuity and
reliability of service by licensees;

[0 fix the trading margin in the intra-
State trading of electricity, irrespective
‘of final destination of the electricity;

[9 to require creation of distrinntion
system including metering and related
infrastructure by the distribution
licensee in a time bound manner;

(mj to specify time bound reduction of
cross * subsidies in tariff;

(n} discharge such other functions as
may be assigned to it under this Act.”,

48, For section क्ष of the principal Act, Clause 48.-- This clause seeks
the following section shall be to amend section 89 of the
substituted, namely:— principal Act so 2s to provide

the duration of the period of
>89, The Chairperson or other Member Chairman and Members of the
shall hold office for a term of three State and Central Comassion
‘years from the date he enters upon his to be reduced from five years
office: to three years and with a



3 4

—__>->-_-- सफ ऊ फ फईकफओफ-हैलतदीक.झकबकबीक्‍-त""नन--न्‍न8ह....

Section 90

Section 92

Section 4

Provided that the Chairperson or ather provision of re-appointment
Wember in the Central Commission or for one more term of three
the State Commission stall be eligible years,

for one more term through
fe-appointment ॥ the same capacity

38 the Chairperson of ३ Member in that
(Commission in which he tad earlier held

office as such:

Provided further that no Chairperson or
ember shall hold office as such after
he has attained the age of sixty-five

years.",
Clause 49.— This clase seeks
4. In section 90 of the principal Act, to amend section 90 of the
ater clause (f}, the following clause principal Act s0 25 to provide
stall be inserted, ramely:— ‘the conditions under which a
Wember cf the Commission
“(gh om the basts of son-performance can be removed on the basis
as adjudged by the Committee of mon-performance as
constituted under section 1094.", adjudged by ३ Committee to
be constituted by the Forum
of Regulators.

50. In section 92 of the principal Act, Clause 50.~ This clause seeks

after sab-section (5), the following sub- to amend section 92 of the

section shall be inserted, namety:— principal Act to provide that
the Appropriate Commission

"{6) Every proceedings before the shall decide the matters

Appropriate Commission shall be expeditiously and in case of

decided expeditiously and with the delay, the 16808 shall be

endeavour to dhoose the proceedings recorded by the Commission,

within one hundred and twenty days

and in the event of delay, the

Appropriate Commitssion shall record

the reasons for delay beyond one

bundred twenty days.”,

51. के section १4 of the principal Act, Clause 51,- This clause seis
in sub-section (3), for the word “shall”, to amend section 94 of the

ro सन इ इिउिचचोौो७--नल......................


ny

3 4

52. Section 1054
New Section
53. Section 127

the word ‘tnay” shall be substituted. principal Act to provide that
the Appropriate Commission
shall appoint a person to
represent the interest of the
consumers,

52, After section 109 of the principal Clause 52,— This clause seeks

‘Act, the following section shall be to insert s new section 109A

ieearted, namety:— in regard to the appointment
of & Committee by Forum for

“109A. (1) The Forum of Regulators Regulators to review the

Shall, from time to time, constitute 30 bertormance of the

independent Committee consisting of spevepriate

not less than three persons of eminence ५७७४

to review the performance of any

Appropriate Commissions and submit 2

report with recommendations of such

Committee to the Central Government.

{2) The Committee appointed under sub-
section (1) shall be entitied to take the
assistance of experts and consultants
to be engaged with the approval of the
Forum of Regulators.

(3) The functions and the terms of
reference, including the time period
for submission of the report, by the
Committee shall be such # may 98
prescribed by the Central
‘Governenent.”,

53. In section 127 of the principal Act, Clause 53.- This clause seeks
in sub-section (1), for the words “an to amend section 127 of
appellate authority as may be the principal Act to provide
prescribed", the words, brackets and that the Ombudsman to
figures “the Ombudsman of the be appointed under
concemed area appointed in terms of sub-section (6) of section 42
sub-section (6) of section 42 and the shall be the Appellate
Ombudsman shall be the appellate Authority.

sxthority under this section” shail be

substituted.



3 4

55. Section 131

34, For the marginal heading “Part Xill- Clause 54,— This clause seeks

Seorganisation of 80810", the marginal to amend the marginal

heading “Part Xill- Reorganisation of heading of “Part XI -

Board and Distribution Licensee" shall Reorganisation of Board”, as

be substituted, “Part Xill - Reorganisation of
Board and Distribution
Licensee” where =the
‘amendment is consequential
im mature,

36. In section 131 of the principal Act— Clause 55.— This clause seeks
‘two amend secthon 131 of the

() forthe marginal heading “Vesting of PrCIPal Act to provide for
property of Board in State Government", "Eorpanisations provisions to
the marginal heading “Vesting of *P€ment the segregation of
property of Board and Distribution t dlstrbxtion functions and
Licensee in the State Goverment” shalt SUPPLY functions through ३
be substituted; ‘statutory scheme.

(fl after sub-section (4), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"4A) (a) The State Goverment shalt
within the period specified under
section S1A draw up a transfer scheme
for transfer of such of the functions,
the property, interest in property,
Tights and abilities of the distribution
licensees relating to supply of
electricity to a company who shall be
the incumbent supply licensee for the
concerned area of supply and so far as
the existing power purchase
Agreements and procurement
arrangements, to which the distribution
licensee is the beneficiary in the
intermediary compasy and publish such
scheme 2s statutory transfer scheme
under the Act,

7



3

Section 142

(0) The distrixaion licensee shall cease
to be charged with and shall not
perform the functions and duties under
this Act to the extent of the transfers
made under sub clause {a) on and after
the effective date of such transfer,

(0 The functions of the intermediary
company shall be sxh as may be
prescribed by the Central
Government.”

56. For section 142 of the principal Act,
the following section shall de
substituted, namety:—

“442. fv case any complaint 8 filed
before the Acpropriate Commission by
aay person ce if that Commission is
satisfied thet any generating company
oF licensee has contravened any of the
Provisions of this Act or the rules or
regulations made there under, or any
Grection छल by the Commission or
has not complied with the renewable
purchase obligation or renewable
generation obtigation as specified, the
Appropriate Commission may after
giving such generating company or
licensee an opportunity of being heard
॥ the matter, by order In writing,
direct that, without prejudice to any
other penalty to which the generating
company of licensee may be liable
under this Act, such generating
company or licensee shall pay, by way
‘af penalty, which shall not exceed one
crore rupees for each contravention
and in case of continuing faiiure with
an additional penalty which may extend
to one lath rupees for every day during

Clause ५6.- This clause seeks
to substitute section 142 of
the principal Act to provide
punishment for  non-
Compliance of directions by
the Appropriate Commission,
The said section provide that
for non-compliance of
directions, the generating
company of licensee shell pay,
by waty of penalty, which shail
Mek exceed one crore rupees
for each contravention and in
case of continuing failure
with an additional penalty
which may extend to one lakh
rupees for every day during
which the failure continues,


3 4

a.

Section 145

which the failure continues after
contravention of the first such
direction;

Provided that in case of non-
compliance of by a generating company
generating Renewable Energy, such
‘generating company shall be 1806 to a
penalty rat exceeding rupees ten lakhs
‘contravention and ॥ case of contiewing
failure with an additional penetty which
May extend to ten thousand rupees for
every day during which the failure
continwes after contravention of the
first such direction,"

57. For section 146 of the principal Act, Clause 57.~ This clause seeks
the following section shall be to amend section 146 of the
substituted, namely:— principal Act to provide
punishment for non-
“146, Whoever, fails to comply with aey compliance of orders or
order or direction given under this Act, directions given under the Act
within such time as may be specified ॥ with an imprisonment for a
the said order or direction or term which may extend to
contravenes or attempts or abets the three months or with fine
contravention of any of the provisions which may extend to one
of this Act or any rules or regulations crore rupees, ar with both in
made there under, shall be punishable respect of each offence and
with impriscament for a term which in case of continuing failure
May extend to three months or with with an additional penalty
fine which may extend to one crore which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both in respect of each rupees for every day during
offence and in the case of a continsing which the failure continues.
fare, with ant additional fice waich
May extend to one lakh rupees for every
day during which the failure continues
after conviction of the first such
offence:



Section 149

Section 162

3

Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to the orders,
Instructions or directions issued under
section 121:

Provided further that in case of nan:
compliance of by ३ generating company
generating Renewable Energy, any
person in charge af such generating
company shall be liable for
imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months or such
generating company shall be tiable to
pay fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees, or with beth in respect of each
offence and $ the case of a contisuing
failure, with an additional fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees for
every day during which the failure
Continues after conviction of the first
such offence.”

58, Section 149 of the principal Act shall
be omitted.

99, In section 162 of the principal act,
‘after sub-section (1), the following su-
Section shall be inserted, namely;

(IA) The Appropriate Government may
prescribe

{a) the qualification, training, powers
aed functions of the Chief Electrical
Impector and Electrical Inspectors;

Clause 58.- This clause
provides for omission of
sectlon 149 of the principal
Act a5 substantive provisions
of the Act cower matters
relating to offences by the
company.

Clause 9.- This clause seeks
to amend section 162 of the
principal Act so as to
empower the Appropriate
Government to make the
rules relating to qualification,
training, powers and
fumetions of the Chief
Electrical Inspectors,
Electrical Inspectors and levy
of fees,


3 4

{b) the fees and charges payable for
undertaking the testing, inspection and
services by the Chief Bectrical inspector
300 Electrical Inspectors; and

(c} the manner of inspection to be
performed by the Chief Electrical
Inspector and the Electrical Inspectors,

60, In section 166 of the principal Act,— Clause 60,— This clause seeks

‘to amend section 166 of the
(i) for the marginal heading pricipal Act so as to make
“Coordination forum”, the marginal certain amendments in the
heading “Coordination Forum, Forum of said section which are
Regulations and District Comenittee” consequentia, in nature.
shall be substituted;

(fi) tm sub-section (2), for the words
“State Commissions”, the woeds “which
shall perform such functions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government”
‘shal be inserted;

(iii) tm sub-section (4), for the words
“and distribution licensees engaged in
generation, transmission and
Gistribution of electricity” the words
“distribution licensees and supply
licensee engaged In generation,
transmission distribution and supply of
electricity” shall be substituted;

(iv) after sub-section (5), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely;—

(6) The decisions of the Co-ordination
Committee constituted under
sub-section (5) shall be placed before
the appropriate Commission within a
period not exceeding seven days.



Section 176

3 4

(7) The Central Government shall
Constitute a Forum of Electrical
Inspectors consisting of the Chief
Slectrical Inspectors and the Electrical
Inspectors of the Centrat Government
and the State Governments and specify
its functions.”.

61. In section 176 of the principal Act, Clause 61.- This clause seeks
‘in sub-section (2) 10 amend section 176 of the

principal Act so as to
{ij after clause (d), the following clause empower the Central
shall be inserted, namety:— ‘Goverment to frame rules on

certain matters which have
(da} the option of the consumer to been inserted by the
choose the supply of licensee under proposed amendments,
sub-section (2) of section 518;

{db} the consumption of the electricity,
More then the quantity of electricity in
@ month, by such consumers under the
proviso to sub-section (2) section 5; ५

(ii in clause (g), for the words, bracers
and figures “sub-section (14)", the
‘words, brackets and figure “sub-section
100 shah be substituted;

(iil) in clause (hj, for the words,
brackets and figures “sub-section (15)",
the words, brackets and figure “sub:
section ($)" shall be substituted:

(te) after clause (i), the following
Clase shall be inserted, namety:—

“(la) the compcsition of the selection
Committee for appointment of
Chairperson and Members of Regicnal
Commission, the qualifications, terms



3 4

५2.

63,

Section 177

Section 18)

and conditions of services of the

Chairperson, Members of the: Regional
‘Comenission, etc., under section 8९

0 after clause (0), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(pa} the compasition, functions and
terms of reference of the Committee
under sub-section (2) of sectlon एप

(vi) after clause (०), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—

(ua) the functions of the ietermedisry
under clause (ci of sub-section (4A) of
section 131",

62. In section 177 of the principal Act, Clause 62.~ This clause seeks
in sub-section (2), in clause (2), after to amend section 177 of the
the words and figures “under section principal Act so as ७
३4, the words “and also measures for empower the Central
smart qrid and ancillary services" shall. Electricity Authority to frame

be inserted. equations on certain matters
‘which have been inserted by
the proposed amendments.
63, In section 180 of the principal Act, Clause 63.— This clause seeks
in sub-section (2), to amend section 180 of the
principal Act to empower the

(i after clause (2), the following Cause crew Government to frame
shal be Inserted, ramety— rules on certain matters

(aa) the manner of collection and Wich have been fserted by
realisation of other dues along with the proposed amendments,
ectricity dues under section 46९

॥॥ after clause (8), the following

03188 shall be inserted, namely:—

(ma) 0१ powers to be exercised and
the functions to be performed and the

63



3

64, Section 186

ew Section

7, The Committee appreciates the Government for bringing this
Bill which will amend the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and will
further strengthen the sector. In this Report, the Committee have
commented up on all those clauses of the Electricity Act where there
is need for further improvement. The broad areas of intervention in

manner of inspection by the Chief
Electrical Inspectors and the inspectors
under sub-section (1A) of section 162;".

64, Miter section 185 of the principal Clause 64,~ This clause seeks
Act, the following section shall be to imwert a new section 186
to empower the Central
Government to issue orders
“188, (1) # any 0001) arises के giving for removal of difficulty white
effect to the provisions of the during implementation of the
Electricity(Amendment) Act, 2014, the Electricity (Amendment) Act,
Central Government may, by order 2014,

inserted, namely:—

published, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may appear to be necessary for
removing the difficulty;

Provided that ॥0 order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of
five years from the date of
commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, 25 soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of
Partiament.”,

the Act can be categorized as follows;—

+ Segregation of carriage and contents
* Grid security

* Promotion of renewable energy

+ Rationatisation of tariff determination

+ Strengthening of Regulatory Commissions


Recovery of revenue by licensee
Timely fiting of tariff petitions

Timely disposal of tariff petitions by the appropriate
commissions

Initiation of 500 Motu proceedings by the commissions for
determination of tariffs

Accountability and transparency in the functioning of
commissions

Toning up of Central Electricity Authority
Granting deemed licensee status to companies

Provision of performance review Committees at Centre and
State levels for the Regulatory Commissions.

65


CHAPTER Ii
SEGREGATION OF CARRIAGE AND CONTENTS

The Bill introduces the concept of separation of carriage and
contents. This means the distribution network will be separated from
the work of supply of electricity. Hitherto, this ts performed by single
entity, f.e., State Discoms. It proposes multiple supply licensees for the
supply business along with the mandatory provisions of one Government
company. However, the distribution work will remain with the State
Government,

Statement of the Government

2. After more than a decade of initiation of power sector reforms,
power distribution is still the weakest link in the Indian power sector.
In distribution sector, competition was envisaged through the concepts
of Open Access and Multiple licensees in the same area of supply. There
has been very limited progress in introducing competition through either
of these routes. While open access at inter-State level is operational,
there are issues around implementation of open access at distribution
level. In order to usher in more competition and to give choice to the
end consumer, it is proposed to segregate carriage and content
businesses. In other words, the entity which will own, operate and
maintain the distribution system right up to the consumers’ premises
should be separated from the entity or entities which will be supplying
electricity to the consumers. As in the case of a transmission licensee,
the distribution licensee will only operate and maintain the distribution
system (wire business) and will not be concerned with the commercial
supply of electricity. This is considered necessary to bring in competition
and efficiency in the supply of electricity with more than one supply
licensees offering supply of electricity to consumers in the same area,
this will be in addition to consumer being able to source electricity
directly from generating companies including captive power plants and
trading licensees. The distribution licensee having supply functions will
be reorganized its supply function shall be vested in a separate entity
which will be a supply licensee termed incumbent supply licensee and
having universal supply obligations to serve all consumers in the area.
Any other person interested in undertaking supply of electricity in the
same area can apply for and obtain the supply licence, However, atleast
one company supplying electricity in an area shall a Government
Company. Each such supply licenses will also have the universal service

66


obligation to supply electricity to all the consumers in the area except

that such obligations on subsequent supply licensees may be progressively
imposed with reference to connected load of the consumers.

The consumer choice to take electricity from any of the supply
Ucensees including incumbent supply licensees shall be however subject
to the condition that once the choice of a supply licensee Is exercised,
the consumer exercising the choice shall continue with the distribution
licensee for a minimum period as specified,

3. To achieve the above objective, the amendments are proposed
in the definitions, namely-Area of Distribution, Distribution, Supply
Licensee, Incumbent Supply Licensee, Supply Licensee of Last Resort
and providing supply of electricity to be a licensed activity. In addition
to the sbove, changes are also made in the existing Part Vi dealing with
distribution and retail supply together as a function of the distribution
licensee. It is proposed to introduce Part VIA dealing with the
and retaining existing Part Vi with the distribution. In addition to the
above, Part VIB is being introduced to deal with the consumer redressal
and ombudsman in respect of distribution and supply separately, The
State Governments are vested with powers to frame and notify the
scheme for the separation of carriage and content in a time period as
may be decided by the State Government.

(Clause No. 2, 8, 9, 11, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30 (insertion of new Part No, VIA), 31 (insertion of new
Part No. VIB), 37, 47, 54 and 55),

4. The clause wise insertions and deletions are mentioned as
under: —

Clause 2: This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act
to amend certain definitions and to insert the new definitions relating
to “ancillary services”, “area of distribution", “decentralised
distributed generation”, “Electricity Distribution Code”, “incumbent
supply licensee", “intermediary company", “obligated entity”,
“renewable energy sources”, “renewable energy service company”,
“smart grid” and “provider of last resort”.

Clause 8: This clause seeks to amend section 12 of the principal
Act so as to introduce the provision of a supply licensee and also
make other consequential changes due to the segregation of carriage
and content.

Clause 9: This clause seeks to substitute section 14 of the principal
Act empowering the Appropriate Commission to grant licence to
any person to transmit electricity as a transmission licensee or to
distribute electricity as a distribution licensee.

67



Clause 11: This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the principal
Act to bring clarity in respect of provisions pertaining to expiry,
revocation of licence and regarding purchase price of utility.

Clause 12: This clause seeks to substitute section 24 of the principal
Act so as to enable the Appropriate Commission to suspend the
licence of the distribution licensee or a supply licensee and appoint
an administrator to discharge the functions of the distribution
licensee or a supply licensee in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the licence.

Clause 17: This clause seeks to amend section 38 of the principal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through Open
Access shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the
transmission charges. Further, it has been clarified that the surcharge
shall be as specified by the Appropriate State Commission instead
of the Central Commisston as it is the State Commisston which deals
with the Cross Subsidy and not the Central Commission.

Clause 18: This clause seeks to amend section 39 of the principal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through Open
Access shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the
transmission charges.

Clause 20: This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the principal
Act so as to specify the duties of distribution licensee and also
provide certain provisions relating to Open Access.

Clause 21: This clause seeks to substitute section 43 of the principal
Act so as to provide that every distribution licensee, shall, on an
application by the owner or occupier of any premises in the area
of distribution, give connection to such premises to enable supply
of electricity, within fifteen days after receipt of the application
requiring such supply.

Clause 22: This clause seeks to amend section 44 of the principal
Act so as to substitute the words “licence to give supply” with the
words “licence to distribute electricity”.

Clause 23: This clause seeks to substitute section 45 of the principal
Act so as to provide that the prices to be charged by a distribution
licensee for the distribution of electricity by him in pursuance of
section 43 shall be in accordance with such tariffs determined by
the Appropriate Commission and such charges authorised by the
Appropriate Commission or otherwise fixed from time-to-time as
per conditions of his licence.


Clause 24: This clause seeks to insert a new section 45A in the
Principal Act so as to provide that the Appropriate Government
may, in consultation with the Appropriate Commission and the
concerned authorities, prescribe the manner of collection and
realisation of any dues under the relevant laws for the time being
in force in that State, along with the electricity dues,

Clause 25; This clause seeks to amend section 46 of the principal
Act so as to substitute the words “requiring a supply of electricity”,
with the words “requiring connectivity to the distribution system”
and the words “giving and supply”, with the words “giving and
maintaining the connection for enabling supply of electricity.”

Clause 26: This clause seeks to amend section 47 of the principal
Act so as to provide that a distribution licensee in the area of
distribution may require any person, who requires connectivity to
the distribution system in pursuance of section 518, to give him
reasonable security, for the payment to him of all monies which
may become due to him in respect of the electricity distributed to
such person or where any electric line or electrical plant or electric
meter is to be provided for distributing electricity to such person,
in respect of the provision of such line or plant or meter, and if
that person fails to give such security, the distribution licensee
may, if he thinks fit, refuse to distribute electricity or to provide
the line or plant or meter for the period during which the failure
continues,

Clause 27; This clause seeks to amend section 48 of the principal
Act so as to substitute the words “supply of electricity”, with the
words “distribution of electricity” the word “supplied” with the
word “distributed”,

Clause 28; This clause seeks to substitute section 49 of the principal
Act so as to provide that with effect from the commencement of
the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014, all consumers having a
connected load of 1 Megawatt and above may enter into an
agreement with any person for supply or purchase of electricity on
such terms and conditions (including tariff) as may be agreed upon
by them.

Clause 29: This clause seeks to substitute section 50 of the principal
Act so as to provide that the State Commission shall specify an
electricity distribution code to provide for recovery of electricity
charges, Intervals for billing of electricity charges, disconnection of
connectivity of electricity for non-payment thereof, restoration of
supply of electricity, measures for preventing tampering, distress or
damage to electrical plant or electrical line or meter, entry of


distribution licensee or any person acting on his behalf for
disconnecting connection and removing the meter, entry for
replacing, altering or maintaining electric lines or electrical plants
or meter and such other matters.

Clause 30: This clause seeks to insert a new Part VIA in the principal
Act containing sections 51A to 51G to deal with the supply of
electricity as distinct from the distribution of electricity,

Clause ३1: This clause seeks to insert a new Part VIB in the principal
Act containing section 51H to deal with the common provisions
applicable to both the distribution and supply function.

Clause 37: This clause seeks to substitute section 62 of the principal
Act so as to provide the determination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission for the reasons mentioned in the sub-section (1) of the
said section. It is further provided that the tariff determined by the
Appropriate Commission for a licensee shall provide for recovery of
all prudent costs of the licensee approved by the Appropriate
Commission in the monthly bills during the tariff period through an
appropriate price adjustment formula including wherever applicable
the fuel, power purchase and procurement price surcharge formula
as may be specified in the Tariff Policy. Also Appropriate Commission
may require a licensee or a generating company to furnish separate
details, as may be specified in respect of generation, transmission,
distribution and supply for determination of tariff.

Clause 47: This clause seeks to amend section 86 of the principal
Act so as to provide the functions being discharged by the State
Commission.

Clause 54: This clause seeks to amend the marginal heading of
“Part Xill — Re-organisation of Board”, as “Part XIll — Re-organisation
of Board and Distribution Licensee” for better clarity.

Clause 55: This clause seeks to amend section 131 of the principal

Act to provide for re-organisations provisions to implement the

segregation of the distribution functions and supply functions through

a statutory scheme.

5. The Committee observed that the concept of separation of
carriage and content involving the ‘wire’ and the ‘electricity’ is the
most debatable amendment proposed by the Government in the Bill.
This issue was therefore, discussed in detail with all the stakeholders.

70


6. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
power departments of State Gavernments on the issue. The states
deposed before the Committee as under:—

Sl. State Views on Segregation of Carriage and Contents (As
No. reproduced from the verbatim record of proceedings)

1 2

3

1. Bihar

2. Karnataka

The first concern is segregation of carriage and
content. It is the most vital proposal of the
Electricity (Amendment) Bill and whether this ts
workable. In our view, it 15 not workable... See, it
is stated in the Bill that carriage and content are
to be separated. When these are separated then
you are proposing two separate licences for wire
licensee, you are saying that there can be parallel
and multiple distribution licensee in an area, But so
far as the wire licensee is concerned, 1 says that
there will be single licensee and particularly the
Government licensee in almost all the States except
a few. The danger lies here when you have surplus
power and multipie licensees are available, then,
the problem is of using the system, If there is single
wire licensee then the first inherent danger will be
of monopoly and then there will be chances of
discrimination. The fair play will not be there... If
there are going to be parallel multiple distribution
ticensee, then there could be multiple parallel wire
licensee.

The main thrust in this amendment is the separation
of carriage and content. From Karnataka side, we
welcome it. But is that the thing which is of
immediate interest for us in this sector is something
which we have to see. The carriage and content is
good in principle which is futuristic. In this situation
where we have shortages in supply and when the
infrastructure development is not full, and we are
stilt not in a position to supply 24X7 power in all
the areas, it may not be prudent to have this now...
The choice to the consumer should be available.
But there should not be a choice to the supply
company. He shall take whosoever applies for it. If
this is so, then, it could take care of the problems.

n


3. Gujarat

5. Himachal

Regarding the first point of segregation carriage
and content, this is definitely a forward looking
measure. Unless a level playing field is provided to
all the suppliers, the challenge of actual
implementation on the ground is very difficult. Then,
it is going to be a collapse af system. In the process
it is the common consumer who will suffer, It is
only the industrial, commercial and high end
consumers who will benefit but everybody else will
suffer. Therefore, before implementation we have
to prepare a proper ground work in which all the
consumers can benefit from out of this. This is what
is required... My next point 15 regarding multiple
distribution licensees, Of course, as per the new
Act, it is one distribution licensee who will take
care of the carriage component, the wire
component. That is fine. It can be only one. But, in
the existing law there ts a provision for more than
‘one distribution licensees in specified areas. In
Gujarat we have one in Special Economic Zone where
a State distribution company and a private SEZ
developer has the distribution licence. So, we are
competing there. Ultimately, it is the consumer who
gets benefit out of that.

Another thing, which will be very critical in terms
of segregation of carriage and content is the
Universal Supply Obligation. Supply itself should not
be allowed to pick and choose. That means that
cherry picking will happen, Any new supplier can
offer it to an industrial or a commercial consumer
at 9 significantly lower tariff than what is currently
charged by the existing distribution licensees. There
is a valid reason behind that.

We are more or less in agreement with what the
representative of Karnataka said, We welcome the
segregation of carriage and content.

We have some reservations so far as our State 15
concerned. In a hilly State like Himachal Pradesh,

72


the load density is very low. We consume about
8,000 million units of power, The geographical area
is very sparse. For the present, the unbundling that
has happened between distribution and generation,
in our opinion, has not matured. Further unbundling
of distribution sector into supply and distribution
segments will, first of all, have an impact on the
cost, Ultimately, the cost is to be borne by the
consumer because of the multiplicity of units... we
are worried about the additional cost of this further
unbundling to the consumer will be more. On that
account, we are saying that it should not be
straightaway made mandatory for us. if at all the
ultimate objective of this is required, then it should
be left to the State Governments. Yes, the provision
should be there, Finally, this being a Concurrent
subject, it should not be must that it has to be
unbundled, If the State Government desires then it
should be separated, otherwise, it should not be
binding on us.

The opinion of the State Government of Kerala with
regard to segregation of content and carriage is
that it should not be made mandatory. There are
two or four important reasons for it. One, it can
never give a level playing ground especially looking
from the perspective of the incumbent operator.
The reason being, in Kerala, we have achieved
100 per cent electrification and 80 percentage of
our consumers’ base is domestic consumers. They
are consuming 50 percentage of the power, giving
us 30 percentage of the revenue. There are 4,000
SC/ST consumers who are giving us 30 percentage
of the revenue, This is one area where cherry-picking
can be done immediately... Regarding the concept
of “supplying licensee”, what is the role of a
“supplying licensee”? It fs not very clear from this.
As | understand, a supplying licensee’s role is to
provide supply of electricity, that is, he should have
some PPAs (Power Purchase Agreements) with him,
and he should bring the consumers. He has two
important functions—having PPAs with him, and

73


8. Jharkhand

bringing the consumers. Now, if there is a problem
with regard to the quality of supply, who is to be
blamed? Is it the ‘supplying licensee’ or the
‘distribution licensee’? To whom should we go? Is it
the ‘supplying licensee” or the ‘distribution licensee"?
tt will create a problem between the ‘supplying
licensee” and the “distribution licensee’, The
“supplying licensee’ will say that the quality problem
ts because of the ‘distribution licensee’ and it will
Create a lot of litigations...While going for a tariff
proposal, the tariff will be determined based upon
the incumbent licensee's cost of operation. When
the incumbent licensee's cost of operation itself ts
on the higher side, the new supplier who is coming
in will be able to get power which |s already
contracted by the ‘distribution licensee’ at lower
tates and supply it to the high end consumers. It
means that the incumbent licensee will bleed,

Goa fs a small State having electricity Department
under the Government body. Because of that, we
have not bifurcated till the transmission and
distribution. But in the meantime, this process Is
going on and we are in the process of finalising this
type of thing which will be coming soon... In regard
to carriage and content, whatever Karnataka and
Kerala have mentioned, those are also our concern,

‘We are of the view that the segregation should not
be done although in our State the segregation of
carriage has taken place. There are five licencees
existing in the State of Jharkhand out of which DVC
and JUSCO are affecting very adversely the State of
Jharkhand and Jharkhand State Electricity Board ...
Accordingly the hon. Commission has given the
licence for one District of Seraikala Kharsawan
existing in Jharkhand State to JUSCO. JUSCO has to
roll out its infrastructure throughout the Districts.
In place they are restricted to the industrial area
only leaving behind the far-flung and remote areas.
Cherry-picking is taking place. As result they are

74


9. Dethi

10. Maharashtra

only picking up the HT consumers. And the JSEB
{now the Jharkhand Urja Vikas Nigam Limited) has
to take care of entire rural consumers throughout
the State. So, this is a proposition which is
completely adverse.

+» the distribution entities are also the supply
entities as of now, So, if there is a segregation of
carriage and contract, one would see that the
distribution companies would be reduced to only
earning the wheeling charges. So, in terms of
responsibilities, what is the distribution companies”
responsibility in terms of carriage and what {s the
responsibility of the supply companies needs to be
delineated properly. Whether it is going to be a
profitable thing for distribution companies to stay
in the business of wheeling when they cannot be
supply entities, this point needs to be taken into
consideration, What would be the liabitities that
they would carry if they are already in Power
Purchase Agreements for 25 years? Are we going to
revisit those Power Purchase Agreements? Are the
supply companies going to enter into new Power
Purchase Agreements? In that case what will happen
to the liabilities of the old distribution company
who are also the supply company? So, those things
need to be factored in.

«++ the essential part in the Act is basically
segregation of carriage and content. In this case, in
Maharashtra, we believe that this is a welcome step.
This is something which would further enhance our
efficiency and give a lot of choices to our consumers.
Having said this, there are certain riders and those
are something which we need to acknowledge...One
is responsibility of the supply agency to pick up
untversal service obligation. It should not be cherry-
picking some customers and not taking the rest of
them. Even if it is a zone which is allotted to a
particular supply company, within the zone, there

75


11. Tamil Nadu

3

is disparity. There could be one zone which is very
good and therefore, we need to ensure that USO is
supported. While we do that, it is also important
that we bring parity in terms of the cost of servicing,
essentially the cross subsidy which is currently
operating and that needs to be sorted out and some
kind of a surcharge needs to be put on the supply
company which 5 going to be present.

>++ Basically we are saying that with the separation
of carriage and content this Bill in one stroke will
make all the State utilities unviable. The view of
the State is that we are against this amendment of
separation of carriage and content. The reason is,
‘we are giving unbridled access to private players to
cherry-picked consumers who are high-paying and
who can be supplied power directly, He is not going
to make any investment into distribution network,
Without making investment into distribution
network, he is getting best paying consumers for
supplying electricity and that too without toss,
Further, he will cherry-pick the consumers; he pick
up consumers in urban areas or high value consumes
in rural areas... we are against it in toto.

As regards Madhya Pradesh, as a matter of principle,
content and carriage is a very forward looking step
and we welcome this step. There will be some
implementation issues which we would tike to
highlight and request for consideration on those
issues so that we move in a coordinated and better
manner.

Loss apportionment will be an issue. Then PPA
assignment is also an issue, We have PPAs ranging
from Rs. 2 to Rs. 5. How to apportion those PPAs?
The Act proposes that one of the Government
companies should be in each DISCOM area. That is
very fine but we should have a system where
consumer has a choice in choosing the supplier than
the supplier choosing the consumer.

76



13, Odisha

>> Our suggestion is that the point of last resort
should be the State Government and let the State
Government instruct or direct that company to fulfil
‘that obligation so that the DISCOM or the incumbent
licensee gets compensated for serving that area and
that class.

The essence of this Bill is separation of content and
carriage. Today, our view is slightly different from
the view which we had taken during the visit of the
Committee, We now feel that there is a good case
for separation of content and carriage. This is slightly
different from the view which we had presented
earlier. It was more of a knee-jerk reaction,
immediate reaction on that day... One suggestion is
that implementation should be in a phased manner
-»» We can give the States slightly more time than
what is proposed in the Bill as one year or based on
the discretion between the Central and the State
Governments. It can be slightly extended, A phased
implementation on a zero generation as well as
voltage class basis would enable the State
Governments to come to terms to set up
infrastructure which is required for separation of
content and carriage... Then, separation of content
and carriage, as a concept, 5 very good but it would
call for massive infrastructure upgradation in
metering. So, we will have to define at some stage
the interface between the distribution licencee and
a supply licencee. In the Bill it is proposed that it
should be In the consumer's premises. So, the
consumer meter is the point of separation between
the distribution licencee and the supply licencee.
We feel this will be extremely difficult, This would
lead to a lot of litigations and a lot of disputes will
come which will be overwhelming, The disputes will
be so overwhelming that most of the State
Governments will then be forced to abandon this
thing even in the initial stages. So, we are suggesting
that, to begin with, the distribution transformer
may be at 33/11 kv level or even below 11/LT level.

7


3

14. Rajasthan

15. Telangana

16, Uttarakhand

If that becomes the segregation point between the
distribution licencee and the supply licencee, things
will be very easy.

>> Insofar as segregation of carriage and content is
concerned, the State is broadly of the view that it
is a welcome step. Firstly, Sir, obviously there Is a
let of problem in the distribution sector. | think,
almost all the distribution companies in the country
are facing a problem whether it 1s regarding the
quatity of power or It Is regarding the quality of
service or whether it is regarding the connections.
The connections are not given in time. 50, there is
certainly a case for private sector participation and
competition. So, we welcome this. Again, there is
this question, of course, of how we avoid the
DISCOMS, the State entities which will be haying
the obligation of the last resort to not be
overburdened because of the cherry-picking,

.AS far as this issue of carriage and content is
concerned, we welcome separation, This will enable
us in bringing in full retail competition, But we
want this to be taken up in 3 phased manner as
suggested by Odisha Government. In the first phase,
we want the present distribution company to be
segregated into the distribution and retail and let
this model work for four or five years and depending
on the experience that we gain out of this
separation, may be after four years, in second phase,
we can allow private players to come into the retail.
This is our suggestion.

As far as segregation of carriage and content is
concerned, our view {s that when a distribution
license is split, a number of coordination activities
that were internationalised for the utilities, that
will create more problems. Our view is that before
considering this, there are vital points which should
be clearly specified regarding cross subsidy and
cherry-picking, it has already been discussed,



17. Puducherry

18, Andhra
Pradesh

19. Chandigarh

PPA segregation and then appointment and
apportionment of distribution losses, There will be
problems to the consumers also. They will have to
approach two places for getting a connection, The
mechanism of grievance redressal should be
standardised,

..-Puducherry, as you know, is a small UT with four
different enclaves separated by several kilometres
in three different States and the consumer
population is only below four lakhs. So, considering
that, the Government of Puducherry has taken a
decision not to unbundile it at the initial stage itself.
So, segregation of carriage and content also may
not be a possible solution for the Government of
Puducherry, At present, the electricity department
itself is working as the service provider and 24x7
hour power supply is ensured at a very reasonable
rate to all the consumers. If private players come
into that, the segregation and competition would
not be good for the consumers because there will
cherry-picking and these kinds of things can be
expected.

The major concern, the carriage and content
separation is going to be a difficult task. so a very
cautious approach is required as has been told by
our technical people.

What is perhaps correct In Europe or America today,
it may not be so applicable today to us. | do not
think most of the States have yet done the
segregation. The generation, transmission and
distribution have taken deep roots, It may be
premature at this stage. May be, one or two States
have sufficiently settled the things. They can embark
on the next step, But for the rest, | think, the
common sentiment is there. We will also adhere to
the same,


7. In addition to the above, some of the State Governments furnished
their views in writing. On this particular issue of Segregation of Carriage
and Contents, the State Government of Meghalaya stated as under:

“Segregation of Carriage and Content is a workable proposition and
will also provide opportunity for open access to ordinary consumers.
Scope for improvement can be assessed only after implementation
of the same. Segregation of Carriage and Content is expected to
bring about competitiveness in the content business.

8. The written submission of Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands states that open access cannot be operationalised there, Also,
there are no captive users of power in the Islands and therefore, this
issue does not apply in respect of the UT of AGN Islands in the present
energy scenario,

9, The Committee also had detailed interaction with the industry
Associations/Power Producers an the Bill, The participants were
ASSOCHAM, CIl, APP, IPPAl and FICCI, All the participants were
unanimously in favour of the proposed amendment to introduce
Segregation of Carriage and Content in the sector.

10, The Committee also had discussion on the issue with the Public
Sector Undertakings working under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Power, namely, NTPC, NHPC, Power Grid Corporation of
India, Power Finance Corporation, THDC, REC, NEEPCO, DVC, SJYNL
and BBMB. The Committee observed that all the PSUs were also agreed
to the concept of Segregation of Carriage and Content.

11, The Committee after having detailed and exhaustive discussion
with various stakeholders, also sought clarifications on the issue from
the Ministry of Power,

12. The Committee, for the sake of clarity asked whether carriage
and contents & the correct phraseology, the Ministry explained as under:—

Yes. The “carriage” denotes the network business and the content
denotes supply business. However, the proposed amendments use
only the terms ‘distribution’ licensee and ‘supply’ licensee.

13. The Committee when enquired about the point of segregation
for the purpose of this Act, the Ministry in a written reply stated that
the intent is to segregate the entire network business from the supply
business. ॥ other words, this will imply segregation at the level of
consumer meter. The transfer scheme for each state will be prepared
by the state based on the conditions prevailing thereof.


14, When enquired whether segregation of carriage and cantent is
Plausible in the wake of the high AT&C losses, the Ministry in a written
reply stated that segregation of carriage and content will help identify
Clearly the technical and commercial losses.

15. When asked how these losses will be adjusted and what will be
the point of their adjustment for the purpose of segregation, it was
replied that the technical losses are generally accounted to the network
business and commercial losses to the supply business. The adjustment
of existing technical and commercial losses will be detailed in the
model transfer scheme, which is being evolved separately.

16, In response to a question whether the presence of multiple
supply licensees not lead to the contrarians with regard to their
responsibilities for maintaining transparency and upholding of
responsibilities, the Ministry replied that the multiple supply licensees
will be bound by the conditions of license to be specified by the
Appropriate Commission. The Regulators have been mandated to monitor
as well as enforce standards of performance of the licensees including
the performance in respect of service obligation towards consumers.

17. The Committee observed that the duties of distribution licensees
among others will be to develop and maintain distribution system in his
area of distribution as has been proposed in Section 42(1) of the Act.
When asked whether it fs in accordance with the concept of segregation
of carriage and contents, the Ministry replied as under:—

Yes. The intent is to entrust on the distribution licensees, the
responsibility of developing and maintaining the distribution system
(1.७. the responsibility relating to distribution network business).
The supply function of the existing distribution company is proposed
to be transferred to the incumbent supply licensee as per the
amendment proposed in the Bill.

81


CHAPTER iil
GRID SECURITY
Objective of the Government:

In the light of the major Grid disturbance occurred in July, 2012
resulting into complete black out in four regions of the country and fast
growing development of Power Sector, integration of Regional Grids to
form the National Grid, the Government felt the need to strengthen
the Grid Security. Also the existing penalties are too insignificant to act
as deterrent for the persans required to comply with the provisions of
the Act and directions issued therein. The non-compliance of the
provisions has led to the grid failure in the recent past, It is of utmost
important that absolute discipline is maintained in the grid and there
should be no violation on the part of any person dealing with the grid.
Accordingly, the penalties provided in the relevant provisions are
significantly increased to act as a proper deterrent (Clause No. 13,14,
56 and 57) . Further, the generating stations shall be required to maintain
a specified capacity of spinning reserve for the grid safety and security
(Clause No. 6). The dedicated transmission lines are also covered under
the regulations relevant to transmission lines for compliance and
Appropriate Government can issue directions for Grid Security and Safety
(Clause 15 and 16).

2. The clause-wise insertions and deletions are mentioned as under:—

Clause 6: This clause seeks to substitute section 7 of the principal
Act to provide for maintenance of spinning reserve of certain capacity
by the generating company and further provide that any generating
company establishing a coal and lignite based thermal generating
station after a date and in a manner to be notified shalt be required
to establish a Renewable Energy Generation capacity as prescribed
by the Central Government from time to time which shall not be
less than ten per cent of the thermal power installed capacity.

Clause 13: This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions
by the Regional Load Dispatch Centres.

Clause 14: This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions
by the State Load Dispatch Centres.


Clause 15: This clause seeks to substitute section 34 of the principal
Act to provide for compliance of Grid Standards as specified by the
Central Electricity Authority, by any licensee or a generating company
Or any person maintaining a dedicated transmission line or any
other person whose system is connected to the Grid,

Clause 16: This clause seeks to amend section 37 of the principal
Act to empower the Appropriate Government to fssue directions for
Grid security and safety.

Clause 56: This clause seeks to substitute section 142 of the principal
Act to provide punishment for non-compliance of directions by
Appropriate Commission. The said section provides that for
non-compliance of directions, the generating company or licensee
shall pay, by way of penalty, which shall not exceed one crore
fupees for each contravention and in case of continuing falture with
an additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees for
every day during which the failure continues.

Clause 57; This clause seeks to amend section 146 of the principal
Act to provide punishment for non-compliance of orders or directions
given under the Act with an imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one crore
rupees, or with both In respect of each offence and in case of
continuing failure with an additional penalty which may extend to
one lakh rupees for every day during which the failure continues.

3. The Committee examined the issue of grid Discipline and Security
in detail and in this connection enquired about the efforts made thus
far by the Government in this regard. It has been informed that CERC
is responsible for oversight of the market and grid security. CERC
introduced Grid Code and UI mechanism for maintaining grid discipline
measure. The Commission's initiatives in regard to Grid Discipline,
७1 mechanism and Grid Security have resulted in improved reliability of
power supply. The frequency norms have been tightened in the following
manner:—

Date from Operating Band (Hz) Variation (Hz)
Before 01.2.2000 Nominal Value +/- 3 % 3.0
01,02.2000 49,0-50.5 1.5
07.04.2009 49,2-50.3 14
3.5.2010 49,5-50.2 0.7
17.9.2010 49,7-50.2 05

17.2.2014 49.9-50.05 0.15


4. It has also been informed that the Central Commission has
replaced UI mechanism with Deviation Settlement Mechanism to improve
grid security. Grid frequency has been further tightened and strict
volume limits have been imposed on over/under drawl.

5. It has further been informed that the grid frequency graph of
Norther, Eastern, North-Eastern and Western (NEW) Grid has continually
improved over the years as could be seen from the Exhibit placed

(Source: NLOC}

6. When asked how the running of frequency at the desired 49.5 Hz
to 50.2 Hz is being ensured, the Ministry informed in a written reply
as under:

Power frequency reflects the load generation balance in the grid at
3 particular instant. It is to be maintained within the specified
range in which all the electrical equipment is designed to perform
safely and efficiently. The permissible frequency band in the Indian
Electricity Grid Code has been progressively tightened over the last
few years in order to ensure reliable operation of the grid. The
nominal frequency of operation in Indian grid is 50.0 Hz. Prior to
1st April, 2009, the permissible frequency band was 49,0 Hz -
50.5 Hz which has been revised from time to time, From
17th February, 2014 onwards, the permissible frequency band is


tightened to 49.90 Hz - 50.05 Hz. During the last year (April 2014-
December 2014), the frequency profile is given in the table below:—

Frequency Profile
April, 2014 to March, 2015

Northern/Western/Eastern/North-Eastern/Southern Regions
& of Time when Frequency was

ont Below Between Above == erage Nax.Freg, Min. Freq,
49% 49,950.05 50.052 Freq.

April, 2014 oo 869
Nay, 2014 rie ne ee) a
Jive, 1014 OF 84H 5H Pr DS RD
dy, 2014 अत. Ok
fox, 2014 “2 976 10% का... uM OK
Sep, 2014 3b HSA 508.38
Oct, 2014 uy = 2 26. HHS
Nov, 2084 1 2 1]
Dec, 2014 3% 40 Be 498 TM #5
Jan, 2015

Feb, 2015

Nar, 205

erage 3.98 0.25 18.17 49.95 ४. ME

Note: The above frequency profile is based on figures in Southern Region during the
period. However, frequency profile of other Regions may be slightly different due
to de-synchronisation of SR Grid with NEW Grid for certain period,

Source:Nttp://cea_nic.in/reports/ monthly/en_div_rep/trequency_protile. pdt

7. The Ministry further stated that the Primary, secondary and
tertiary control of frequency is a basic pre-requisite for reliable and
secure operation of any power system. Implementation of free governor
operation fs being pursued, Frequency Response Characteristics (FRC),


which is also indicative of the control area response, is being evaluated
as per procedure approved by the CERC. There is need for
implementation for Reserves and Ancillary Services to have secure and
reliable power system operation with better frequency control.

8. The Committee thereafter, enquired about the efforts made by
the Government with regard to reviewing the functioning of National
Load Dispatch Center and Regional Load Dispatch Centers to maintain
grid security, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:—

“As per the Electricity Act, 2003, the RLDCs are apex bodies to
ensure integrated operation of the power system in the concerned
region.

Further, Ministry of Power vide National Load Dispatch Centre (NLDC)
Rules notified on 2.3.2005, has designated NLDC as the apex body
to ensure integrated operation of National Power System.

Power System Operation Corporation Limited ("POSOCO”), was
established in March 2009 to oversee the grid management function
of the RLDCs and NLDC. Ministry of Power vide its notification
dated 27.9.2010 notified that POSOCO shall operate the five Regional
Load Dispatch Centres (RLDCs) and the National Load Dispatch Centre
(NLDC) me.f. 1.10.2010. There are five regional grids, namely North,
West, East, North-East and South which have been progressively
synchronized since1991 thereby establishing synchronized National
Grid tn India in 2013.

The Government of India vide its Cabinet decision dated
10th December 2014 has made Power System Operation Corporation
(POSOCO) as an Independent Government Company. In the process,
the institutional framework for an independent, secure and reliable
power system operation entity at the national level has been put
in place as mandated under the Electricity Act, 2003.”

9. The Committee further asked whether the functioning of POSOCO
has been taken into account while factoring in the concept of grid
security, the Ministry stated as under:—

Yes, the functioning of POSOCO has been taken into account while
factoring in the concept of grid security. Independent, retiable and
efficient functioning of POSOCO, comprising RLDCs and NLDC is
important for ensuring grid security, as RLDCs are responsible for
carrying out real time operations for grid control and dispatch of
electricity within the region through secure and economic operation
in accordance with the Grid Standards and the Grid Code notified
by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC),


10. The Committee observed that the overdrawal of electricity
from the grid is the prime reason for grid indiscipline. When asked
about the manner in which it ts being regulated/monitored, the Ministry
informed as under:—

As per Deviation Settlement Mechanism, 2014 Regulations, the aver-
drawals/under-drawals of electricity by any buyer during a time
block shall not exceed 12% of its scheduled drawal or 150 MW,
whichever is lower, when grid frequency is “49.70 Hz and above”
and “below 50.10 Hz”. Also, no over-drawal of electricity by any
buyer ts permissible when grid frequency is “below 49.70 Hz” and
no under-drawal of electricity by any buyer shall be permissible
when grid frequency 5 “50.10 Hz and above”. In addition to Charges
for Deviation, Additional Charge for Deviation upto 100 % of Charges
for Deviation are applicable for over-drawal as well as under-
injection of electricity for each time block in excess of the volume
limit specified.

Further, Close monitoring of the system parameters is carried out
at the RLDC/NLDC level, RLDCs/NLDC give messages (both verbal &
written) in case the system parameters (frequency, voltages, line
loadings, over-dravis, over-injection, etc.) deviate from the specified
values. In case of persistent violation, the matter is also escalated
at appropriate levels by issuing violation messages.

However, in certain cases, feeders identified in consultation with
the States are also being opened to restrict overdrawal by the
States from the grid to maintain grid security.

As per the provisions under Section 5.5 of the IEGC, RLDCs also
submit periodic report the instances of persistent/significant
non-compliance of IEGC to the CERC. Further, petitions are also
filed with CERC, Based on the petitions filed by RLDCs/NLDC with
CERC and also through suo-motu petitions, CERC has issued orders
directing the concerned constituents to maintain system parameters
and grid security by curbing overdrawals and effective toad
Management, CERC has also imposed penalties for persistent
violations,

11. The Committee for the sake of clarity, also asked about the
steps being taken to detect and curb gaming in the power trading
which is contributing to the grid indisciptine. The Ministry replied in
written note that a Market Monitoring Cell (WMC) has been established
by CERC for oversight and surveillance of the Indian Electricity Market.
The MMC publishes market related reports which are available on the
CERC website,

87


12. It was further informed that Indian Electricity Market so far is
a physical delivery based market and all trades are scheduled in
accordance with the provisions of the Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC)
specified by CERC. Any deviations from the schedule are governed by
the CERC Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations 2014.

13. Further, the Committee also observed that there is requirement
for establishing spinning reserve by the generating company under
Section 7 of the Act. As per the amendment Bill, the spinning reserve
is to be identified by the Central Government. As the State Governments
were not in agreement to this provision, the Ministry during the course
of evidence, proposed that the word ‘Central Government’, ‘Appropriate
Commission’ may be inserted.

14. The Ministry also proposed that ‘Spinning reserve shall be made
available on the directions of the National Load Despatch Centre or
Pegional Load Despatch Centre or State Load Despatch Centre, as the
case may be, in place of System Operator’.

15. Regarding the time limit for establishing Spinning reserve also,

the Ministry proposed that it may be notified by the ‘Appropriate
Commission’ in place of the Central Government,


CHAPTER IV
OPEN ACCESS

Open Access is defined in the Electricity Act, 2003 as the
“Non-Discriminatory provision for the use of transmission lines or
distribution system or associated facilities with such lines or system by
any licensee or consumer or a person engaged in generation in
accordance with the regulations specified by the Appropriate
Commission.”

2. The Objective of Open Access as contained in Electricity Act
2003 & to facilitate supply of Electricity from surplus region to deficit
region and to tap the source of Electricity such as captive generation
and renewable generation. The Committee observed that Section 42 (2)
of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the State Commission shall
introduce open access in such phases and subject to such conditions,
{including the cross subsidies, and other operational constraints) as
may be specified within one year of the appointed date by it and in
specifying the extent of open access in successive phases and in
determining the charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard to all
relevant factors including such cross subsidies, and other operational
constraints. The fifth proviso to Section 42 (2) of the Electricity Act
2003, Act provides that the State Commission shall, not later than five
years from the date of commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2003, by regulations, pravide such open access to all consumers
who require a supply of electricity where the maximum power to be
made available at any time exceeds one megawatt. At present, most
of the State Commissions have issued open access regulations in their
States.

३, The Committee found that at distribution level also, most of the
SERCs have notified terms and conditions of Open Access Regulations,
Though open access has been one of the important drivers of reforms
for market development, it has not been implemented in the same
Spirit as envisaged in the Act. There are issues around imptementation
of open access at distribution level. Some State Governments have
issued statutory orders blocking the flow of electricity beyond their
boundaries. There is a conflict of interest due ta existence of cross
subsidies in the retail tariff structure so that the discoms do not want
to lose paying/subsidising consumers. Ring fencing of SLDCs, reasonable
open access charges and availability of surplus power are also required
for successful implementation of open access.

89


4. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Power through
@ written note that according to the law, generation ts deticensed and
a generating company has full discretion to sell its electricity to a
customer of its choice. As an exception for extreme situations the Act
has a provision (Section 11) which gives powers to the Governments to
give directions to generating companies in respect of operating and
maintenance of generating stations in extraordinary circumstances like
natural calamity, war etc. These powers have been invoked by several
State Governments (beginning with Karnataka and followed by
Tamil Nadu, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh) prohibiting export of power
from their State on the ground of power shortages. Several orders of
CERC holding that open cannot be restricted by such directions
of the State Governments were challenged in the High Courts. The
matter is sub-judice in Supreme Court.

5. In the present Bill, the Government has proposed amendments
to the following important clauses relating to ‘Open Access’:—

Clause 17: This clause seeks to amend section 38 of the principal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through Open
Access shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the
transmission charges. Further, it has been clarified that the surcharge
shall be as specified by the Appropriate State Commission instead
of the Central Commission as it ts the State Commission which deals
with the Cross Subsidy and not the Central Commission.

Clause 18: This clause seeks to amend section 39 of the principal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through Open
Access shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the
transmission charges.

Clause 20: This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the principal
Act so as to specify the duties of distribution licensee and also
provide certain provisions relating to Open Access.

6. The Committee observed that Section 42 (2) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 inter-alia provides that the State Commission shall introduce
Open Access in such phases and subject to such conditions, including
the cross subsidies, and other operational constraints as may be specified
within one year of the appointed date. Keeping in view the constraints
noticed in implementation, the Committee asked about the mechanism
in place to ensure that State Commission introduces Open Access as
provided under the Act. The Ministry replied that Open Access under
the Electricity Act, 2003 aims to facilitate supply of electricity from

90


the surplus region to deficit region and to tap the source of electricity
such as captive generation and renewable generation. Central
Commission is responsible for facilitating inter-state transmission of
electricity. Open access at intra-state level remains the responsibility
of SERCs. Open Access at inter-state level is fully operational.

At State level, as per information available with Forum of Regulators
(FOR) secretariat, most of the SERCs have notified terms and conditions
of Open Access Regulations. Though open access has been one of the
important drivers of reforms for market development, it has not been
implemented in the same spirit as envisaged in the Act. There are
issues regarding implementation of open access at distribution level.
Some State Governments have fssued statutory orders blocking the flow
of electricity beyond their boundaries. Ring-fencing of SLOCs, reasonable
open access charges and availability of surplus power are also required
for successful implementation of open access,

7. Open access at intra-state level remains the responsibility of
SERCs, Most of the State/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions have
notified the open access regulations providing inter-alia for open access
to consumers whose demand exceeds one Mega Watt. The status of
open access regulations, phasing and charges in the States as furnished
by Forum of Regulators (FoR) Secretariat, is shown in the table below:—

STATUS OF OPEN ACCESS REGULATIONS, PHASING AND CHARGES (11.06.2014)

4. श्छाः Necification Determination Open Access Determination Determination
No. of CA = of Shecharge allowed to of Wheeling of
Fealation urges. Yansuaion
with connected Charges
1081 of 1MW
tnd 0007९
t 2 3 4 $ 6 7
1 APERC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Arunachal Yes No Yes No No
3. AERC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4 BERC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
5. CSERC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
6. DERC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

1


10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

21.

23,
24,

26.
27.

GERC
HERC
HPERC
J@KSERC
JSERC

MERC

NERC
OERC

Sikkim
TNERC
TERC
UPERC
UERC

JERC-MaM
JERC-UTs

TOTAL

FFF RF KF eFC EF ES FF EEE FF F\~

7

nN
w

FFT KF Fe FF KFC EF FC FF FF F\-

FF FCT FF ser FFF है हैं हे है FFF FF F\*

27

है ह है हैं FF sKKC CF eR EK Fe EE KIO

nm
wo

FFT है हैं ॥ हु STF FFL TF FFF FF हैं हैं | 5

क्र
w

8. As may be seen in the table above, 27 State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions (SERC) have issued regulations on Open Access in intra~
state transmission and distribution, 27 SERCs have allowed Open Access
to consumers with loads of 1MW and above. 23 SERCs have determined
Transmission Charges, 23 SERCs have determined Wheeling Charges and

23 SERCs have determined Cross Subsidy Surcharge for Open Access.

92


9, It was further stated by the Ministry that electricity is a concurrent
subject in the Constitution. Ministry of Power has all along facilitated
its operationalization through policy directions and creating suitable
environment for enabling regulations, consultations and dialogue with
varlous stakeholders/State Governments, The Ministry of Power in
consultation with M/o Law & Justice/Ld. Attorney General of India has
issued clarification vide tetter dated 30.11.2011 that “all 1MW and
above consumers are deemed to be open access consumers and that
the regulator has no jurisdiction over fixing the energy charges for
them”, All concerned have been requested to take necessary steps for
implementing the provisions relating to open access in the Electricity
Act, 2003 in light of the said opinion, However, some of the SERCs have
stayed the operationalisation of open access based on the above
interpretation,

10, The Committee note that keeping in view the status of the
implementation of “Open Access‘ since it was introduced in the Electricity
Act, 2003, the Government in the proposed amendment Bill have
proposed certain amendments in Section 49 that all consumers having
a connected load of 1 Mega Watt and above may enter into an agreement
with any person for supply or purchase of electricity on such terms and
conditions {including tariff) as may be agreed upon by them.

11, Further, the Ministry informed that the Forum of Regulators also
evolved a model regulation for Intra-State Open Access. The key features
of FOR model regulations are as under:—

~ Consumers with load of 10 MW and above or Generators
having installed capacity of 10 MW and above are eligible to
avail open access in intra-State transmission. Generators with
capacity below 10 MW are eligible to avail open access in
distribution system.

- Open Access shall be granted on payment of transmission,
wheeling and other charges.

- Consumers for availing Open Access have to be:—

© Connected to industrial feeder provided that all the
consumers on such industrial feeder opt for Open
Access,

© Connected through an independent feeder.

© Other consumers can avail Open Access subject to
rostering restrictions,

93



~ Criteria for granting long term access, medium-term open
access or short term open access,

© LTA with or without system augmentation.
© MTOA only without system augmentation.

12. The Committee have noted that in order to provide Open Access
to the consumers, following amendments have been proposed in Section
42 of the Electricity Act, 2003-

For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

"42. (1) It shall be the duty of a distribution licensee to—

(a) develop and maintain an efficient, coordinated and
economical distribution system in his area of distribution
and to enable supply electricity in accordance with
the provisions contained in this Act;

{b) provide non-discriminatory open access to its
distribution system as specified by the Appropriate
Commission;

(८) perform such other functions, not inconsistent with
the Act as may be specified by the Appropriate
Commission,

(2) The State Commission shall introduce open access for use of
distribution system in such phases and subject to such
conditions, (including the cross subsidies, and other
operational constraints) as may be specified within one year
of the appointed date by it and in specifying the extent of
open access in successive phases and in determining the
charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard to all relevant
factors including such cross subsidies, and other operational
constraints.

(3) The open access shalt be allowed on payment of a surcharge
which shail be in addition to the wheeling and other charges
payable to the distribution licensee, as compensatory charges
determined by the State Commission to meet the requirement
of cross subsidy in the area of supply:—

Provided that the surcharge and cross subsidies referred to
sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) shall be progressively reduced in
the manner as may be specified by the State Commission:

94


Provided further that such surcharge shail not be leviable in case
open access is provided to a person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to the destination of
his own use,

(4) The open access consumers procuring electricity from
renewable energy sources shall not be required to pay the
surcharge for open access for such period as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the open
access consumer shall not switch over to any other supplier
except by giving the notice of minimum time period as may
be specified by the Appropriate Commission.”

13, The Committee further asked whether the condition of cross-
subsidies in the introduction of Open Access by the State commission
was the core condition and the manner in which it has been envisaged
for implementation through this amendment Bill, It was also asked
whether it has helped successfully in the growth of Open Access in the
Sector, The Ministry replied that Section 42 (2) clearly specifies that
the State Commission shall introduce open access in such phases and
subject to such conditions, (including the cross subsidies, and other
operational constraints) as may be specified within one year of the
appointed date by ft and in specifying the extent of open access in
successive phases and in determining the charges for wheeling, it shall
have due regard to all relevant factors including such cross subsidies,
and other operational constraints. In some of the states, higher cross
subsidy surcharge has restricted implementation of open access, whereas,
in some states discoms negative cross subsidy surcharge have been
determined leading to financial loss to discoms. The cross subsidy
surcharge fs as high as Rs 3.56/unit (FY 2013-14) in states like
Tamil Nadu and Zero in case of Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam
limited, Uttar Pradesh,

The Working Group on Power for 12th Plan while considering the
formula for calculation of Cross Subsidy Surcharge (C5S) observed that
the existing method for calculating cross subsidy surcharge given in the
Tariff Policy, which uses the weighted average cost of power purchase
of top 5% as a factor, leads to a negative cross subsidy surcharge in
certain cases. Allowing the consumers to migrate to open access under
these conditions increases the burden of the distribution utilities and
this was not in line with the spirit of the cross-subsidy surcharge as per

95


the Tariff Policy. The Working Group had, therefore, recommended that
an altemative method for calculating the cross subsidy surcharge should
be worked out to ensure that neither open access is throttled nor does
the host Discom unduly suffer due to migration of open access consumers,
Based on the recommendations of the Working Group and comments
received from various stakeholders, suitable amendments in the Tariff
Policy are under consideration.

14. The Committee when asked whether the introduction of Open
Access has helped the power consumers in the agricultural/industrial/
domestic sectors of the country by access to cheaper power and reliable
supply of the same, the Ministry informed tn writing that as the
introduction of Open Access has not progressed substantially, there is
no perceptible impact to the power consumers in the agricultural,
industrial, domestic sectors of the country by access to cheaper power
and reliable supply of the same. However, as per information made
available by CERC, more than 3000 inter-state open access consumers

have been buying electricity through Power Exchanges by availing open
access.

15. The Committee observed the fact that while Open Access has
incentivised the power producers since there are no restrictions on
them to sell power outside state but on the other hand, State DISCOMs/
Electricity Boards are deprived of electricity produced in their States
thereby creating discontentment among them and leading to the invoking
of Section 11 of the Act.

16. When asked how the Government propose to solve this problem
as otherwise the electricity deficit States will take recourse to this
legislative provision, the Ministry stated that as per the provision of the
Electricity Act, 2003, generation is delicensed and a generating company
has full discretion to sell its electricity to a customer of its choice.
However, under ‘extraordinary’ circumstances artsing out of threat to
security of the State, public order or a natural calamity or such other
ciroumstances arising in the public interest, the State Government under
Section 11 of the Electricity Act, 2003, may issue directions to generating
companies in respect of operating and maintenance of generating
stations. These powers have been exercised by several State Governments
(beginning with Karnataka and followed by Tamil Nadu, Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh} prohibiting export of power from their State on the
ground of power shortages. Orders of CERC holding that open access

%


cannot be restricted by such directions af the State Governments were
challenged in the High Courts, CERC contested these cases. On the
basis of the opinion of the Ministry of Law, Ministry of Power had
written to the States that Section 11 does not permit prohibiting open
access. Karnataka High Court has upheld the order of the State
Government. Ministry of Power has moved the Supreme Court against
the order of the Karnataka High Court. The matter is sub-judice in
Supreme Court.

17. The Committee observed that Section 11 of the Electricity Act
2003 empowers the State Governments to issue directives to Power
Generating Companies in exceptional circumstances. When asked the
Ministry to elaborate the term ‘exceptional circumstances’, they informed
that As per the Electricity Act 2003, Section 11 is meant to be invoked
only in extraordinary circumstances (e.g. threat to security of State,
public order, natural calamity etc.) and is not meant to restrict open
access.

18, When asked about the steps taken by the Union Government to
discourage the misuse of this Section by the State Governments, the
Ministry informed that the Ministry of Power has filed SLP against the
Karnataka High Court judgement upholding the Orders Issued by the
State Government of Karnataka under section 11 of the Act restricting
open access. The matter is sub-judice.

19. In response to a question whether the frequent recourse to
Section 11 ts not in contravention to the spirit of Open Access and in
that case how the Government propose to reconcile the two contradictory
situations, the Ministry informed that Discoms are resistant to give
open access to industrial consumers (bulk consumer category) since
industrial tariffs are usually high. This impasse 15 one of the biggest
hurdles for open access implementation. In order to create independent
SLDCs, Ministry of Power has asked all States to set up independent
500९5 as they play an important role in implementation of open access.
Ring fencing of SLOCs from Utilities and empowerment of Load Dispatch
Centres would remove the hurdles from Open Access implementation.

20. The Committee when enquired about the details of outcome
that has accrued as a result of the limited presence of Open Access in
the Electricity Sector and also the feedback received/concerned
expressed by the various stakeholders in power sector with regard to

7


the concept of Open Access in the country and reaction of the
Government thereto, the Ministry replied as under:—

Open Access at inter-State level is fully operational. The details of
open access availed on Inter State Transmission System during last five
years are given below:—

TOTAL NO. OF APPROVED ENERGY
(Bilateral + Collective) TRANSACTIONS (Million Units)
2008-09 15414 30521
2009-10 18128 39457
2010-11 19883 55232
2011-12 24111 66987
2012-13 32088 73153
2013-14 33917 86973
2014-15 (upto Dec., 14) 28231 61701
(Source; NLDC)

At State level, as per information available with Forum of Regulators
secretariat, most of the SERCs have notified terms and conditions of

Open Access Regulations.

The Forum of Regulators (FOR) has deliberated on the issues
concerning implementation of open access and made a detailed
examination with recommendations concerning the following issues:
(i) legal and policy provisions and the status of their implementation;
(ii) identification of problem areas with the conclusion, inter alia, that
the weakest link is the State Load Dispatch Centre (SLDC) which, unless
made truly independent, will frustrate all effort at open access;
(iii) measures for ring-fencing of SLDC; (iv) structural and financial
re-modelling, including technological upgradation; (v) staffing pattern;
(vi) incentive and disincentive scheme; and (vii) fees and charges for
the SLDCs.

The Forum emphasised the need for: (i) rationalization of various
open access charges including surcharge; (॥) uniform standby
arrangement for back-up supply to make open access a reality;
(iii) monitoring of open access transactions by the State Commission;
and {iv) display of illustrative examples of charges for open access to
help the potential consumer take an informed decision on the open
access option.

98


CHAPTER V
PROMOTION OF RENEWABLE ENERGY

Renewable energy has become an important agenda of India’s energy
planning process especially since climate change has taken centre stage
in the domestic and international policy arena. To demonstrate its
commitment to renewable energy, the Government has set aggressive
targets for renewables and several incentives and policy initiatives at
the Central and State levels have been put in place both for grid
connected and off-grid renewable energy. It is evident that the
development of renewable energy sector hinges on the combination of
legislative frameworks, funding mechanisms, institutional arrangements,
and co-ordination mechanisms, which work together to Support the
implementation of RE strategies, policies and programmes. The
Committee feel that despite the growing momentum of activity in this
Sector, there are certain issues which highlight the gaps in the governance
of renewable energy in India,

2. Now, the Government has shown its concern for the production
of this vital green energy and for the purpose, provisions have been
made in the proposed Bilt which lay emphasis on mandatory generation
of renewable power,

Objective of the Government:

ऊँ The country has very vast potential of generation of electricity
from Renewable Energy Sources. However, the same need to be promoted
by bringing changes in the existing laws. Accordingly, various measures
are proposed in the Bill to encourage generation of electricity from
Renewable Energy Sources. The amendments provides framing and
hotification of ‘National Renewable Energy Policy’, development of
Renewable Energy Industry, introducing Renewable Power Generation
obligation on new conventional coal and lignite based thermal power
plant, and option for already commissioned coal and lignite based
thermal power plants and bringing exemption of sale of electricity
generated from renewable energy sources from cross subsidy and open
access.

4. For the Purpose of encouraging production of renewable energy
in the country, the Government in the present Bill has proposed
amendments tn the Clause No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 13, 14, 20 and 56.

9



100

5. The details of each of these clauses are as under:—

Clause 2: This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act
to amend certain definitions and to insert the new definitions relating
to “ancillary services”, “area of distribution”, “decentralised
distributed generation", “Electricity Distribution Code”, “incumbent
supply licensee”, “intermediary company”, “obligated entity",
“renewable energy sources”, "renewable energy service company”,
“smart grid” and “provider of last resort”.

Clause 3: This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the principal Act
to provide for a separate National Renewable Energy Policy for the
promotion of renewable sources of energy and for measures to
promote smart grid, ancillary services and decentralised distribution
generation etc.

Clause 4: This clause seeks ta amend section 4 of the principal Act
to pravide for harnessing solar power and renewable sources included
as a part of the National Policy in the context of the stand alone
system,

Clause 5: This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act
५० 35 to substitute the expression “area” with the expression “parts
of the country”.

Clause 6: This clause seeks to substitute section 7 of the principal
Act to provide for maintenance of spinning reserve of certain capacity
by the generating company and further provide that any generating
company establishing a coat and lignite based thermal generating
station after a date and in a manner to be notified shall be required
to establish a Renewable Energy Generation capacity as prescribed
by the Central Government from time to time which shall not be
less than ten per cent of the thermal power installed capacity.

Clause 9: This clause seeks to substitute section 14 of the principal
Act empowering the Appropriate Commission to grant licence to
any person to transmit electricity as a transmission licensee or to
distribute electricity as a distribution licensee.

Clause 13: This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions
by the Regional Load Dispatch Centres.

Clause 14: This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions
by the State Load Dispatch Centres,


Clauses 20: This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the principal
Act so as to specify the duties of distribution licensee and also
provide certain provisions relating to Open Access,

Clause 56; This clause seeks to substitute section 142 of the principal
Act to provide punishment for non-compliance of directions by
Appropriate Commission. The said section provide that for non-
compliance of directions, the generating company or licensee shalt
pay, by way of penalty, which shall not exceed one crore rupees for
each contravention and in case of continuing failure with an
additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees for every
day during which the fallure continues.

6. The Committee is informed by the Government through a written
communication that the planning of the power sector is being done in
accordance with a low carbon growth strategy which stipulates emphasis
on power generation from hydro, nuclear and renewable energy sources
to the extent possible. The all India installed power generation capacity
as on 31.01.2015 was 2,58,701 MW comprising 1,80,362 MW Thermal,
40,867 MW Hydro, 5,780 MW Nuclear and 31,692 MW Renewable Energy
Sources. Respective Regulatory Commission have set RPOs for each
State to promote setting up of RPO target.

7, The Committee while welcoming this step of the Government
taken to encourage renewable power generation, also apprehend the
practical difficulties which are going to hinder the growth of green
energy production, mainly due to mixing of its promotion with the
conventional energy, proposing a minimum criteria of ten per cent of
tenewable energy production for every power plant etc.

8, The Committee therefore, discussed the issue of production of
renewable energy with all the stakeholders including the State
Governments and Power producers, The views of the State Governments
have been tabulated below:—

Sl. State Views on Production of renewable energy (As

No. reproduced from the verbatim record of
proceedings)

1 2 3

1. Bihar If you read the whole Act, you will find that the

amendment is completely silent on the issue of
renewable energy. Only a percentage has been fixed
and nothing more has been said which promotes

101



102

Gujarat

the renewable energy. Even the definition of
renewable energy certificate is not there, we have
to come clearly on these definitions...it should be
Clearly defined as to what are the obligations which
are to be met and what would be the outcome in
case those are not met in a time bound manner.

On promotion of renewable energy, | think the
provision in the Act is quite alright because in
Karnataka we have been in the forefront in
renewable energy. More than pushing the generators
to start producing renewable energy, the focus
should be on purchase obligations on the companies,
That is how we are operating and we are meeting
more than the supply obligations. But to give a
major thrust to renewable energy, the major issue
is the Grid. Suppose there is 2,500 MW in the night,
in the morning it will be only 700 MW. Unless we
have sufficient spinning reserve, we cannot ramp
up generation.

When we get more renewable generation of
particularly wind, there is no demand. During the
monsoon season we get more wind power generation
which we do not require. So we have to back down
our long-term requirement. But then, pump storage
has to be in forest areas and environmental concerns
are there. Therefore, renewable also, though it is
good to talk about renewable, but we have to take
it with a pinch of salt because we have got the
experience of Europe where they had to pay negative
charges, The rate came low and they had to pay
money, The countries had to pay penalties for
generating more. These things are there.

Then, solar power comes in the afternoon when
actually the demand is less. During the peak load
time there is no solar power generation. Otherwise,
the provisions are alright. We have no issues on the
provisions.

We agree that we need to add more of renewable
energy. The grawth in energy consumption from fossil


3

fuel needs to be reduced. But at the same time,
one of the suggestions that the developers of new
conventional based power plants should set up
10 per cent of that capacity of renewable is not a
requirement. | fully agree with our colleague from
Karnataka, What ७ required is a proper Renewable
Power Purchase Obligation. We suggest that there
should be a uniform minimum RPO across the
country. That should be fixed at the national level.
Then, the individual State regulators in consultation
with the State Governments should be authorised
to fix the RPO higher than the national minimum so
that if some States want to impose more mandate,
then let it be at the option of the regulators in
consultations with the State Governments concemed.
Another problem is that many issues relating to
renewable energy have remained unresolved, It is
because there is a very poor enforcement of RPO
obligation. The law itself should provide that this
has to be mandatorily enforced. That minimum has
to be enforced. Only then this will pick up...

Another thing fs that this RPO should be applicable
to every consumer tneluding captive consumers or
Open access consumers. It should be applicable to
every consumer of electricity irrespective of what
category they belong to... | think, each State should
be able to manage within 10 per cent — then that
concept of scheduling of even renewable energy
should be implemented so that it does not create
havoc in the system, What is important is that you
shoutd schedule it when it has crossed ten per cent
of your total energy input in the system, That will
mitigate the problem of variability and additional
burden that comes out of the renewable energy.
May be some years down the line, that concept
should be able to be implemented, My suggestion is
that our law should have some provision which may
not be implemented immediately, but some years
down the line when the system is ready. Then, it
should be an enabling provision so that this can be
implemented.

103


4, Assam

5. Himachal
Pradesh

6. Kerala

8. Maharashtra

104

3

The representative of Assam was in agreement with
the views expressed by the States of Gujarat and
Karnataka on the issue,

It is a welcome step, and in hilly States for small
hydro up to 25 MW is renewable, The cap of 25 MW
put to treat hydro as renewable should be removed
in the sense that hydro is a green energy... the
entire components of renewable energy should be
combined and separate targets for solar and other
renewables should not be there. There should be
provision for production linked incentive for
renewable energy.

Renewable energy is good if there is a breakthrough
in storage technology. In the case of renewable,
solar should be captured, stored and then used in
the nights, As long as there is no breakthrough in
the storage technology, going for in a large scale
might not give us. Especially in the Kerala where
domestic consumers reach home only in the night.
As I said, eighty per cent of the consumers are
consuming fifty per cent of the power and they are
consuming this during six in the evening to six in
the moming. Under this particular point of time,
we cannot depend upon renewable without a good
storage facility.

This will become profitable only if we subsidise the
battery and all those elements. The life of the
battery ts five years or four years. This is again a
unique thing in Kerala’s consumer mix which has to
be looked into. Further, there should be incentive
for energy saving.

On promotion of renewable energy, | will appreciate
that the renewable energy should be given proper
weightage so that it can be used at various levels.
But the financial constraint may be the concern for
this region because by virtue of financial costing,
our tariff may go up.

There 5 a big role for renewable energy in terms
of generation in the Act. RGO ७ something which is
being provided. It छ welcome again because sourcing



10. Madhya

of this energy and levelised price in the basket of
energy which is supplied to the consumers, there
will be a lot of potential which can be exploited in
those States where those resources are available to
set up generation plants and then it can be wheeled
across to the areas where this can be combined.

With this Increasing obligations on generation,
purchases and supplies, there will be a need to
invest and there will be some difficulty which will
happen in terms of setting up of green energy
corridors. Our rough calculation is that for 10
megawatts, about a crore of rupees 5 currently
required to bring that electricity into the existing
grade.

So, these kinds of expenses will have to be provided
of supported. That is something in terms of financial
liability. We have to take that into account either
through some support mechanism on short-term
through Budget or some other mechanism to reduce
to ensure that these commitments are honoured
technically,

It is a very important public policy issue. It should
be promoted. Ail | am saying, it should be the State's
responsibility: Central Government or State
Government... we support that Hydro power of all
capacities should be a part of renewable because it
छ a renewable. We have artificially put a limit of
25 MW and that cap should go.

Renewable energy is a welcome step but we should
stagger it. We should not go to ten per cent in one
80. May be, it must be two or three per cent and
five per cent and ten per cent because it has two
imptications like financial and technicat implications.
Balancing of grid will be an issue and DISCOMs are
not cash rich. So, in one go it does not pinch them
and they will also learn, improve and move from
two to three per cent, to five per cent to ten per
cent.

105


11. Odisha

12. Rajasthan

13. Telangana

14, Uttarakhand

15. Puducherry

16, Lakshadweep

106

3

the present amendment says that only for the
additional upcoming generation, the RGO would be
applicable. We are suggesting that even with the
existing captive generation plants, which is a major
share of thermal power generation in the country,
there must be an enhanced Renewable Generation
Obligation.

...about the renewable energy, it is certainly the
need of the hour. | think, going ahead, we have to
go in for renewable energy. But we think that the
pace has to be a little slower. It needs to be phased
out and we need to move a little more slowly
especially because of the two reasons that have
been mentioned, that fs grid stability and that it is
going to be a very expensive proposition.

As far as this renewable energy is concerned, we
welcome the changes incorporated in this
Amendment Bill, But we want one change in this
wherein the penalty of non-compliance of these
RPOs have to be specified because we have seen
that even though the regulators are specifying the
RPOs percentages, they are not insisting upon the
implementation of these percentages. So some
penalties may be laid down In the Act itself. In that
way the regulator and distribution utilities can
enforce these RPO obligations.

As regards the promotion of renewable ts concerned,
as everybody has expressed, it should be done in 3
phased manner, It is a welcome step and we are
with this.

So far as the renewable energy is concerned, the
land area in the UT is very limited, we have very
limited scope for doing it. But except for solar
energy, no other non-solar energy proposals can be
feasible there.

As far as renewable source of energy is concerned,
our land area is extremely Limited, which is just 28
square kilometres. As | have mentioned, we have



1 2 3

installed two megawatt capacity so far and 10 per
cent of our energy need is met by solar energy. We
are also exploring other sources, especially the
biomass based projects - the coconut based biomass
projects. After making a detailed study we went for
the apen bidding process and through the subsidy
component of the MNRE Ministry. We have yet to
experience as bidders in this regard but we are
exploring all the options.

17. Chandigarty ...1 do not feel that setting target at 8 per cent of
solar energy should be mandatory.

18. Chhattisgarh First is the renewal obligation, That should not be
50 source specific. It must be uniform. Whatever is
available, you must purchase ten per cent or eight
per cent or so within the State,

19, Sikkim Since the new Bill seeks to separate renewable of
solar and other biomass, we would like to point out
that Sikkim has abundance of Hydro power and Hydro
power also should have been kept in the same
category, There is so much of potential in micro
and smait skills. It should be at par. The State like
Sikkim should not be forced to buy solar RPO because
RPO {s going to burden consumers only.

9, The Committee during their discussion with the representatives
of Industry Associations/Power producers observed that the provision of
10 per cent mandatory renewable energy generation alongwith the
thermal capacity was not welcomed by most of them, The issues like;
renewable energy not being cost effective as compared to thermal,
non-obligatary on the part of the supply licensee to purchase renewable
energy, low plant load factor with unpredictable variations in its
generation, problem with regard to uniform transmission of renewable
energy to the Grid etc, were raised by them.

10. The Committee also sought clarification from the Government
‘on the issue. It was asked whether all the activities regarding promotion
of different sources of renewable energy will be brought under one
umbretla. The Government replied that the Electricity (Amendment)
Bill, 2014 does consider renewable energy as a group and as technology
agnostic, Therefore it has provided equa level playing field for promotion
of different sources of renewable energy.

107



11. The Committee when asked whether the future expansion plan
in solar and wind sources will be clubbed with it or will they go on
separately, the Ministry replied that MNRE has suggested amendment in
the tariff policy to include a RPO trajectory reaching at minimum 15%
of the total electricity mix by March, 2019 with solar RPO of minimum
8%, It implies that there is a special category for solar RPO and other
renewable energy sources have been clubbed in non-solar category,

12. On the issue of mandatorily generation of ten per cent renewable
energy by the upcoming power generating plants, the Committee was
informed during the course of evidence by the Ministry that keeping in
view the concerns of various stakeholders including the State
Governments and the power producers, they have decided to remove
the ceiling of ten per percent for renewable energy. The Ministry,
therefore, proposed that in Section 7, sub-section (1) of the Act, the
relevant changes would be made,

13. The Committee, however, came to the conclusion that in order
to give a boost to the generation of renewable energy, a minimum
criteria for its mandatory generation by the upcoming power plants has
to be fixed in the Act itself.

108


CHAPTER VI

PROVISIONS RELATING TO REGULATORY COMMISSIONS
& APPELLATE TRIBUNALS

Legislative Provisions:

Section 76(1} of the Act mandates the Central Government to form
a Central Commission named as Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC). The CERC was constituted broadly for regulating the tariff of
generating companies owned or controlled by the Central Government
and generating companies for supplying electricity for more than one
State, to regulate and determine tariff for Inter-State transmission of
electricity, to issue the transmission Licensees, specifying grid code
having regard to the Grid Standards. The CERC ७ also mandated to
advise the Central Government on National Electricity Policy and Tariff
Policy, promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in activities
of the electricity industry,

2. Similarly, as per Section 82(1), the State Governments are required
to constitute State Electricity Regulatory Commissions within six months
of the appointed date. All the State Governments have constituted
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions broadly for determination of
Tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity
within the State, facilitating intra-State transmission, to regulate
electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees.
Two Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions (JERCs) have also been
constituted, one for States of Manipur and Mizoram and the other for
Union Territories and Goa.

3. Further, Section 110 of the Act provides the Central Government
to establish an Appellate Tribunal named as Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity (APTEL) to hear appeals against the orders of adjudicating
officer or the Appropriate Commission. The Appellate Tribunal of
Electricity was established on 7th April, 2004 with it’s headquarters at
Delhi. Under the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, Chairperson,
APTEL has constituted the Principal Bench at Dethi and three circuit
benches at Chennai, Mumbat and Kolkata.

4. In order to create a common floor to enable discussion between
the CERC and the SERCs, the Forum of Regulators (FoR) was constituted
vide Notification dated 16th February, 2005 in pursuance of the provision

109


under section 166(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003. The Forum consists
of Chairperson of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) and
Chairpersons of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs). The
Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of the Forum, The Secretary to
the Central Commission is the ex-officio Secretary to the Forum.
Secretarial assistance to the Forum is provided by the Central
Commission. The headquarters of the Forum {s located at New Dethi.
The Central Commission may take necessary financial contributions
from the State Commissions for carrying out the activities of the Forum.
The Central Commission keeps separate accounts for the activities of
the Forum,

The Forum discharges the following functions, namely;—

+ Analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of Central
Commission and State Commissions and compilation of data
arising out of the said orders, highlighting, especially the
efficiency improvements of the utilities;

+ Harmonization of regulation in power sector;

+ Laying of standards of performance of licensees as required
under the Act;

* Sharing of information among the members of the Forum on
various issues of common interest and also of common
approach;

+ Undertaking research work in-house or through outsourcing
on issues relevant to power sector regulation;

+ Evolving measures for protection of interest of consumers
and promotion of efficiency, economy and competition in
power sector; and

* Such other functions as the Central Government may assign
to it, from time to time,

5. The Forum is expected to meet at least twice in a year. The
Forum frames its own rules of business for the conduct of its meetings.
The Forum of Regulators prepares every year, an annual report, giving
a summary of its activities during the previous financial year and copies
of the report are forwarded to the Central Government.

Objective of the Government:

6. There are issues on the State Commission not allowing the tariff
te cover the cast and expenses and creating regulatory assets. In this
regard, the amendments are proposed in the relevant sections of the

110


Act allowing licensees to recover cost of electricity without any revenue
deficit, pass through of the effect of fuel and power purchase cost
more than once in a year and incorporating provision for initiating
suo-motu proceedings for determination of tariff. Further, the tariff
policy framed under Section 3 has also been made mandatory for the
determination of Tariff. The non-compliance of Standards of Performance
by licensees is also made more stringent by incorporating the provision
for recommendation for revocation of license by Government due to
non-compliance of Standards,

2. For the purpose, the Government has proposed amendments in
the following clauses:

Clause 35: This clause seeks to insert a new section 59A in the
principal Act to enable the Appropriate Government to recommend
for revocation of licence due to non-compliance of standard of
performance by the licensee.

Clause 36: This Clause seeks to amend section 61 of the principal
Act whereby certain additional guidelines have been added in regard
to tariff determination. It has been specifically provided that the
provisions of the Tariff Policy shall be followed by the Appropriate
Commission in the tariff determination,

Clause 37: This clause seeks to substitute section 62 of the principal
‘Act so as to pravide the determination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission for the reasons mentioned in the sub-section (1) of the
said section. It is further provided that the tariff determined by the
Appropriate Commission for a licensee shall provide for recovery of
all prudent costs of the licensee approved by the Appropriate
Commission in the monthly bills during the tariff period through an
appropriate price adjustment formula including wherever applicable
the fuel, power purchase and procurement price surcharge formula
as may be specified in the Tariff Policy. Also Appropriate Commission
may require a licensee or a generating company to furnish separate
details, as may be specified in respect of generation, transmission,
distribution and supply for determination of tariff.

Clause 38: This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the principal

Act so as to provide the consequences of tariff petition not being

filed in time by the Utilities and enables the Appropriate Commission

to proceed ahead in view of the importance of timely tariff revision
for viability of the power sector.

3. The Government further informed that in the course of
implementation of the Electricity Act, there have been certain issues
on the timely disposal of the tariff petitions and other proceedings by
the Appropriate Commission, particularly, the State Regulatory

WwW


Commission. There are also aspects in the appointment of the Chairman
and Members of the State Commission, It is considered necessary to
provide for a time limit within which the Appropriate Commission should
announce its orders. In order to ensure accountability in the working
of the Appropriate Commission, it is also provided that the Forums of
Regulator will constitute 3 Committee periodically to inquire into and
decide on the conduct and functioning of the Appropriate Commission
and place the report to the Government. Accordingly, changes provides
the term of office for the Chairperson or other Member for a term of
three years from the date he enters upon his office or 65 years of age
whichever fs earlier and eligible for second term on re-appointment,
expeditious disposal of tariff petitions by the Commission from 120
days to 90 days, review of performance of Regulatory Commissions by
a Peer Committee constituted by Forum of Regulators, removal of
Member in case of non-performance, interim nomination against
vacancies in case of delay of more than 5 months in the appointment
of Chairpersons’ Members of the State Commissions.

4. For the purpose, the Government has proposed amendments in
the following clauses:—

Clause 39; This clause seeks to substitute section 66 of the principal
Act ५० as to provide that the Appropriate Commission shall endeavour
to promote the development of a market (including trading and
forward and futures contract) in power and a market for encouraging
energy efficiency in power in such manner as may be specified and
shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy, referred to in
section 3, and other directions issued by the Central Government
in the public interest from time to time.

Clause 44: This clause seeks to amend section 78 of the principal
Act so as to make certain amendments in the provisions of the
Selection Committee to select Members of the Central Commission.

Clause 45: This clause seeks to amend section 79 of the principal
Act so as to include a new clause in sub-section (1) of the said
section relating to functions of the Central Commission.

Clause 46: This clause seeks to amend section 85 of the principal
Act so as to make certain amendments in the provisions of the
Selection Committee to select Members of the State Commission.

Clause 47: This clause seeks to amend section 86 of the principal
Act so as to provide the functions being discharged by the State
Commission,

112


Clause 48; This clause seeks to amend section 89 of the principal
Act so as to provide the duration of the period of Chairman and
Members of the State and Central Commission to be reduced from
five years to three years and with a provision of re-appointment for
one more term of three years.

Clause 49: This clause seeks to amend section 90 of the principal
Act ५० as to provide the conditions under which a Member of the
Commission can be removed on the basis of non-performance as
adjudged by a Committee to be constituted by the Forum of
Regutators.

Clause 50: This clause seeks to amend section 92 of the principal
Act to provide that the Appropriate Commission shall decide the
matters expeditiously and in case of delay, the reasons shall be
recorded by the Commission.

Clause 52: This clause seeks to insert a new section109A in regard
to the appointment of a Committee by Forum for Regulators to
review the performance of the Appropriate Commission.

5. The Committee while looking into the relevant amendments
Proposed in the Bill, asked about the steps taken so far by the CERC
for market development. The Ministry replied through a written note
35 under:—

The Commission played an important role in creation of market
structure and market rules. The Commission provided license to
electricity traders and facilitated establishment of power exchanges in
country. By framing regulations on open access and power market, the
Commission provided alternative avenues for power purchase through
open access, power exchange and through traders.

The CERC has issued inter alia the following regulations as per
Electricity Act, 2003 for development of power market and promote
power trading:—

* Grant of Connectivity, Long-Term Access and Medium-term
Open Access in Inter-state Transmission on 7th August 2009
Separated connectivity from open access.

+ Terms and Conditions for Transmission License Regulations,
2009.

+ Terms and Conditions for Trading License Regulations, 2009.
» Open Access Regulations, 2008.
113


+ Sharing of Inter-State Transmission Charges and Losses
Regulations, 2010,

+ Power Market Regulations, 2010.
+ Trading Margin Regulations, 2010.

Absence of market access for buyers and sellers of electricity,
evacuation infrastructure for seamless flow of electricity, safe and
secure operation of the grid were some of the major bottlenecks
that were hindering growth of the electricity sector. CERC has
taken initiatives to address these and related Issues through various
Regulations. Open access in transmission has helped make generation
more competitive and has provided choice to Discoms as well as
open access consumers, This is helping many captive generators
and open access consumers to buy and sell electricity in the short-
term market. Over 3000 open access consumers are buying power
through Power Exchanges.

Short-term open access in transmission has been in place for last
many years, CERC has provided for deemed concurrence of SLOCs
for open access if their decision is not given within 3 specified
timeframe. CERC has notified regulations for Connectivity, Medium-
term Open Access and Long-term access.

The Regulations of “Grant of Connectivity, Long-Term Access and
Medium-Term Open Access in interstate Transmission” aim at
providing transmission products of different varieties, standardization
of procedures, defining timelines and ensuring a level-playing field
among different categories of market players. This has also abotished
the discrimination between the public sector generators and private
sector generators in terms of grid connectivity. With Regulations on
Medium-term open access, transmission corridors can be availed for
@ period of three months to three years.

6. When asked about how far these steps have been successful in
attracting private players and bringing competition in the sector, the
Ministry informed as under: —

The above mentioned regulations have ensured that the market
functions in a fair and transparent manner. The market intermediaries
like electricity traders and market infrastructure like power
exchanges are regulated through these regulations. The market
rules, risk management are defined through these regulations.
A well functioning market ensures that the confidence of participants
in market छ built. Short-term power trading has helped in resource

114


optimization by facilitating the transfer of surplus power to deficit
regions in the country in a large country like India with diverse
geography and climatic conditions and full optimisation of generation
assets in meeting short-term peak demand, It has also helped bring
in captive generation into the market. The price signal in market
has helped attract investment in power generation. With the multiple
buyers and sellers model developed, with introduction of markets,
generators have multiple alternatives to sell power which has
reduced the possibility of getting stranded, The business risk for
generators has reduced significantly,

The short term prices have reduced over the last 5 years and the
volumes have increased. The average short-term power prices and volume
trends are shown below:—

Year _ Electricity Trading Power Exchange
Volume

(Billion Average Volume Average
Units) Traded (Billion Power

Price Units) Exchange
(Rs. /kWh) Price

(Rs, /kWh)
2008-09 21.42 7.29 2.77 7.49
2009-10 26.82 5.26 7,086 4.96
2010-11 27,7 4.79 15.52 3.44
2011-12 35.84 4.18 15.54 ३.57
2012-13 36.12 4.33 23.54 ३.6
2013-14 35.11 4.29 30,67 2.90

7, It was further informed by the Ministry that the Commission has
introduced Point of Connection Tariff to remove regional cascading of
transmission charges and provide level playing field for all generators
to compete in Competitive bidding.

8, Similarly, the Committee also enquired about the functioning

and coordination among the State Regulatory Commissions, The Ministry
stated as under:—

The State Commission discharges its mandated functions in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Government Policies and

115


116

the resources available. Section 86 provides the functions of State
Commissions as follows: —

“Section 86.

(Functions of State Commission):—

(1) The State Commission shall discharge the following functions,
namely:—

(b)

1०)

(d)

(e)

(g)
(nh)

(i)
(i)

(k)

determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission
and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail,
as the case may be, within the State:

Provided that where open access has been permitted
to a category of consumers under section 42, the State
Commission shall determine only the wheeling charges
and surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of
consumers;

regulate electricity purchase and procurement process
of distribution licensees including the price at which
electricity shall be procured from the generating
companies or licensees or from other sources through
agreements for purchase of power for distribution and
supply within the State;

facilitate intra-State transmission and wheeling of
electricity;

issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission
licensees, distribution ticensees and electricity traders
with respect to their operations within the State;
promote co-generation and generation of electricity
from renewable sources of energy by providing suitable
measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of
electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase
of electricity from such sources, a percentage of the
total consumption of electricity in the area of a
distribution licensee;

adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees,
and generating companies and to refer any dispute for
arbitration;

levy fee for the purposes of this Act;

specify State Grid Code consistent with the Grid Code
specified under clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section
79;

specify or enforce standards with respect to quality,
continuity and reliability of service by licensees;

fix the trading margin in the intra-State trading of
electricity, if considered, necessary; and

discharge such other functions as may be assigned to
it under this Act.


(2) The State Commission shalt advise the State Government on
all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(i) promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in
activities of the electricity industry;

{H) promotion of investment in electricity industry;

(iif), reorganization and restructuring of electricity industry
in the State; matters concerning generation,
transmission, distribution and trading of electricity or
any other matter referred to the State Commission by
that Government.

(3) The State Commission shall ensure transparency while
exercising its pawers and discharging its functions.

(4) In discharge of its functions, the State Commission shall be
guided by the National Electricity Policy, National Electricity
Plan and tariff policy published under section 3.”

9. The State Commissions independently function in their respective
States. The Forum of Regulators (FoR) provides an interactive platform
to the member SERCs/JERCs to share their experiences. The intent 15
to build synergy between various Electricity Regulatory Commissions
and to inter-alia bring about harmonisation of regulations in power
Sector, Issues of importance facing the sector (at inter-state level or
intra-state level) are discussed and consensus is evolved in FoR.

10. The Committee when asked about giving the due autonomy the
SERCs in discharging their assigned duties impartially, the Ministry replied
as under:,

Yes. SERCs have been given due autonomy to discharge their duties
impartially. The functions of the State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions (SERCs) are specified in Section 86 of the Electricity
Act, 2003. The Act also contains provisions facilitating autonomy to
the SERCs in their functioning, such as:—

(i) The State Commission has independent status as provided in
Section 82(2) of the Act;

(ii) A fixed tenure has been specified in section 89(1) of the Act
for the Chairperson and Members of the State Commissions;

(iif) Chairperson and Members of the State Commissions cannot
be removed from office except as provided in section 90 of
the Act;

1114



{iv) The State Commissions have power to appoint their officers
and staff as per section 91 of the Act;

(२) The State Commissions are vested with powers of a civil
court in respect of matters specified in section 94 of the Act,

11, Further, the Committee asked how far Forum of Regulator (FoR)
has proved successful in providing a platform for Central and State
Regulators to arrive at a common conclusion bringing uniformity in
regard to the regulation of the Electricity Sector In the Country. The
Committee also asked about the limitations that prevent FoR from
being more effective in the compliance of the Model Regulations on the
various topics. The Ministry replied as under: —

The State Commissions independently function in their respective
and the Forum of Regulators (FoR) provides an interactive platform
to the member SERCs/JERCs to share their experiences. The intent
{s to build synergy between various Electricity Regulatory
Commissions and to inter-alia bring about harmonisation of
regulations in power sector. Issues of importance facing the sector
{at inter-State level or intra-State level) are discussed and consensus
15 evolved in FoR. However, the State Commissions are independent
to take their own considered view despite the consensus arrived at
the Forum of Regulators.

Role played by FoR

In pursuance of the mandate under the Act and the rules, the
Forum has taken a number of initiatives. It has been a very active
body engaging in meetings at regular intervals for consensus building
00 issues facing the power sector, conducting studies in house and
through outsourcing agencies, on issues of relevance and importance
for the power sector in generat, and undertaking capacity building
programmes for regulators and regulatory staff.

Frequency of Meetings of FoR

The frequency of meeting of the Forum has been increasing
continuously. In the last two years the Forum has held meetings on
an average every two months. A detailed account of meetings held
in the last five years is presented in the table below—

Financial Year No. of Meetings

1 2

2008-09 a
2009-10 5

118


1

2
2010-11 6
2011-12 6

7

2012-13
2013-14 4
2014-15 7 (upto Feb., 2015)

12. Some of the important issues discussed by the Forum during
Financial Year 2013-14 are as under: -

+ Proposed amendments in the Electricity Act, 2003 to facilitate
Open access, separation of carriage & content, grid security
etc,

+ CERC's draft regulation on Terms & Conditions of Tariff for
the control period 2014-19.

+ Grid Operation and Security—Review of Status.

+ Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO)-Status of Compliance
and Suggestions for more effective enforcement.

+ Adequacy of Power Supply: Issues of Stranded Capacity and
Reliability.

+ Power procurement planning of distribution companies.
FoR Studies

13, In order to bring about harmonious approach to regulation, the
Forum has evolved several Model Regulations. Some of the important
Model Regulations are mentioned below:—

* Modet Regulations for Multi-Year Distribution Tariff,

+ Model Regulations for Protection of Consumer Interest.

+ Model Terms and Conditions of Intra-State Open Access
Regulations.

* Model DSM Regulation for SERCs.

* Model Regulation for SERCs for Renewable Energy Certificate
(REC) Framework.

119


+ Model Regulation on Standards of Performance for Distribution
Licensees.

+ Model Supply Code.

14. It was also informed that SERCs generally refer to the model
Regulations framed by FoR while framing their regulations, and adapt
the principles based on the State specific factors.

45, The Government has proposed amendments to various clauses
of the Electricity Act, 2003, as mentioned in the para 2 and 4 above,
mainly to strengthen the Regulatory Commissions. When asked the
objective and the need to strengthen them, the Ministry replied that
the Central and State Regulators have been provided with wide range
of powers under the Electricity Act, 2003. In order to ensure that the
Regulators discharge effectively the functions as mandated under the
Electricity Act, 2003 these institutions need to be strengthened, At the
same time, a suitable mechanism 5 required to be put in place to
ensure accountability and transparency in their functioning.

16. In response to a question whether any review has been done
with regard to role and responsibilities of Regulatory Commissions, the
Ministry informed that the Electricity Act, 2003 envisages preparation
of Annual Report by the Appropriate Commission. The Commissions are
required to highlight their performance in these reports, which are laid
before the Parliament or State Legislature, as the case may be, by the
Appropriate Commission. However, the proposed amendment seeks to
make specific provisions for institutionalizing performance review of
the Regulators through the Forum of Regulators.

17. Regarding the accountability and transparency of the Regulatory
Commissions, the Committee observed that The CERC and SERCs are
accountable to the Parliament and respective State Legislatures
respectively. Besides, the Commissions have to give speaking orders
considering the views of all Stakeholders as well as display these Orders
transparently on their websites.

18. When asked whether any system of grievance redressal is there
in the functioning of the Commissions, the Ministry replied that any
person aggrieved by an order made by CERC or SERCs has the right to
appeal against the same before the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity.
Further, during the course of evidence, the Ministry informed that a
provision for constitution of a joint forum for redressal of grievances
of the consumers shall be inserted in the Act saying—‘as may be specified
by the State Commission within a period as may be specified or within
six months, whichever ts earlier’.

120


19. Further, it has been informed that it has been envisaged, in the
Electricity Amendment Bill, to constitute an independent Committee
by the Forum of Regulators to review the performance of any Appropriate
Commission and submit a report to the Central Government.

20. When asked whether any review has been done about the
Performance of the Commissions, the Ministry informed that no
performance review of the Regulatory Commissions has been done so
far, However, on this issue Working Group on Power for 12th Plan has
recommended that “the performance of the Regulatory Commissions
shall be reviewed annually by a multi-disciplinary body on the basis of
performance evaluation matrix and report to the Appropriate Government
for necessary action”.

21, During the course of evidence, the Ministry informed that “The
Central Government shall constitute a Committee to review the
performance of Central Commission or any State Commission, as and
when required. The Committee shall be headed by Member, NITI Ayog
and include two eminent experts from energy sector to be nominated
by the Central Government”.

The Committee however, was not in agreement on the constitution
of the Committee to review the performance of State Commissions by
the Central Government. They concluded that any such Committee may
be constituted by the concerned State Governments and not the Central
Government.

22. Regarding the modification of Selection Committee for the
Members of Central and State level Regulatory Commissions, the Ministry
replied that in view of winding up of Pianning Commission, composition
of the Selection Committee to select Members of the Central Commission
is proposed to be changed. Besides, to make selection process more
effective and transparent, composition of the Selection Committee to
select Members of the State Commission, {s also proposed to be changed.

23, When asked about the steps being proposed in this regard, the
Ministry responded as under:—

“Camposition of the Selection Committee to select Members of the
Central Commission ts proposed to be changed and is proposed to
be headed by Chairperson of Public Enterprises Selection Board
along with existing Members. Secretary-in-charge of Ministry of
Central Government dealing with department of Consumer Affairs
is included in the proposed composition.

121



Composition of the Selection Committee to select Members of the
State Commission is proposed to be changed. The Selection
Committee will be headed by retired Judge of the Hon'ble High
Court with five members including the Chairperson.”

24. Regarding the justification as how this will make the Regulatory
Commission more effective and transparent, the Ministry informed that
in the proposed amendment, number of members is going to be
increased. This will make selection process more judicious and
transparent besides having wider consultation by experts in the
Committee.

25. When asked, why the tenure of Members being reduced and
they are being eligible to seek re-nomination into the same position,
the Ministry replied that the duration of the period of Chairman and
Members of the State and Central Commission is proposed to be reduced
from 5 years to 3 years in the initial appointment but with a provision
of re-appointment for one more term of 3 years. This is being done to
review the functioning after 3 years.

122


CHAPTER शा
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY

26. The Committee have been informed that the basic role and
responsibilities of the CEA are as under:—

Central Electricity Authority (CEA) was established under Section 3
of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and subsequently, continued
functioning under Section 70 of the Electricity Act, 2003. The cadre
of the Authority belongs to the Central Power Engineering Services
Group “A” with Secretariat staff provided by the Central Secretariat
Services. The administration of the Cadre is maintained by Ministry
of Power, Government of India. The Chairperson and the Members
of the Authority constitute an Authority for performing the various
functions under the Act. CEA under the provisions of the Act has
been entrusted with various functions which are reproduced as
below:

The Authority under Section 73 of the Act shall perform such
functions and duties as the Central Government may prescribe or
direct, and in particular to—

(8) advise the Central Government on the matters relating to
the national electricity policy, formulate short-term and
perspective plans for development of the electricity system
and co- ordinate the activities of the planning agencies for
the optimal utilisation of resources to subserve the interests
of the national economy and to provide reliable and
affordable electricity for all consumers;

(७) specify the technical standards for construction of electrical
plants, electric lines and connectivity to the grid;

(८) specify the safety requirements for construction, operation
and maintenance of electrical plants and electric lines;

(d) specify the Grid Standards for operation and maintenance of
transmission lines;

{e) specify the conditions for installation of meters for
transmission and supply of electricity;

(f} promote and assist in the timely completion of schemes and
projects for improving and augmenting the electricity system;

123


(g) promote measures for advancing the skill of persons engaged
in the electricity industry;

(h) advise the Central Government on any matter on which its
advice is sought or make recommendation to that Government
on any matter if, in the opinion of the Authority, the
recommendation would help in improving the generation,
transmission, trading, distribution and utilisation of
electricity;

{i) collect and record the data concerning the generation,
transmission, trading, distribution and utilisation of el
and carry out studies relating to cost, efficiency,
competitiveness and such like matters;

(j) make public from time to time information secured under
this Act, and provide for the publication of reports and
investigations;

{k) promote research in matters affecting the generation,
transmission, distribution and trading of electricity;

(0) carry out, of cause to be carried out, any investigation for
the purposes of generating or transmitting or distributing
electricity;

(m) advise any State Government, licensees or the generating
companies on such matters which shall enable them to
Operate and maintain the electricity system under their
ownership or control in an improved manner and where
necessary, in co-ordination with any other Government,
licensee or the generating company owning or having the
control of another electricity system;

(0) advise the Appropriate Government and the Appropriate
Commission on all technical matters relating to generation,
transmission and distribution of electricity; and

(०) discharge such other functions as may be provided under
this Act.”

Further, the Central Government can issue directions to the Authority
in the interest of various policies and the Authority shall be guided by
these in the discharge of function under Section 75 of the Act.

Section 177 also provides powers to the Authority to make regulations
under the Act. These include:

(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations
Consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry out
the provisions of this Act.

124


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
power conferred in sub-section (1), such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the Grid Standards under section 34;

(b) suitable measures relating to safety and electric supply
under section 53;

(०) the installation and operation of meters under section
55:

(9) the rules of procedure for transaction of business under
sub-section (9) of section 70;

(०) the technical standards for construction of electrical
plants and electric lines and connectivity to the grid
under clause (b) of section 73;

(f) the form and manner in which and the time at which
the State Government and licensees shall furnish
statistics, returns or other information under section
74.

(ह) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified;

(3) All regulations made by the Authority under this Act shall be
subject to the conditions of previous publication.

27. The Committee further asked about the specific amendments
that have been proposed for CEA. The Ministry stated that the proposed
amendments are mainly under Section 70 of the Act wherein the Central
Electricity Authority has been designated as a Department to be
established by the Central Government under the Act and shall exercise
such functions and perform such duties as are assigned under the
Electricity Act, 2003. The terms and conditions, including the eligibility
and experience of the Chairperson and Members to be appointed by the
Central Government shall be prescribed under the Act. It is also proposed
that the post of Chairperson and Members be encadred for the CPES
Cadre.

28. When asked, how the proposed amendments will ensure more
effective functioning of CEA, the Ministry informed that the proposed
amendments will clearly specify the status of the Central Electricity
Authority as a Department and shall be functioning as a Authority for
exercising the functions assigned to it under the Act. This will also lead
to more clarity and effective functioning of CEA as all service matter
would also be in line with the guidelines notified by Government of

125


India, D/o Personnel and Training. Further, the Cadre shall be established
in a proper way and will be maintained smoothly due to encadrement
of the posts of Chairperson/Members,

29. The Committee further asked whether the CEA has performed
hitherto as an institution on expected lines, the Ministry stated that
the functioning of CEA was affected due to various vacancies available
and not filled in the past due to various reasons including court cases,
However, carrying out these amendments and framing of rules
appropriately under the provisions of the Act shall ensure effective
functioning of CEA again.

30. The Committee enquired as to what has prompted to bring
amendments relating to CEA. The Ministry replied as under:—
The proposed amendments are made for:
{i) Clarifying the status of CEA as a Department and not a
statutory body,

(ii) Providing better promotional avenues for the officers of CEA
by encadering various posts at the level of Members and
Chairperson.

126


CHAPTER VIII
RATIONALIZATION OF TARIFF DETERMINATION

The Committee while noting the proposed amendments relating to
tariff determination, regulation and the recovery asked about the factors
and inputs that are taken into account while determining the tariff.
The Ministry replied as under:—

The appropriate Commission determines the tariff as per the terms
and conditions u/'s 62 of the Electricity Act 2003. It is guided by the
following criteria:

+ The factors which would encourage, good performance and
optimum investments;

* Safeguarding of consumers; interest and at the same time,
recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner;

+ The principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
« Multi-year tariff principles;

+ That the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
electricity and also reduce cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission;

+ The promotion of co-generation and generation of electricity
from renewable sources of energy;

+ The National Electricity Policy and Tariff poticy.
2. The appropriate Commission follows the following procedure:

The petitions are placed on the website of the CERC/SERC seeking
comments from the respondents and all other stakeholders. An
open hearing is held, where stakeholders can present their views in
person. The CERC/SERC considers all the comments/views and does
its own prudence check. The tariff of power from generating stations
and charges for transmission and distribution systems are fixed
after this process, through a speaking order for the Tariff Period.
In case of the tariff of consumer based on cross subsidy fixed by
the CERC/SERC for different categories of consumers, in accordance
with the State Government policy, the CERC/SERC issues a speaking

127


Tariff Order for the year for different categories of consumers. In
both cases, the Order incorporates the comments of stakeholders,
giving the reason for the decision of the CERC/SERC in respect of
tariff.

Besides, the Tariff Policy issued by Ministry of Power in 2006 as
amended from time to time, lays down the following framework for
performance based cost of service regulation to fix the tariff for
generation, transmission as well as distribution, which is considered
by the appropriate Commission:

Return on investment

Equity norms

Depreciation

Cost of debt

Cost of Management of Foreign Exchange Risk
. Operating Norms

Renovation and Modernization

. Multi Year Tariff

Benefits under CDM

Pen ए छए़ ee yp =

3. The Committee when asked whether some new factors are
required to be taken into account for determining the tariff, the Ministry

replied in negetive.

4. When asked about participation of the Association/Representative’s
Bodies/Consumers etc, form part of process before arriving at any
decision with regard to tariff fixation, the Ministry replied as under:—

Yes, all the stakeholders including the Assoclation/ Representatives
Bodies/Consumers etc. are allowed to take part in the process
before arriving at any decision by the Appropriate Commissions
with regard to tariff fixation.

5, The Committee for the sake of clarity, enquired whether as of
now the process of tariff fixation is deficient, the Ministry replied as
under:—

The process of fixation of tariff followed by Appropriate Commission
as of now is not deficient, as it follows transparent process in
respect of tariff determined under the cost-plus approach

128


(u/s 62 of the Electricity Act 2003). In respect of tariff determined
through competitive bidding, (u/s 63 of the EA 2003) the tariff ts
adopted by the Appropriate Commission, after ensuring that the
Proper process of bidding has been followed.

6. The Committee also observed that due to the gaps in tariff
Policy and its process there has been continuous hike in electricity
tariff which has come in for great public criticism. However, the
Government is shown its ignorance to this fact in writing.

7, The Committee further asked, about the instances of delays in
filing tariff petitions by the licensees and the corrective steps taken by
the competent authority, The Ministry replied as under:—

Instances of delays in filing of tariff petitions by the licensees
(Discoms) were observed by the Ministry of Power based on the
reports of Power Finance Corporation and the Forum of Regulators.
Secretary (Power) through the letter dated 21.1.2011, invited the
attention of APTEL to the aspect that tariff revision has not taken
place in several States, owing to the delay by the States to file
annual tariff revision petitions in time.

Based on the communication from the Ministry of Power, APTEL
initiated a swo-motu petition and directed the State Electricity
Regulatory Commission inter alia that .... “It should be the endeavour
of every State Commission to ensure that the tariff for the financial
year is decided before ist April of the tariff year, = In the event
of delay in filing of the ARR, truing-up and Annual Performance
Review, one month beyond the scheduled date of submission of the
petition, the State Commission must initiate suo-motu

for tariff determination in accordance with Section 64 of the Act
read with clause 8.1 (7) of the Tariff Policy”.

APTEL also directed all the State Commissions to follow the directions
scrupulousty, and send the periodical reports by 1st June of the
relevant financial year about the compliance of the directions to
the Secretary, Forum of Regulators, who in turn will send the status
report to this Tribunal and also place it on its website,

The Forum of Regulators complied with the directions of the APTEL.
The APTEL vide their Order dated 3.11.2014 held that, there has
been some delay in passing the Tariff Orders for FY 2014-15. However,
several of the Commissions have explained the delay in passing
such orders on the ground of the directions given by the Election
Commission of India, Some other State Commissions have also put

129


forth other reasons such as non-submission of data, etc. It is apparent
that almost all the State Commissions are cognizant of the necessity
of passing timely tariff orders. In the circumstances, no further
directions are needed in this regard except to reiterate the timelines
mentioned in the main order dated 11.11.2011.

8. When asked about the corrective action proposed by the
Government in the amendment Bill, the Ministry stated that through
this amendment it is proposed that if the application for tariff ts not
filed within thirty days of the last date specified for such filing, the
Appropriate Commission would initiate proceedings on its own for
determination of tariff, The reasons for this amendment is that a number
of State Distribution Companies were not filing Tariff Petitions in time.

9. Regarding the details about the prescribed time limit for disposal
of tariff petition by the appropriate Commissions, the Ministry informed
as under;—

The Electricity Act, 2003 prescribes the time limit of 120 days for
disposal of tariff petitions by the Appropriate Commissions. The
number of days for issue of Tariff Orders is also proposed to be
reduced from 120 days to 90 days. If the application for tariff is not
filed within thirty days of the last date specified for such filing, the
Appropriate Commission wouid initiate proceedings on Its own for
determination of tariff.

10. When asked about the usual time taken by the appropriate
Commissions for disposal of tariff petition, the Ministry replied that the
time taken for disposal of the tariff petitions varies from Commission
to Commission. However, the time taken by the Commission is from
three months to three years.

11, Regarding the broad reasons for the delay in disposal of tariff
petition by the appropriate Commissions, the Ministry replied as under:—

(i) The petitions filed were deficient in vital technical and
financial information. The generating companies and
transmission licensees take usually long time to make up the
deficiency in the petition;

{ii) The petitions are taken for hearing after complete in all
respect. During the hearing, the parties sometimes seek
adjournment for filing of replies and rejoinders or seek
additional information;

130


(iii) The Commission some time asks for additional information
on affidavit after hearing the parties and process takes time
to get completed;

(iv) The number of tariff petitions filed during the years has
been exponentially increasing, while the existing staff strength
which remains unaltered since inception of the Commission
's unable to cope with the work 1030 of examining the tariff
claims in detail in accordance with the Provisions of the
regulations making the objections of the beneficiaries and
caiculation of tariff.

12. Regarding the corrective steps being prescribed for disposal of
tariff petition by the appropriate Commissions within the prescribed
time limit, the Ministry replied that CERC is initiating the process for
sanction of more staff to meet the demand of the increasing work load,
In the meantime, CERC is taking steps to engage consultants to assist
the regular staff in the process of tariff determination.

13. The Committee then asked about the provisions which have
been proposed for non-compliance of the time limit by the appropriate
Commission. The Ministry stated as under:—

One of reasons for delay in disposal of tariff petitions is the time
taken by the generating companies and transmission licensees to remove
the deficiency in the petitions at the initial stage and subsequently by
all the parties to complete the pleading and submit the required
information in time, CERC has initiated the steps to prescribe the time
limit for each petitions for compliance with the directions of the
Commission failing which the Petition will be summarily rejected,

14. The Committee observed that the Ministry has proposed initiation
of suo-motu proceedings by the commissions for determination of tariffs
in the amendment Bill. When asked about the basis for introducing this
Provision into the Act, the Ministry replied as under:—

Instances of delays in filing of tariff petitions by the licensees were
observed by the Ministry of Power based on the reports of Power
Finance Corporation and the Forum of Regulators. Secretary (Power)
through the letter dated 21.1.2011, invited the attention of APTEL
to the aspect that tariff revision has not taken place in several
States, owing to the detay by the States to file annual tariff revision
petitions in time,

Based on the communication from the Ministry of Power, APTEL
initiated 3 suo-motu petition and directed the State Electricity

13


Regulatory Commission inter alia that .... “It should be the endeavour
of every State Commission to ensure that the tariff for the financial
year is decided before 1 April of the tariff year. w. In the event of
delay in filing of the ARR, truing-up and Annual Performance Review,
one month beyond the scheduled date of submission of the petition,
the State Commission must initiate suo motu proceedings for tariff
determination in accordance with Section 64 of the Act read with
clause 8.1 (7) of the Tariff Policy”.

Hence this provision has been introduced in the amendment to EA
2003, so that the State DISCOMS get tariff order on time and the
consumers are also not inconvenienced by making higher lump sum
payments.

15. When asked, will this not be construed to be a leverage for
supply licensees, the Ministry stated that this will not be construed as
a leverage for supply licensees not to file tariff petitions, because in
this case also the process of hearing and passing of tariff order will
remain the same as prescribed in Section 64 of Electricity Act, 2003,

16. When asked, will suo motu proceedings in this regard not infringe
upon the rights of the some of the stakeholders, the Ministry replied
that this will not infringe upon the rights of the stakeholders, since the
procedure for tariff order would remain the same as when the
Distribution company would file the Petition, i.e. the stakeholders can
continue to participate in the proceedings before the tariff order is
passed.

17. During the course of evidence the Ministry proposed the following
changes in the applicability of tariff policy in Section 61, Sub-Section
Q):-

“Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate
commission shall necessarily be guided by the Tariff Policy for the
purpose of Tariff determination.”

18, The Committee was further informed by the Ministry during the
course of evidence that consequent to the feed back from the stake
holders during the discussion with the Committee, they propose following
addition to the Section 62:—

“Provided that there shall be no re-determination of tariff by the
Appropriate Commission under this section for the tariff determined
by competitive bidding as per Section 63 except under change in
Law or force majeure as specified in the Standard Bidding
Documents.”

132


19, The Ministry also proposed to change in the amendments
Proposed, the following with regard to Section 62(1){b):—

“Provided also that any penalty imposed under this Act shall not be

accounted for determining the tariff under this section and shall
not be passed through to the consumers as part of tariff determined.”

133


CHAPTER IX
GRANTING DEEMED LICENSEE STATUS

The Committee observe that the Government, through this
amendment to the Electricity Bill, 2003, has proposed to treat Railways
and Deh! Metro Rall Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation, SEZs or
such other transport entities as deemed Licensee. This provision will
enable these entities to engage in the business of transmission or supply
of electricity.

2. For the purpose, the Government has proposed following
ainendment:—

Section 14 9. For section 14 of the principal Act, the follawing
shall be substituted, namely:—

“14. The Appropriate Commission may, on an application
made to it under Section 15, grant a licence to any
person—

{a) to transmit electricity as a transmission licensee; or
(b) to distribute electricity as a distribution licensee:

Provided that the Developer of a Special Economic Zone
notified under sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Special
Economic Zones Act, 2005, shall be deemed to be a
licensee for the purpose of this clause, with effect
from the date of notification of such Special Economic
Zone:

Provided further that the decentralised distributed
generation networks not connected to the distribution
system may continue to operate without getting
connected to the distribution system, even in case of
grant of licence for operation of the distribution system
in that area; or

(८) to undertake trading in electricity as an electricity
trader, or

(०) to supply electricity as a supply licensee, in any
area as may be specified in the licence:

134


Provided that any person engaged in the business of
transmission or supply of electricity under the provisions
of the repealed laws or any Act specified in the Schedule
on or before the appointed date shall be deemed to be
3 licensee under this Act for such period as may be
stipulated in the licence, clearance or approval granted
to him under the repealed laws or such Act specified in
the Schedule, and the provisions of the repealed laws
or such Act specified in the Schedule in respect of such
licence shall apply for a period of one year from the
date of the commencement of this Act or such earlier
Period as may be specified, at the request of the
licensee, by the Appropriate Commission and thereafter
the provisions of this Act shall apply to such business:

Provided further that any person engaged in the business
of distribution of electricity on or before the
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act,
2014 shall be deemed to have authorisation to undertake
distribution of the electricity as a distribution licensee
and also to supply electricity as a supply licensee till
the transfer scheme under clauses (a) and (b) of
sub-section (4A) of section 131 is effective in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, where upon the
distribution business and the supply business shall be
undertaken in the manner as stipulated in the said

Provided also that the Central Transmission Utility or
the State Transmission Utility shall be deemed to be a
transmission licensee under this Act:

Provided also that in case an Appropriate Government
transmits electricity or distributes or supplies electricity
or undertakes trading in electricity, whether before or
after the commencement of this Act, such Government
shall be deemed to be a licensee under this Act, but
shall not be required to obtain a licence under this Act:

Provided also that the Railways as defined under the
Indian Railways Act, 1989 and the Metro Rail Corporation
established under the Metro Railways (Operation and
Maintenance) Act, 2002 be deemed to be a licensee
under this Act, and shall not be required to obtain a
licence under this Act:

135


136

Provided also that the Damodar Valley Corporation,
established under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948, shall be deemed
to be a licensee under this Act but shall not be required
to obtain a licence under this Act and the provisions of
the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
‘Act, shall continue to apply to that Corporation:

Provided also that the Government company or the
company referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section
(4) of sub-section (4A) of section 131 of this Act and
the company of companies created in pursuance of the
Acts specified in the Schedule or any company or
companies as may be notified by the Central
Government, shall be deemed to be a licensee under
this Act:

Provided also that the Appropriate Commission may grant
a licence ta two or more persons for supply of electricity
within the same area of supply, subject to the conditions
that the applicant for grant of supply licence within the
same area shall, without prejudice to the other
conditions or requirements under this Act, comply with
the additional requirements (relating to the capital
adequacy, Credit worthiness or code of conduct) as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, and no such
applicant, who complies with all the requirements for
grant of licence, shall be refused grant of licence on
the ground that there already exists a licensee in the
same area for the same purpose:

Provided also that at least one of the supply licensee
shall be a Government company or Government
Controlled Company:

Provided also that where a person intends to generate,
distribute and supply electricity in a rural area to be
notified by the State Government, such person shall not
require any licence for such generation, distribution
and supply of electricity, but he shall comply with the
measures which may be specified by the Authority under
Section 53;

Provided also that where a person intends to generate
and supply electricity from renewable energy sources,
such person shall not require any licence for such


generation and supply of electricity, but he shall comply
with the measures which may be specified by the
Authority under Sections 53 and 73:

Provided also that a supply licensee shall not require a
licence to undertake trading in electricity:

Provided also that a distribution licensee, after effective
date of transfer under sub-section (4A) of Section 13,
shail not engage in trading or supply of electricity:

Provided also that in a case where a distribution licensee
was undertaking the distribution of electricity, prior to
the commencement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act,
2014, for @ specified area within his area of distribution
through a franchisee such franchisee shall not be
required to obtain any separate licence from the State
Commission concerned and such distribution licensee
shall remain responsible for distributian and supply of
electricity in that area of distribution till the expiry of
the existing agreement with the distribution and supply
licensee of that area.”.

3. The Government has also proposed amendment to Section 54 as
under: —

Section 54 32. In Section 54 of the principal Clause 32.—This clause
Act, in sub-section (1), in the seeks to amend Section
proviso, after the words and 54 of the principal Act
figures “the Railways Act, whereby the metro
1989", the words, brackets and railway under the Metro
figures “or metro railway under Railways (Operation
the Metro Railways (Operation maintenance) Act, 2002
and Maintenance) Act, 2002" has been added in
shall be inserted, addition to Ratlways in

view of the necessity to
treat both alike,

4. The Committee also sought inputs from the Ministry of Rattways
on the proposed amendments. They furnished their views in writing as
follows:—

Railway ts the single largest consumer of electricity in the country
catering to the needs of all sections of the society and a vital
infrastructure for the development of the country. It not only
provides the most efficient and economical mode of public transport

137



138

but also operates in line with its socio-economic obligations. In
view of the importance and strategic nature of the services being
provided by Railways, it should be treated separately so that it
does not require any licence for carrying out activities in its own
premises as recognized in the Act and in doing so will not pay any
cross subsidy to the existing distribution licensees and exempted
from any obligations other than technical standards applicable to
other licensees,

Further, as of now, Railways have to deal with a large number of
issues of procedural, regulatory and legal nature with a large number
of entities at State/regional/ national levels which leads to avoidable
wastage of a time and effort. As it provides essential services to
the nation they should have priority in terms of grants of transmission
corridors/restoration of supply etc. As such, It will be desirable
that 00 the time, Railways do not have their own regulatory body,
CERC shall be the Appropriate Commission for ali purposes in the
Act. In doing so, CERC, APTEL and other statutory bodies may be
strengthened through representation from Railways at appropriate
level having qualification and experience in the field of Railways
Electric Traction to be prescribed by the Central Government.

Amendments proposed by Railways
{i) Additionat Proviso to be added in Section 42(2)

“Provided further that such surcharge shall not be levtable to
Railways in discharging their functions.”

(ii) Section 77(1) (d) “A person having qualification and
experience in Railway Electric Traction.”

(iff) In Section 112(1) The words ‘three’ to be replaced with
‘four’

(iv) In Section 113 (1)(b) Sub-section (४) to be added as “A
person having quatification and experience in Railway Electric
Traction”

(v) Section 173A to be inserted as “Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, till the time 8 regulatory
authority is constituted by Railways, CERC should be the
Appropriate Commission for all purposes in the Act for Railways
in discharge of their functions under the Act and in doing so
Railways shall be exempted from any obligations other than
technical standards applicable to other licensees and will be
treated on priority hy the statutory bodies established under
the Electricity Act, 2003.7


5. The Committee, initially, sought some clarifications from the
ihinistry of Power on the use of the phraseology in the Bill. When asked,
to spell out the difference of licensee and deemed licensee, the Ministry
replied that Ucensee ts a company seeking to undertake the specific
operation for which a license is required from the Appropriate
Cammission. Deemed licensee, are deemed to be Licensee under the
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, and has to inform the Appropriate
Commission for carrying out the activities and is not required to obtain
the license.

6. When asked about the need for introducing the provision of
deemed licensee, the Ministry Informed that Deemed licensee is
conceptualized in wake of continuation of existing licensees and
maintaining continuity in the operation.

7, Regarding similarity in the functioning power and jurisdiction of
Oeemed licensee and existing licensees, the Ministry further informed
that functioning, Power and Jurisdiction is well defined in the license
granted by the Appropriate Commission in accordance with the
Regulations notified by the Commission,

है, During the course of evidence, for the purpose keeping this
Clause open for any entity to be included in the term * Deemed Licensee”,
कप corerapeopaned that the following shall be ‘wsertad in
Section 14, proviso T=

“read with the Metro Railways (Amendment) Act, 2009 and such
other transport entities as may be notified by the Central
Government, from time to time shall be deemed to be a licensee
under this Act, and shall not be required to obtain a license under
this Act.”


CHAPTER X
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS

Having considered the views of stakeholders, experts and the
Ministry of Power, the Committee now proceed to make general
observations/recommendations on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2014.

Segregation of Carriage and Contents

4. The Committee notes that the concept of segregation of
Carriage and Content is the soul of the Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2014, This will help in clearly identifying the technical and commercial
losses as hitherto the technical losses are usually accounted to the
network business white commercial losses to supply business. The
intention is to segregate the entire distribution network from the
supply business. However, clarity Is required as to the level and
manner at which it will be put into action. The broad and flexible
guidelines in this regard are to be framed giving the States due
scope to align these guidelines as per their conditions.

2. The Committee find that the Bill also envisages to introduce
multiple supply licensees in the area of supply businesses with one
incumbent supply licensee. These licensees will be regulated by the
conditions of license to be specified by the appropriate Commission.
The Committee feel that this is the most vital function having the
potential to make or mark the success of the story and hence, it
cannot be left alone to the wisdom of appropriate Commission. Some
well defined parameters should be laid down so as to allay the
discretionary and arbitrary powers of Commission, This becomes all
the more necessary given the nature of the consumer mix of our
country, The norms to be laid down should envision the equitable
apportionment of consumers for the purpose of supply of electricity
taking into consideration the status of consumers, direct and
cross-subsidy being paid to them and also the losses of technical and
commercial nature. This will help in dispelling the apprehension
about the cherry picking of the consumers by the supply licensee.

3. The Committee observe that there have been encouraging
response from most of the States on the idea of segregation of
Carriage and Content. However, some of them have expressed their

140


apprehensions about its sudden and immediate implementation as
this is a radical step as far as power sector is concerned. Hence,
States may not be well prepared to adopt it in one go as a period
of one year was provided after the commencement of the Electricity
Amendment Act, 2014 for separation of distribution and supply of
electricity. After interaction with the various stakeholders, the
Government has now proposed a pertod of two years or within such
period as the appropriate State Government may decide in
consultation with the Central Government whichever is later but not
exceeding 5 years and in such a manner and phases as prescribed.
The Committee welcome the proposal of the Government on the
Issue of the implementation of segregation of Carriage and Content
giving the States option to implement it in a gradual manner. The
Committee also feel that some incentives may be provided to the
States who take lead in the implementation of segregation of carriage
and content.

4. The Committee note that the choice for selecting the area
cannot be left entirely to the private supply licensee. Instead, areas
in which subsequent supply licensees could be allowed should be
Progressively notified in consultation with the all concerned. This is
important considering the technical prerequisites for hassle free
operation of multiple supply licensee in an area, such as, smart
metering with real time communication for all points of energy
transaction, putting in place proper mechanism for energy accounting
among multiple supply licensee, making foolproof system for real
time scheduling of power by multiple supply licensees etc. Such
Progressive introduction of multiple licensees is in tune with the
approach of piloting new systems, learning and extending the system
in phases.

5. The provision of last resort supply licensee is a welcome step,
but it may lead to the Government supply licensee becoming a last
resort supply licensee invariably. If this happens, it may lead to
manifold problems and a stage may come wherein this licensee will
be in no position to supply the electricity, Hence, this concept should
be developed and implemented in such a manner that each of the
supply licensees in whichever area they are working, shall shoulder
the responsibitity of last resort supply licensee irrespective of the
area of supply. For the purpose, appropriate norms can be laid down
after identifying the category of consumers for whom this kind of
last resort supply licensee may really be a last resort for getting the
electricity. The universal supply obligation should be mandatory for
all supply licensees in his area of license and also in the areas which

141


may be assigned to such licensees from time to time with a view to
ensure that all such supply licensees are provided a level playing
field.

6, The Committee note that the work of distribution shall remain
with the distribution licensee which is going to be a Government
company. Presumably this is being done because most of the
distribution network ts in the Government sector and it cannot be
devolved into the private sector as it will involve several
comptications, However, it has been proposed that supply licensee
will make use of these distribution lines for the purpose of supply
business, It is true that they cannot do it without taking the services
of distribution lines, and hence, if not allowed, this will hamper the
objective of the Bill, The Committee while fully endorsing the move
feel that the would-be supply licensees should have some
accountability towards these distribution lines and other apparatus
related to it. Simply, charging a fee would be insufficient as huge
amount has been invested into these distribution lines and also on
maintaining them. Whether levying a fee for availing the services
would sustain these lines should be considered into all its aspects
and thereafter an appropriate decision should be taken whether
something extra is required to be levied upon for availing the services
of distribution network.

7. The Committee note that the Bill proposes the creation of
intermediary company. This means an entity succeeding to the existing
power purchase agreements and procurement agreements of the
relevant distribution licensees on reorganization. Although, this will
succeed the existing arrangements yet creation of intermediary
company by unbundling of distribution function is nothing but
replication, It may lead to imperfection in bulk supply market by
design and will lead to adding in the transaction cost without any
value to the consumers. Modalities regarding dynamic allocation of
PPAs is yet to be worked out along with its legal implications, This
may also lead to the presence of only window for purchase of
electricity. Despite the fact that some mechanism is required after
the unbundling of the distribution, yet some system will have to be
introduced to ensure that intermediary company fs working in a fair
and transparent manner within the stipulated guidelines. These
guidelines may appropriately be framed in consultation with the all
concerned.

8. The Committee note that there is no coordination with regard
to the needs of the consumers. Although, these issues will arise only
after the introduction of the concept of segregation of Carriage and

142


Content, yet they are too vital to be left unattended, Installation of
meters, billing, disconnections and grievance redressal relate to all
kinds of consumers. Hence, they require clarity right from the
beginning. Whether it will be a single meter business for distribution
and supply or otherwise needs clarification, Similarly, the issue of
disconnection also need to be resolved in the similar vein. The
Committee, therefore, feel that consumers related issues need to be
resolved at this stage itself in a broad manner paving the way for
the States to fine tune them as per their local conditions. Similarly,
ho mechanism has been suggested for making available the option to
consumer with regard to choice of supply licensee, transfer of system
from one to another based on the choice of the consumer and the
cost involved in such choice and transfer, the Committee observe
that these issues should be addressed satisfactorily.

9. The Committee note that after interaction with the various
stakeholder on the Bill a new proviso has been inserted to
Section 14 regarding franchisee, The Proviso states that ‘in a case
where a distribution licensee or a supply licensee proposes to
undertake distribution or supply of electricity for a specified area
within his area of distribution or supply through a franchisee, that
franchisee shall not be required to obtain any separate licence from
the Appropriate Commission and such distribution licensee or supply
licensee shall be responsible for distribution or supply of electricity
in his area of distribution or supply’. The Committee observe that
this provision has been inserted with a view to provide more options
for the smooth service regarding distribution and supply of electricity,
However, ft has not taken note about the accountability of such
franchisees as they are free from seeking any permission from
appropriate bodies. No guidelines shall be applicable to them and
they will be acting on their own violation. Since they will be engaged
in the service intensive sector affecting myriads of customers hence,
they should be made accountable for their services, The Committee,
therefore, recommend that such franchisees should be made
accountable in some manner to the customers so that they do not
flee after complaints of their unsatisfactory and unhealthy practices
which they tend to adopt during the course of their franchisee,

Grid security
10. The Committee note that there is a provision wherein any

enerating company may be required by the system operator to
build and maintain a spinning reserve of such capacity as may be

143


generating station after a date and in a manner to be notified shall
be required to establish a Renewable Energy Generation capacity as
prescribed by the Central Government from time to time which shall
not be less than ten per cent of the thermal power installed capacity.
The Committee appreciate the resolve of the Government for
promotion of the renewable energy in the country, However, during
discussion on the issue, several factors regarding its practicability
and implementation came up for analysis, Given the intermittent
nature of the production of renewable energy mainly based on climate
factors including low plant load factor, grid security and its operation
etc. making it mandatory to a certain percentage may lead to several
other problems. Keeping in view the above factors, the Government
agreed to amendments specifying that any generating company shall
be required to establish such renewable energy generation capacity
or procure and supply renewable energy equivalent to such capacity,
as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time
after due consultation with stakeholders. The Committee welcome
the flexibility shown by the Government in this regard. However,
the Committee feel that there should be some minimum obligation
to promote renewable energy. Hence, the Committee feels that it
should be fixed to 5 per cent of the total energy generating capacity
of the upcoming plant, Thereafter, it can be increased based on the
amenability of all the related factors.

Provisions relating to Regulatory Commissions & Appellate ‘Tribunals

44, The Committee note that the Electricity Amendment Bill,
2014 tend to provide extraordinary power to Regulatory Commission
to regulate the sector. This inter-alia includes power to grant license
to supply electricity as supply licensee (Section 14) transmit electricity
as transmission licensee (Section 14), period or such license
(Section 15), expiry and revocation of license (Section 20), suspension
of license of Distribution Licensee or Supply licensee and appoint
administrator to discharge their functions (Section 24), specifying
surcharge for Open Access customers (Section 38 & 40), specifying
electricity code to provide recovery of electricity charges, intervals
for billing of electricity charges, disconnection, restoration of supply
etc, (Section 50). Besides, Regulatory Commission will have decisive
say in determination of tariff. Section 12 has been proposed for
amendments stating that no person shall transmit electricity,
distribute electricity, undertake trading in electricity or supply of
electricity to consumers unless he is authorized to do so by a license.
It is the Regulatory Commission which is authorized to grant licenses
for these purposes. The Committee are of the view that the electricity

146


sector is undergoing transformation and it is essential to regulate it,
However, to bestow such unfettered power to a body may open
other avenues for misuse of authority in the changed scenario,
Electricity is a sensitive sector and it needs careful supervision so
35 to promote healthy and transparent competition for benefit of
the customers. To achieve this some mechanism should be evolved
with laid down norms wherein it is ensured that the

Commissions are functioning efficiently, transparently and also as
per the spirit of the law. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that Regulatory Commission should be mandated in such a way that
they act in a transparent manner for the purpose of implementing
the various provisions of the Electricity Act and they should be
made accountable for the functions which they are assigned to do.

15, The Committee note that one of the functions of the
Regulatory Commission is the timely disposal of tariff petition and
other proceedings before them, The Electricity Act, 2003 envisaged
Preparation of Annual Report by the Appropriate Commission
regarding their performance. However, the proposed amendments
seeks to make specific provisions for institutionalizing performance
review of regulators through Forum of Regulators by constituting an
independent Committee consisting of three persons of eminence,
After discussion, the Government has now proposed that the Central
Government shall constitute a Committee to review the performance
of Central Commission or any State Commission, as and when
required. The Committee welcome this move as a body of FoR, was
not the appropriate mechanism to review their own performance
because of the subjectivity. The Committee, therefore, endorse the
Proposed amendments in the bill.

16. The Committee note that one of the proposed amendments
Suggests Initiation of suo motu proceedings for the purpose of tariff
determination. This has ostensibly been Proposed due to non-filing
of petitions by the State DISCOMs, Tariff determination involves a lot
of inputs which are taken into account before its filing. Although
there should be no excuse for delay in filing of petitions, yet it
makes little sense to empower appropriate commission to take self
initiative in this regard, Correspondingly it should be provisioned
that Regulatory Commission shall decide the tariff petition within
the specified time failing which its functioning and performance
should be commented upon. Without the cooperation from the
relevant quarters, determination of tariff will have littie significance
and relevance. Although number of days for issue of tariff orders is
Proposed to be reduced to 90 from 120 yet nothing has been said

147


to ensure the compliance within the specified time. The data
submitted to the Committee shows that from 2010-11 till 2013-14
average time taken for disposal of per petition is about 14 months
whereas for the year 2013-14, it ts 23 months per petition. This
delay makes the entire process and its outcome meaningless. Hence,
the Committee recommend that in addition to Initiation of suo motu

by the Commission, it would also be essential to define
a timeline and its adherence for disposal of tariff petition by the
Commissions.

17, The Committee note that the nature of function of Regulatory
Commissions are quasi-judicial in nature. So far, the Commission has
the members from the background of engineering, economic,
commerce, finance, law and management. The functions involves
the primary knowledge of law with judicial interpretation. Hence,
the amendments of the Government to induct one person having
qualification and experience in the field of law and judiciary is a
welcome step (Section 85). The Committee approves the amendment
suggested in this regard.

Central Electricity Authority

18. The Committee observe that Central Electricity Authority is
the technical body of the Government dealing with all aspects of the
electricity in the country. It also advises the Central Government on
matters relating to National Electricity Policy, formulate short term
and perspective plan of the development of electricity system and
advises on optimum utilization of resources to provide reliable and
affordable electricity to all the customers, The Committee are
satisfied with the functioning of the Authority. The Government
itself has proposed for clarification about the status of CEA as a
department and not as a statutory body. For better promotion avenues
for officers of CEA encadrement of various posts at the level of
members and chairpersons has also been suggested. The Committee
welcome the proposal of the Government and recommend that this
should be done on urgent basts.

Rationalization of Tariff Determination

19, The Committee observe that the tariff policy is the guiding
light prescribing various parameters for determination of tariff. The
Government proposed amendments in Section 61, sub-Section 2
providing that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
provision of tariff policy shall be followed by the Appropriate
Commission for the purpose of tariff determination. After

148


deliberations on the subject, the Government amended the proposal
making that Appropriate Commission shall necessarily be guided by
the Tariff Policy. The Government has softened its stand with regard
to the mandatory adherence to Tariff Policy keeping in view the
federal structure of our country, The Committee aiso appreciate the
need for an Umbrella Policy in this regard as the constituents for
determination of tariff are broadly identical throughout the length
and breadth of the country. Yet the Committee feel that the Tariff
Policy to be adopted should also have an element of the flexibility
Siving due autonomy to the States to act within the broad framework
of the National Tariff Policy, This becomes essential as the ground
realities, availabilities of raw material, manpower and other essential
inputs may vary State to State, in view of the above, a rigid and
uniform approach for determination of tariff may not be as beneficial,
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Tariff Policy should
be framed in such a manner that it is in consonance with the
provisions of the Electricity Act and also provide due and desired
autonomy to the States within its ambit.

20, At present two processes of tariff fixation are in vogue.
Under Section 62 of the Electricity Act, tariff is determined on cost
plus approach. Under this section, determination of tariff is guided
Primarily by the following criteria:—

* The factors which would encourage, good performance
and optimum investments;

+ Safeguarding of consumers; interest and at the same time,
recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner;

* The principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
* Multt-year tariff principles;

. That the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
electricity and also reduce cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission;

+ The promotion of co-generation and generation of
electricity from renewable sources of energy;

* The National Electricity Policy and Tariff policy,
Tariff policy of the Government lays down the framework for
Performance based cost of service regulation to fix the tariff for

Beneration, transmission as well as distribution. It provides
9 parameters for fixation of tariff, On being asked whether the

149


process of tariff fixation is deficient, the Government replied in
negative. One of the criteria ts multi-year tariff principles which has
been found to be satisfactory and it has also been stated that no
new factors are proposed to be taken into account for determining
the tariff. Amendments have been proposed making tariff revision
an yearly exercise. The Committee are not averse to the yearly
determination of tariff, However, we would like to Impress upon
that yearly tariff revision should not be done only for increasing the
tariff, The constituents as reflected in the tariff policy for determining
the tariff should be evaluated objectively and the benefit of
improvements on return of investment, equity norms, depreciation,
cost of debt should be passed on to customers. Besides, standards
of performance should also be regularly reviewed before revising
the tariff upwards. The Committee endorse the amendments proposed
by the Government,

21, The Committee note that the Government has proposed
amendment in Section 62 (1) providing that the Appropriate
Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with the
provisions of this Act for supply of electricity by a generating company
to a supply licensee including supply of electricity under a back to
back arrangement involving an intermediary company, electricity
trader or any other licensee, Provided that the Appropriate
Commission may, in case of shortage of supply of electricity, fix the
minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or purchase of
electricity in pursuance of an agreement, entered into between a
generating company and a licensee or between licensees, for a period
not exceeding one year to ensure reasonable prices of electricity.
Provided further that there shall be no such determination of tariff
by the Appropriate Commission under this clause (a) to the extent
the Central Government specifies that the procurement of electricity
from the sources identified for the purpose by the supply licensee
shall be done only by competitive bidding as per section 63. Further,
during the course of evidence, the Ministry proposed: Provided that
there shall be no re-determination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission under this section for the tariff determined by
competitive bidding as per section 63 except under change in law or
force majeure as specified in the Standard Bidding Documents. The
Committee feel that the proposed exceptions to Section 63 should
either be illustratively elaborated so as to dispel any scope of
discretion and subjectivity for tariff switching from section 63 to 62.

22. The Committee note that in the process of rationalization of
tariff determination, the Government has proposed amendment tn
Section 61 D providing for recovery of cost of electricity without any

150


revenue deficit in the context of tariff determined under
Section 62. The Committee observe that this is a prospective
arrangement and a welcome move as well. However, it is also noted
that nothing has been said about the outstanding dues of various
State DISCOMs (Regulatory Asset). Without realization of the
outstanding dues, the health of State DISCOMs cannot be improved.
Before embarking on the new system, It will be prudent if some
concrete suggestions are also given with regard to the liquidation of
regulatory assets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to
ensure the better future of DISCOMs some mechanism should be put
in place for realization of their dues by liquidating the regulatory
assets.

23. During the course of interaction, it was learnt that some
States/Distributors/Suppliers levy*s commercial rate on educational
institutions 1,6, schools and colleges, it is observed that in a State
like Maharashtra for the past several years Rs. 10 to Rs. 12 per unit
commercial rate are being charged even on Government aided/
charitable schools, Such heavy commerciai electricity charges are
also collected even from schools which are in slums. The Committee
feel such type of commercial electricity charges/exploitation be
stopped. Further, the Ministry should clarify, either in the tariff
policy or in the Act, that “residential electricity rate must be levied
on all schools and colleges”.

Granting Deemed Licensee Status

24. The Committee observe that the amendment proposed in
Section 14 of the Electricity Act, 2003 enables Indian Railways,
Dethi Metro Rall Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation, SEZs or
such other transport entities as deemed Licensees. They will be
empowered under the Law to engage in the business of transmission
or supply of electricity. The Committee further note that giving the
status of ‘Deemed Licensee’ to the transport entities will not only
enable them to setup captive power generation plants for consumption
of electricity but they will be facilitated in the way that their projects
will not be delayed anymore in want of electricity supply from the
transmission licensees. Needless to mention that apart from getting
Prompt supply of electricity, they will also get cost effective power
for themselves. This provision will also reduce transport fair for the
general public in the view that Railways/ Delhi Metro will be getting
cost effective power, The Committee while welcoming this provision
by the Government ensuring rapid growth of the Industrial Sector
and also the public Railways operating in the country recommend

15


that all the Metro Railways operating in different States should also
be brought under the ambit of ‘Deemed Licensee’. The Committee
also recommend that till Railways have their own Regulatory Body,
CERC may be designated as the Appropriate Commission for all
purposes including procedural, regulatory and legal matters. Also,
the Railways should be exempted from obligations other than
technical standards, The Committee hope that once the Bill is passed
by the Parliament, the Government will take prompt action on making
the provision a reality.

25. Few members have difference of opinion on certain clauses.
Their notes are placed at Exhibit.

26. Clause-wise recommendations are given in the Appendix.

New Deut; KIRIT SOMAIYA,
S May, 205 | Chairperson,

5 Vaisakha, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

152


APPENDIX |

Perens evel Clause-wise

Clause-wise amendments discussed during the hearing, accepted by
the Ministry and now Recommended by the Committee

The corrections/improvements in the Electricity (Amendment)
Bill, 2014 accepted by the Ministry of Power based on deliberations/
discussions during the committee meetings — (vide Para 3 of the

)

(i)

(iit)

In section 2 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred
as the principal Act)—

(i) in clause (1), for the words “Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity", the words “Appellate Tribunal for Energy” shall
be substituted;

(71) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely;—

“(1A) “ancillary services”, in relation to power system (or
grid) operation, means the services necessary to support the
Power system (or grid) operation for maintaining power
quality, reliability and security of the grid as may be specified
by the Appropriate Commission;

Section 7

“7. (1) Any generating company may establish, operate and
maintain a generating station without obtaining a licence
under this Act, if tt complies with the technical standards
relating to connectivity with the grid referred to in clause
(b) of section 73:

Provided that any generating company establishing a
generating station after a date as notified may be required
to build and maintain a spinning reserve of such Capacity as
may be specified by the Authority from time to time:

Section 7

Provided further that any generating company before
establishing or expanding the capacity of a generating station
shall submit a detailed project report and duly inform about
the same to the Authority.

153



154

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Explanation,—For the purposes of sub-section (1), the
expression “spinning reserve” means the backup capacity of
a generating station which shall be made available on the
directions of the National Load Despatch Centre or Regional
Load Despatch Centre or State Load Despatch Centre, as
the case may be, within a time limit as may be notified by
the Appropriate Commission in consultation with the Central
Government, to maintain grid safety and security,

Section 7

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained tn sub-section (1),
any generating company, establishing a coal and lignite based
thermal generating station after a date as notified, shall be
required to establish such renewable energy generation
capacity or procure and supply renewable energy
equivalent to such capacity, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government from time to time after due consultation
with stakeholders.

Provided that such renewable energy generation capacity
shall not be less than five percent of the thermal capacity.

(3) In case any existing coal and lignite based thermal power
generating station, with the concurrence of all the power
procurers under the existing Power Purchase Agreements,
establishes additional renewable energy generating capacity
or procure and supply additional renewable energy, such
renewable energy shall be allowed to be supplied to the
procurers on terms and conditions as mutually agreed
amongst them including bundling and approved by the
Appropriate Commission, and the Obligated Entities who
finally buy such power shall account the same towards their
renewable purchase obligations.

Section 12

(3) Without prejudice to sub-section (2), the Appropriate
Government in consultation with the Appropriate Commission
may, in public interest, permit more than one distribution
licensee to operate in any area, if it is considered necessary.

Section 14 proviso 7

Provided also that the Railways as defined under the Indian
Railways Act 1989, the Metro Rail Corporation established under
the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002


(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

read with the Metro Railways (Amendment) Act, 2009,
mono rail and such other transport entities as may be
notified by the Central Government, from time to time,
Shall be deemed to be a licensee under this Act, and shall
fot be required to obtain a license under this Act;

Section 14 proviso 11

Provided also that , in case of multiple Supply licences being
issued one of the supply licensees shall be a Government
company or Gavernment Controlled Company, within a time
frame as notified by Appropriate Government.

Section 14 proviso 17

Provided also that in a case where a distribution licensee
or a supply licensee proposes to undertake distribution or
supply of electricity for a specified area within his area of
distribution or supply through a franchisee, that franchisee
shall not be required to obtain any separate licence from
the Appropriate Commission and such distribution licensee
or supply licensee shall be responsible for distribution or
supply of electricity in his area of distribution or supply,

Section 29 proviso 6

“(6) If any generating company or licensee fails to comply
with the directions issued under sub-sectfon (21 of sub-section
(3), he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten crore
rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance of the directions
\ssued under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), by a
generating company for generating renewable energy, such
generating company for generating renewable energy shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees.”

Section 33 proviso 5

(5) If any generating company or licensee fails to comply
with the directions issued under sub-section (1), he shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance of the directions
issued under sub-section(t), by a generating company for
generating renewable energy, such generating company for
generating renewable energy shall be liable ta a penalty not
exceeding ten lakh rupees.”,

155


156

(xi)

(xi)

“PART Vi A — SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY

518. Duties of supply licensee.—(1) It shall be the duty of
the supply licensees to supply electricity in the concerned
area of supply in accordance with the provisions of the Act:

Provided that till the transfer of the obligation to supply to
the incumbent supply licensee, the existing distribution
licensee shall have the obligations to continue to supply
electricity in the area of supply in accordance with the
provisions of the Act with the same rights, privileges and
duties of the supply licensee.

(2) The Appropriate State Government shall, within a period
of two years from the commencement of the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2014 or within such period as the
Appropriate State Government may decide In consultation
with the Central Government, whichever is later but not
exceeding five years from the commencement of this Act,
provide for separation of distribution and supply of electricity
in such manner and phases as prescribed and for such
purpose, issue appropriate transfer scheme and vest the
supply functions in the incumbent supply licensee and the
existing power purchase agreements and procurement
arrangement in the intermediary company respectively as
per the provision of section 131,

“PART VIA - SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY

518. Duty to Supply on request.—(1) The supply licensee as
selected by the Customer (Consumer) shail, on an application
of the owner or occupier of any premises within fifteen days
of the connection being given to the premises by the
distribution licensee in terms of section 43 commence supply
of electricity as required by the person:

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any Customer
(Consumer) in the area of supply shall, in such manner as
may be specified by Appropriate Commission have the option
to choose any of the supply licensees for supply of electricity
to the premises awned or occupied by him.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
“application” means the application complete in all respects
in the appropriate form, as required by the supply licensee,


(xiii)

(xiv)

(xv)

along with documents showing payment of necessary charges
and other compliances:

Provided that the provider of last resort shall have the
obligation to supply electricity to the Customer (Consumer)
in the area of supply in case the supply licensee chosen by
the Customer (Consumer) ceases to be a supply licensee or
otherwise fails to supply or his supply licence ts suspended
for any reason whatsoever.”

Section 51 D

51D. Power to recover charges—(1) Subject to the provisions
of this section, the maximum ceiling of charges to be

by a supply licensee for the supply of electricity by him to
& particular category of consumer in pursuance of Section
51(B) shall be as determined by the Appropriate Commission
from time to time.

(2) The maximum ceiling of charges shall be fixed by the
Appropriate State Commission on the basis of normative costs
and standards of performance as lald down by such
Commission

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act the Supply
licensee may, with the prior approval of the Appropriate
Commission, charge any price higher than the ceiling charge
as may be mutually agreed with any consumer.

Section 51H

Consumer grievances redressal—(1) Every distribution licensee
of supply licensee shall, as the case may be, having the
obligation to distribute electricity in his area of distribution
छा to supply in his area of supply within six months from the
appointed date or date of grant of licence, whichever is
earlier, establish a forum for redressal of grievances of the
consumers in accordance with the guidelines as may be
Specified by the State Commission.

Provided that in case of multiple supply licensees a joint
forum for redressal of grievances of the consumers shall
be constituted as may be specified by the State Commission
within a period as may be specified or within six months,
whichever is earlier.

Section 61 Sub-Section (2)

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
Appropriate Commission shall necessarily be guided by the
Tariff Policy for the purpose of Tariff determination.”.

157


वश)

For section 62 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—

“62, (1) The Appropriate Commission shall determine the
tariff in accordance with the provisions of this Act for—

{a) supply of electricity by a generating company to & supply
licensee inctuding supply of electricity under a back to back
arrangement involving an intermediary company, electricity
trader or any other licensee:

Provided that the Appropriate Commission may, In case of
shortage of supply of electricity, fix the minimum and
maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or purchase of electricity
in pursuance of an agreement, entered into between a
generating company and a licensee or between licensees,
for a period not exceeding one year to ensure reasonable
prices of electricity:

Provided further that there shall be no such determination
of tariff by the Appropriate Commission under this clause (a)
to the extent the Central Government specifies that the
procurement of electricity from the sources identified for
the purpose by the supply licensee shall be done only by
competitive bidding as per section 63;

(०) purchase of electricity by the supply licensee from the
intermediary company;

(८) transmission of electricity;

(d) wheeting of electricity;

(९) retail sale of electricity.

Provided that there shall be no re-determination of tariff
by the Appropriate Commission under this section for the
tariff determined by competitive bidding as per
section 63.

Note: ‘The Committee feel that the price fixed under

competitive bidding process cannot be allowed to change
through redetermination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission’.

Section 62(1)(b)

Provided further that the tariff determined for retail sale of
electricity shall be the ceiling tariff for the respective
categories of consumers, the supply licensee shall be entitled


(xvii)

beviti)

to charge any consumer category at an amount lesser than
the ceiling tariff, subject to sub-section (3) and also, without
in any way affecting the obligation of a supply licensee to
pay the intermediary company, the transmission licensee,
the distribution licensee and generating company, as the
case may be.

Provided also that any penalty imposed under this Act
shall not be accounted for determining the tariff under
this section and shall not be pass through to the consumers
as part of tariff determined.

Section 66

"66, The Appropriate Commission shalt endeavour to promote
the development of a market (including trading) in power
and a market for encouraging energy efficiency in power in
such manner as may be specified and shall be guided by the
National Electricity Policy, referred to In section 3, and other
directions issued by the Central Government in the public
interest from time to time

Provided that the market for forward and futures contract
in electricity shall be developed in a manner and after a
date to be notified by the Central Government,

Section 66, the experience in forward and future contracts/
trading in the commodity market/exchanges has a bad
experience in India. The National Stock Exchange Limited
scam is an example,

L Committee feel in this background of shortage and
leakages in power sector, it won't be feasible to have
forward and future contracts/market at this juncture.
More than 95 to 98 per cent distribution of power is
with DISCOMs/Government PSUs. Where is the question
of forward and future trading. Allowing such forward
future trading at this juncture in power sector will
result into manipulation/artificial shortages which will
push the prices upward causing net 1055 to the common
customer.’ it is proved that in the commodity exchanges,
non-transparent future and forward trading with the
help of circular trading is used to manipulate the prices
of the Commodity. “The Committee feel that as indian
Power sector is growing, ‘no’ forward and future
transaction/trade should be allowed in power
exchanges.

159


160

(xix)

(xx)

Section 77

“(1) The Chairperson and the Members of the Central
Commission shall be persons having adequate knowledge of,
or experience in, or shown capacity in, dealing with problems
relating to engineering, law, judiciary ,economics, commerce,
finance or, management and shall be appointed in the
following manner, namely:—

{a) one person having qualifications and experience in the
field of engineering with specialisation in generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity;

{b) one person having qualifications and experience in
the field of law or judiciary;

(८) two persons having qualifications and experience in
the field of economics, commerce, finance or

management:
Provided that not more than one Member shall be appointed
under the same category under clause (c):

Provided further that the Central Government may appoint
any person as the Chairperson from amongst persons who ts,
or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or The Chief
Justice of a High Court:

Provided also that no appointment under above proviso shall
be made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of
india.

Section 84 — Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson
and Members of State Commission:

“(1) The Chairperson and the Members of the State
Commission shail be persons of ability, integrity and standing
who have adequate knowledge of, and have shown capacity
in dealing with problems relating to engineering, finance,
commerce, economics, law, judiciary or management,

(2) One of the members shall be appointed under
sub-section (1) having qualification and experience of law or
Judiciary.

(3) The State Government may appoint any person as the
Chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a
Judge of the High Court under sub-section (21:

Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall
be made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of
that High Court,


(xxi) Section 85

oc)

(xxtit)

in section 85 of the principal Act,—

(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely;—

“(1) The State Government shall, for the Purposes of selecting
the Members of the State Commission, constitute a Selection
Committee consisting of —

{a) & person who is a Judge of the High Court
Chairperson, ex-officio;

(0) the Chief Secretary of the concerned State on,
Member, ex-officio;

(०) the Chairperson of the Central Commission. Member,
ex-officio;

(d} the Chairperson of the #&000570,,................ _
Member, ex-officio;

(e) @ person to be nominated by the State Government in
accordance with sub-section (28)........................... oa
बन Member;"

Section 79

(da) regulate electricity purchase and procurement process
Of licensees as referred to in the seventh and eighth provisos
to section 14 inctuding the price at which electricity shall be
Procured from the generating companies or licensees or from
other sources through agreements for purchase of power for
distribution and supply through-out the country;

(db) to determine the tariff for supply and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail in respect of the licensees
as referred to in the seventh and eighth provisos to
Section 14;

(6) To issue licences to persons to function as transmission
licensee and electricity trader with respect to their inter-
State operations;

(ja) to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy.
109(A)

The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to

review the performance of Central Commission or any State
Commission, as and when required.

161


162

{2) The Committee shall be headed by a person who 5, or
has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of a High Court and include two eminent experts from energy
sector to be nominated by the Central Government.

(3) The Committee appointed under sub-section (1) shall be
entitled to take the assistance of experts and consultants to
be engaged.

(4) The functions and the terms ‘of reference, including the
time period for submission of the report, by the Committee
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.”


APPENDIX Ii

508, ५.६ House, Rafi

M.B. RAJESH Now Denno oor

Member of Parliament Nalinakanthi, AKG Nagar Colony
Kadamkode, Karingarappuily P.O.

(Lok Sabha) "Palakkad, Korala.

Member: Phone : (491-250 6600

. Committee on Energy Mobile: (0) 9446343499

* Consultative Committee on Agriculture Email : mbrajesh.palakkad@gmadl.com

com
Dated 28.4.2015
To

Shri Kirith Somatya,
Hon'ble Chairman,
Standing Committee on Energy.

Dear Chairman,

| would like to submit a separate note of dissent to the draft report on
Electricity Amendment Bill, 2014,

Thanking you,
Yours Sincerely

M.B. Rajesh

163


| find the report on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 does not

carry several aspects to be noted and presented before the Parliament.
Hence, | may wish to add a separate pote of dissent as follows:

164

1. The main focus of the proposed amendment is on separation

of carriage and content for creation of a retail power market
and thus providing choice to end consumers for selecting his
supplier of electricity. But the major issue confronting the
sector is not the lack of choice to the consumer, but it is the
infrastructure deficit that is the main deterrent. The deficit
in infrastructure starts from deficit in fuel supply for power
generation, deficit in power generation capacity, deficit in
power transmission capacity to deficit in power distribution
capacity.

. The experience of developed economies which had

experimented with the separation of carriage and content
for creation of the retail power market provides the important
lesson that unless an efficient bulk power market is functional
with proper checks and balances, the experiment can lead to
exploitation of the consumers and result in failure of the
entire system. The experience in US, especially that of
California, provides ample insights on the necessity for a
perfect bulk power market. However, India és facing deficit
in power generation, transmission and distribution
infrastructure. When markets function in such deficits in the
entire value chain, the results are predictable, It will be
disastrous for the end consumers and windfall gains for
suppliers.

. The World Bank in Its report titled “More Power to India:

Challenge of Electricity Distribution” after surveying the
international experience in separation of carriage and content
in electricity distribution as well as the present state of
Indian power sector has concluded that time is not ripe for
such a country wide roll out of such separation. Instead the
World Bank was cautious while suggesting piloting of the
separation to gain experience in the Indian context. However,
the Bill seeks to unbundie the distribution sector of the entire
country within one year of enactment of the Amendment,
which could be disastrous for the entire sector.

4, Clause 30 of the Amendment bill introducing new section 51B

(1) suggests that the choice of selecting the supplier will be
available to only those elite consumers who are having a load


factor which ts progressively prescribed by the Central
Government. Already the Central Government has made 1६
Clear that only those consumers whase load is more than
500 KW or 1000 KW only have the said choice, Such consumers
form only a very small fraction of the consumers mostly in
the range of 0.01% of the entire consumers. Thus 99.99% of
the consumers are out of the ambit of the provisions relating
to choosing the supplier of choice, Although the Government
Suggests that the load profile will be revised progressively,
the statute does not provide for mandatory choice for the
entire spectrum of consumers,

. The subsequent supply licensee has an obligation to supply in
respect of only those consumers as prescribed by the Central
Government as per proviso to section 51(8)(1) (Clause 30
inserting Part VIA in the amendment bill). These consumers
having a higher load profile are the cream of the subsidizing
consumers owing to a number of factors like: (i) average
consumer tariff is often higher than average retail tariff due
to cross subsidy content in tariff, (if) average consumer tariff
छ higher than the cost of supply at the higher voltage level,
(iti) cost of service of consumers having high load profile is
iow due to higher supply voltage, higher volume of
Consumption at a single point etc, it is pertinent to note that
the consumers served by the subsequent supply ticensee need
not pay the crass subsidy surcharge as in the case of open
access Consumers. These consumers who are few in number
{around 0.01%) and consumes huge quantum of
{about 30% of the entire consumption in typical States) can
easily be picked up by the subsequent supply licensees by
offering lower tariff, since the cast of supplying them is
lower than their prevailing tariff. Such “cherry picking’ of
the cream of the consumers by subsequent supply licensees
will abnormally increase the present tariff of all other
consumers supplied by incumbent supply licensee, especially
those subsidised sector of consumers.

a The cross subsidy system jn electricity tariff is followed in ail
the States which results in tariffs higher than the average
cost of supply for consumers like commercial Customers,
industrial customers etc. who consume electricity in large
quantum, It also allows tariffs lower than the average cost
of supply for tow end domestic consumers and small scale
industries, The profit earned through sales at a higher rate
\s presently utilised by distribution utilities to offset the loss

165


166

in selling power at lower rates to low end domestic/agriculture
consumers. Roughly about 82% of the domestic consumers (as
per World Bank report) are presently paying electricity tariffs
at far less rates than the cost of supply due to cross subsidy
structure ॥ tariff. About 30% of electricity sold in the country
fs availed by our farmers at heavily subsidized rates. Currently
the distribution utilities could serve these sections since part
of the burden is shared by the wealthy households and

business ventures through cross subsidy in their
tariff. Once these consumers who are paying at rates much
above the cost of supply are selectively picked up by the
new private supply licensees, no one will be left to share the
burden.

दि The proposed amendments open interesting options to wealthy

sections of the society to avail power at lower rates. The
markets will be happy that the creamy layer of consumers
having better paying capacity are freed from the shackles of
the existing distribution licensee and become potential direct
beneficiaries through the new private supply licensees. The
new supply licensees will be happy that they can cherry pick
the wealthier sections and make huge profits since the heavy
baggage of poor and the needy will continue to remain with
the public sector incumbent licensee, Most probably the
existing cross subsidy structure in tariff will disappear and
the poor wilt start paying through their nose at rates similar
to their wealthier counterparts. Eventually most of those
ordinary consumers will be forced to surrender the electricity
connection being a luxury item affordable only to the rich
and the famous.

. Considering these aspects | strongly feet that the content

and carriage separation in Electricity distribution as weil as
unbundling of the sector will be disastrous to the sector.
Hence, these proposals should be suitably amended.

| While the existing provisions prescribe that the State

Commissions shall be guided by the national tariff policy, the
amendment proposed under new section 61(2) (Clause 36 of
amendment bill) propose that the same shall be mandatory
‘on the State Commissions. Since the maturity of electricity
sector as well the state of the economy in each State vary,
it is not prudent to prescribe a single poticy mandatory on alt
State Commissions. Instead the State Governments may be


10,

ie

12.

a

empowered to prescribe the State Tariff Policy as a guiding
Principle for the State Commissions in consultation with the
Central Government.

‘Through the proposed amendment in section 89 through clause
48 of the Bill, the term of office of Chairperson and members
of the Regulatory Commissions are sought to be reduced
from the present 5 years to 3 years. Earlier, the members or
Chairperson where not eligible for appointment again to the
same position. However, through the amendment, after
Feducing the term of appointment to 3 years, provision for
feappointment to the same position for another term is
provided for, Obviously the intentions of such amendment is
Mot to strengthen the regulatory mechanism. Such amendment
Proposals obviously aims at creation of undue loyalty among
regulators, which is detrimental to the overall development.
of the sector and goes against the very objectives of the Act
itself.

As part of strengthening of the State Regulatory Commissions,
it is suggested that the Commissian’s may be authorised to
direct auditing of the accounts of distribution and supply
licensees through CAG or other independent authority as
decided by the Appropriate Commission.

Electricity is listed under the concurrent tist of the schedule
of the Indian Constitution, which espouses a federal
governance for the country. Thus while the inter-State
Seneration and transmission are naturally governed by the
Central Government, the distribution and Supply functions
are entirely in the domain of State Governments along with
State specific generation and transmission systems.

However, the proposed amendments seeks to disturb this
delicate balance of powers through various provisions that go
counter to the Constitutional scheme of governance,

Some provisions that leads to micro management of the
distribution and supply functions by the Central Government
which ought to be entirety in the domain of State Governments
include (1) the load profile of consumers eligible for choosing
Supply licensee in a State will be determined by Central
Government from time to time; (ii) the expert committee to
be constituted by forum of regulators for evaluating
Performance of State Regulatory Commissions will submit

167



168

14.

report of evaluation to Central Government; (iif) the National
Tariff Policy will have to be mandatorily followed by State
Regulatory Commissions; (iv) the separation of distribution
and supply functions in the States shall be in accordance
with the National Tariff Policy; (v) the intermediary company
formed by the State Governments by unbundling the
distribution company shall function as prescribed by the
Central Government; (vi) only the Central Government can
allow functioning of more than one distribution licensee |n
the same geographical area within a State; and (vii) smart
meters to be installed at consumer premises as per
prescription of Central Government etc. All these provisions
allowing Central Government to infringe the authority of State
Governments in Power distribution and management should
be deleted.

Prescribing certain percentage for generating capacity as
obligatory renewable energy generation to the Generators 5
not proper to be included in this Bilt, Instead that can be
prescribed from time to time by the respective Governments
as part of their policy documents. Hence the percentage
mandated in the proposed amendment may be deleted.


5, MUTHUKARUPAN wn, ६.७. 186, North Avenue, New Dethi-110 00॥

MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT 45०० 47750 का

एणजाओ 2 कक 24, 4th Middie Street,
1: ein ear

+ पा ०16 ndain कह 4९७४००४४५७५०थ४१४१ न

+ Commettee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha
+ MPLADS Committee, Rajya Sabha

+ Consultative Committee on Ministry of Home Affairs
+ Committee on Direct Taxes

To

The Honourabie Chairman,

Parliamentary Standing Committee on Energy,
Parliament House,

New Dethi.

Sir,

| submit Dissent Note Regarding the Electricity Amendment Bill of
2014.

On behalf of our Party, AIADMK, | raised the following points, which
were based on Honourable Amma's guidance.

By separating carriage and content in the distribution sector, this
Bill, in one stroke, makes all the power utilities in the public sector
totally unviable,

This Bill seeks to give unbridled access to private players to supply
power, to consumers and enable them to use the already-laid out
distribution networks of the public sector power companies.

Without investment in the distribution network or without any
responsibility to maintain the network, the proposed supply licensees
would access all the high value customers in commercially viable areas,
amounting to cherry-picking, without social obligations.

The social obligations, as far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, are
domestic and agricultural category, which constitute 68% of the total
consumers. The level of cross-subsidy in Tamil Nadu for domestic users
1s 34%, and the level of cross-subsidy for agricultural category is 50%,
as per the tariff order dated 20.6.2013.

169


While the State Public Sector Power utilities would only be left
with the obligation of power supply to subsidized-categories of
consumers. This will make the State Public Sector Power Distribution
Companies further finally sick.

The implementation of separation of carriage and content will force
retrenchment of staff in the existing Discoms, leading to public unrest,
and Law and order problems.

On behalf of the Government of Tamil Nadu; | totally disagree and
oppose certain sections of this Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

This Bill seeks to amend Section 29 (6), titled "Compliance of
Directions regarding Regional Load Despatch Centre’. The existing
provision with regard to penalty says that if one fails to comply with
the directions, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding Rs. 15
lakh,

The Amendment Bill says that the penalty would be ‘not exceeding
Rs. 1 crore’.

Here, we feel that the penalty that the Bill seeks to impose is very
exorbitant and so, the existing provision with regard to penalty should
be retained.

The Bill further seeks to amend Section 33 (5) of the Bill titled
‘Compliance of Directions regarding State Load Despatch Centre’. The
existing provisions says that if one fails to comply with the directions,
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding Rs, 5 lakh.

The Amendment Bill says that the penalty would be "not exceeding
Rs. 1 crore’,

So, | mentioned that the penalty that is sought to be imposed ts
exorbitant and hence, the existing provision may be retained.

The Bill seeks to substitute section 42 of the principal Act. | said
that | oppose the provision regarding ‘Removal of surcharge to the open
access consumers, and also switch over of open access consumers’.

| said that the provision of open access consumers shall not switch
over to any other supplier except by giving some minimum notice
period, as may be specified by the appropriate Commission, It reiterated
that it is not sufficient and so, the appropriate Commission has to
decide the time period, in consultation with the utility.

1 also said that | disagree with sections 142 and 146, which is
regarding, punishment for non-compliance of direction by appropriate
Commission. In the existing Act, the punishment prescribed 8 not

170


exceeding Rs. 1 lakh for each contravention, and in case of continuing
failure, it will be with an additional penalty of Rs, 6,000 every day,

The Amendment Bill says that it will not exceed Rs. 1 crore for
each contravention and in case of continuing failure, it will be with an
additional penalty which may extend to Rs. 1 lakh every day.

So, | mentioned that the penalty that 1 sought to be imposed is
very exorbitant and hence, the existing provision may be retained.

Section 146 of the existing Act talks about punishment for non-
compliance of orders or directions. It says that if there is any violation,
there will be punishment with imprisonment for three months or with
fine which may extend to Rs. 1 lakh or with both. in the case of
continuing failure, there will be an additional fine of Rs. 5,000 each
day.

But the Amendment Bill says that there will be imprisonment for
three months and a fine of Rs. 1 crore or with both.

In the case of continuing failure, the fine amount would be Rs. 1
lakh each day.

The suggestion of Hon'ble Amma’s Government is that the existing
Provisions of the Electricity Act may be retained.

Finally, | said that | oppose the separation of carriage and content;
| also oppose Sections 29(5), 33(5), 42(3), 142 and 146, etc., of the
Electricity Bill,

in view of the above, | reiterated the view of the Government of
Tamil Nadu, that is, these amendments are not necessary, and so, | am
fully against all these amendments.

Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(5. MUTHUKARUPPAN)

71


et

Deepender Singh Hooda

Member of Parliament—Lok Sabha (Rohtak)

Whip—Congress Parliamentary Party

DISSENT NOTE TO THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

Hon'ble Chairman
Standing Committee on Energy

Note of Dissent to the Standing Committee of Energy on consideration of the
Draft Report of the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 dated 05,05,2015,

1 wish to express my dissent to the Standing Committee of Energy

on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 (henceforth referred to as
the Bill) for the following reasons:

172

1, No proper safeguards for poor/rural/agricultural consumers
This Bill seeks to separate the role of electricity supplier
and from the distributer by creating two separate roles — 3
supply licensee who would be authorized to supply electricity
to consumers and a distribution licensee who will distribute
electricity, But, by separating carriage and content without
safeguards this Bill will make all power utilities in the public
sector unviable.

(9)

(b)

The current version of the Bill seeks to give unfettered
access to private players to supply power to consumers,
and enables them to use the current distribution
network of the public sector power companies. Without
any investment in the distribution network or any
responsibility to maintain the network, the proposed
supply licensees would be able to access all the high
value customers in commercially viable areas,
amounting to cherry-picking without any social
obligations.

This would mean that, for instance, private players
would be more interested in servicing those areas which


have a higher number of electricity consumers and
thus likely to earn them a greater profit, leading to an
implied side-lining of the poor, The Bill allows for
multiple power suppliers and it is assumed that the
large number of suppliers will allow for greater
alternatives and better slabs for costumers. In reality,
the presence of a large number of private players will
likely lead to privatization of the power supply in our
country. This may lead them to categorize electricity
consumers into a ‘priority’ and a ‘non-priority’ or
‘subsidized’ category, There would be limited electricity
Penetration in poorer, agrarian areas of our country,
which in turn would mean that peopte in rural areas,
like our farmers and the poor would end up bearing
the brunt of this skewed 900८५ This Bill will facilitate
Private power houses to profit off the common
consumer who will be left to the mercy of loss making
Government utilities and face power shedding.

2 Nationalizing losses, privatizing profits

fa)

(b)

India is a nation yet to secure energy security, While
the intention of the Bill is to undoubtedly raise retail
competition in this sector and thus tide over
depreciating quality and rising costs, in truth, it does
not take into account the true consequences of a
Possible free market. True competition is only possible
in a situation of surplus of energy, and not scarcity
such as the one plaguing India. And to date, | doubt
there is any country in the world, even developed
ones which can honestly say that it is completely energy
secure as the energy requirements of the world are
ever-expanding. Given this situation, It is believable
to say that the market too is constantly reinventing
itself to cater to the world’s grawing energy needs.
Add ॥ the fact that markets are very fickle entities,
and you have a situation that is ripe for selective
application of this Bill, leading to a gradual
deterioration of the incumbent public sector licensee.
Thus, to implement this Bill would be to nationalize
the losses while privatizing the profits.

Even assuming that this Bill does manage to raise a
sufficient level of competition, it must be remembered
that the same would be confined to high-consumption

173


174

urban areas, much to the detriment of the poor
consumer, This is because at present the State
distribution companies are highly financially-dependent
on the revenues earned from high-end consumers which
allow them to subsidize electricity supply to poor and/
or rural consumers. The presence of private players
and competing slabs will automatically attract high-
end consumers to them who will then no longer remain
tied down to the public sector, And in tum, the
presence of high-end consumers will further increase
competition among private players who will all jostle
to provide them with the best rates, leading to a
concentration of electricity suppliers in urban/high-
consumption areas to whom high-end consumers wilt
continue to flock. This vicious cycle will leave the
poor previously subsidized electricity consumer out in
the cold,

3. Undue burden on States

The draft amendments, which seek to bring significant
changes in the existing Electricity Act, curtail the powers of
State Governments who are more closely linked to and
directly answerable to the people in respective States:

4.

(७)

{b)

States have often attempted to soften the effect of
ever-increasing tariff rates and have done so at great
expense using their own resources, The Bill in question
will force them to use State resources to cater to the
essentials of a free market, which could be very much
against the social policies of the State. This could
accelerate a process by which State utilities’ losses
deepen, imposing a heavy fiscal burden on the
respective State :

In india, the situation in power sector, such as consumer
mix, consumer spread, sources of generation, ownership
pattem etc, are vastly different from States to States.
By divesting the State Governments of their control,
the Centrat plans to install regulatory mechanisms that
are uniform in nature and in alignment with the center's
policies. Uniformity sounds goad in theory, but ॥ truth
such policies may not necessarily address the specific
needs of each and every State.

Further deterioration of the public power sector

The enactment of the Bill would also run counter to its very
spirit for yet another reason — this Bill seeks a revitalization
of the energy sector policy in our country but should this Bill


be recommended, it will once again burden the State/public
power sector:

(9) The losses of distribution utilities have reached gigantic
Proportions threatening to derail the financial sector
of the country, This has forced Central Governments
to announce successive debt relief packages to avert
the collapse of entire power sector. The 480 losses
remain abnormally high and the subsidy burden of State
Governments has increased manifold. And yet, the
amendments in the Bill do not clarify how they will
tackle the problems of state utility lasses, rising tariffs
and fuel availability which are the main challenges
presently faced by India. This will make the State
Public sector power distribution companies further
financially sick.

The aforementioned points are basis for sufficient alarm and raise,
in my opinion, many vatid reasons as to why this Bill ought not to be
Fecommended by the Standing Committee on Energy,

Hence, | wish to respectfully submit my dissent from the views
expressed by this Committee on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014,

Sd/-
Deepender Singh Hooda, M.P.

Sd/-
Oscar Fernandes, M.P.

Sd/-
Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu, M.P.

Sd/-
Viplove Thakur, M.P.

175



ANNEXURE A

INDEX
Representations/memoranda received on Electricity (Amendment)

Bill, 2014
Sl. No. Head Name of the organizations
1 2 3
1. State Government i. Madhya Pradesh

if, Gujarat

iii, Meghalaya

4,

DISCOMS
Regulatory

Industry

iv, Andaman & Nicobar (Admn.)
v. Kerala
i. Maharashtra
i. Report of Forum of Regulators
ii. West Bengal
iti. Manipur
iv, Maharashtra
४. Punjab
vi, Bihar
vii. Madhya Pradesh
vili, Gujarat
ix. Nagaland
x. Goa
xi. Uttarakhand
xii. Odisha
जग. Rajasthan
xiv. Arunachal Pradesh
xv. Kerala
xvi. Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission
xvii, Uttar Pradesh
xvili, Assam
xix, Haryana

i. FICCI

it, Climate Parliament
fii, Indian Energy Regulatory Services
iv. Hindustan Electric Power Ltd.

176


3

¥. Retailers Association of India
vi. Indian Energy Exchange
vil, Confederation of Indian industry
viii, K. Raheja Group
ix, Renew Power
x, Bajaj Fin Serve
xi. HCL Technologies Ltd.
जी, Chamber of Small industries
Associations
xiii, The Bengal Chamber
xiv. TERI
xv, Hindalco Industries Ltd.
xvi. RE Connect Energy
xvii. SELCO Foundation
xviti, Prayas (Energy Group), Pune
xix. Malana Power Company Ltd.
20. IPPAL
20d, PHD Chamber of Commerce & industry
xxii. Faridabad Industries Association
xxii, Tetra Tech,
xxiv, Reliance Industries Ltd.
xxv, Promotion of Fossil Fuel Based
Cogeneration in India
sxovi, Samta Power
xxvii, Association of Power Producers
xxvili, The Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry of India
xxix, National Solar Energy Federation of
India
xxx, Suryavanshi Spinning Mills Ltd.
2008, Aananda Lakshmi Spinning Mills Ltd,
जता,
३0091. U.P. Sugar Mills Cogen Association
sxoxxiv. National Solar Energy Federation of
India

1 Dr, V.G. Patel, Chairman, Consumer
Education and Research Centre
ii, Shri Suresh Kumar, General Secretary,
KSEB Officers Association, Kerala
ffi. Shri Ranjit Kumar, General Secretary,
Kerala State Electricity Board Engineers
Association

177


3

viii.
ix.
x
at
xii.
xiii.
xiv.

xv
xvi,

vil.
xvill.

xix.

५ Shri Sunil Jagtap, General Secretary

Subordinate Engineers Association,
Pune

Shri Shankar Narayanan, General
Secretary TNEB Engineers Association,
Tamil Nadu

. Shri Sanjoy Kumar Bhunia, Hon.

Secretary West Bengal State Electricity
Board Engineers Association

. Shri BK. Gupta, GM, Indian Energy

Regulatory Services

Shri M.K. Unnikrishna Panicker, MP
Thivruananthapuram

Shri 2९, Khare, GM Chhattisgarh Vidyut
Mandal Abhiyanta Sangh

Dr, ५.8, Pandey, Member, Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forum, Delhi
Smt. Tara Murali, Citizen Consumer and
Civic Action Group

Shri Anil Razdan, Chairman, Utility DSM
Forum

Federation of Karnataka Electricity
Board Employees Union

Chhattisgarh Vidyut Mandal Abhiyanta
Sangh

Haryana Power Engineers’ Association
Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport
Undertaking - BRIHAN

All India Power Engineers Federation
Akhil Bhartiya Vidyut Majdoor Maha
Sangh

IFAPA,

xx. Shopping Centres Association of India

xxi.
xxit.
xxiii.

xxiv.

Consumer Grievance Rederessal Forum
for TPDDL

Tamil Nadu Electricity Board
Employees’ Union

Shri J.0. Seelam, Member of
Parliament

Citizen Consumer है Civic Action Group

EEE

178


zi
:

vil. Shri 0.8 Chirania, Jaipur
vill, ALL Bengal Electricity Consumers
Association
tx. All India Power Engineers Federation,
New Dethi
x, Akhil Bhartiya Vidyut Majdoor
Mahasangh
xi. Shri Vijay Singh Bisht
xii, Shri K. Raju Nayyar
xf, Shri S.K, Jain, Delhi
xiv, Shri Ram Awtar Sharma, Jaipur
xy, Shri Anoop Ganatra, Mumbai
xvi. Allahabad Patrika Pvt. Ltd.
xvii, Shri Samaiuddin Manoori
xviii. Shri Abhay Kumar, New Dethi
xix. Md. Eusuph, West Bengal
xx, Shri Ashish Kumar Singh
xxi. Shri Abhisekh Bajpaf, Kanpur
201, Shri Ajay Kumar, Ranchi
xxili. Shri Subhash Chand
xxiv. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jain, Agra
xxv. Shri GL. Sharma, Jaipur
xxvi, Shri Dilip Kumar Aggarwal, Madhya
Pradesh

xxvii, Shri Om Prakash, UP
xxviii, Shri Avdesh Kumar Verma, UP
xxix. Shri C. Krishnamurthy, Chennai
3200९, Shri Hira Bharti, Mumba
xxxi, Newspaper Articie
१0001, Shri Vinod Kumar Gupta, Haryana
३0901, Shri R. Kumar
३0009 Shri Amit Kapoor, J. Sagar Associates,
New Dethi
३000७ Shri Somdutt Sharma, Ahmedabad

179


2 3

7.

180

xxxvi. Shri Prabudh Purwar, Madhya Pradesh
xxxvil, Shri Mitilesh Kumar Sharma, Jaipur
xxxix, Shri Pankaj Kumar
xl, Shri Amit Kapoor, Advocate, Dethi
xl. Shri Somdutt Sharma, Ahmedabad
xlii, Shri P, Parameswaran, Kerala
xlifi, Shri N.K, Saxena, Delhi
जार, Shri 65, Rajagopal, Chennai
अर, Shri Aswin Mehta, Delhi
xlvi. Shri J.C. Mahanti, Kotkata
आशा, Shri D.R.B. Saxena, Ghaziabad, UP
xiviii, Shri Raju Nayyar
xlix. Shri Kundan Kishore, Chennai
1. Shri ४. Mutthuswami, Chennai
li. Shri Siraj Salikeen Mulla, Andhra
Pradesh
Ui, Shri Ashok Kumar Changani, Rajasthan
(क्र. Shri Bidya Bushan Shasani, Sundargah
liv. Shri Raja Rao
७४. Shri 0, Laxmanan
[शं, Shri V.K. Gupta

i, Sunshine Energy

ii. Numac
fil, 5७८० Foundation

tv. Green Infra, Ltd., New Dethi

४ STATKRAFT, New Dethi

vi. Reconnect Energy, Gurgaon (Haryana)
vii, Green Energy Association, Mumbai
viii, Century Rayon, Thane, Mumbai


ANNEXURE B
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 191 of 2014
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003,

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth
Year of the Republic of india as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity Short title
(Amendment) Act, 2014.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

३७ of 2003, 2. In section 2 of the Electricity Act, 2003 Amendment
(hereinafter referred as the principal Act) % sction 2

(i) after clause (1), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

*(1A) “ancillary services”, in relation
to power system or grid operation,
means the services necessary to support
the power system or grid operation for
maintaining power quality, reliability and
security of the grid;';

(i) after clause (2), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:-

*(2A) “area of distribution” means
the area within which a distribution
licensee is authorised by his licence to
distribute electricity;’;

and
commence-
ment

(iit) in clause (3), for the words
“distribution licensee”, the words “supply
licensee” shall be substituted;

181


182

(iv) in clause (8), after the words “or
association” occurring at the end, the words “in
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by
the Central Government from time to time;”
shall be inserted;

(४) in clause (12), after the words and
brackets “useful energy (including electricity)”
occurring at the end, the words “as specified
by the Authority” shall be inserted;

(vi) after clause (15), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

‘{15A) “decentralised distributed
generation” means electricity generation
from wind, small hydro, solar, biomass,
biogas, bio-fuel, generation from any kind
of waste including municipal and solid waste,
geothermal, hybrid power system or such
other sources as may be notified by the
Central Government for end-use at or near
the place of generation;’;

(vii) for clause (16), the following clause
shalt be substituted, namely:—

(16) “dedicated transmission Unes™
means any radial electric supply-tine for
paint to point transmission which is required
for the purpose of connecting a captive
generating plant or generating station to
any transmission line or sub-station or
switching station or generating station, or
the load centre, as the case may be, subject
to the condition that such line shall not
form a loop with the grid and shall not be
shared except with the prior approval of
the Appropriate Commission;';

(viii) in clause (17), for the words “for
supplying electricity to the consumers in his
area of supply”, the words “to enable supply of
electricity to the consumers in his area of
distribution” shall be substituted;

(ix) after clause (17), the following clause
shall be inserted, namety;—


10 of 1956.

18 of 2013

“(17A)} “distribution” means the conveyance
of electricity by use of distribution system;';

(x) in clause (23), in sub-clause (a), for the
word “supplied”, the words” distributed,
supplied” shall be substituted;

(0) after clause (23), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(23A) “Electricity Distribution Code”
means the Electricity Distribution Code
specified in section 50;

(xt) in clause (24), for the figures “50”
occurring at the end, the figures and letter
“S1G” shalt be substituted;

(xiii) in clause (25), after sub-clause (b),
the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(ba) distribution system; or";

(xiv) in clause (31), for the words and figures
“section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (45) of
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be
substituted;

(xv) in clause (35), for the words “high
voltage line", the words “high voltage line or
high pressure cables” shalt be substituted;

(xvi) after clause (35), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:-

1350) “incumbent supply licensee” means
the entity to which the supply functions and
undertakings, other than those vested in the
intermediary company, is vested under
sub-section (4A) of section 131;

(358) “intermediary company” means the
entity succeeding to the existing power purchase
agreements and procurement arrangements of
the relevant distribution licensees on
reorganisation as per sub-section (4A) of section
13177;

183


(xvil) for clause (41), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(41) “local authority” means any urban
focal body or rural local body or body of
port commissioners or other authority
entrusted by the Union or any State
Government with the control or management
of any area or tocal fund;’;

(xviii) after clause (46), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

*(46A) “obligated entity” means the
distribution licensee or the consumer owning
the captive power plant or the open access
consumer, as the case may be, which is
mandated under section 86 of the Act in
order to procure electricity from or any
market instrument representing the
renewable energy sources;";

(xix) after clause (57), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(57A) “renewable energy sources” for
the purposes of this Act, means the small
hydro, wind, solar, bio-mass, bio-fuel, bio-
895, co-generation from these sources, waste
including municipal and solid waste,
geothermal, tidal, forms of oceanic energy
and such other sources as may be notified
by the Central Government from time to
time.

Explanation—For the purposes of this
clause, the expression “small hydro” means
hydro generating stations of capacity not
exceeding the capacity notified by the
Central Government for this purpose;

(57B) “Renewable Energy Service
Company” means an energy service company
which provides renewable energy to the
consumers in the form of electricity for the
purposes of this Act;";


(xx) after clause (61), the following clause
shall be inserted,

‘{61A) “Smart Grid" means an electricity
network that uses information and
communication technology to gather
information and act intelligently in
automated fashion to improve the efficiency,
teliability, economics, and sustainability of
generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity and such other information as
may be specified by the Authority;’;

(xxi) after clause (70), the following clauses
shail be inserted, namet

*{70A) “supply licensee” means a person
authorised under section 14 to supply
electricity to consumers and shall include,
incumbent supply licensee;

(70B) “provider of last resort” means
the supply licensee who, from time to time,
is designated so by the Appropriate
Commission; ५

(xxii) in clause (71), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that sharing and use of power
system for telecommunication shall not be
construed as trading for the purpose of this
Acts";

(xxitt) in clause (72), after the words “from
3 generating station”, the words “or a
sub-station” shall be inserted.

3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely: —

“3.(1) The Central Government shail, from time

to time, prepare, review and notify the National
Electricity Policy, Tariff Policy and National
Renewable Energy Policy, in consultation with
the State Governments and the Authority for
development of the power system based on
optimal utilisation of resources such as coal,
natural gas, nuclear substances or materials,
hydro and renewable sources of energy and for
separation of distribution and supply functions
and measures to promote Smart Grid, ancillary
services and decentralised distributed
generation, ete.

Substitution

section for
section 3,

National
Policy and
plan


Amendment
‘of section 4,

186

(2) The Authority shall prepare 8 National
Electricity Plan in accordance with the National
Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in
five years:

Provided that the Authority while preparing
the National Electricity Plan shall publish the
draft National Electricity Plan and invite
suggestions and objections thereon from
licensees, generating companies and the public
within such time as may be prescribed:

Provided further that the Authority shall—

(a) notify the plan after obtaining the
approval of the Central Government;

(b) revise the plan incorporating therein
the directions, if any, given by the Central
Government while granting approval under
clause (a).

(3) The Authority may review or revise the
National Electricity Plan in accordance with the
National Electricity Policy.

(4) The Central Government may, after such
consultation with the State Governments as may
be considered necessary, notify policies and
adopt measures for promotion of Renewable
Energy Generation including through tax rebates,
generation linked incentive, creation of national
renewable energy fund, development of
renewable industry and for effective
implementation and enforcement of such
measures.

4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the
words “notify a national policy permitting stand
alone systems", the words “notify a national
policy for hamessing solar power and other forms
of renewable energy to ensure electricity to
un-electrified rural households and permitting
stand alone systems” shall be substituted.


5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the Amendment
word “areas” the words “parts of the country" section 6.
shall be substituted.

6. For section 7 of the principal Act, the Substitutton
following section shall be substituted, namely:~ 2०%
section 7.
“7. (1) Any generating company may Generating
establish, operate and maintain a generating 77७०७
station without obtaining a licence under this requirement
Act, if it complies with the technical 30 for setting
standards relating to connectivity with the grid generating
referred to in clause (9) of section 73:

Provided that any generating company
establishing may be required by the system
operator to build and maintain a spinning reserve
of such capacity as may be notified by the
Central Government from time to time:

Provided further that any generating
company before establishing or expanding the
capacity of a generating station shall submit a
detatled project report and duly inform about
the same to the Authority,

Explanation--For the purpases of sub-section
(1), the expression “spinning reserve" means the
backup capacity of a generating station which
shall be made available on the directions of the
system operator, within a time limit as may be
notified by the Central Government, to maintain
gtid safety and security.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), any generating company
establishing a coal and lignite based thermal
generating station after a date and in a manner
to be notified shall be required to establish a
Renewable Energy Generation capacity as
Prescribed by the Central Government from time
to time which shall not be less than ten per
cent of the thermal power installed capacity,

(3) In case any existing coal and lignite based

thermal power generating station, with the
concurrence of power procurers under the

187



of section 8.

existing Power Purchase Agreements, chooses
for setting up additional renewable energy
generating capacity, the energy produced from
there shall be allowed to be bundled and pass
through shall be allowed in such cases by the
Appropriate Commission and the Obligated
Entities who finally buy such power shall account
the same towards their renewable purchase
obligations”.

7. In section 8 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), after the words
“hydro generating station”, the words
“including multipurpose hydro facilities with
power generation” shall be inserted;

(9) in sub-section (2), after clause (0),
the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:-
शूट) project should maintain minimum

ecological flow in the river;".

8. For section 12 of the principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—

“12. (1) No person shall—

{a) transmit electricity; or

(b) distribute electricity; or

(2) undertake trading in electricity;
or

(9) supply of electricity to consumer,
unless he is authorised to do so by a
licence Issued under section 14, or is
exempt under section 13:

Provided that no licence shall be required
by a generating company, a captive generating
plant and a trading licensee for supply of
electricity to open access consumer in any place:

Provided further that no licence shall be
required for the activities assigned to the
intermediary company under the Act,


28 of 2005.

(2) The Appropriate Commission shall not
grant licence to more than one distribution
licensee in any area of distribution:

Provided that where two or more distribution
licensees within the same area of distribution
are existing on the date of the commencement
of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014, they
shall continue their operation till such period
as specified in their licence.

(3) Without prejudice to sub-section (2), the
Central Government in consultation with the
Appropriate Commission may, in public interest,
permit more than one distribution licensee to
operate in any area, if it is considered
necessary.”.

9. For section 14 of the principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—

“14. The Appropriate Commission may, on
an application made to it under section 15, grant
a licence to any person—

(बी to transmit electricity as a
transmission licensee; or

(७) to distribute electricity as a
distribution licensee:

Provided that the Developer of a Special
Ecanomic Zone notified under sub-section (1) of
section 4 of the Special Economic Zones Act,
2005, shall be deemed to be a licensee for the
purpose of this clause, with effect from the
date of notification of such Special Economic
Zone:

Provided further that the decentralised
distributed generation networks not connected
to the distribution system may continue to
operate without getting connected to the
distribution system, even in case of grant of
licence for operation of the distribution system
in that area; or


190

{c) to undertake trading in electricity as an
electricity trader, or

(9) to supply electricity as a supply licensee,
in any area as may be specified in the licence:

Provided that any person engaged in the
business of transmission or supply of electricity
under the provisions of the repealed laws or
any Act specified in the Schedule on or before
the appointed date shall be deemed to be a
licensee under this Act for such period as may
be stipulated in the licence, clearance or
approval granted to him under the repealed laws
or such Act specified in the Schedule, and the
provisions of the repealed laws or such Act
Specified in the Schedule in respect of such
licence shall apply for a period of one year
from the date of the commencement of this Act
or such earlier period as may be specified, at
the request of the licensee, by the Appropriate
Commission and thereafter the provisions of this
Act shall apply to such business:

Provided further that any person engaged
in the business of distribution of electricity on
or before the commencement of the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2014 shall be deemed to have
authorisation to undertake distribution of the
electricity as a distribution licensee and also to
supply electricity as a supply licensee till the
transfer scheme under clauses (a) and (b) of
sub-section (4A) of section 131 is effective in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, where
upon the distribution business and the supply
business shall be undertaken in the manner as
stipulated in the said transfer scheme:

Provided also that the Central Transmission
Utility or the State Transmission Utility shall be
deemed to be a transmission licensee under this
Act:

Provided also that in case an Appropriate
Government transmits electricity or distributes
or supplies electricity or undertakes trading in


24 of 1989,

60 of 2002,

14 of 1948,

electricity, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, such Government
shall be deemed to be a licensee under this
Act, but shall not be required to obtain a licence
under this Act:

Provided also that the Railways as defined
under the Indian Railways Act, 1989 and the
Metro Rail Corporation established under the
Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act,
2002 be deemed to be a licensee under this
Act, and shall not be required to obtain a licence
under this Act:

Provided also that the Damodar Valley
Corporation, established under sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the Damodar Valley Corporation
Act, 1948, shall be deemed to be a licensee
under this Act but shall not be required to obtain
a licence under this Act and the provisions of
the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948,
insofar as they are not Inconsistent with the
provistons of this Act, shall continue to apply to
that Corporation:

Provided also that the Government company
or the company referred to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (4) or sub-section (4A) of section
131 of this Act and the company or companies
created in pursuance of the Acts specified in
the Schedule or any company or companies as
may be notified by the Central Government,
shall be deemed to be a licensee under this
Act:

Provided also that the Appropriate
Commission may grant a licence to two or more
persons for supply of electricity within the same
area of supply, subject to the conditions that
the applicant for grant of supply licence within
the same area shall, without prejudice to the
other conditions or requirements under this Act,
comply with the additional requirements
(relating to the capital adequacy, Credit
worthiness or code of conduct} as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and no

191


192

such applicant, who complies with all the
requirements for grant of licence, shall be
refused grant of licence on the ground that there
already exists a licensee in the same area for
the same purpose:

Provided also that at least one of the supply
licensee shall be a Government company or
Government Controlled Company:

Provided also that where a person intends
to generate, distribute and supply electricity in
3 rural area to be notified by the State
Government, such person shall not require any
licence for such generation, distribution and
supply of electricity, but he shall comply with
the measures which may be Specified by the
Authority under section 53:

Provided also that where a person intends
to generate and supply electricity from
renewable energy sources, such person shall not
require any licence for such generation and
supply of electricity, but he shall comply with
the measures which may be specified by the
Authority under sections 53 and 73:

Provided also that a supply licensee shall
Not require a licence to undertake trading in
electricity:

Provided also that a distribution licensee, after
effective date of transfer under sub-section (44)
of section 13, shall not engage in trading or
supply of electricity:

Provided also that in a case where a
distribution licensee was undertaking the
distribution of electricity, prior to the
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2014, for a specified area within his area
of distribution through a franchisee such
franchisee shall not be required to obtain any
separate licence from the State Commission
concerned and such distribution licensee shall
remain responsible for distribution and supply
of electricity in that area of distribution till the


expiry of the existing agreement with the
distribution and supply licensee of that area.”.

10. In section 15 of the principal Act, for Amendment
sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall % *ctn 15.
be substituted, namely:—

"(8) A licence shall continue to be
inforce for a period of twenty-five years or
more as may be specified in the licence,
unless such licence is revoked or renewed.”.

11. ॥ 20 of ,— Amendment
in section the principal Act, ipsam
(8) in sub-section (1),—

(i) in opening portion, after the
words “licence of any licensee”, the
words “or when the duration of any
licence expires” shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (a), after the words
“licence has been revoked", the words
and brackets “or expires (hereinafter
referred to as the outgoing licensee)"
shall be inserted;

(ii) # clause (८), after the words
“revocation of licence”, the words “or
expiry of the period of the licence or”
shall be inserted;

(9) for sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Where a utility is sold under sub-section
(1), the purchaser shall pay to the licensee the
purchase price of the utility in such manner as
may be agreed upon between the parties.”;

(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “the

licence” wherever they occur, the words
“outgoing licence” shall be substituted.

12. For section 24 of the principal Act, the Substitution
following section shall be substituted, namely:— 99"
section 24,

193


194

“24. (1) If at any time the Appropriate
Commission is of the opinion that a distribution
licensee or a supply licensee—

(a) has persistently failed to maintain
uninterrupted distribution or supply of electricity
conforming to standards regarding quality of
electricity to the consumers; or

(b) is unable to discharge the functions or
perform the duties imposed on it by or under
the provisions of this Act; or

(c) has persistently defaulted in complying
with any direction given by the Appropriate
Commission under this Act; or

(d) has broken the terms and conditions of
licence, and circumstances exist which render
ft necessary for it in public interest so to do,
the Appropriate Commission may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, suspend, for a period
not exceeding one year, the licence of the
distribution licensee or a supply licensee and
appoint an Administrator to discharge the
functions of the distribution licensee or a supply
licensee In accordance with the terms and
conditions of the licence:

Provided that before suspending a licence
under this section, the Appropriate Commission
shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
distribution licensee or a supply licensee to make
representations against the proposed suspension
of licence and shall consider the representations,
if any, of the distribution licensee or a supply
licensee,

(2) Upon suspension of licence under
sub-section (1), the utilities of the distribution
licensee or a supply licensee shall vest in the
Administrator for a period not exceeding one
year or up to the date on which such utility is
sold in accordance with the provisions contained
in section 20, whichever is later.

(3) The Appropriate Commission shall, within
one year of appointment of the Administrator


under sub-section (1), elther revoke the licence
in accordance with the provisions contained in
section 19 or revoke suspension of the licence
and restore the utility to the distribution
licensee or a supply licensee whose licence had
been suspended, as the case may be.

(4) In & case where the Appropriate
Commission revokes the licence under
sub-section (3), the utility of the distribution
licensee or a supply licensee shall be sold within
@ period of one year from the date of revocation
of the licence in accordance with the provisions
of section 20 and the price after deducting the
administrative and other expenses on sale of
Utilities and such other amounts as may be due
from the licensee shall be remitted to the
distribution licensee or a supply licensee.”,

13. In section 29 of the principal Act, for
sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(6) If any licensee fails to comply with
the directions issued under sub-section (2)
or sub-section (3), he shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding ten crore rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance
of the directions issued under sub-section
(2) or sub-section (3), by a generating
company for generating renewable energy,
such generating company for generating
renewable energy shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding one crore rupees,”,

14, In section 33 of the Principal Act, for
Sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(5) If any licensee fails to comply with
the directions issued under sub-section (1),
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding

Amendment
of section 29.

Amendment
of section 33.

195


one crore rupees:

Provided that in case of non-compliance
of the directions issued under sub-section
(1), by a generating company for generating
renewable energy, such generating company
for generating renewable energy shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding ten lakh
rupees.”.

Substitution 15. For section 34 of the principal Act, the

of Tam following section shall be substituted, namely:—

section 34,
Grid “34, Every licensee or generating
Standards, company, person owning and maintaining

dedicated transmission lines and any other
person whose system is connected to the
grid shall comply with such technical
standards of operation and maintenance of
transmission lines, in accordance with the
Grid Standards, as may be specified by the
Authority.”.

Amendment 16. In section 37 of the principal Act, after
of section 37. the words “necessary for", the words “grid
security and safety and for" shalt be inserted.

Amendment 17. In section 38 of the principal Act, in
ofsection 38, sub-section (2), in clause (0), for sub-clause
(ii), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely: —

“(i) any consumer as and when such
open access is provided by the State
Commission under sub-section (2) of section
42, on payment of the transmission charges,
as may be specified by the Central
Commission and surcharge if any determined
by the Appropriate Commission of the State
in which the premises of the consumer ts

located:".
‘Amendment 18, ॥ section 39 of the principal Act, in
of section 39. sub-section (2), in clause (0), in sub-clause (ii),—

(8) for the words “as may be specified
by the State Commission”, the words “if any
determined by the Appropriate Commission
of the State” shall be substituted;

196


{b) in the second proviso, for the words
“State Commission”, the words “Appropriate
Commission" shall be substituted;

{c) in third proviso, for the words “State
Commission”, the words “Appropriate
Commission” shall be substituted.

19. In section 40 of the principal Act, in
clause (८), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “as
may be specified by the State Commission”, the
words “as may be specified by the Appropriate
Commission of the State in which the premises
of the consumer is located” shall be substituted.

20, For section 42 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely;—

“42. (1) It shall be the duty of a distribution
licensee to—

(a) devetop and maintain an efficient,
co-ordinated and economical distribution
system in his area of distribution and to
enable supply electricity in accordance with
the provisions contained in this Act;

(b) provide non-discriminatory open
access to its distribution system as specified
by the Appropriate Commission;

(९) perform such other functions, not
inconsistent with the Act as may be specified
by the Appropriate Commission.

(2) The State Commission shall introduce
open access for use of distribution system in
such phases and subject to such conditions,
(including the cross subsidies, and other
operational constraints) as may be specified
within one year of the appointed date by it and
in specifying the extent of open access in
successive phases and in determining the charges
for wheeling, it shall have due regard to all
relevant factors including such cross subsidies,
and other operational constraints.

of section 40,

Substitution,

section for
yoction 42,

Duties of
cistribution

open access.

197


if

i

(3) The open access shall be allowed on
payment of a surcharge which shall be in
addition to the wheeling and other charges
payable to the distribution licensee, as
compensatory charges determined by the State
Commission to meet the requirement of cross
subsidy in the area of supply:

Provided that the surcharge and cross
subsidies referred to sub-section (2) and sub-
section (3) shall be progressively reduced in the
manner as may be specified by the State
Commission:

Provided further that such surcharge shall
not be leviable in case open access is provided
to a person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use.

(4) The open access consumers procuring
electricity from renewable energy sources shall
not be required to pay the surcharge for open
access for such period as may be prescribed by
the Central Government,

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section, the open access consumer shall
not switch over to any other supplier except by
giving the notice of minimum time period as
may be specified by the Appropriate
Commission.”,

21. For section 43 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“43. (1) Save as otherwise provided in
this Act, every distribution licensee, shall,
on an application by the owner or occupier
of any premises in the area of distribution,
give connection to such premises to enable
supply of electricity, within fifteen days after
receipt of the application requiring such
supply:


Provided that where such connectivity to
the premises requires extension of distribution
mains, or commissioning of new substations, the
distribution licensee shall give connection to
enable supply of electricity to such premises
immediately after such extension or
commissioning or within such period as may be
specified by the Appropriate Commission:

Provided further that in case of a village or
hamlet or area wherein no provision for supply
of electricity exists, the Appropriate Commission
may extend the said period as it may consider
necessary for electrification of such village or
hamlet or area.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this
sub-section, the expression “application” means
the application complete in all respects in the
appropriate form, as required by the distribution
licensee, along with documents showing payment
of necessary charges and other compliances.

(2) It shall be the duty of every distribution
licensee to provide, if required, electric plant
or electric line for connectivity and enabling
electric supply to the premises specified in
sub-section (1).

(3) If a distribution licensee fails to give
connection to the premises in the area of
distribution within a period specified in
sub-section (1), he shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to one thousand rupees for
each day of default.’

22. In section 44 of the principal Act, for
the words “licensee to give supply", the words
“licensee to distribute electricity” shall be
substituted.

23. For section 45 of the principal Act, the

Amendment
of section 44.

Substitution

following section shall be substituted, namely:— ५

“45. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, the prices to be charged by a

section for
section 45,
Power to
recover
charges.

199


Amendment
of section 46,

of section 47,

200

distribution licensee for the distribution of
electricity by him in pursuance of section 43
Shall be in accordance with such tariffs
determined by the Appropriate Commission and
such charges authorised by the Appropriate
Commission or otherwise fixed from time-to-
time and conditions of his licence,

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 62,
in determining charges under this section a
distribution licensee shall not show undue
preference to any person or class of persons or
discrimination against any person or class of
persons.

24. After section 45 of the principal Act,
the following section shalt be inserted, namely:—

“45A. The Appropriate Government may,
in consultation with the Appropriate
Commission and the concerned authorities,
prescribe the manner of collection and
realisation of any dues under the relevant
laws for the time being in force in the State
along with the electricity dues.”,

25. In section 46 of the principal Act,

(1) for the words “requiring a supply of
electricity", the words “requiring
Connectivity to the distribution system” shalt
be substituted;

(ii) for the words “giving and supply",
the words “giving and maintaining the

connection for enabling supply of electricity”
shall be substituted,

26, In section 47 of the principal Act,—

(i) for sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namety:—

“(1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, a distribution licensee in the area
of distribution may require any person, who
requires connectivity to the distribution
system in pursuance of section 514, to give


him reasonable security, as may be
determined by regulations, for the payment
to him of all monies which may become due
to him—

(8) in respect of the electricity
distributed to such person; or

(9) where any electric line or
electrical plant or electric meter is to
be provided for distributing electricity
to such person, in respect of the
provision of such line or plant or meter,

and if that person fails to give such security,
the distribution licensee may, if he thinks
fit, refuse to distribute electricity or to
provide the line or plant or meter for the
period during which the failure continues.”;

(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words
“supply of electricity", the words
“distribution of electricity” shall be
substituted;

(iti) in sub-section (3), for the words
“supply of electricity", the words
“distribution of electricity” shall be
substituted,

27, In section 48 of the principal Act,— Amendment

of section 48.
(i) in the opening portion, for the words
“supply of electricity", the words
“distribution of electricity” shall be
substituted;

(fi) in clause (0), for the word “supplied”
occurring at the end, the word “distributed”
shall be substituted.

28. For section 49 of the principal Act, the Substitutton
following section shall be substituted, namely:— of ne" |
section 49,

“49. (1) With effect from the commen- pe taprnvert

cement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 0: or
2014, all consumers having a connected load purchase of
of 1 Megawatt and above with the power ‘lectricity


system, may procure at their option
electricity through open access under
bilateral arrangement from any generating
company, trading licensee, or from any other
source.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 62, the
consumers mentioned in sub-section (1), may
enter into an agreement with any person for
supply or purchase of electricity on such terms
and conditions (including tariff) as may be
agreed upon by them.”.

Substitution 29. For section 50 of the principal Act, the
Of new following section shail be substituted, namely:—

section for
section 50.
The “50. The State Commission shall specify
Fiecticlty an Electricity Distribution Code to provide
Code. for recovery of electricity charges, intervals

for billing of electricity charges,
disconnection of connectivity of electricity
for non-payment thereof, restoration of
supply of electricity, measures for preventing
tampering, distress or damage to electrical
plant or electrical line or meter, entry of
distribution licensee or any person acting
on his behalf for disconnecting connection
and removing the meter, entry for replacing,
altering or maintaining electric tines or
electrical plants or meter and such other
matters.”.

Insertion of 30. After Part VI of the principal Act, the
new Part A following Part and sections shall be inserted,

sections 514 namely:—
to 51G.
“PART VIA

SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY

Duties of 518. (1) It shall be the duty of the supply

prt dae licensees to supply electricity in the concemed
area of supply in accordance with the provisions
of the Act:

Provided that till the transfer of the
obligation to supply to the incumbent supply
licensee, the existing distribution licensee shall


have the obligations to continue to supply
electricity in the area of supply in accordance
with the provisions of the Act with the same
rights, privileges and duties of the supply
licensee.

(2) The Appropriate State Government shall,
within 3 period of one year from the
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2014 or within such period as the
Appropriate State Government may decide in
consultation with the Central Government,
Provide for separation of distribution and supply
of electricity and for such purpose issue
appropriate transfer scheme and vest the supply
functions in the incumbent supply licensee and

518. (1) The supply licensee as selected by
the Consumer shall, on an application of the
owner or occupier of any premises within fifteen
days of the connection being given to the
premises by the distribution licensee in terms
of section 43 commence supply of electricity as
required by the person;

Provided that a supply licensee other than
the incumbent supply licensee shall have the
duty to supply electricity progressively based
on the load factor of the consumers as specified
by the Central Government.

(2) Seve as otherwise provided in this Act,
any consumer in the area of supply shall, in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government; have the option to choose any of
the supply licensees for supply of electricity to
the premises owned or occupied by him.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this
sub-section, “application” means the application
complete in all respects in the appropriate form,
as required by the supply licensee, along with

203


documents showing payment of necessary
charges and other compliances:

Provided that the provider of last resort shall
have the obligation to supply electricity to the
consumers in the area of supply in case the
supply licensee chosen by the consumer ceases
to be a supply licensee or otherwise his supply
licence is suspended for any reason whatsoever.

(3) It shall be the duty of every supply
licensee to arrange for the purchase of
electricity including by procurement of
electricity from the intermediary company with
the objective of providing reliable and
uninterrupted electricity supply.

(4) if a supply licensee fails to give supply of
electricity within a period as mentioned in
sub-section (1), he shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to one thousand rupees for
each day of default.

51C. Nothing contained in section 518, shall
be taken as requiring a supply licensee to give
supply of electricity to any premises in its area
of supply, if he ts prevented from so doing by
cyclone, floods, storms or other occurrences
beyond his control.

51D. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, the prices to be charged by a supply
licensee for the supply of electricity by him in
pursuance of section 51B shall be in accordance
with such tariffs fixed from time-to-time and
conditions of his licence.

(2) The charges for electricity supplied by a
supply licensee in the area of supply shall be—

(a) fixed tn accordance with the methods
and the principles as may be specified by
the concerned State Commission;

(0) published in such manner so as to
give adequate publicity for such charges and
prices,


(3) The charges for electricity supplied by a
supply licensee in the area of supply may include
a fixed charge in addition to the charge for the
actual electricity supplied.

(4) Subject to the provisions of section 62,
in fixing charges under this section a supply
licensee shall not show undue preference to
any person or class of persons or discrimination
against any person or class of persons.

15) The charges fixed by a supply licensee
shall be market determined:

Provided that the Appropriate Commission
shall determine a ceiling charge based on the
normative costs and standards of performance,
subject to sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) of
section 62;

Provided further that the supply licensee
shall not charge any amount higher than the
ceiling charge as applicable to all consumers in
a category.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act the supply licensee may, with the prior
approval of the Appropriate Commission, charge
any amount higher than the ceiling charge as
may be mutually agreed with any consumer.

516. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, a supply licensee may require any
person, who requires a supply of electricity in
pursuance of section 51B, to give him reasonable
security, as may be determined by regulations,
for the payment to him of all monies which
may become due to him in respect of the
electricity supplied to such person; and if that
person fails to give such security, the supply
licensee in the area of supply may, if he thinks
fit, refuse to give the supply of electricity for
the period during which the failure continues.

(2) Where any person has not given such
security as is mentioned in sub-section (1) or
the security given by any person has become

Power to
require
security,


Additional
terms of
supply.

uae
2

invalid or insufficient, the supply licensee may,
by notice, require that person, within thirty
days after the service of the notice, to give him
reasonable security for the payment of all
monies which may become due to him in respect
of the supply of electricity.

(3) If the person referred to in sub-section
(2) fails to give such security, the supply licensee
may, if he thinks fit, discontinue the supply of
electricity for the period during which the failure
continues.

(4) The supply licensee shall pay interest
with reference to the bank rate, as may be
specified by the State Commission, on the
security referred to in sub-section (f), and
refund such security on the request of the person
who gave such security.

(5) A supply licensee shall not be entitled
to require security in pursuance of clause (३) of
sub-section (1) if the person requiring the supply
is prepared to take the supply through a
pre-payment meter.

51F. A supply licensee may require any
person who requires a supply of electricity in
pursuance of section 518 to accept-

(a) any restrictions which may be
imposed for the purpose of enabling the
supply licensee to comply with the
regulations made under section 53;

(b) any terms restricting any liability of
the supply licensee for economic loss
resulting from negligence of the person to
whom the electricity is supptied.

51G. The State Commission shall specify an
Electricity Supply Code to provide for recovery
of electricity charges, intervals for billing of
electricity charges, disconnection of supply of
electricity for non-payment thereof, assessment
for unauthorised use and theft of electricity,
restoration of supply of electricity and such
other matters.


24 of 1989.

60 of 2002,

34. After Part VIA of the principal Act, as
50 inserted, the following Part and section shall
be inserted, namely:—

“PART VIB

OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO
DISTRIBUTION AND SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY

Insertion of
new

VIB and
section
51H.

51H. (1) Every distribution licensee or supply Consumer
licensee, as the case may be having the sievances

obligation to supply in the area of supply, shall,
within six months fram the appointed date or
date of grant of licence, whichever is earlier,
establish a forum for redressal of grievances of
the consumers in accordance with the guidelines
as may be specified by the State Commission.

(2) Any consumer, who is aggrieved by non-
redressal of his grievances under sub-section
11), may make a representation for the redressal
of his grievance to an authority to be known as
Ombudsman to be appointed or designated by
the State Commission,

(3) The Ombudsman shall settle the
grievance of the consumer within such time and
in such manner as may be specified by the
State Commission.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2)
and (3) shall be without prejudice to right which
the consumer may have apart from the rights
conferred upon him by the those sub-sections.”,

32. In section 54 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), in the proviso, after the words
and figures “the Railways Act, 1989", the words,
brackets and figures “or metro railway under
the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance)
Act, 2002” shall be inserted.

33. In section 55 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—

“Provided that smart meters, as specified
by the Authority, shall be installed at each stage

of section 54,

Amendment
of section 55-


Insertion of
new section

dation of
Appropriate
Government
for

amendment
of section 61,

208

for proper accounting and measurement for the
purpose of metering and consumption from the
point of generation up to such consumers who
consume more than the quantity of electricity
in a month as prescribed by the Central
Government.”,

34, In section 56 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:-

“(1A) Nothing contained in this section
shall require the supply licensee to
disconnect electricity in case of prepayment
meter in excess of the quantum of electricity
pre-paid by the consumer.”.

35. After section 59 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

“S9A. In case any complaint is filed
before the Appropriate Government and if
the Appropriate Government is satisfied that
any license has not discharged any of the
functions assigned to him by the Act,
including the standards of performance
specified by the Appropriate Commission,
the Appropriate Government may
recommend for the revocation of licence of
the said licensee.”,

36. Section 61 of the principal Act shall be
numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and,—

{a) In sub-section (1) as so numbered—

(i) for clause (0), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(d) safeguarding of consumers’ interest
and at the same time, recovery of the cost
of electricity by the licensees without any
revenue deficit in the context of the tariff
determined under section 62:

Provided that the revenue deficit, if any,
prior to the commencement of the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2014, shall be recovered in

of section 56.


Substitution
of new

section for
section 62.

Determination
of tariff.

such manner as may be prescribed by the
Appropriate Government.”;

(if) for clause (h), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:

“(h) the promotion of co-generation
and generation of electricity from
renewable sources of energy and hydro

power,
(iil) in clause (i), the words “and tariff
policy” shall be omitted,

(b) after sub-section (1) as so numbered
the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act, the provisions of Tariff Policy
shall be followed by the Appropriate
Commission for the purpose of Tariff

37, For section 62 of the principal Act, the
following section shail be substituted, namely:—

“62. (1) The Appropriate Commission
shall determine the tariff in accordance with
the provisions of this Act for—

(a) supply of electricity by a generating
company to a supply licensee including
supply of electricity under a back to back
arrangement involving an intermediary
company, electricity trader or any other
licensee;

Provided that the Appropriate Commission
may, in case of shortage of supply of electricity,
fix the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff
for sale or purchase of electricity in pursuance
of an agreement, entered into between a
generating company and a licensee or between
licensees, for a period not exceeding one year
to ensure reasonable prices of electricity:

Provided further that there shall be no such
determination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission under this clause (a) to the extent
the Central Government specifies that the



210

procurement of electricity from the sources
identified for the purpose by the supply licensee
shall be done only by competitive bidding as
per section 63;

(b) purchase of electricity by the supply
licensee from the intermediary company;

(८) transmission of electricity;
(d) wheeling of electricity;
{e) retail sale of electricity:

Provided that the tariff determined for retail
sale of electricity shall be the ceiling tariff for
the respective categories of consumers, the
supply licensee shall be entitled to charge any
consumer category at an amount lesser than
the ceiling tariff, subject to sub-section (3) and
also, without in any way affecting the obligation
of a supply licensee to pay the intermediary
company, the transmission licensee, the
distribution licensee and generating company,
as the case may be.

(2) The tariff determined by the Appropriate
Commission for a licensee shall provide for
recovery of all prudent costs of the licensee
approved by the Appropriate Commission in the
monthly bills during the tariff period through
an appropriate price adjustment formula
including wherever applicable the fuel, power
purchase and procurement price surcharge
formula as may be specified in the Tariff Policy.

(3) The Appropriate Commission may require
a licensee or a generating company to furnish
separate details, as may be specified in respect
of generation, transmission, distribution and
supply for determination of tariff.

(4) The Appropriate Commission shall not,
while determining the tariff under this Act, show
undue preference to any consumer of electricity
but may differentiate according to the
consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage,
total consumption of electricity during any


specified periad or the time at which the supply
is required or the geographical position of any
area, the nature of supply and the purpose for
which the supply is required.

(5) No tariff or part of any tariff may
ordinarily be amended, more frequently than
once in any financial year, except in respect of
fuel and power purchase price adjustment which
shall be permitted under the terms of the fuet
and power purchase price adjustment formula
as may be specified by the Appropriate
Commission.

(6) The Commission may require a licensee
OF @ generating company to comply with such
procedure as may be specified for calculating
the expected revenues from the tariff and
charges which he or it is permitted to recover.

(7) If any licensee or a generating company
recovers a price or charge exceeding the tariff
determined under this section, the excess
amount shall be recoverable by the person who
has paid such price or charge along with interest
equivalent to the bank rate without prejudice
to any other liability incurred by the licensee.”

38. In section 64 of the principal Act,—

(i) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

(1A) If the application ts not filed
in time the Appropriate Commission
shall, not later than thirty days of the
last date specified for such filing, on its
own Initiate proceedings for determi-
nation of tariff and call for such
information, details and documents as
the Appropriate Commission may require
for such determination,

(1B) The Appropriate Commission may draw
adverse inference against the generating
company or licensee for the failure to provide

of section 64.

211


of new
section for
section 66.

Devetopment
of market.

of section 67.

Amendment
of section 68,

212

any information, details and document required
to be filed before the Appropriate Commission.”,

(#) in sub-section (3), in the opening portion,
for the words “one hundred and twenty days
from receipt of an application”, the words
“ninety days from receipt of application or
initiation of proceedings, as the case may be,”
shall be substituted.

39. For section 66 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“66. The Appropriate Commission shall
endeavour to promote the development of a
market (including trading and forward and
futures contract) In power and a market for
encouraging energy efficiency in power in such
manner as may be specified and shall be guided
by the National Electricity Policy, referred to in
section 3, and other directions issued by the
Central Government in the public interest from
time to time.”.

40. In section 67 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words “supply or
transmission”, the words “distribution or
transmission” shall be substituted.

41, In section 68 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (1), after the word,
brackets and figure “sub-section (2)", the
words and figures “of section 67" shall be
inserted;

(if) in sub-section (5), after the words
“application of the licensee”, the words “or
the generating company” shall be
substituted;

(iii) in sub-section (6), and before the
Explanation, after the words “from the
licensee”, the words “or the generating
company” shall be inserted.


Insertion of

new section

694.

42. After section 69 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

No objection “69A. Whenever any person is carrying out

of licensees.

any activity within the area of any transmission
or distribution licensee or within the area of
any other person operating and maintaining any
system for conveyance of electricity and such
activity is likely to have any implication on the
transmission system or distribution system of
such licensee or of such other person, such
Person shall obtain the prior consent of such
licensee or such other person, as the case may
be, in such manner as may be specified by the
Appropriate Commission.”.

43. For section 70 of the principat Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“70. (1) There shall be a body constituted
by the Central Government to be called the
Central Electricity Authority to exercise such
functions and perform such duties as are
assigned to it under this Act.

(2) The Central Electricity Authority,
established under section 3 of the Electricity
(Supply) Act, 1948 and functioning as such
immediately before the date of commencement
of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014, shall
be deemed to be the Central Electricity
Authority for the purposes of this Act and the
Chairperson, Members, Secretary and other
officers and employees thereof shall be deemed
to have been appointed under this Act and they
shall continue to hold office on the same terms
and conditions on which they were appointed
under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.

(3) The Authority shall consist of not more
than fourteen Members {including its
Chairperson) of whom not more than eight shall
be full-time Members to be appointed by the
Central Government.

(4) (a) The Central Government may appoint
the Chairperson and Members of the Authority
from amongst persons of ability, integrity and

54 of 1948.

213


214

standing who have knowledge of, and adequate
experience and capacity in, dealing with
problems relating to engineering, finance,
commerce, economics or industrial matters, and
at least one Member shall be appointed from
each of the following categories, namely:—

{i} engineering with specialisation in
design, construction, operation and
maintenance of generating stations;

(ii) engineering with specialisation In
transmission and supply of electricity;

(iii) applied research in the field of
electricity;

(iv) applied economics, accounting,
commerce or finance;

(b) The terms and conditions, including the
eligibility and experience of the Chairperson and
Members to be appointed by the Central
Government shall be such as may be prescribed,

(5) The Chairperson shatl be the Chief
Executive of the Authority.

(6) The headquarters of the Authority shall
be at Dethi.

(7) The Authority shall meet at the head
office or any other place at such time as the
Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction
of business at its meetings (including the quorum
at its meetings) as it may specify.

(8) The Chairperson, or if he is unable to
attend a meeting of the Authority, any other
Member nominated by the Chairperson in this
behalf and in the absence of such nomination
or where there is no Chairperson, any Member
chosen by the Members present from among
themselves shall preside at the meeting.

(9) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a


majority of votes of the Members present and
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes,
the Chairperson or the person presiding shall
have the right to exercise a second or casting
vote.

(10) All orders and decisions of the Authority
shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any
other officer of the Authority duly authorised
by the Chairperson in this behalf.

{11} No act or proceeding of the Authority
shall be questioned or shall be invalidated
merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution
of, the Authority.

(12) The Chairperson of the Authority and
other full-time Members shall receive such salary
and allowances as may be determined by the
Central Government and other Members shall
receive such allowances and fees for attending
the meetings of the Authority, as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.”.

44. In section 78 of the principal Act,—

(a) for sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) The Central Government shall,
for the purposes of selecting the
Members of the Appellate Tribunal and
the Chairperson and Members of the
Central Commission, constitute a
Selection Committee consisting of—

(a) Chairperson of the Public
Enterprises Selection 80810. ...
Chairperson, ex officio;

(b) Secretary-in-charge of the
Ministry of the Central Government
dealing with the Department of
Consumer Affairs .....wember, ex officio;

(c) Secretary-in-charge of the
Ministry of the Central Government

of section 68,

215


Amencment
of section 79.

Amendment
of section 85.

216

dealing with the Department of Legal
Affairs—Member, ex officio;

(d) a person to be nominated by
the Central Government in accordance
With sub-section (2)........................०«
Member, ex officio;

(९) a person to be nominated by
the Central Government in accordance
with sub-section (3)

(f) Secretary-in-charge of the
Ministry of the Central Government
dealing with Power .......... Member,
ex officio;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words and
figures “the Companies Act, 1956", “the
Companies Act, 2013" shall be substituted.

45. In section 79 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for clause (८), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(c) to regulate the inter-State
transmission of electricity including
Promotion and development of Smart Grid ,
ancillary services and decentralised
distributed generation;",

46. In section 85 of the principal Act,—

{a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-
section shail be substituted, namely;—

“(1) The State Government shall, for
the purposes of selecting the Members

of the State Commission, constitute a

Selection Committee consisting of—

(3) 3 person who has been a Judge
of the High Court..... Chairperson;

(b) the Chief Secretary of the
concerned State........+04 Member;

(९) the Chairperson of the
#प्रताजा()........ .. «७५५०० Member;

1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.


18 of 2013.

(d) the Chairperson of the Central
Commission or a Member of the Central
Commission to be nominated by the
Chairperson......Member;

(९) a person to be nominated by
the State Government in accordance
with sub-section (2A).............Member;

{b) after sub-section (2), the following

sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2A) For the purposes of clause (e)
of sub-section (1}, the State Government
shall nominate from amongst persons
holding the post of Chairperson or
managing director, by whatever name
call, of any public financial institution
specified in the Companies Act, 2013.";

(९) after sub-section (5), the following

sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(5A) In case of delay in the
constitution of the selection committee
for more than two months or in
appointment of the Chairperson or
Members of the State Commission for
more than five months, the Central
Government shall be entitled to
nominate one officer from the Central
Electricity Authority not below the rank
of Chief Engineer as ex-officio member
of that Commission and to discharge the
functions of the member till such time
the member is appointed in terms of
this section and the member assumes
the charge.”.

47. In section 86 of the principal Act, for
sub-section (1}, the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(1) The State Commission shall

discharge the following functions, namely:—

(a) determine the tariff for
generation, supply, transmission and
wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk
or retail, as the case may be, within
the State:

of section 36,

217


218

Provided that where open access has
been permitted to a category of
consumers under section 42, the State
Commission shall determine only the
wheeling charges and surcharge thereon,
if any, for the said category of
consumers;

(0) regulate electricity purchase and
procurement process of supply licensees
including the price at which electricity
shall be procured from the generating
companies or licensees or from other
sources through agreements for purchase
of power for supply within the State;

(८) facilitate intra-State transmission
and wheeling of electricity and promote
Smart Grid, net metering, ancillary
services and decentralised distributed
generation;

(9) issue licenses to persons seeking
to act as transmission licensees,
distribution licensees, supply licensees
and electricity traders with respect to
their operations within the State;

(6९) promote cogeneration from
renewable sources of energy and
generation of electricity from renewable
sources of energy by providing suitable
measures for connectivity with the grid
and sale of electricity to any person,
and also specify, for purchase of
electricity from such sources, a
percentage of the total consumption of
electricity in the area of a supply
licensee;

(f) promote cogeneration from
sources other than renewable sources
and hydro power generation by providing
suitable measures for connectivity with
the grid and sale of electricity to the,
licensee having the obligation to supply
to consumers in the area of supply;

(g) adjudicate upon the disputes
amongst the licensees, generating
companies, intermediary company or


between any of them, as the case may
be, and to refer any dispute for
arbitration;

(1) levy fee for the purposes of this
Act;

(i) specify State Grid Code consistent
with the Grid Code specified under
clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section
79;

(j) specify or enforce standards with

respect to quality, continuity and
reliability of service by licensees;

(0) fix the trading margin in the
intra-State trading of electricity,
irrespective of final destination of the
electricity;

(0 to require creation of distribution
system including metering and related
infrastructure by the distribution
licensee in a time bound manner;

(m) to specify time bound reduction
of cross-subsidies in tariff;

(0) discharge such other functions
86 may be assigned to 10 under this Act.”.

48. For section 89 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“89, The Chairperson or other Member
shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date he enters upon his office:

Provided that the Chairperson or other
Member in the Central Commission or the
State Commission shall be eligible for one
More term through re-appointment in the
same capacity as the Chairperson or a
Member in that Commission in which he had
earlier held office as such:

Provided further that no Chairperson or
Member shall hold office as such after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.

Substitutan:
of new

section for
section 89,

Term of
office and
७७७७७
of service
of Members,

219


Amendment
‘of section 90.

‘of section 92.

‘of section 94.

Insertion of

105A.
A review of

of
Appropeiate
‘Camentsstons,

Amendment

of section 127.

220

49. in section 90 of the principal Act, after
clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(g} on the basis of non-performance as
adjudged by the Committee constituted under
section 109A.”.

50, In section 92 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—

“(6) Every proceedings before the
Appropriate Commission shall be decided
expeditiously and with the endeavour to
dispose the proceedings within one hundred
and twenty days and in the event of delay,
the Appropriate Commission shall record the
reasons for delay beyond one hundred
twenty days.”.

51. In section 94 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (3), for the word “shall”, the word
“may” shall be substituted,

52. After section 109 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

“109A, (1) The Forum of Regulators shall,
from time to time, constitute an independent
Committee consisting of not less than three

५ persons of eminence to review the performance

of any Appropriate Commissions and submit a
report with recommendations of such Committee
to the Central Government.

(2) The Committee appointed under
sub-section (1) shall be entitled to take the
assistance of experts and consultants to be
engaged with the approval of the Forum of
Regulators.

(3) The functions and the terms of
reference, including the time period for
submission of the report, by the Committee shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Govermment.”,

53. In section 127 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words “an appellate
authority as may be prescribed", the words,
brackets and figures “the Ombudsman of the


concerned area appointed in terms of
sub-section (6) of section 42 and the Ombudsman
shall be the appellate authority under this
section” shall be substituted,

54. For the marginal heading “Part 2॥॥-
Reorganisation of Board”, the marginal heading
“Part Xlll-Reorganisation of Board and
Distribution Licensee” shall be substituted.

55. In section 131 of the principal Act—

(i) for the marginal heading “Vesting of
property of Board in State Government”,
the marginal heading “Vesting of property
of Board and Distribution Licensee in the
State Government” shall be substituted;

(ii) after sub-section (4), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

(4A) (a) The State Government shall
within the period specified under section
51A draw up a transfer scheme for
transfer of such of the functions, the
property, interest in property, rights and
liabilities of the distribution licensees
relating to supply of electricity to a
company who shall be the incumbent
supply licensee for the concerned area
of supply and so far as the existing
power purchase Agreements and
Procurement arrangements, to which the
distribution licensee is the beneficiary
in the intermediary company and publish
such scheme as statutory transfer
scheme under the Act.

(b) The distribution licensee shall
cease to be charged with and shall not
perform the functions and duties under
this Act to the extent of the transfers
made under sub clause (a) on and after
the effective date of such transfer.

(८) The functions of the intermediary
company shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Gavernment.”.

131,

221


Punishenent 56. For section 142 of the principal Act,

for non- the following section shall be substituted,

is directions Namely: —

Appropriate “142. In case any complaint is filed

Commission, before the Appropriate Commission by any
person or if that Commission is satisfied that
any generating company or licensee has
contravened any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, or any direction issued by the
Commission or has not complied with the
renewable purchase obligation or renewable
generation obligation as specified, the
Appropriate Commission may after giving
such generating company or licensee an
opportunity of being heard in the matter,
by order in writing, direct that, without
prejudice to any other penalty to which the
generating company or licensee may be
liable under this Act, such generating
company or licensee shall pay, by way of
penalty, which shall not exceed one crore
rupees for each contravention and in case
of continuing failure with an additional
penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees
for every day during which the failure
continues after contravention of the first
such direction:

Provided that in case of non- compliance
of by a generating company generating
Renewable Energy, such generating company
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
rupees ten lakhs contravention and in case
of continuing failure with an additional
penalty which may extend to ten thousand
rupees for every day during which the failure
continues after contravention of the first
such direction.”.

Substitutson 57, For section 146 of the principal Act,
of new the following section shall be substituted,

section for namely:

section 146.

Punishment “146. Whoever, fails to comply with any
for pace order or direction given under this Act,
eK cniiaee or within such time as may be specified in the
directions. said order or direction or contravenes or

attempts or abets the contravention of any


of the provisions of this Act or any rules or
regulations made thereunder, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months or with
fine which may extend to one crore rupees,
or with both in respect of each offence and
in the case of a continuing failure, with an
additional fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees for every day during which the
failure continues after conviction of the first
such offence:

Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to the orders, instructions
or directions issued under section 121:

Provided further that in case of non-
compliance of by a generating company
generating Renewable Energy, any person in
charge of such generating company shall be
liable for imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months or such
generating company shall be liable to pay
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees,
or with both in respect of each offence and
in the case of a continuing failure, with an
additional fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for every day during which
the failure continues after conviction of the
first such offence.".

० ion 149 of the Act shall be Omission of
i ननतामब ३४००५ कुल

59. In section 162 of the principal Act, after Amendment
sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall of section 162,
be inserted, namely: —

“(1A) The Appropriate Government may
prescribe—

(a) the qualification, training,
powers and functions of the Chief
Electrical Inspector and Electrical
Inspectors;

(b) the fees and charges payable for
undertaking the testing, Inspection and
services by the Chief Electrical Inspector
and Electrical Inspectors; and


Amendment
af section 166,

Amendment

(८) the manner of inspection to be
performed by the Chief Electrical
Inspector and the Electrical Inspectors.

60. In section 166 of the principal Act,—

{i} for the marginal heading
“Coordination forum”, the marginal heading
“Coordination Forum, Forum of Regulations
and District Committee” shall be substituted;

(#) in sub-section (2), for the words
“State Commissions”, the words “which shall
perform such functions as may be prescribed
by the Central Government” shall be
inserted;

(ili) in sub-section (4), for the words
“and distribution licensees engaged in
generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity” the words “distribution licensees
and supply licensee engaged in generation,
transmission, distribution and supply of
electricity” shall be substituted;

(iv) after sub-section (5), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“(6) The decisions of the
Coordination committee constituted
under sub-section (5) shali be placed
before the appropriate commission
within a period not exceeding seven
days.

(7) The Central Government shall
constitute a Forum of Electrical
Inspectors consisting of the Chief
Electrical Inspectors and the Electrical
Inspectors of the Central Government
and the State Governments and specify
its functions.”.

61, In section 176 of the principal Act, in

Stsection 76. sub-section (2)-

224

(i) after clause (d), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
(da) the option of the consumer to
choose the supply of licensee under
sub-section (2) of section 518;


{db} the consumption of the
electricity, more than the quantity of
electricity In a month, by such
consumers under the proviso to
sub-section (2) section 55;";

(1) in clause (g), for the words, brackets
and figures “sub-section (14)", the words,
brackets and figure “sub-section (2)" shall
be substituted:

(iff) In clause (h), for the words, brackets
and figures “sub-section (15)", the words,
brackets and figure “sub-section (4)” shail
be substituted;

(iv) after clause (i), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

“{ia) the composition of the
selection Committee for appointment of
Chairperson and Members of Regional
Commission, the qualifications, terms
and conditions of services of the
Chairperson, Members of the Regional
Commission, etc., under section 83A;";

(४) after clause (p), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(pa) the composition, functions and
terms of reference of the Committee
under sub-section (3) of section 109A;";

(vi) after clause (u), the following clause
shall be inserted, namety;—

“(ua) the functions of the
intermediary under clause (c) of
sub-section (4A) of section 131;”.

62. In section 177 of the principal Act, in Amendment
Sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the words of section
and figures “under section 34”, the words “and '77-
also measures for smart grid and ancillary
services” shall be inserted.

63, In section 180 of the principal Act, in amendment
sub-section (2), sees

225


(i) after clause (a), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:-

“(aa) the manner of collection and
realisation of other dues along with
electricity dues under section 454;";

(ii) after clause (m), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

(ma) the powers to be exercised and the
functions to be performed and the manner of
inspection by the Chief Electrical Inspectors and
the Inspectors under sub-section (1A) af section
162;",

Insertion of 64, After section 185 of the principal Act,

ee the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

Power to "186. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
२ effect to the provisions of the Electricity

{Amendment) Act, 2014, the Central
Government may, by order published, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of five
years from the date of commencement of
this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.”.

226


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Electricity Act, 2003 (the said Act) was enacted to consolidate
the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and
use of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive to
development of electricity industry, promoting competition therein,
protecting interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas,
rationalisation of electricity tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding
subsidies, promotion of efficient and environmentally benign policies,
constitution of the Central Electricity Authority, Regulatory Commissions
and establishment of Appellate Tribunal,

2. A Working Group on Power was constituted by the
Planning Commission on the 4th March, 2011 for the purpose of
development of power sector, The said Group, after consultation with
various stakeholders, recommended for amendments in the said Act.
Based on its recommendations and experience gained during the years,
it was felt that there is a need to review and amend some of the
provisions keeping in view the overall objectives of the said Act to
bring in further competition and efficiency in the distribution sector by
giving choice to the consumers, promotion of renewable energy,
maintenance of grid security, rationalisation of tariff determination and
Strengthening of the Regulatory Commissions.

3. The amendments to the said Act have been proposed to segregate
the carriage (distribution sector/network) from the content (electricity
supply business) in the pawer sector by introducing multiple supply
licensees in the content based on market principles and continuing with
the carriage (distribution network) as a regulated activity. The proposed
amendments also provide for recovery of revenue by licensees without
any revenue gap, timely filing of tariff petitions by utilities and disposal
of the same by the Appropriate Commission within a specified time
period and empowering the Appropriate Commissions for initiating
suo motu proceedings for determination of tariff in case the utility or
generating companies do not file their petitions in time.

4. Moreover, It is felt necessary to improve accountability and
transparency in the working of the Appropriate Commissions without
affecting their functional autonomy and te bring clarity in the provisions
pertaining to the Central Electricity Authority, Further, granting deemed
licensee status to companies notified by the Central Government, the
provision of composite electricity bills, installation of smart meters
beyond a consumption level to be prescribed by the Central Government,

227


dedicated transmission lines and certain modifications in the composition
of the Selection Committees at Central and State level for selection of

the

Chairperson and Members of the regulatory Commissions are some

of the other amendments proposed in the said Act.

5. Accordingly, the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014, Inter alia,

proposes: —

228

(a) to substitute section 3 of the said Act so as to make the
provisions for National Renewable Energy Policy in addition to the
existing National Electricity Policy and Plan;

(09) to amend section 7 of the said Act to provide for setting up
of renewable energy generating station with a spinning reserve;

(०) to substitute section 14 of the said Act so as to grant
separate licence for distribution and supply and for specific
exemptions to promote renewable energy;

(०) to amend sub-section (8) of section 15 of the said Act so as
to substitute the period of licence from twenty five years to such
period as may be specified by the Appropriate Commission.

(९) to amend sections 29 and 33 of the said Act so as to
enhance the penalty for non-compliance of directions by the
concerned Load Despatch Centres;

(f) to substitute section 34 of the said Act so as to include the
dedicated transmission lines under Grid Standards;

18) to insert a new section 454 in the said Act so as to provide
that the Appropriate Government may, in consultation with the
Appropriate Commission and the concerned authorities, prescribe
the manner of collection and realisation of any dues under the
relevant laws for the time being in force in that State, along with
the electricity dues;

(0) to insert new Parts VIA and VIB in the said Act relating to
supply of electricity and other provisions relating to distribution
and supply of electricity respectively;

{i) to insert a new section 59A enabling the Appropriate
Government to recommend to Appropriate Commission for revocation
of licence;

() to amend section 61 of the said Act so as to promote hydro
power, reduction in regulatory assets and making the Tariff Policy
mandatory;


(0) to insert @ new section 109A in the said Act relating to
“review of performance of Appropriate Commission” to constitute
a Committee for reviewing the performance of the said Commission;
and

(0) to amend section 162 of the said Act so as to empower the
Appropriate Government to make the rules relating to qualification,
training, powers and functions of the Chief Electrical Inspectors,
Electrical Inspectors and levy of fees.

6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deva; PIYUSH GOYAL
The 16th December, 2014,

229



Notes on clauses

Clause 2.— This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the principal
Act to amend certain definitions and to insert the new definitions
relating to “ancillary services”, “area of distribution”, “decentralised
distributed generation”, “Electricity Distribution Code", “incumbent-
supply licensee”, “intermediary company”, “obligated entity”, “renewable
energy sources”, “renewable energy service company”, “smart grid”
and “provider of last resort”.

Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the principal Act
to provide for ३ separate National Renewable Energy Policy for the
promotion of renewable sources of energy and for measures to promote
smart grid, ancillary services and decentralised distribution generation,
etc.

Clause 4.— This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the principal
Act to provide for harnessing solar power and renewable sources included
as a part of the National Policy in the context of the stand alone
system.

Clause 5.— This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act
50 as to substitute the expression “area” with the expression “parts of
the country".

Clause 6.—This clause seeks to substitute section 7 of the principal
Act to provide for maintenance of spinning reserve of certain capacity
by the generating company and further provide that any generating
company establishing a coal and lignite based thermal generating station
after a date and in a manner to be notified shall be required to
establish a Renewable Energy Generation Capacity as prescribed by the
Central Government from time to time which shall not be less than ten
per cent, of the thermal power installed capacity.

Clause 7.— This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the principal
Act to provide that the multipurpose hydro power with power generation
shall be included as a part of hydro-electric generation. Further, it is
provided that the Central Electricity Authority while giving concurrence
to the hydro stations should take into account the maintenance of
minimum ecological flow in the river.

Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 12 of the principal
Act so as to introduce the provision of a supply licensee and also to
make other consequential changes due to the segregation of carriage
and content,

230


Clause 9.~This clause seeks to substitute section 14 of the principal
Act empowering the Appropriate Commission to grant ticence to any
person to transmit electricity as transmission licensee or to distribute
electricity as a distribution licensee,

Clause 10. -- This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the principal
Act so as to clarify that the period of license shall be specified by the
Appropriate Commission,

Clause 11.— This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the principal
Act to bring clarity in respect of provisions pertaining to expiry,
revocation of licence and regarding purchase price of utility,

Clause 12.— This clause seeks to substitute section 24 of the principal
Act so as to enable the Appropriate Commission to suspend the licence
of the distribution licensee or a supply licensee and appoint an
administrator to discharge the functions of the distribution licensee or
a supply licensee in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
licence.

Clause 13.— This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions by
the Regional Load Despatch Centres.

Clause 14.— This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the principal
Act to increase the quantum of penalty for violation of directions by
the State Load Despatch Centres.

Clause 15.— This clause seeks to substitute section 34 of the principal
Act to provide for compliance of Grid Standards as specified by the
Central Electricity Authority by any licensee or a generating company
oF any person maintaining a dedicated transmission line or any other
person whose system is connected to the Grid.

Clause 16.— This clause seeks to amend section 37 of the principal
Act to empower the Appropriate Government to issue directions for
Grid security and safety,

Clouse 17.— This clause seeks to amend section 38 of the principal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through open access
shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the transmission
charges. Further, it has been clarified that the surcharge shail be as
specified by the Appropriate State Commission instead of the Central
Commission as it is the State Commission which deals with the cross
subsidy and not the Central Commission,

Clouse 18,— This clause seeks to amend section 39 of the princtpal
Act to provide that a consumer getting electricity through open access

231



shall be subject to payment of surcharge in addition to the transmission
charges.

Clause 19.~ This clause seeks to amend section 40 of the principal
Act to clarify that the quantum of surcharge to be paid as specified by
the Appropriate Commission of the State where the end-use premise of
the consumer is located.

Clause 20.— This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the principal
Act so as to specify the duties of distribution licensee and also provide
certain provisions relating to open access.

Clause 21.- This clause seeks to substitute section 43 of the principal
Act so as to provide that every distribution licensee, shall, on an
application by the owner or occupier of any premises in the area of
distribution, give connection to such premises to enable supply of
electricity, within fifteen days after receipt of the application requiring
such supply.

Clause 22.— This clause seeks to amend section 44 of the principal
Act so as to substitute the words “licence to give supply” with the
words “licence to distribute electricity.”

Clause 23.— This clause seeks to substitute section 45 of the principal
Act so as to provide that the prices to be charged by a distribution
licensee for the distribution of electricity by him in pursuance of section
43 shall be in accordance with such tariffs determined by the Appropriate
Commission and such charges authorised by the Appropriate Commission
06 otherwise fixed from time-to-time as per conditions of his licence.

Clause 24.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 45A in the
principal Act so as to provide that the Appropriate Government may, in
consultation with the Appropriate Commission and the concerned
authorities, prescribe the manner of collection and realisation of any
dues under the relevant laws for the time being in force in that State,
along with the electricity dues.

Clouse 25.— This clause seeks to amend section 46 of the principal
Act ५० as to substitute the words “requiring a supply of electricity”,
with the words “requiring connectivity to the distribution system” and
the words “giving and supply”, with the words “giving and maintaining
the connection for enabling supply of electricity”.

Clause 26.— This clause seeks to amend section 47 of the principal
Act so as to provide that a distribution licensee in the area of distribution
may require any person, who requires connectivity to the distribution

232


system in pursuance of section 51A, to give him reasonable security, for
the payment to him of all monies which may become due to him in
respect of the electricity distributed to such person or where any
electric line or electrical plant or electric meter is to be provided for
distributing electricity to such person, in respect of the provision of
such Line or plant or meter, and if that person fails to give such security,
the distribution licensee may, if he thinks fit, refuse to distribute
electricity or to pravide the line or plant or meter for the period during
which the failure continues.

Clause 27,— This clause seeks to amend section 48 of the principal
Act so as to substitute the words “supply of electricity”, with the words
“distribution of electricity" and the word “supplied”, with the word
“distributed”.

Clause 28, - This clause seeks to substitute section 49 of the principal
Act so as provide that with effect from the commencement of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014, all consumers having a connected
load of 1 Mega Watt and above may enter into an agreement with any
person for supply or purchase of electricity an such terms and conditions
(inctuding tariff) as may be agreed upon by them.

Clause 29.— This clause seeks to substitute section 50 of the principal
Act so as to provide that the State Commission shall specify an electricity
distribution code to provide for recovery of electricity charges, intervals
for billing of electricity charges, disconnection of connectivity of
electricity for non-payment thereof, restoration of supply of etectricity,
measures for preventing tampering, distress or damage to electrical
plant or electrical line or meter, entry of distribution licensee or any
Person acting on his behalf for disconnecting connection and removing
the meter, entry for replacing, altering or maintaining electric tines or
electrical plants or meter and such other matters.

Clause 30,- This clause seeks to insert a new Part VIA in the
Principal Act containing sections 51A to 51G to deal with the supply of
electricity as distinct from the distribution of electricity.

Clause 31,.— This clause seeks to insert a new Part VIB in the
principal Act containing section 51H to deal with the common provisions
applicable to both the distribution and supply function.

Clause 32.— This clause seeks to amend section 54 of the principal
Act whereby the metro railway under the Metro Railways (Operation
Maintenance) Act, 2002 has been added in addition to Railways in view
of the necessity ta treat both alike.

233


Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 55 of the principal
Act whereby additions have been made for proper energy accounting at
various stages through an appropriate meter.

Clause 34,— This clause seeks to amend section 56 of the principal
Act and a provision has been made in regard to pre-paid meters, wherein
the concept of notice for disconmection shall not be required.

Clause 35.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 59A in the
principal Act to enable the Appropriate Government to recommend for
revocation of licence due to non-compliance of standard of performance
by the licensee.

Clause 36,— This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the principal
Act whereby certain additional guidelines have been added in regard to
tariff determination. It has been specifically provided that the provisions
of the Tariff Poticy shall be followed by the Appropriate Commission in
the tariff determination,

Clause 37.— This clause seeks to substitute section 62 of the principal
Act so as to provide the determination of tariff by the Appropriate
Commission for the reasons mentioned in the sub-section (1) of the said
section. It is further provided that the tariff determined by the
Appropriate Commission for a licensee shall provide for recovery of all
prudent costs of the licensee approved by the Appropriate Commission
in the monthly bills during the tariff period through an appropriate
price adjustment formula including wherever applicable the fuel, power
purchase and procurement price surcharge formula as may be specified
in the Tariff Policy. It is also provided that the Appropriate Commission
may require a licensee or a generating company to furnish separate
details, as may be specified in respect of generation, transmission,
distribution and supply for determination of tariff.

Clause 38.— This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the principal
Act so as to provide the consequences of tariff petition not being filed
in time by the Utilities and enables the Appropriate Commission to
proceed ahead in view of the importance of timely tariff revision for
viability of the power sector.

Clause 39.— This clause seeks to substitute section 66 of the principal
Act $0 as to provide that the Appropriate Commission shall endeavour
to promote the development of a market (including trading and forward
and futures contract) in power and a market for encouraging energy
efficiency In power in such manner as may be specified and shall be
guided by the National Electricity Policy, referred to in section 3, and
other directions issued by the Central Government in the public interest
from time to time.

234


Clause 40.~ This clause seeks to amend section 67 of the principal
Act 50 as to make certain consequential amendments on account of the
segregation of distribution and supply functions.

Clause 41.— This clause seeks to amend section 68 of the principal
Act $0 as to make certain amendments in the said section which are
consequential in nature.

Clause 42.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 69A in the
Principal Act for taking prior consent of the existing licensee while
Carrying on any activity in the area of licensee, This is to protect the
interest of the existing licensee and to avoid interruptions in the power
system.

Clause 43,- This clause seeks to amend section 70 of the principal
Act so as to bring clarity in the provisions relating the Central Electricity
Authority,

Clause 44.— This clause seeks to amend section 78 of the principal
Act So as ta make certain amendments in the provisions of the Selection
Committee to select Members of the Central Commission,

Clause 45.— This clause seeks to amenk! section 79 of the principal
Act so as to include 8 new clause in sub-section (1) of the said section
relating to functions of the Central Commission,

Clause 46.— This clause seeks to amend section 85 of the principal
Act $0 as to make certain amendments in the provisions of the Selection
Committee to setect Members of the State Commission.

Clause 47,- This clause seeks to amend section 86 of the principal

Act so as to provide additional functions being discharged by the State
Commission.

Clause 48.— This clause seeks to amend section 89 of the principal
Act 50 as to provide the duration of the period of Chairman and Members
of the State and Central Commission to be reduced fram five years to
three years and with a provision of re-appointment for one more term
of three years,

Clause 49.— This clause seeks to amend section 90 of the principal
Act so as to provide the conditions under which a Member of the
Commission can be removed on the basis of non-performance as adjudged
by a Committee to be constituted by the Forum of Regulators.

Clause 50.— This clause seeks to amend section 92 of the principal
Act to provide that the Appropriate Commission shall decide the matters
expeditiously and in case of delay, the reasons shall be recorded by the
Commission.

235



Clause 51,— This clause seeks to amend section 94 of the principal
Act to provide that the Appropriate Commission shall appoint a person
to represent the interest of the consumers.

Clause 52.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 109A in
regard to the appointment of a Committee by Forum for Regulators to
review the performance of the Appropriate Commission.

Clause 53.— This clause seeks to amend section 127 of the principal
Act to provide that the Ombudsman to be appointed under sub-section
(6) of section 42 shall be the Appellate Authority.

Clause 54. This clause seeks to amend the marginal heading of
“Part XIIl - Re-organisation of Board”, as “Part XIll - Re-organisation of
Board and Distribution Licensee” where the amendment is consequential
in nature.

Clause 55.— This clause seeks to amend section 131 of the principal
Act to provide for re-organisations provisions to implement the
segregation of the distribution functions and supply functions through
a statutory scheme.

Clause 56.— This clause seeks to substitute section 142 of the
principal Act to provide punishment for non-compliance of directions by
the Appropriate Commission. The said section provide that for non-
compliance of directions, the generating company or licensee shal pay,
by way of penalty, which shall not exceed one crore rupees for each
contravention and in case of continuing failure with an additional penalty
which may extend to one lakh rupees for every day during which the
failure continues.

Clause 57.— This clause seeks to amend section 146 of the principal
Act to provide punishment for non-compliance of orders or directions
given under the Act with an imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees,
or with both in respect of each offence and in case of continuing
failure with an additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees
for every day during which the failure continues.

Clause 58.— This clause provides for omission of section 149 of the
principal Act as substantive provisions of the Act cover matters relating
to offences by the company.

Clause 59.— This clause seeks to amend section 162 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Appropriate Government to make the rules
relating to qualification, training, powers and functions of the Chief
Electrical Inspectors, Electrical Inspectors and levy of fees.

236


Clause 60,— This clause seeks to amend section 166 of the principal
Act so as to make certain amendments in the said section which are
consequential in nature,

Clause 61,- This clause seeks to amend section 176 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to frame rules on certain
matters which have been inserted by the proposed amendments.

Clause 62,- This clause seeks to amend section 177 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Electricity Authority to frame
regulations on certain matters which have been inserted by the proposed
amendments.

Clause 63,— This clause seeks to amend section 180 of the principal
Act to empower the State Government to frame rules on certain matters
which have been inserted by the proposed amendments.

Clause 64.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 186 to empower
the Central Government to issue orders for removal of difficulty while
during implementation of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014,

237


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to amend section 176 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 which empowers the Central Government to make rules. The
matters on which rules may be made inter alia, relate to (a) the option
‘of the consumer to choose the supply of licensee under sub-section (2)
of section 518; (b) the consumption of the electricity more than the
quantity of electricity in a month, by such consumers under the proviso
to sub-section (2) of section 55; (c) the composition, functions and
terms of reference of the Committee under sub-section (3) of
section 109A, and (6) the functions of the intermediary company under
clause (c) of sub-section (4A) of section 131.

2. Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to amend section 177 of the Electricity
Act which empowers the Central Electricity Authority to make
regulations and for this purpose, it is proposed to amend clause (a) of
sub-section (2) of said section which is consequential in nature.

3, Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to amend section 180 of the principal
Act, which empowers the State Government to make rules. The matters
on which rules may be made, inter alia, relate to (a) the manner of
collection and realisation of other dues along with electricity dues
under section 458 and; (b) the powers to be exercised and the functions
to be performed and the manner of inspection by the Chief Electrical
Inspectors and the inspectors under sub-section (14) of section 162.

4, The matters in respect of which the said rules and regulations
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and
as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power ts, therefore, of a normal character.

238


EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,

(7) . . . .

(3) “area of supply” means the area
within which a distribution licensee Is
authorised by his licence to supply
electricity;

(8) “Captive generating plant” means a
power plant set up by any person to generate
electricity primarily for his own use and includes
ब power plant set up by any co-operative society
or association of persons for generating
electricity primarily for use of members of such
co-operative society or association;

(12) “Cogeneration” means a process which
simultaneously produces two or more forms of
useful energy (including electricity);

(16) “dedicated transmission lines” means
any electric supply-line for point to point
transmission which are required for the purpose
of connecting electric lines or electric plants of
@ captive generating plant referred to in
section 9 or generating station referred to in
section 10 ta any transmission lines or
sub-stations or generating stations, or the load
centre, as the case may be;

ANNEXURE

Definitions.

239


240

(17) “distribution licensee” means a licensee
authorised to operate and maintain a distribution

system for supplying electricity to the consumers
in his area of supply;

. . . . .

(23) “electricity” means electrical energy—

(०) generated, transmitted, supplied or
traded for any purpose; or

. . . . .

(24) “Electricity Supply Code” means the
Electricity Supply Code specified under
section 50;

(31) “Government company” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956;

. . . . .

(35) “high voltage tine" means an electric
line or cable of a nominal voltage as may be
specified by the Authority from time to time;

. . . . .

{41) “local authority” means any Nagar
Panchayat, Municipal Council, municipal
corporation, Panchayat constituted at the
village, intermediate and district tevels, body
of port commissioners or other authority legaily
entitled to, or entrusted by the Union or any
State Government with, the control or
management of any area or local fund;

. * . . .

(71) “trading” means purchase of electricity
for resale thereof and the expression “trade”
shall be construed accordingly;

(72) “transmission lines” means all high
pressure cables and overhead lines (not being
an essential part of the distribution system of a

Section 1 of
1956.


licensee) transmitting electricity from a
generating station to another generating station
Or a sub-station, together with any step-up and
step-down transformers, switch-gear and other
works necessary to and used for the control of
such cables or overhead lines, and such buildings
or part thereof as may be required to
accommodate such transformers, switch-gear
and other works;

PART ॥
NATIONAL ELECTRICITY POLICY AND PLAN

3. (1) The Central Government shall, from
time to time, prepare the National Electricity
Policy and tariff policy, in consultation with the
State Governments and the Authority for
development of the power system based on
optimal utilisation of resources such as coal,
natural gas, nuclear substances or materials,
hydro and renewable sources of energy.

(2) The Central Government shall publish
the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy
from time to time.

(3) The Central Government may, from time
to time, in consultation with the State
Governments and the Authority, review or revise
the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy
referred to in sub-section (1).

(4) The Authority shall prepare a National
Electricity Plan in accordance with the National
Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in
five years:

Provided that the Authority while preparing
the National Electricity Pian shall publish the
draft National Electricity Plan and invite
Suggestions and objections theron from licenses,
generating companies and publish within such
time as may be prescribed;

241


National
palicy on
stand slone
systems for
rural arees
and non-

242

Provided further that the Authority shall—

{a) notify the plan after obtaining the
approval of the Central Government;

{b) revise the plan incorporating therein
the directions, if any, given by the Central
Government while granting approval under
clause (a).

(5) The Authority may review or revise the
National Electricity Plan in accordance with the
National Electricity Policy.

4. The Central Government shall, after
consultation with the State Governments,
prepare and notify a national policy, permitting
stand alone systems (including those based on
renewable sources of energy and other non-
conventional sources of energy) for rural areas.

. . . छः .

6. The concemed State Government and the
Central Government shall jointly endeavour to
provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets through rural
electricity infrastructure and electrification of
households.

PART ॥
GENERATING OF ELECTRICITY

7. Any generating company may establish,
operate and maintain a generating station
without obtaining a licence under this Act if it
complies with the technical standards relating
to connectivity with the grid referred to in
clause (09) of section 73.

8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 7, any generating company intending
to set up a hydro-generating station shall prepare
and submit to the Authority for its concurrence,
a scheme estimated to invoive a capital
expenditure exceeding such sum, as may be
fixed by the Central Government, from time to
time, by notification.


(2) The Authority shall, before concurring
in any scheme submitted to it under sub-section
(11 have particular regard to, whether or not in
its opinion,—

PART IV
LICENSING
12. No person shall—
{a) transmit electricity; or
(0) distribute electricity; or

(८) undertake trading in electricity,
unless he is authorised to do so by a licence
issued under section 14, or is exernpt under
section 13.

. * . . .

14. The Appropriate commission may, on an
application made to it under section 15, grant
a licence to any person—

(a) to transmit electricity as a trans-
mission; or

(0) to distribute electricity as a distri-
bution licensee; or

(८) to undertake trading in electricity
35 an electricity trader, in any area as may
be specified in the licence:

Provided that any person engaged in the
business of transmission or supply of electricity
under the provisions of the repealed laws or
any Act specified in the Schedule on or before
the appointed date shall be deemed to be a
licensee under this Act for such period as may
be stipulated in the licence, clearance or
approval granted to him under the repealed laws
or such Act specified in the Schedule, and the
provisions of the repealed laws or such Act
specified in the Schedule in respect of such
licence shall apply for a period of one year

Grant of
licence.

243


244

from the date of commencement of this Act or
such earlier period as may be specified, at the
request of the licensee, by the Appropriate
Commission and thereafter the provisions of this
Act shall apply to such business:

Provided further that the Central
Transmission Utility or the State Transmission
Utility shall be deemed to be a transmission
licensee under this Act:

Provided also that in case an Appropriate
Government transmits electricity or distributes
electricity or undertakes trading in electricity,
whether before or after the commencement of
this Act, such Government shall be deemed to
be a licensee under this Act, but shall not be
required to obtain a licence under this Act:

Provided also that the Damodar Valley
Corporation, established under sub-section (1)
14 of 1948. of section 3 of the Damodar Valley
Corporation Act, 1948, shall be deemed to be a
licensee under this Act but shall not be required
to obtain a licence under this Act and the
provisions of the Damodar Valley Corporation
Act, 1948, in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, shall continue to
apply to that Corporation:

Provided also that the Government company
or the company referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 131 of this Act and the company or
companies created in pursuance of the Acts
specified in the Schedule, shall be deemed to
be a licensee under this Act:

Provided also that the Appropriate
‘Commission may grant a licence to two or more
persons for distribution of electricity through
their own distribution system within the same
area, subject to the conditions that the applicant
for grant of licence within the same area shall,
without prejudice to the other conditions or


requirements under this Act, comply with the
additional requirements relating to the capital
adequacy, creditworthiness, or code of conduct
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and no such applicant, who
complies with all the requirements for grant of
licence, shall be refused grant of licence on the
ground that there already exists a licensee in
the same area for the same purpose:

Provided also that in a case where a
distribution licensee proposes to undertake
distribution of electricity for a specified area
within his area of supply through another person,
that person shall not be required to obtain any
separate licence from the concerned State
Commission and such distribution licensee shall
be responsible for distribution of electricity in
his area of supply:

Provided also that where a person intends
to generate and distribute electricity in a rural
area to be notified by the State Government,
such person shall not require any licence for
such generation and distribution of electricity,
but he shall comply with the measures which
may be specified by the Authority under
section 53:

Provided also that a distribution licensee
shall not require a licence to undertake trading
in etectricity.

15. (1) * . . . *

(8) A licence shall continue to be in force
for a period of twenty-five years unless such
licence is revoked,

. . * . .

20. (1) Where the Appropriate Commission
revokes under section 19 the licence of any
licensee, the following provisions shall apply,
namely:—

(०) the Appropriate Commission shalt
invite applications for acquiring the utility

for grant of
licence,

Sale of
utilities of
licensees,

245


distribution
licence and
sale of
utility.

246

of the licensee whose licence has been
revoked and determine which of such
applications should be accepted, primarily
on the basis of the highest and best price
offered for the utility;

. . . . .

{c) all the rights, duties, obligations and
liabilities of the licensee, on and from the date
of revocation of licence or on and from the
date, if earlier, on which the utility of the
licensee Is sold to a purchaser, shall obsolutely
cease except for any liabilities which have
accrued prior to that date;

. . * . .

(2) Where a utility is sold under sub-
section (1), the purchaser shall pay to the
licensee the purchase price of the utility in such
manner as may be agreed upon.

(3) Where the Appropriate Commission issues
any notice under sub-section (1) requiring the
licensee to sell the utility, it may, by such notice,
require the licensee to detiver the utility, and
thereupon the licensee shall deliver on a date
specified in the notice, the utility to the
designated purchaser on payment of the
purchase price thereof.

24. (1) If at any time the Appropriate
Commission ts of the opinion that a distribution
licensee—

(9) has persistently failed to maintain
uninterrupted supply of electricity conforming
to standards regarding quality of electricity to
the consumers; or

(०) is unable to discharge the functions or

perform the duties imposed on it by or under
the provisions of this Act; or

(८) has persistently defaulted in complying
with any direction given by the Appropriate
Commission under this Act; or


(d) has broken the terms and conditions of
licence, and circumstances exist which render
it necessary for it in public interest so to do,
the Appropriate Commission may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, suspend, for a period
not exceeding one year, the licence of the
distribution licensee and appoint an
Administrator to discharge the functions of the
distribution licensee in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the licence:

Provided that before suspending a licence
under this section, the Appropriate Commission
shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
distribution licensee to make representations
against the proposed suspension of licence and
shall consider the representation, If any, of the
distribution licensee.

(2) Upon suspension of licence under sub-
section (1), the utilities of the distribution
licensee shall vest in the Administrator for a
period not exceeding one year or up to the
date on which such utility is sold in accordance
with the provisions contained in section 20,
whichever is later.

(3) The Appropriate Commission shall, within
one year of appointment of the Administrator
under sub-section (1), either revoke the licence
fn accordance with the provisions contained in
section 19 or revoke suspension of the licence
and restore the utility to the distribution
licensee whose licence had been suspended, as
the case may be.

(4) In a case where the Appropriate
Commission revokes the licence under sub-
section (3), the utility of the distribution licensee
shall be sold within a period of one year from
the date of revocation of the licence in
accordance with the provisions of section 20
and the price after deducting the administrative
and other expenses on sale of utilities be
remitted to the distribution licensee.

27


of
Girections.

directions,

Grid

iL

Government,

Trarsmission
७छा and
functions.

248

* * * . .
29.41)" . . . .

(6) If any licensee, generating company or
any other person fails to comply with the
directions issued under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3), he shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding rupees fifteen lacs.

33, (1)* . . .

(5) If any licensee, generating company or
any other person fails to comply with the
directions issued under sub-section (1), he shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees five
lacs.

Other provisions relating to transmission

34, Every transmission licensee shall comply
with such technical standards, of operation and
maintenance of transmission lines, in accordance
with the Grid Standards, as may be specified by
the Authority.

. . . . .

37. The Appropriate Government may issue
directions to the Regional Load Despatch Centres
or State Load Despatch Centres, as the case
may be, to take such measures as may be
necessary for maintaining smooth and stable
transmission and supply of electricity to any
region or State.

38. (1) * . . . .

(2) The functions of the Central Transmission
Utility shall be—

(0) to provide non-discriminatory open

access to its transmission system for use
by-


. . . . .

(if) any consumer as and when such open
access fs provided by the State Commission
under sub-section (2) of section 42, on
payment of the transmission charges and a
surcharge thereon, as may be specified by
the Central Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised
for the purpose of meeting the requirement of
current level cross-subsidy:

Provided further that such surcharge and
cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced
omitted in the manner as may be specified by
the Centrat Commission:

Provided also that the manner of payment
and utilisation of the surchage shall be specified
by the Central Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable In case open access is provided to
3 person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use.

39.01) * . . . .

(2) The functions of the State Transmission
Utility shall be—

. . . . .

4) to provide non-discriminatory open
access to its transmission system for use
by—

. . - . .

(fi) any consumer as and when such open
access fs provided by the State Commission
under sub-section (2) of section 42, on
payment of the transmission charges and a
surcharge thereon, as may be specified by
the State Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised
for the purpose af meeting the requirement of
current level cross-subsidy:

Transmission
Utility and
functions.


Duties of
‘transmission

250

Provided further that such surcharge and
cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced in
the manner as may be specified by the State
Commission:

Provided also that the manner of payment
and utilisation of the surcharge shall be specified
by the State Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable in case open access is provided to
@ person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use,

40, It shall be the duty of a transmission
licensee—

. . . . .

(c) to provide non-discriminatory open access
to its transmission system for use by—

. . . . .

(#) any consumer as and when such open
is provided by the State Commission under
sub-section (2) of section 42, on payment of
the transmission charges and a surcharge
thereon, as may be specified by the State
Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised
for the purpose of meeting the requirement of
current level cross-subsidy:

Provided further that such surcharge and
cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced in
the manner as may be specified by the
Appropriate Commission:

Provided also that the manner of payment
and utilisation of the surcharge shall be specified
by the Appropriate Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable in case open access is provided to
@ person who has established a captive


generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use.

. . . . .

PART VI
DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY

Provisions with respect to distribution
licensees

42. (1) It shall be the duty of a distribution
licensee to develop and maintain an efficient,
co-ordinated and economical distribution system
in his area of supply and to supply electricity in
accordance with the provisions contained in this
Act.

(2) The State Commission shall introduce
open access in such phases and subject to such
conditions, {including the cross subsidies, and
other operational constraints) as may be
Specified within one year of the appointed date
by it and in specifying the extent of open access
in successive phases and in determining the
charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard
to all relevant factors including such cross
subsidies, and other operational constraints:

Provided that such open access shall be
allowed on payment of a surcharge in addition
to the charges for wheeling as may be
determined by the State Commission:

Provided further that such surcharge shall
be utilised to meet the requirements of current
level of cross subsidy within the area of suppty
of the distribution licensee:

Provided also that such surcharge and cross
subsidies shall be progressively reduced in the
manner as may be specified by the State
Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable in case open access is provided to
a person who has established a captive

Duties of

distribution
licensee and
open access.

251



252

generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use:

Provided also that the State Commission
shall, not later than five years from the date of
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2003, by regulations, provide such open
access to all consumers who require a supply of
electricity where the maximum power to be
made available at any time exceeds one
megawatt.

(3) Where any person, whose premises are
situated within the area of supply of a
distribution licensee, (not being a tocal authority
engaged in the business of distribution of
electricity before the appointed date) requires
a supply of electricity from a generating
company or any licensee other than such
distribution licensee, such person may, by notice,
require the distribution licensee for wheeling
such electricity in accordance with regulations
made by the State Commission and the duties
of the distribution licensee with respect to such
supply shall be of a common carrier providing
non-discriminatory open access.

(4) Where the State Commission permits a
consumer or class of consumers to receive supply
of electricity from a person other than the
distribution licensee of his area of supply, such
consumer shall be liable to pay an additional
surcharge on the charges of wheeling, as may
be specified by the State Commission, to meet
the fixed cost of such distribution licensee arising
out of his obligation to supply.

(5) Every distribution licensee shall, within
six months from the appointed date or date of
grant of licence, whichever is earlier, establish
a forum for redressal of grievances of the
consumers in accordance with the guidelines as
may be specified by the State Commission,

16) Any consumer, who is aggrieved by non-
redressal of his grievances under sub-section (5),

57 of 2003


may make a representation for the redressal of
his grievance to an authority to be known as
Ombudsman to be appointed or designated by
the State Commission.

(7) The Ombudsman shall settle the
grievance of the consumer within such time and
in such manner as may be specified by the State
Commission.

{8) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (6)
and (7) shall be without prejudice to right which
the consumer may have apart from the rights
conferred upon him by those sub-sections.

43, (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, every distribution licensee, shall, on a
application by the owner or occupier of any
premises, give supply of electricity to such
premises, within one month after receipt of the
application requiring such supply:

Provided that where such supply requires
extension of distribution mains, or commissioning
of new sub-stations, the distribution licensee
shall supply the electricity to such premises
immediately after such extension or
commissioning or within such period as may be
specified by the Appropriate Commission:

Provided further that in case of a village or
hamtet or area wherein no provisions for supply
of electricity exists, the Appropriate Commission
may extend the said period as it may consider
necessary for electrification of such village or
hamlet or area.

Explanation._For the purposes of this sub-
section,“application” means the application
complete in all respects in the appropriate form,
as required by the distribution licensee, along
with documents showing payment of necessary
charges and other compliances.

(2) tt shall be the duty of every distribution
licensee to provide, if required, electric plant
or electric line for giving electric supply to the

253


Exceptions
from duty to

supply
electricity.

24

premises specified in sub-section (1):

Provided that no person shall be entitled to
demand, or to continue to receive, from a
licensee a supply of electricity for any premises
having a separate supply unless he has agreed
with the licensee to pay to him such price as
determined by the Appropriate Commission.

(3) If a distribution licensee fails to supply
the electricity within the period specified in
sub-section (1), he shall be lable to a penalty
which may extend to one thousand rupees for
each day of default,

44, Nothing contained in section 43 shall be
taken as requiring a distribution licensee to give
supply of electricity to any premises if he is
prevented from so doing by cyclone, floods,
storms or other occurences beyond his control.

45. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, the prices to be charged by a
distribution licensee for the supply of electricity
by him in pursuance of section 43 shall be in
accordance with such tariffs fixed from time to
time and conditions of his licence.

(2) The charges for electricity supplied by a
distribution licensee shall be—

(a) fixed in accordance with the methods
and the principles as may be specified by
the concerned State Commission;

{b) published in such manner so as to
give adequate publicity for such charges and
prices.

(3) The charges for electricity supplied by a
distribution licensee may include—

(a) a fixed charge in addition to the
charge for the actual electricity supplied;

(b) a rent or other charges in respect of

any electric meter or electrical plant
provided by the distribution licensee,


(4) Subject to the provisions of section 62,
in fixing charges under this section a distribution
licensee shall not show undue preference to
any person or class of persons or discrimination
against any person or class of persons.

(5) The charges fixed by the distribution
licensee shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the regulations made
in this behalf by the concerned State
Commission,

46. The State Commission may, by
regulations, authorise a distribution licensee to
charge from a person requiring a supply of
electricity in pursuance of section 43 any
expenses reasonably incurred in providing any
electric line or electrical plant used for the
purpose of giving that supply,

47. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, a distribution licensee may require any
person, who requires a supply of electricity in
pursuance of section 43, to give him reasonable
security, as may be determined by regulations,
for the payment to him of all monies which may
become due to him—

(a) in respect of the electricity supplied
to such person; or

(b) where any electric line or electrical
plant or electric meter is to be provided for
supplying electricity to such person, in
respect of the provision of such line or plant
or meter, and if that person fails to give
such security, the distribution licensee may,
if he thinks fit, refuse to give the supply of
electricity or to provide the line or plant or
meter for the period during which the faflure
continues.

(2) Where any person has not given such
security as is mentioned in sub-section (1) or
the security given by any person has become
invalid or insufficient, the distribution licensee

Power to

255


Additianal
terms of
supply.

electricity
supply code,

256

may, by notice, require that person, within thirty
days after the service of the natice, to give him
reasonable security for the payment of all
monies which may become due to him in respect
of the supply of electricity or provision of such
line or plant or meter.

(3) If the person referred to in sub-section
(2) fails to give such security, the distribution
licensee may, if he thinks fit, discontinue the
supply of electricity for the period during which
the failure continues.

. . . . .

48. A distribution licensee may require any
person who requires a supply of electricity in
pursuance of section 43 to accept—

. . . . .

(b) any terms restricting any liability of the
distribution licensee for economic loss resulting
from negligence of the person to whom the
electricity is supplied.

49. Where the Appropriate Commission has
allowed open access to certain consumers under
section 42, such consumers, notwithstanding the
provisions contained in clause (0) of sub-section
(1) of section 62, may enter into an agreement
with any person for supply or purchase of
electricity on such terms and conditions
(including tariff) as may be agreed upon by
them,

50. The State Commission shall specify an
electricity supply code to provide for recovery
of electricity charges, intervals for billing of
electricity charges, disconnection of supply of
electricity for non-payment thereof, restoration
of supply of electricity, measures for preventing
tampering, distress or damage to electrical plant
or electrical line or meter, entry of distribution
licensee or any person acting on his behalf for
disconnecting supply and removing the meter,
entry for replacing, altering or maintaining


63 of 1948.

35 of 1952,

24 of 1989.

electric lines or electrical plants or meter and
such other matters.

* . . . .

54, (1) Save as otherwise exempted under
this Act, no person other than the Central
Transmission Utility or a State Transmission
Utility, or a Ucensee shall transmit or use
electricity at a rate exceeding two hundred and
fifty watts and one hundred volts—

{a) in any street, or
(b) in any place,—

(0) in which one hundred or more
persons are ordinarily likely to be
assembled; or

(fi) which is a factory within the
meaning of the Factories Act, 1948 or a
mine within the meaning of the Mines
Act, 1952; or

111) to which the State Government,
by general or special order, declares the
provisions of this sub-section to apply,

without giving, before the commencement of
transmission or use of electricity, not less than
seven days’ notice in writing of his intention to
the Electrical Inspector and to the District
Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police, as
the case may be, containing particulars of the
electrical installation and plant, if any, the
nature and the purpose of supply and complying
with such of the provisions of Part XVII of this
Act, as may be applicable:

Provided that nothing in this section shall
apply to electricity used for the public carriage
of passengers, animals or goods, on, or for the
lighting or ventilation of the rolling stock of any
railway or tramway subject to the provisions of
the Railways Act, 1989.

. . “ . *

Control of
transmis-
sion and

use of



Use, etc,, of
meters,

‘Tariff
regulations,

Determination

of tariff.

55. (1)* . . . *

(2) For proper accounting and audit in the
generation, transmission and distribution or
trading of electricity, the authority may direct
the installation of meters by a generating
company or licensee at such stages of
generation, transmission or distribution or
trading of electricity and at such locations of
generation, transmission or distribution or
trading, as it may deem necessary,

PART VII
TaniFr
61. The Appropriate Commission shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, specify the
terms and conditions for the determination of
tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by the
following, namely:—

(d) safeguarding of consumers’ interest and
at the same time, recovery of the cost of
electricity in a reasonable manner;

. . . “ .

(h) The promotion of co-generation and
generation of electricity from reasonable sources
of energy;

(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff
policy:

62. (1) The Appropriate Commission shall
determine the tariff in accordance with the
provisions of this Act for—

(a) supply of electricity by a generating
company to a distribution licensee:
Provided that the Appropriate Commission

may, in case of shortage of supply of electricity,


fix the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff
for sale or purchase of electricity in pursuance
of an agreement, entered into between a
generating company and a licensee or between
licensees, for a period not exceeding one year
to ensure reasonable prices of electricity;

(0) transmission of electricity;
(c) wheeling of electricity;
(०) retail sale of electricity:

Provided that in case of distribution of
electricity in the same area by two or more
distribution licensees, the Appropriate
Commission may, for promoting competition
among distribution licensees, fix maximum
ceiting of tariff for retail sale of electricity.

(2) The Appropriate Commission may require
a licensee or a generating company to furnish
separate details, as may be specified in respect
of generation, transmission and distribution for
determination of tariff.

(3) The Appropriate Commission shall not,
while determining the tariff under this Act, show
undue preference to any consumer of electricity
but may differentiate according to the
consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage,
total consumption of electricity during any
specified period or the time at which the supply
is required or the geographical position of any
area, the nature of supply and the purpose for
which the supply ts required.

(4) No tariff or part of any tariff may
ordinarily be amended, more frequently than
one in any financial year, except in respect of
any changes expressly permitted under the terms
of any fuel surcharge formula as may be
specified.

(5) The Commission may require a licensee
Or वे generating company to comply with such
procedure as may be specified for calculating

259


Procedure

Tarrif order.

of market.

the expected revenues from the tariff and
charges which he or it is permitted to recover.

(6) If any licensee or a generating company
recovers a price or charge exceeding the tariff
determined under this section, the excess
amount shall be recoverable by the person who
has paid such price or charge along with interest
equivalent to the bank rate without prejudice
to any other liability incurred by the licensee.

64. (11 * . . न .

(3) The Appropriate Commission shail, within
one hundred and twenty days from receipt of
an application under sub-section (1) and after
considering all suggestions and objections
received from the public,—

(9) issue a tariff order accepting the
application with such modifications or such
conditions as may be specified in that order;

(b) reject the application for reasons to
be recorded in writing If such apptication 5
not in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder or the provisions of any other
law for the time being in force:

Provided that an applicant shall be given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard before
rejecting his application.

66. The Appropriate Commission shall
endeavour to promote the development of a
market (including trading) in power in such
manner as may be specified and shall be guided
by the National Electricity Policy referred to in
section 3 in this regard.


PART पा
‘Worrs
Works of licensees

67. (1) A licensee may, from time to time piped

but subject always to the terms and conditions yp of
of his licence, within his area of supply or streets,

transmission or when permitted by the terms of ००३,

his licence to lay down or place electric supply
lines without the area of supply, without that
area Carry out works such as—

(०) to open and break up the soil and
pavement of any street, railway or tramway;

(6) to open and break up any sewer,
drain or tunnel in or under any street,
railway or tramway;

(c) to alter the position of any line or
works or pipes, other than a main sewer
pipe;

(d) to lay down and place electric tines,
electrical plant and other works;

(७) to repair, alter or remove the same;

(1 to do all other acts necessary for
transmission or supply of electricity.

. . * . .

Provisions relating to overhead lines

68. (1) An overhead line shall, with prior
approval of the Appropriate Government, be
installed or kept installed above ground
in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (2).

(5) Where any tree standing or lying near
an overhead line or where any structure or other
object which has been placed or has fallen near
an overhead line subsequent to the placing of
such line, interrupts or interferes with, or is

261


262

likely to interrupt or interfere with, the
conveyance or transmission of electricity or the
accessibility of any works, an Executive
Magistrate or authority specified by the
Appropriate Government may, on the application
of the licensee, cause the tree, structure or
object to be removed or otherwise dealt with
as he or it thinks fit.

(6) When disposing of an application under
sub-section (5), an Executive Magistrate or
authority specified under that sub-section shall,
in the case of any tree in existence before the
placing of the overhead line, award to the person
interested in the tree such compensation as he
thinks reasonable, and such person may recover
the same from the licensee.

Explanation,—For the purposes of this
section, the expression “tree” shall be deemed
to include any shrub, hedge, jungle growth or
other plant.

PART IX
(छा Evectrucery AurHorny
Constitution and functions of Authority

70, (1) There shall be a body to be called
the Central Electricity Authority to exercise such
functions and perform such duties as are
assigned to it under this Act.

12) The Central Electricity Authority,
established under section 3 of the Electricity
{Supply) Act, 1948 and functioning as such
immediately before the appointed date, shall
be the Central Electricity Authority for the
purposes of this Act and the Chairperson,
Members, Secretary and other officers and
employees thereof shall be deemed to have been
appointed under this Act and they shall continue
to hold office on the same terms and conditions
on which they were appointed under the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.

54 of 1948


{3) The Authority shall consist of not more
than fourteen Members (including its Chaiperson)
of whom not more than eight shall be full-time
Members to be appointed by the Central
Government,

(4) The Central Government may appoint
any person, eligible to be appointed as Member
of the Authority, as the Chairperson of the
Authority, of, designate one of the full time
Members as the Chairperson of the Authority.

(5) The Members of the Authority shall be
appointed from amongst persons ‘of ability,
integrity and standing who have knowledge of,
and adequate experience and capacity in dealing
with problems relating to engineering, finance,
commerce, economics or industrial matters, and
at least one Member shall be appointed from
each of the following categories, namety:—

(०) engineering with specialisation in
design, construction, operation and
maintenance of generating stations;

(०) engineering with specialisation in
transmission and supply of electricity;

(c) applied research in the field of
electricity;

(d) applied economics, accounting,
commerce or finance.

(6) The Chairperson and all the Members of
the Authority shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Central Government.

(7) The Chairperson shall be the
Chief Executive of the Authority.

(8) The headquarters of the Authority shall
be at Dethi.

(9) The Authority shall meet at the head
office or any other place at such time as the
Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such


rules of procedure in regard to the transaction
of business at its meetings {including the quorum
at its meetings) as it may specify.

(10) The Chairperson, or if he is unable to
attend a meeting of the Authority, any other
Member nominated by the Chairperson in this
behalf and in the absence of such nomination
or where there is no Chairperson, any Member
chosen by the Members present from among
themselves shall preside at the meeting.

(11) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a
majority of votes of the Members present and
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes,
the Chairperson or the person presiding shall
have the right to exercise a second or Casting
vote,

(12) All orders and decisions of the Authority
shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any
other officer of the Authority duly authorised
by the Chairperson in this behalf.

(13) No act or proceedings of the Authority
shall be questioned or shall be invalidated
merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution
of, the Authority,

(14) The Chairperson of the Authority and
other full-time Members shall receive such salary
and allowances as may be determined by the
Central Government and other Members shail
receive such allowances and fees for attending
the meetings of the Authority, as the Central
Government may prescribe.

(75) The other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members of the
Authority including, subject to the provisions of
Sub-section (6), their terms of office shall be
such as the Central Government may prescribe.


78, (1) The Central Government shall, for Constitution
the purposes of selecting the Members of the 2 Setection
Appellate Tribunal and the Chairperson and to
Members of the Central Commission, constitute feconmend
3 Selection Committee consisting of—

(@) Member of the Planning Commission
in charge of the energy sector....
Chairperson;

(b) Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry
of the Central Government dealing with the
Department of 1९७४ Affairs......... Member;

(०0 Chairperson of the Public Enterprises

(०) a person to be nominated by the
Central Government In accordance with sub-
SOCHON: (2) .....००००«०+०«०६००++०+० ५५१ Member;

{e) a person to be nominated by the
Central Government in accordance with

(f) Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry
of the Central Government dealing with

79. (1) The Central Commission shall Functions of
discharge the following functions, namely:— commission.

. . . . .

(८) to regulate the inter-State transmission
of electricity;

85. (1) The State Government shall, for the Constitution

purposes of selecting the Members of the Bedoonsay

State Commission, constitute a Selection to select
Members of

Committee consisting of - State
(9) @ person who has been Judge of the
High Court... >> Chairperson;

265


266

(b) the Chief Secretary of the concerned
State... ++ Member;

(८) the Chairperson of the Authority or
the Chairperson of the Central
(जा$5$0॥........ . ७ «०००००००० seers Member:

Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson who is or has been a
Judge of the High Court,

. - . . .

86. (1) The State Commission shall discharge
the following functions, namely:—

(a) determine the tariff for generation,
supply, transmission and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the
case may be, within the State:

Provided that where open access has been
permitted to a category of consumers under
section 42, the State Commission shall determine
only the wheeling charges and surcharge
thereon, if any, for the said category of
consumers;

(b) regulate electricity purchase and
Procurement process of distribution licensees
including the price at which electricity shall be
procured from the generating companies or
licensees or from other sources through
agreements for purchase of power for
distribution and supply within the State;

(0 facilitate intra-State transmission and
wheeling of electricity;

(d) issue licenses to persons seeking to act
35 transmission licensees, distribution licensees
and electricity traders with respect to their
operations within the State;

(९) promote co-generation and generation
of electricity from renewable sources of energy
by providing suitable measures for connectivity


with the grid and sale of electricity to any
person, and also specify, for purchase of
electricity from such sources, a percentage of
the total consumption of electricity in the area
of a distribution licensee;

(f) adjudicate upon the disputes between
the licensees and generating companies and to
refer any dispute for arbitration;

(6) levy fee for the purposes of this Act;

{h) specify State Grid Code consistent with
the Grid Code specified under clause (h) of
sub-section (1) of section 79;

(i) specify or enforce standards with respect
to quality, continuity and reliability of service
by licensees;

U) fix the trading margin in the intra-State
trading of electricity, if considered, necessary;

(00 discharge such other functions as may
be assigned to it under this Act.

Appropriate Commission—Other provisions

89, (1) The Chairperson or other Member
shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date he enters upon his office:

Provided that the Chairperson or other
Member in the Central Commission or the State
Commission shall not be eligible for re-
appointment in the same capacity as the
Chairperson or a Member in that Commission in
which he had earlier held office as such:

Provided further that no Chairperson or
Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained the age of sixty-five years.

(2) The salary, allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and Members shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Appropriate Government:

Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Members.

267


268

Provided that the salary, allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of the
Members, shall not be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.

(3) Every Member shall, before entering upon
his office, make and subscribe to an oath of
office and secrecy in such form and in such
manner and before such authority as may be
prescribed.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), a Member may—

(०) relinquish his office by giving in
writing to the Appropriate Government a
notice of not less than three months; or

(b) be removed from his office in
accordance with the provisions of section
90.

(5) Any member ceasing to hold office as
such shall—

(@) not accept any commercial
employment for a period of two years from
the date he ceases to hold such office; and

(b) not represent any person before the
Central Commission or any State Commission
in any manner.

Explanation,—For the purposes of this
sub-section, “commercial employment” means
employment in any capacity in any organisation
which has been a party to the proceedings before
the Appropriate Commission or employment in
any capacity under, or agency of, a person
engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or
financial business in electricity industry and
includes a director of a company or partner of
a firm or setting up practice either
independently or as partner of a firm or as an
adviser or a consultant,

. . . . .


94. (1)* . . * + Powers of

(3) The Appropriate Commission may a

authorise any person, as it deems fit, to
represent the interest of the consumers in the
proceedings before it.

७७०७

127. (1) Any person aggrieved by the final Appest to

order made under section 126 may, within thirty 5
days of the said order, prefer an appeal in such
form, verified in such manner and be
accompanied by such fee as may be specified
by the State Commission, to an appellate
authority as may be prescribed.

PART Xill
Rearcansanion OF 90४७

juthority.

34.0) * . . . « Nesting of

. न . . * State

142. in case any complaint is filed before Punishment

for

mon

the Appropriate Commission by any person or if compliance
that Commission is satisfied that any person has of directions

contravened any of the provisions of this Act or 1401७

the rules or regulations made thereunder, or ¢
any direction Issued by the Commission, the
Appropriate Commission may after giving such
person an opportunity of being heard in the
matter, by order in writing, direct that, without
prejudice to any other penalty to which he may
be liable under this Act, such person shall pay,
by way of penalty, which shall not exceed one
lakh rupees for each contravention and in case
of a continuing failure with an additional penalty
which may extend to six thousand rupees for
every day during which the failure continues
after contravention of the first such direction.

‘commission.


Punishment.
for non:
compliance
‘of orders or
directions.

Offences by
Companies,

270

146, Whoever, fails to comply with any order
or direction given under this Act, within such
time as may be specified in the said order or
direction or contravenes or attempts or abets
the contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months or with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees, or with both in respect of
each offence and in the case of a continuing
failure, with an additional fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees for every day during
which the failure continues after conviction of
the first such offence:

Provided that hothing contained in this
section shall apply to the orders, instruction or
directions issued under section 121.

. . . . -

149. (1) Where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a company, every person
who at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of and was responsible to the
company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company shall be
deemed to be guilty of having committed the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.

42) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where an offence under this
Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of


the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of having committed such offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section,—

(a) “company” means a body corporate
and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and

(b) “director” in relation to a firm,
means a partner in the firm,

PART XViil
MISCELLANEOUS.
166. (1) * ७ . & &

(2) The Central Government shall also
constitute a forum of regulators consisting of
the Chairperson of the Central Commission and
Chairpersons of the State Commissions.

(4) The State Government shall constitute a
coordination forum consisting of the Chairperson
of the State Commission and Members thereof
representatives of the generating companies,
transmission licensee and distribution licensees
engaged in generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity in that State for smooth
and coordinated development of the power
system in the State.

. . . . .

176.(1)* . . . .

(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—

Fower of
Central
Government

to make
rules.


Powers of
Authority to

regulations.

272

(g) allowances and fees payable to other
members for attending the meetings of Authority
under sub-section (14) of section 70;

(h} other terms and conditions of service of

the Chairperson and members of the Authority
under sub-section (15) of section 70;

177.(1)* . . . .

(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the power conferred in
sub-section (1), such regulations may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(9) the Grid Standards under section 34;

. . . . Ps


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.

(Shri Piyush Goyal, Minister of Power)

273


STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 22ND JANUARY, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM 'E', PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairman
MenteRS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Saumitra Khan
. Shri Jagdambika Pal
. Shri M.B. Rajesh
- Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhale Singh
५ Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha

oN के Ww >>

9. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes

11. Shri Ram Jethmalani

12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
13. Shri 5. Muthukaruppan

14, Dr, K.P. Ramatingam

15. Sari Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
16. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

17. Smt. Viplove Thakur
274


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary

2. Shri N.K.Pandey — Director

3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik - Additional Director
Worvesses

MINISTRY OF POWER

1, Shri P. K. Sinha — Secretary
2. Shri R.N. Choubey — Spl. Secretary
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry — Spl. Secretary
4. Shri B.N. Sharma — Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
CERC
Ms. Shubha Sarma — Secretary, CERC
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY
Shri Major Singh — Chairperson
PSU, AUTONOMOUS BODIES, STATUTORY BODIES, ETC.
1. Shri RN. Nayak — CMD, Powergrid
2. Shri Sunil Kumar Sonee — CEO, POSCO

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
Smt. Varsha Joshi — Joint Secretary, MNRE

2, At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power to the
sitting of the Committee and made known to them the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3, After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the Ministry of Power made a power point presentation
on ‘Proposed Amendments in the Electricity Act 2003’.

275


4. In course of the sitting, the Committee raised the following
important points with the representatives of the Ministry of Power:

(i) Issues related to Separation of Carriage and Content in the
distribution sector;

(fi) Promotion of Renewable Energy;
{iii} Grid Security;

(iv) Rationalization of Tariff and making Tariff fixation process
more certain and effective;

{v) Performance Monitoring and strengthening of Regulatory
Commissions;

(vi) Provisions for levy of inspection fees by Electrical Inspectors
etc; and

(vii) Production of energy and the environmental hazards.

Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives of the Ministry responded
to the same. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish written repties to the queries which could not be responded
to by them.

5. After some deliberations, the Committee decided to call the
Power Secretaries of the State Governments to have their views on the
subject on 6th February, 2015. The Committee also decided to call the
Central/State Regulators, Central and State PSUs, Power Producing
Associations, Power Consumer Associations and other stakeholders etc.
during the course of examination of the Bill.

6. The Committee also decided to select the subject ‘Energy
Conservation’ for examination during the year 2014-15 in addition to
the subjects already selected by the Committee,

7. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

276


STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 6TH FEBRUARY, 2015 IN MAIN
COMMITTEE ROOM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to 1310 and 1400 to 1630 hrs.

PRESENT

Dr, Kirit Somaiya ~ Chairperson
Mewaens

Lok Sabha

2. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

. Shri Saumitra Khan
. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

. Smt. Krishna Raj

. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

. Shei Purno Agitok Sangma

. Shri Devender Singh alias Bhole Singh
|. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri 5. Muthukaruppan
Dr. K.P, Ramatingam
Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapotu
Smt. Viplove Thakur
था



Secretaasat

1. Shri Devender Singh Additional Secretary
2, Shri N.K.Pandey — Director

3. Shri Arun K Kaushik ~ Additional Director
4, Smt. L.N. Haokip - Under Secretary
Witnesses
MINISTRY OF POWER
Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
CERC
1. Ms. Shubha Sarma ~ Secretary, CERC
2. Shri Sushanta K. Chatterjee — Joint Chief, Regulatory
Affairs, CERC
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY
1. Shri Major Singh — Chairperson
2. Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma — Chief Engineer
3. Shri K.N. Garg — Member
STATE POWER DEPARTMENTS
KARNATAKA
1. Shri P. Ravi kumar, — Additional Chief Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj Kumar Pandey — MD, BESCOM
3. Shri W.M. Shivakumar — Director
GUJARAT
1. Shri L.Chuango — Principal Secretary
2. Shri 5.8. Khyaliya ~ MD
3. Shri 6.२ Jangid — GM
ASSAM

1. Shri ४.8. Pyarelal — Additional Chief Secretary
278


MAHARASHTRA

1. Shri Mukesh Khullar
2, Shri 0.8 Gupta
3. Shri PP. Pathak

PUDUCHERRY

1, Shri TM. Balakrishnan
2. Shri 0, Ravi

KERALA

1. Shri 5. Venugopal
2. Smt. P.P. Sajitha

CHANDIGARH

1, Shri Sarvjit Singh
2. Shri M.-P. Singh

BIHAR

1. Ms. Palka Sahni

2. Me. 5.1, Singh
3. Mr Nadeem Ahmad

4. Mr, Umang Anand
HIMACHAL PRADESH

1. Shri V.8, Pyaretal
JHARKHAND

1. Shri S.C.Mishra
DELHI

1, Smt. Shakuntala 0, Gamlin
2. Shri Indu Shekhar Mishra

3. Shri YVVJ Rajashekhar
4, Shri J.P. Singh
5. Shri Abhishek Moza

Principal Secretary
cmp
Resident Manager

Superintending Engineer-tl!

Additional Secretary

Secretary Engineering
Superintending Engineer

MD

Chief Engineer
Executive Engineer
Assistant Resident Engineer

Additional Chief Secretary

Chief Engineer (C&R)

Principal Secretary

Additional Secretary

Director

Member

Deputy Secretary, DERC
279


MADHYA PRADESH
1. Shri 1.C.P. Keshri
HARYANA

1. Shri Ravinder Kumar Batra
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chopra

PUNJAB

1, Shri A, Venu Prasad
2. Shri K.L. Sharma

MEGHALAYA

1. Shri Jopthian Lyngdoh
RAJASTHAN

1. Shri Sanjay Malhotra
ODISHA

1. Shri Hemant Sharma
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan
3. Shri A.K. Bohra

TAMILNADU
1. Shri (Dr.) M. Saf Kumar
2. Shri Rajesh Lakhoni

LAKSHADWEEP

1. Shri H. Rajesh Prasad
2. Shri Asar Pal Singh

३, Shri R. Ravichandaran

TELANGANA
1. Shri Arvind Kumar
2. Shri C. Srinivash Rao
UTTARAKHAND

1. Shri Shri S.S. Yadav
2. Shri S.N. Verma

Principal Secretary

Secretary Engineer

Secretary, Power
Director

Secretary

Principal Secretary

Chairman-cum-MD
Chairman
CEO (CSO), DISCOMs

CMD, Tamil Nadu Generations
& Distribution Co.

Secretary Energy Deptt.

Administrator

Additional Resident
Commissioner

Executive Engineer, Deptt. of
Electricity

Secretary
Director (Finance), TSSSPDCL

MD, UPCL
MD, UJVN


CHHATTISGARH

1. Shri Arun Bhatnagar — Addl, Chief Engineer
2. Shri RK. Shankar — Supdt. Engineer

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, CERC and
Power Departments of the States to the sitting of the Committee and
made known to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker.

3. The Chairperson, then apprised them about the concerns of the
Committee with regard to the ‘Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and
requested them to give pointed suggestions on the various issues
involved. After introducing themselves the representatives of the Power
Departments of the States then submitted their views before the
Committee on the Bill one by one.

4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

(i) Issues related to Separation of Carriage and Content in the
distribution sector;

(ii) Promotion of Renewable Energy
(fii) Grid Security;

(iv) Rationalization of Tariff and making Tariff fixation process
more certain and effective;

(९) Performance Monitoring and strengthening of Regulatory
Commissions;

(vi) Provisions for levy of inspection fees by Electrical Inspectors
etc; and

(vii) Production of energy and the environmental hazards.

5. Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the Bill and the representatives of the State Power
Departments responded to the same, The Committee directed them to
furnish written replies to the list of points sent ६० them alongwith the
replies to queries which could not be responded to by them during the
course of the sitting, The Chairperson also asked them to furnish in
writing any other suggestions which may come to their mind relating to
the Bill,

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record,

The Committee then adjourned.
281


STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

MINUTES OF THE 12TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY, 2015 IN MAIN
COMMITTEE ROOM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs, to 1400 hrs. and 1400 hrs. to
1500 hrs.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
Meneens
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi
5. Shri Saumitra Khan
6. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
7. Or. Arun Kumar
8. Shri Jagdambika Pat
9. Smt. Krishna Raj
10. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Purno Agitok Sangma
. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Oscar Fernandes
14, Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
15. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
16. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu

a
nN


Secretaeur

1. Shri Devender Singh ~ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Arun K, Kaushik == Additional Director
4, Smt. LN. Haokip ~ Under Secretary
Wirnesses.
MINISTRY OF POWER
1. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY
2. Shri Major Singh ~ Chairperson
3. Shri K.N. Garg — Member
4. Shri Pankaj Batra — Chief Engineer
5. Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma — Chief Engineer
CERC
6. Me. Gireesh B. Pradhan ~ Chairperson
7. Mr M, Deena Dayalan — Member
8. Me ALK. Singhal — Member
9. Mr 8.5. Bakshi — Member
10, Ms, Shubha Sharma — Secretary
WITHesses.
TAMIL NADU
1. Mr. Akshaya Kumar ~ Chairman
UTTARAKHAND
1. Shri Subhash Kumar — Chairman
KERALA
1. Shri T. Manoharan — Chairperson
ODISHA

1. Shri S.P Nanda — Chairperson


KARNATAKA

1. Shri M.R. Sreenivasa Murthy

GUJARAT
1. Shri Pravinbhai Patel
TRIPURA

1. Shri Niharendu Chakraborty

2. Shri Hare Krishna Das
ANDHRA PRADESH

1. Shri Dr. Pervela Raghu
UTTAR PRADESH

1, Shri Des Deepak Verma
MADHYA PRADESH

1. Dr, Dev Raj Birdi
PUNJAB

1. Mrs. Romila Dubey

2. Shri Gurinder Jit Singh
MAHARASHTRA

1, Smt. Chandra lyengar

2. Shri Azeez M. Khan

3. Shri Deepak Lad
SIKKIM

1. Shei T.T. Dorji
HARYANA

1. Shri M.S. Puri
RAJASTHAN

1. Shri Vishvanath Hiremath
ASSAM

1. Shri Naba Kumar Das
284

Chairperson

Chairman

Chairman

Member

Chairman

Chairperson

Chairperson

Chairperson

Member

Member

Chairperson

Chairman

Chairman


CHHATTISGARH

Shri Narayan Singh — Chairperson
JHARKHAND
(Justice) Shri N.N. Tiwari ~  Chatrperson
JAMMU AND KASHMIR,
Shri Basharat Ahmad Dhar — Chairperson
DELHI
1. Shri J.P. Singh — Member
2. Shri 8.8 Singh — Member
TELANGANA
Shri Ismail All Khan — Chairman
NAGALAND
Donray A. Shishak — Chairperson
BIHAR
U.N. Panjiar — Chairperson
WEST BENGAL
Shri 0.6 Maliick ~ Consultant

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, CERC and
Regulatory Commissions of the States to the sitting of the Committee
and made known to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of
the Directions by the Speaker.

3. The Chairman, then apprised them about the concerns of the
Committee with regard to examining the ‘Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2014" and requested them to give pointed suggestions on the various
issues involved. After introducing themselves the representatives of the
CERC and Regulatory Commissions of the States then submitted their
views on the Bill before the Committee on the Bill one by one.

4, The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

{i) Need to review the functioning of Regulatory Commissions
and ensure their accountability for smooth and unhindered
development of Power Sector;

285


{if) Rationalization of Tariff and making Tariff fixation process
more certain and effective;

(il) Issues related to Separation of Carriage and Content in the
distribution sector;

{iv) Performance Monitoring and strengthening of Regulatory
Commissions including their financial autonomy;

(४) Issues relating to ‘Open Access’.
(vi) Promotion of Renewable Energy;

(vii) Need to minimize the commercial losses throughout the
Country;

(viii) Production of energy and the environmental hazards.

5. Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the Bill and the representatives of the Regulatory Commissions
of States responded to the same. The Committee directed them to
furnish written replies to the list of points sent to them alongwith the
teplies to queries which could not be responded to by them during the
course of the sitting. The Chairman also asked them to furnish in
writing any other valuable suggestion which they feel are relevant and
appropriate to strengthen the Power Sector through the Bill under
reference.

6. The Committee also decided to select the subject ‘Deen Dayal
Upadhyay Gramin Jyoti Yojna’ for examination during the year 2014-15
in addition to the subjects already selected by them.

7. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned,


STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

MINUTES OF THE 14TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 11TH MARCH, 2015 IN COMMITTEE

ROOM *€', PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1600 hrs. to 1815 hrs.

ownawn

9.
10,
11,
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17,

18.

19.

PRESENT
Or. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
Memsers

Lok Sabha

. Shri M. Chandrakasi

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
» Dr. Arun Kumar

Shri R.P, Marutharajaa

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

Shri Purno Agitok Sangma

Shri Devender Singh atias Bhote Singh

Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha

Shri V.P. Singh Badnore

Shri Oscar Fernandes

‘Shri Javed Ali Khan

Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu

Dr, Anil Kumar Sahani

Smt. Viplove Thakur


SecreTaRur
1. Shri Devender Singh

Additional Secretary

2. Shri N.K, Pandey ~ Director
३, Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Additional Director
4, Smt. L.N. Haokip — Under Secretary

LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES
MINISTRY OF POWER

1. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary

2. Shri Gyanesh Bharti — Director

3. Shri Sandesh Sharma — Chief Engineer, CEA

4. Shri Sandeep Naik — AGM, NTPC
ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY OF INDIA

5. Mr. Rajesh K, Mediratta — Director

6. Ms. Shruti Bhatai — Vice President
INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA

7. Mr, Harry Dhaul - G6

8. MMs. Iqbal Kaur — Sr. Manager

9. Mr. Nikhil Rai

10. Mr. Gaurav Sharma
CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY

11, Me. Anil Sardana — Chairman

12, Mr. Arun Srivastava — Chief Regulatory, Tata Power
13, Mr. Amit Kapur — Partner, JSA Associates

14. Mr. ४.3. Talwar — Ex, Member, APTEL

15. Mr, Athar Shahab — CEO, Vedanta

16. Ms. Soma Banerjee — Hear - Energy & infra

17. Mr. Sandeep Sarin — Executive Officer

18. Me. Gopal Saxena — CEO, BSES Rajdhani


ASSOCIATION OF POWER PRODUCERS
19. Shri Kapil Sharma

20.
21

. Shri Chetan Bundela
. Shri Ashok Kumar Khurana

22, Shri Abhishek Chatterjee

23.
FICCI
24,

+ Shri MR. Krishna Rao

. Mr. Prabir Neogi

25. Mr. Kandarp Patel

27,

. Me. Subaan Muker}!

. Mr, Sameer Ganju

28. Mr. Anish De

29.

30.

. Mr. Vivek Pandit

|. Ms. Tavieen Kaur

31. Shri Arjun Sinha

Senior Vice President, Reliance
Infrastructure

Torrent Power Ltd.

DG, Association of Power
Producers

Assistant DG, Association of
Power Producers

Vice President, Adani Power

Chairman
Co-Chairman

Partner, PLR Chambers—
Advocates & Solicitor

Head Northern Region, Adani
Power

Partner, KPMG Advisory Services
Pvt. Ltd.

Sr. Director & Head-Energy,
FICCI

Additional Director Energy,
FICC!

Senior Associate, PLR Chambers

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the
Industry Associations to the sitting of the Committee and made known
to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. The Chairman, then apprised them about the concerns of the
Committee with regard to the ‘Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014" and
requested them to give pointed suggestions on the various issues
involved. After introducing themselves the representatives of the Industry
Associations then made power point presentation and submitted their
views before the Committee on the Bill one by one.


4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:
(i) Issues related to Separation of Carriage and Content in the
distribution sector;
(ii) Promotion of Renewable Energy;
(iil) Grid Security;

{iv) Rationalization of Tariff and making Tariff fixation process
more certain and effective;

{v) Performance Monitoring and Strengthening of Regulatory
Commissions;

(vi) Provisions for levy of inspection fees by Electrical inspectors
etc.;

(vii) Retrospective conditions of Power Purchase Agreements on
those plants having Fuel Supply Agreements;

(vill) Misuse of section 11 of Electricity Act, 2003 by some State
Governments; and
490 Attempts by the Government to interfere in the sector through
license regulation of supply licensees or permission for
capacity expansion, etc.

5. Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the Bill and the representatives of the Industry Associations
responded to the same. The Chairman also asked them to furnish in
writing any other suggestions which may come to their mind relating to
the Bill.

6, The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

290


STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 27TH MARCH, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.

PRESENT

Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
Mewes

tok Sabha

. Shri M. Chandrakasi

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey

. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Saumitra Khan

Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

Shri Jagdambika Pal

, Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

. Smt, Krishna Raj

. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
५ Shri Malyadri Sriram

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

15. Shri ४४ Singh Badnore

16. Shri Oscar Fernandes

17. Shri Ram Jethmalani

18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
19, Shri 5. Muthukaruppan,

20. Shri Javed All Kchan

21, Dr. K.P Ramalingam

22. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
23, Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

24, Smt. Viplove Thakur

PONV # एम हे

xpets

291


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh ~ Addl. Secretary

2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director

३. Shri Arun K. Kushik ~ Additional Director
4. Smt. LN. Haokip ~ Under Secretary

LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES
MINISTRY OF POWER

1. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary

2. Shri Gyanesh Bharti — Director

3. Shri Sandesh Sharma — Chief Engineer, CEA
PSUs

4. Shri M.K, Goel — CMD, PFC

5. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury — CMD, NTPC

6. Shri R.S.T. Sai — CMD, NHPC

7. Shri Deepak Sarwal ~ Executive Director, THDC
8. Shri R.N. Nayak — CMD, PGCIL

9. Shri R.N. Mishra — CMD, 5४४

10. Shri Rajiv Sharma — CMD, REC

11. Shri Dinesh Arora — ED (DDUGJY), REC

12. Shri ९८, Pankaj — CMD, NEEPCO

13. Shri A.W.K. Langstieh — Chairman, OVC

14, Shri A.B. Agrawal — Chairman, BBMB

STATE GOVERNMENTS
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR

15. Shri U.K, Paut —  Supdt. Engineer
292