ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2015-16]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 10.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 265
Price : R  54.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2015-2016) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................... 12
CHAPTER III Observation/Recommendation which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................... 29
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration ..... 30
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited..................................................... 33
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
3rd December, 2015 ..................................... 34
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the 5th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ................................... 36
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2015-16)
Dr. Kirit Somaiya —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Om Birla
3. Shri M. Chandrakasi
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Saumitra Khan
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
9. Dr. Arun Kumar
10. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
11. Shri Sriram Malyadri
12. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
13. Dr. (Smt.) Pritam Gopinath Munde
14. Shri Jagdambika Pal
15. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
16. Shrimati Krishna Raj
17. Shri M.B. Rajesh
18. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
19. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
20. Shri P .A. Sangma
21. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Ram Jethmalani
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan
26. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
27. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
28. Dr. K.P . Ramalingam
29. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
30. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
31. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
4. Ms. Deepika — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 11th Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 5th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy on Demands for Grant (2015-16) of the Ministry of Power.
2. The 5th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27th April,
2015 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 14th July, 2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 3rd December, 2015.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
07 December, 2015 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2015-2016.
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2015
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report
contained 12 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12
Total-10
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 6 and 9
Total-02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations/Comments contained in Chapter I of
the Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months
of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government
on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit
comments.
A. Annual Plan Outlay
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
6. The Committee had observed that the continuous low actual
expenditure since 2011 could be the prime reason for the Ministry of
Finance for not acceding to the proposed demand of Rs. 19,243.46
crore of the Ministry for the year 2015-16. The Committee were
concerned with the constant under-utilization of the funds allocated to
the Ministry of Power. The Committee were informed that the under
utilization of fund by the Ministry was due to non-finalization of various
new schemes and since, the said schemes had been finalized, there
would be optimum utilization of funds. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry should strengthen their monitoring
mechanism and also review and revamp their planning process. The
Committee had also recommended that the Ministry may put
indefatigable efforts in ensuring the timely utilization of the funds
allocated to them so that they could justifiably put up further demands
at the time of Revised Estimates.
7. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:
“The following mechanism has been put in place to oversee the
utilization of budgetary allocation under various plan schemes with
regular periodicity at different levels:
(i) The programme Division (at the level of the concerned Joint
Secretary) reviews the progress of utilization of the outlay
(both GBS and IEBR) with the concerned implementing
agencies/organizations on monthly basis and suggest course
corrections/measures from time to time to improve
utilization.
(ii) The progress is monitored at the level of JS&FA on quarterly
basis with a view to rationalize the allocation.

3
(iii) The progress is further reviewed at the level of Secretary
(Power) on half yearly basis.
Further , the two major flagship schemes (DDUGJY and IPDS) have
their own in-built monitoring mechanism to watch the progress of
implementation.”
8. In tune with their recommendation, the Committee appreciate
the Ministry’s initiatives in strengthening the monitoring mechanism
to oversee the utilization of budgetary allocation under various plans/
schemes with regular periodicity at different levels. However, the
Ministry have failed to apprise the Committee about the actual
expenditure so far. As there is no mention about the actual financial
utilization, the effectiveness of the monitoring mechanism could not
be ascertained. The Committee, however, trust the effectiveness of
the monitoring mechanism in place in ensuring optimum utilization
of budget allocated for the year 2015-16. The Committee, therefore,
will like to re-emphasize their recommendation that the Ministry
should review and revamp their planning process and put in strenuous
efforts in ensuring the timely utilization of the funds allocated to
them, so that they could justifiably put up enhanced demands.
B. Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
9. The Committee had noted that the Integrated Power Development
Scheme (IPDS) is a new scheme launched by the Ministry by subsuming
the erstwhile Restructured—Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (R-APDRP) as one of its three components. The other two
components are strengthening of sub-transmission & Distribution network
in the urban areas and metering of distribution transformers/feeders/
consumers in the urban areas. This scheme, like its predecessor , envisages
reduction of AT&C losses to 15%. The Accelerated Power Development
and Reforms Programme was re-structured and was approved as a Central
Sector Scheme on 31.07.2008 with total outlay of Rs. 51,577 crore to
reduce the AT&C losses to the level of 15%. However, the scheme, in
5 years, could manage to reduce AT&C losses only 2% from 27.47% in
the year 2008 to 2009 to 25.38% in the year 2012-13. The Committee
had earlier recommended to the Government to review the programme
as the same was not producing the desired results. The Government
had reinvented this programme with identical goal of bringing down
AT&C losses to the level of 15%. The Committee had further
recommended that the Ministry should provide an explicit timeline for
implementation of the IPDS and like DDUGJY , the year by which the
prime goal of IPDS, i.e. reduction of AT&C losses to 15%, will be
achieved.

4
10. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated:
“The reduction of AT&C losses from 27.47% in 2008-09 to 25.38% in
2012-13 is at the national level. However, R-APDRP is a town level
intervention. The AT&C loss reduction under R-APDRP is to be
measured for five years with first year starting at least a year after
completion of Part-A (IT) project and Part-B completion. Under the
scheme, Part-A (IT) system is yet to be verified as completed for
any State by Third Party Independent Evaluation Agencies-IT ,
appointed by MoP/PFC. The same are in process in many States.
Part-B scheme is completed in 240 towns. As such, the results
regarding reduction of AT&C losses under R-APDRP are likely to be
evident only from next FY i.e. 2016-17.
The objective of Integrated Power Development Scheme is reduction
of national level AT&C losses to below 15%. As per the trajectory
for AT&C loss reduction as agreed by all State power utilities, AT&C
losses are to be brought to below 15% by FY 2021-22. The same is
now proposed to be achieved by FY 2019-20. Revised proposed
trajectories have been circulated by MoP among State utilities for
their consent. ”
11. Concerned about the slow pace of reduction of AT&C losses
in the country over the last many years, the Committee had many
a time recommended to provide an explicit timeline to achieve
reduction of AT&C losses to 15%. The Ministry, in their reply, has
stated that as per the trajectory for AT&C loss reduction as agreed
by all the State power utilities, AT&C losses are to be brought to
below 15% by FY 2021-22. The same is now proposed to be achieved
by FY 2019-20 and that revised proposed trajectories have been
circulated by MoP among State utilities for their consent. The
Committee, while appreciating the reduction in timeline set for AT&C
losses, will like to re-emphasize that the timeline of 2019-20 should
be further reviewed as the result of the completion of part A&B of
the R-APDRP will soon to leave their impact from the next financial
year. As majority of the term under part A of the programme has
been declared go-live and around 272 towns have been covered
under part B of the programme, it becomes all the more necessary
that AT&C losses is brought down to the desired level within a span
of one year.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
12. The Committee had noted that the Ministry do not have separate
data for Technical and Distribution losses. AT&C losses include technical
losses due to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipment used

5
for transmission, transmission and distribution of power , whereas
commercial losses are due to pilferage of energy by hooking of lines
and bypassing the meters, defective meters, errors in meter reading,
etc. The technical losses are inherent in a system and cannot be
eliminated entirely but can be reduced to a certain level while
commercial losses which have the major share in AT&C losses could be
eliminated completely. Since the AT&C losses are a mix of these two,
the Committee believed that having separate data for technical losses
and distribution losses will be instrumental in reduction of avoidable
commercial losses. The Committee had, therefore, recommended to
the Ministry to expeditiously prepare separate data for technical losses
and commercial losses.
13. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken reply, has stated
as under:
“MoP appreciates the concern of Standing Committee that separate
data for technical & commercial losses shall enable calculations of
exact commercial losses, which are due to various reasons, such as,
pilferage, defective meters & errors in meter reading etc. State
utilities are being requested to provide said data along with quarterly
AT&C loss data submitted to nodal agency. Ministry of Power and
PFC, the Nodal Agency are regularly pursuing with them to provide
the data.
It may however be submitted that segregation of losses into technical
& commercial losses is a complex and long drawn exercise. At best,
an assessment of these losses can be attempted on a pilot basis
over a sample network. ”
14. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee to
expeditiously prepare separate data for technical losses and
commercial losses, the Ministry, inter-alia, has stated that segregation
of losses into technical and commercial losses is a complex and long-
drawn exercise. They have, however, assured that an assessment of
these losses can be attempted on a pilot basis over a sample network.
The Committee appreciate the Ministry ’s willingness to attempt an
assessment of the losses on a pilot basis. Keeping in view, the
commercial losses which have a major share in AT&C losses and
which could be eliminated completely, the Committee will like to
reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry should expeditiously
prepare separate data for technical losses and commercial losses.

6
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
15. The Committee had noted that against the target of 1,07,440
Ckm for the 12th Five Year Plan, the achievement till February, 2014
was 51,635 Ckm. The Committee had also noted that there had been
a massive generation capacity addition in the country and a number of
power generation projects were under execution or at the planning
stage. Due to the advent of Private Sector in generation sector and
enabling environment for setting up of New and renewable Energy
projects, the power sector of the Country was set to grow at a rapid
pace. This huge generation capacity would need transmission lines of
the matching capacity to distribute the electricity generated to all
corners of the country. The Committee had felt that the planning for
transmission should not only be done with the generation projects but
also the execution of transmission should be ahead of generation. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended to the Government to expedite
the pace of work to ensure that the targets set for the 12th Plan were
fully achieved. The Committee were also of the view that the
Government should examine the feasibility of identifying major
transmission corridors which would be needed in the coming years and
start the groundwork prospectively to ensure that inadequacy of
transmission capacity did not become a bottleneck for transmission of
electricity across the country.
16. The Ministry of Power , in their Action Taken Reply, have stated
as under:
“Against the target of 1,07,440 Ckm for 12th Plan period, the
achievement till March, 2015 is 55,956 Ckm. The target for the
balance period of 12th plan i.e. during 2015-16 & 2016-17 is 23712
Ckm and 27,772 Ckm respectively.
Against the target of 2,82,750 MVA of transformation capacity for
12th Plan period, the achievement till March, 2015 is 1,86,549 MVA.
Additional 50,542 MVA and 45,659 MVA have been targeted to be
completed during the balance period of 12th plan i.e. 2015-16 &
2016-17.
In order to facilitate integration of large scale renewable generation
capacity envisaged in 12th Plan, a comprehensive transmission plan
comprising intra-state and inter-state transmission system (ISTS)
strengthening has been identified and taken for implementation as
part of “Green Energy Corridors-I (GECs) ”. Intra-state transmission
scheme under GECs is being implemented by the respective States,
whereas ISTS is being implemented by POWERGRID. These are under
various stages of implementation.

7
Further , a 20 year perspective plan covering aspects of General
Network Access (GNA) is under preparation by CEA in consultation
with POWERGRID and States/Stakeholders for the overall
development of transmission system. Under GNA approach,
transmission systems is planned based on Generation/Demand
quantum and their location without identification of the contracted
source of purchase/sale and generator and the States/Consumer
could be given general network access (GNA) to ISTS for the agreed
quantum of power (MW). This approach is expected to address the
issues of congestion and enable the execution of transmission system
ahead of generation.
A number of high capacity power transmission corridors and Green
Energy Corridors have been identified/planned and are being
implemented to enable seamless transfer of power from generation
rich States to energy deficit States. These corridors include 765kV
transmission lines and ±800kV HVDC transmission systems. ”
17. In response to the recommendation of the Committee that
the Government should examine the feasibility of identifying major
transmission corridors which will be needed in the coming years and
start the groundwork prospectively to ensure that inadequacy of
transmission capacity does not become a bottleneck for transmission
of electricity across the country, the Government have stated that
a Comprehensive Transmission Plan comprising Intra-State and Inter-
State Transmission Systems (ISTS) has been taken up for
implementation as part of the “Green Energy Corridors-I (GECs)” and
a 20-year Perspective Plan covering aspects of General Network Access
(GNA) is under preparation by CEA in consultation with POWERGRID,
States and other Stakeholders, for the overall development of the
Transmission System. The Committee note with satisfaction that the
Government have identified a number of high capacity Power
Transmission Corridors and Green Energy Corridors which are being
implemented to enable seamless transfer of power from generation
rich States to energy deficit States. These corridors include 765kV
transmission lines and ±800kV HVDC transmission systems. The
Committee acknowledge the initiatives taken by the Ministry to
expedite the pace of work in the transmission of electricity across
the country and also to ensure that the targets of Transmission
Capacity set for the 12th Plan are fully achieved. The Committee
trust that the Ministry through coordinated efforts will be able to
achieve the target of Transmission Capacity of 1,07,440 ckm for the
12th Plan, so as to ensure that the electricity generated is transmitted
and distributed to all the corners of the country. The Committee will
like to be apprised periodically, of the progress and development
regarding the implementation of these above cited plans.

8
Hydro Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
18. The Committee had noted that only 1,895 MW of hydro power
generation capacity could be added, whereas in the thermal sector the
generation capacity addition was as high as 51,488 MW during the
12th Plan so far. The Committee had time and again been expressing
their anguish over the sluggish execution of hydro generation capacity
resulting in the falling share of hydro in the total energy mix. The
hydro power share in terms of installed capacity (MW) was 43.50% in
the year 1970. At present, the hydro power share is about 15.8%. The
Committee had been informed by the Ministry that since the hydro
projects have a longer gestation period, they take longer time in their
completion. Also, most of the potential lies in the remote reaches of
Himalayas. The Ministry had also enumerated the provisions made and
the steps taken for the growth of the hydro sector. The Committee had,
however, found that since the 11th Five Year Plan there has been a
visible slowdown in the hydro sector. Even the Private Sector whose
performance in the thermal sector as far as capacity addition is
concerned is par excellence, could manage to add a meagre 169 MW
of hydro power generation capacity so far in the 12th Plan. The
Committee, therefore, were inclined to infer that the present policies
relating to the hydro power sector were ineffective as they had failed
to bring any positive change in the sector. The Committee had
recommended that the Government should thoroughly review the present
policies related to the hydro power sector to provide the much-needed
impetus to this sector. The Committee had also recommended that if
the hydro sector is that difficult to develop and so unlucrative, then
the Government should try to incentivize this sector through various
interventions.
19. The Ministry of Power , in their Action Taken Reply, have stated
as under:
“It may be appreciated that the Hydro Power Projects are impacted
by issues such as long gestation period compared to thermal power
projects; geological surprises; inter-State issues; land acquisition;
environmental and forest clearances; finalization of rehabilitation
and resettlement issues; natural calamities; law and order problems;
local issues etc. Further, the share of hydro power in the installed
capacity (MW) has declined from 45.6% in 1966 i.e. from start of
the 4th Plan to 19.5% in 2012  i.e. start of the 12th Plan and 15.49%
at the end of April, 2015. This decline in the share of hydro power
in the energy mix is an outcome of both the slower pace of

9
development of hydro power projects due to various reasons and
the increasing share of thermal, nuclear and renewable sources of
energy. An alternative of development of hydro power could be the
percentage of the identified hydro power potential developed. As
on 30.4.2015, out of the identified potential (above 25 MW) of
1,45,320 MW, 36,846.87 MW (25.35%) is developed and 12,493 MW
(8.59%) is under development.
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the progress of
under construction power projects through frequent site visits and
interaction with the developers and equipment suppliers. In addition,
a Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up by the
Ministry of Power for independent monitoring of Thermal and Hydro
Generation projects targeted for commissioning during the
12th Plan and beyond. Regular reviews are also taken by the Ministry
at various levels to identify the problem areas and facilitate faster
resolution of inter-ministerial and other outstanding issues.
Water being a State subject, allotment of hydro projects is done by
the State Governments. To facilitate the expeditious implementation
of allotted projects, the Ministry of Power has taken up issues
related to environment and forest clearances with MoEF&CC and as
a result, the process for grant of EC/FC has been streamlined by
that Ministry. Ministry of Power has also taken up the issues of
expeditious completion of Cumulative Impact Assessment and
Carrying Capacity Studies of the river basins with MoEF and this has
been pursued at the highest level of Government. Completion of
the Basin Studies and decision on their recommendations by MoEF&CC
will enable clarity on the optimum number of projects in each river
basin and also help to expedite the environmental clearances.
Ministry of Power is also conducting regular reviews of progress on
identified roads/bridges required for development of MEPs in
Arunachal Pradesh, the State with the maximum identified hydro
power potential, to address the problem of inaccessibility of the
sites.
To incentivise the hydro sector , the provision relating to 40% sale
as merchant power in the Hydro Policy for the private sector , was
extended to the public sector in 2011. Recognizing that time and
cost overrun in hydro power projects is often due to factors beyond
the control of the developers, it has been proposed to extend the
cost plus regime in the Tariff Policy for hydro projects till the end
of the 13th Plan period  i.e. 2022. ”

10
20. The Government, in their reply, have stated that the share
of hydro power in the installed capacity (MW) has declined from
45.6% in 1966, i.e. from the start of the 4th Plan, to 19.5% in 2012,
i.e. the start of the 12th Plan, and 15.49% at the end of April, 2015.
The Government have also enumerated various reasons like long
gestation period; geological surprises; inter-State issues; land
acquisition; environmental and forest clearances; rehabilitation and
resettlement issues; natural calamities; law and order problems;
local issues, etc., for this decline in the share of hydro power in the
energy mix. The Committee note with satisfaction that, to fast-track
the process of implementation of hydro projects, the Central
Electricity Authority (CEA) has been monitoring the progress of under-
construction power projects through frequent site visits and having
interaction with the developers and equipment suppliers; further, a
Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up by the Ministry
of Power for independent monitoring of Thermal and Hydro
Generation projects targeted for commissioning during the 12th Plan
and beyond. It is also noted that the Ministry has been undertaking
regular reviews at various levels to identify the problem areas and
facilitate faster resolution of inter-ministerial and other outstanding
issues like environment and forest clearances; grant of EC/FC;
expeditious completion of Cumulative Impact Assessment and Carrying
Capacity Studies of the river basins.
Further, in response to the recommendation of the Committee
that the Government should try to incentivize the hydro sector
through various interventions, the Government have stated that to
incentivize the hydro sector, the provision relating to 40% sale as
merchant power in the Hydro Policy for the private sector, had been
extended to the public sector in 2011. The Government have also
proposed to extend the cost plus regime in the Tariff Policy for
hydro projects till the end of the 13th Plan period  i.e. 2022.
The Committee understand that India ranks fifth in the world in
terms of usable hydroelectric potential, with an estimated potential
of about 145 GW, making it one of the most important potential
sources to meet the energy security needs. However, despite the
advancement in civil engineering technology and the increasing
pressure to reduce the country ’s carbon footprint by harnessing
clean energy sources, the Government are able to develop just 25.35%
of the total identified hydro power potential and an additional
12,493 MW is under development.
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the
Government, however, the Committee note that the Government
have not responded to their recommendation that the Government

11
should thoroughly review the present policies related to the hydro
power sector to provide the much needed impetus to this sector.
Also, the Committee feel that there is a need to salvage the under-
construction projects as a first-step; further, the Government should
create a favourable environment for advancement of the hydro sector
by formulating enabling policies and guidelines. Therefore, the
Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Government
should thoroughly review the present policies related to the hydro
power sector, as the Committee are of the view that the present
policies relating to this sector are ineffective and they have failed
to bring any positive change in the hydro sector.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in Fifth Report, under Direction 73A of the ‘Directions by
the Speaker ’
Annual Plan Outlay
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Committee while scrutinizing the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)
for the year 2015-16 note that against the sought outlay of Rs. 19,243.46
crore (GBS Component), the Ministry of Finance approved the allocation
of Rs. 6,799.43 crore only. Though the budgetary cut is across the
board, two heads viz. Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)—
and Power Sector Development Funds are most affected. Even the Deen
Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) got only Rs. 4,500 crore
against the demand of Rs. 9,000 crore. The Committee feel that there
is hardly any need to expound the importance of the development of
electricity sector for overall growth of the country. The Committee,
therefore, express their concern over the approval of lesser than
demanded budgetary allocation by the Ministry of Finance. However,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power during the evidence apprised the
Committee that though they would have liked to have more budgetary
provisions for two flagship programmes of the Ministry of Power i.e.
DDUGJY and IPDS, nonetheless, they have got a reasonable assurance
from the Ministry of Finance of providing more budgetary provision at
the RE stage depending on the progress of expenditure. The Committee,
therefore, urge that the Ministry of Power continue to accelerate the
momentum of execution of their programmes and utilize the fund as
per their demanded budgetary allocation and request the Ministry of
Finance to provide more allocation to the Ministry of Power at the
stage of RE if the Ministry of Power so requires.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted and steps are
being taken to improve the pace of expenditure so that the Ministry has
adequate grounds to not only justify the existing allocation but also

13
demand additional funds for meeting the requirements of various
programmes and activities. In this regard, it is submitted that as on
30th June 2015, out of total Annual Plan Budget allocation of 6799.74
crore, Rs. 1524.02 crore has already been spent while keeping in view
the restriction of 1/6th  ceiling of vote-on-account. This constitutes
22.41% of the annual allocation for the current year as against 2.79%,
3.27% and 1.05% during the corresponding period of 2012-13, 2013-14
and 2014-15 respectively. Thus the performance during the first quarter
of 2015-16 has already shown a significant improvement over the
corresponding period in the previous years.
There is an inter-Ministerial Monitoring Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) which periodically meets to sanction
projects and review progress of implementation of the two major flagship
schemes - DDUGJY and IPDS. DDUGJY Projects for 6 States at an
estimated cost of Rs. 8853.12 crores have been sanctioned by Monitoring
Committee headed by Secretary (P). IPDS projects for 6 States at an
estimated cost of Rs. 3268.33 crore have also been sanctioned. Efforts
are being made to impress upon the State Governments to submit the
DPRs to the Monitoring Committee for sanctioning of further projects.
Efforts are also being made to expedite utilization of funds in other
schemes. MOP has additionally sought supplementary grants under six
schemes on the basis of the satisfactory level of expenditure so far. The
Ministry of Power proposes to maintain the same tempo of pace of
expenditure in the remaining part of the year as well.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee note that from 2011-12 to 2014-15, the Ministry
was allocated Rs. 9,642 crore every year. Notably, against the allocation,
their actual expenditure for the said period was Rs. 4,827.35 crore,
Rs. 6,063 crore, Rs. 5,180.53 crore and Rs. 4,999.59 crore respectively.
The Committee, therefore, believe that this could be the prime reason
for the Ministry of Finance for not acceding to the proposed demand
of Rs. 19,243.46 of the Ministry. The Committee are concerned with the
constant under-utilization of the funds allocated to the Ministry of
Power. The Committee were informed that the under utilization of fund
by the Ministry was due to non-finalization of various new schemes and
since, the said schemes have now been finalized, there would be
optimum utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry strengthen their monitoring mechanism and also review
and revamp their planning process. The Committee also recommend

14
that the Ministry may put indefatigable efforts in ensuring the timely
utilization of the funds allocated to them so that they could justifiably
put up further demands at the time of Revised Estimates.
Reply of the Government
The following mechanism has been put in place to oversee the
utilization of budgetary allocation under various plan schemes with
regular periodicity at different levels:
(i) The programme Division (at the level of the concerned Joint
Secretary) reviews the progress of utilization of the outlay
(both GBS and IEBR) with the concerned implementing
agencies/organizations on monthly basis and suggest course
corrections/measures from time to time to improve
utilization.
(ii) The progress is monitored at the level of JS&FA on quarterly
basis with a view to rationalize the allocation.
(iii) The progress is further reviewed at the level of Secretary
(Power) on half yearly basis.
Further , the two major flagship schemes (DDUGJY and IPDS) have
their own in-built monitoring mechanism to watch the progress of
implementation
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
The Committee note that there is an outlay of Rs. 4,40,795.85
crore for Central Power Sector for the 12th Five Year Plan. This comprise
Rs. 3,86,516.84 crore of Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) to
be raised by the Central Power Sector Undertakings themselves and
Rs. 54,279.00 crore of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS). The actual
utilization upto 31.01.2015, during the 12th Plan period is Rs. 1,51,177.78
crore including Rs. 1,39,485.04 crore IEBR and Rs. 11,692.74 crore as
GBS. The Committee feel that the achievements so far are far from
being satisfactory. The Committee further note that the major segment
of IEBR i.e. Rs. 2,19,612.50 crore pertains to NTPC. However , their
achievement till said date is only Rs. 57,104.50 crore leaving a gap of
Rs. 1,62,507.80 crore. Since, only two years are left in the ongoing
12th Plan period, it is very unlikely that the target of Rs. 2,19,612.50

15
crore in respect of NTPC is going to be achieved. The Committee do
not concur with the argument of Secretary, Power that this is the result
of ambitious planning by the CPSUs at the beginning of the Five Year
Plan which usually does not get realized. The Committee believe that
the target of Rs. 2,19,612.50 crore for NTPC was not insurmountable
and the Public Sector Undertaking such as NTPC has capability to achieve
this. Even the Power Grid a counterpart CPSU of NTPC has managed to
put up a good performance by achieving Rs. 60,815 crore so far against
the target of Rs. 1,02,034 crore. The Committee are of the firm view
that in attaining the goal of electricity for all in the country, the giant
CPSUs such as NTPC has to perform exceedingly well. The Committee,
therefore recommend that the Ministry may provide all possible
assistance to NTPC to improve its performance so that they can reach
at least near to Rs. 2,19,615.50 crore targets if the same is not fully
achieved.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
The Ministry would like to submit that the Five Year Plan projects are
made by NITI AAYOG (erstwhile Planning Commission) on the basis of
the recommendations contained in the Working Group Reports and with
reference to the shelf/pipeline of projects in the following three broad
categories (i) On-going projects including projects spilled over from the
previous Plan (11th Plan); (ii) Renovation & Modernisation; and
(iii) New Projects including investment in Joint Ventures, coal minning
and other schemes. While there could be reasonable certainty about
the quantum and phasing of CAPEX in respect of the projects falling in
the first two categories, the same can not be said about the new
projects. The investment/CAPEX in new power projects are linked to
several pre-requisites such as availability of land, fuel (coal/gas) linkage,
forest/environmental clearances, other statutory clearances etc. Some
of these issues may be relevant in the case of on-going projects too.
Delay(s) in fulfilling these pre-requisites impact the quantum and phasing
of CAPEX against these projects. With specific reference to NTPC, the
reasons for low level of expenditure vis-a-vis the 12th Plan projections
are as follows:
(a) Gas-based projects could not be taken up due to lack of
fuel—Kawas-II, Gandhar-II and Rajiv Gandhi CCPP-I.
(b) Investment approval delayed due to delay in award of bulk
tendering projects — Gadarwara, Lara, Darlipalli, Solapur
and Tanda-II. Court case filed by M/s Ansaldo for rejection
of technical bid. Award had to be retendered.

16
(c) Projects considered in original plan but award delayed/not
awarded yet — Barethi, Pudimadaka, Katwa, Gajmara,
Dhuvran, etc. due to environmental, land, shortage of water
issues, change in site.
(d) Projects scrapped — Giderbaha, Khasiabara (Hydro) and
Badarpur Expansion.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
Recommendation (Sl. No . 4)
The Committee note that the Government has initiated a new
scheme called Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
subsuming the erstwhile Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY), which was launched with a goal of providing access to
electricity to all households in the country. DDUGJY , apart from rural
electrification envisages the separation of agriculture and non-agriculture
feeders and strengthening and augmentation of sub-transmission &
distribution infrastructure in rural areas. The Committee believe that
these two new components in this scheme complements the main
objective or rural electrification, therefore, would be helpful in
electrifying all the villages on the sustainable basis. The Committee are
also pleased to note that their recommendation of covering all the
villages irrespective of any population criteria has been accepted by
the Ministry and they have made such provision in DDUGJY . Since DDUGJY
is a new scheme, the effectiveness of its provisions is yet of stand the
test of time. The Committee, however, would like to recommend the
Ministry to ensure that the problems that marred the erstwhile RGGVY
should not crop up in this new scheme.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of Committee has been noted for effective
implementation of DDUGJY . Some significant steps taken in this regard
are as follows:
(a) DPRs shall be prepared and submitted for consideration based
on actual field survey and as per updated schedule of rates
to arrive the actual quantity/Scope to avoid any cost revision
in future. Cost overruns, if any, on the ground of quantity
variation shall not be entertained by MOP subsequently and
shall be borne by the State Government.

17
(b) Metering has been given due emphasis and provision of
funding for consumer metering, feeder metering and
Distribution Transformer metering have been kept in the
scope.
(c) All Discoms including private sector Discoms and State Power
Departments will be eligible for financial assistance under
the scheme as against the earlier scheme where private
DISCOMs were not eligible for funding.
(d) DPRs will be recommended by existing State Level Standing
Committee constituted for RGGVY programme under the
chairmanship of Chief Secretary before submission to the
Nodal Agency. State Level Standing Committee, headed by
the Chief Secretary will comprise of Secretaries of Energy,
Rural Development, Finance, Panchayati Raj, Forest, Revenue,
Representative of REC etc. for recommending the projects
to Government of India to sanction, monitoring of progress
and resolving implementation issues. This will facilitate quick
allotment of land for sub-stations,resolving ROW issues and
speedy clearance of forest cases.
(e) Ministry of Power has also requested State Govt. to constitute
District Electricity Committee, to be headed by concerned
Hon’ble MP of the district to oversee the progress of rural
electrification works. It has been made mandatory to obtain
consent of the concerned MP of the district while preparing
for DPR for electrification works.
(f) On the request of Ministry of Power , Ministry of Rural
Development expanded the scope of District Level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committee for “Review of erstwhile RGGVY ”
as a regular agenda item in the District Level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committee Meetings, headed by the Hon ’ble MPs.
(g) An appropriate Project Management Agency (PMA) will be
appointed by the utility for monitoring and ensuring timely
implementation of the project. 100% grant will be provided
by GOI towards expenditure incurred on PMA.
(h) Complete flexibility has been provided to the States to
prioritize scope of work as per their requirement.
(i) The works in Gram Panchayat selected under Saansad Adarsh
Gram Yojana (SAGY) shall necessary be included in the DPR.
(j) While formulating DPRs the utility shall necessarily consult
the public representatives including Member of Parliament.
Utility shall furnish a certificate to this effect while
submitting DPRs to Nodal Agency.

18
(k) All Discoms including private sector Discoms, State Power
Departments and RE Cooperative Societies are eligible for
financial assistance under DDUGJY .
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee note that Integrated Power Development Scheme
(IPDS) is a new scheme launched by the Ministry by subsuming the
erstwhile Restructured—Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (R-APDRP) as its one of the three components. The other
two components are strengthening of sub-transmission & Distribution
network in the urban areas and metering of distribution transformers/
feeders/consumers in the urban areas. This scheme like its predecessor
envisages for reduction of AT&C losses to 15%. Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme was Re-structured and was
approved as Central Sector Scheme on 31.07.2008 with total outlay of
Rs. 51,577 crore to reduce the AT&C losses to the level of 15%. However,
the scheme in 5 years could manage to reduce only 2% AT&C losses
from 27.47% in the year 2008-09 to 25.38% in the year 2012-13. The
Committee have also time and again recommended the Government to
review the programme as the same was not producing the desired
results. The Government now has reinvented this programme with
identical goal of bringing down AT&C losses to the level of 15%. Since,
the IPDS has been finalized recently, it is yet to be seen as to what
extent the programme is more effective than its predecessor in reducing
the AT&C losses. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should provide an explicit timeline for implementation of the IPDS and
like DDUGJY , the year by which the prime goal of IPDS i.e. reduction
of AT&C losses to 15%, will be achieved.
Reply of the Government
The reduction of AT&C losses from 27.47% in 2008-09 to 25.38% in
2012-13 is at the national level. However, R-APDRP is a town level
intervention. The AT&C loss reduction under R-APDRP is to be measured
for five years/with first year starting at least a year after completion
of Part-A (IT) project and Part-B completion. Under the scheme,
Part-A(IT) system is yet to be verified as completed for any State by
Third Party Independent Evaluation Agencies-IT , appointed by MoP/PFC.
The same are in process in many States. Part-B scheme is completed
in 240 towns. As such, the results regarding reduction of AT&C losses
under R-APDRP are likely to be evident only from next FY i.e. 2016-17.

19
The objective of Integrated Power Development Scheme is reduction
of nation level AT&C losses to below 15%. As per the trajectory for
AT&C loss reduction as agreed by all State power utilities, AT&C losses
are to be brought to below 15% by FY 2021-22. The same is now
proposed to be achieved by FY 2019-20. Revised proposed trajectories
have been circulated by MoP among State utilities for their consent.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
The Committee note that a target of 88,537 MW of power generation
capacity addition was set for the 12th Five Year Plan period. They
further note that against this target, a generation capacity of
54,383 MW has been added till 28.02.2015. The Committee are glad
that more than 60% of the total targets are achieved in the first three
years of the plan. However , when the committee scrutinized the data
of the Ministry closely, it has been revealed that it is the Private Sector
whose exceptional performance during the said period is responsible
for such good performance in overall generation capacity addition
programme. The Private Sector , so far , have achieved a remarkable 72%
of the total target. However, on the other hand, dismal performance
of the Central Sector is continuing in the 12th Plan also. Their
achievement so far i.e. 40% is the lowest of the three sector viz.
Central, State and Private. The Committee are anguished over the
incessant poor performance of the Central Sector since the 11th Plan
period. This is so when the slipped projects of 11th Plan have also been
counted in their performance in the 12th Plan so far. The Committee
also observe that ever since the Private Sector has started to increase
their pace in capacity addition, the Central Sector has slowed down.
The Ministry has been enumerating various reasons that they blame for
such poor performances. The Committee, however, hardly find them
convincing as the same problems are also being faced by the Private
Sector and even then they are coming up with such impressive figure
consistently since the 11th Plan period. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the declining performance of Central Sector be taken
seriously and the utmost efforts be made by the Ministry to reinstate
this sector in the race of generation capacity addition.
Reply of the Government
(i) Hydro Capacity Addition Performance
A hydro capacity addition of 10,897 MW (6004 MW in Central Sector,
1608 MW in State Sector and 3285 MW in Private Sector) is programmed
for the 12th Plan (2012-17).

20
Out of this, hydro Projects with aggregate installed capacity of
2660 MW have been commissioned (upto 30.04.2015) and 8237 MW is
under various stages of construction for benefits during remaining period
of 12th Plan and beyond. Sector wise details are as under:
Sector Total Under Commissioned Percentage
(MW) Execution (MW) commissioned
(MW)
Central Sector 6004 3780 2224 37.04%
State Sector 1608 1506 102 6.34%
Private Sector 3285 2951 334 10.17%
Total: 10897 8237 2660 24.41%
As can be seen, performance of Central sector has been better than
Private & State sectors during 12th Plan as far as Hydro capacity addition
is concerned. The percentage of commissioned projects during
11th Plan in Central Sector was only 17.91% as against 37.04% in the
12th Plan.
The following monitoring mechanism is in place in Ministry of Power
for timely completion of the hydro projects:
• Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the progress
of hydro power projects (above 25 MW) continuously through
site visits, interaction with the developers & other
stakeholders and critical study of monthly progress reports.
The CEA holds review meetings with the developers and
other stakeholders to sort out the critical issues.
• Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP), set up by the Ministry
of Power , independently follow up and monitors the progress
of the hydro projects.
• Ministry of Power also reviews the progress of ongoing Hydro
electric projects regularly with the concerned officers of
CEA, equipment manufacturers, State Utilities/CPSUs/Project
developers, etc.

21
(ii) Thermal Capacity Addition Performance
Sector-wise break-up of thermal capacity addition targets and
achievements (till 31.03.2015) during 12th Five Year Plan is given below:
Sector Target % Cap. Additional Total %
(MW) share in Comm. Cap. Capacity achievement
Target From Comm. commissioned w.r.t.
Target (MW) (MW) Sector
(MW) Target
Central 14877.6 20.6 9317 25.5 9342.5 62.8
State 13922 19.2 11472 647.1 12119.1 87.0
Private 43540 60.2 20745 15512.5 36257.5 83.3
Total 72339.6 100.0 41534 16185.1 57719.1
As against the targeted capacity of 14877.6 MW in central sector,
a capacity of 9342.5 MW ( i.e. 62.8% with respect to the Target) has
been commissioned till 31.03.2015 ( i.e. during the first three years
of the 12th Five Year Plan). The remaining targeted capacity of
5560.6 MW is likely to be commissioned during the balance period of
12th Five Year Plan.
Following steps have been taken for timely completion of Central
Sector power projects:
i. Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the progress
of construction of the power projects through frequent site
visits, interaction with the developers & other stakeholders
and critical study of monthly progress reports. In addition,
CEA holds review meetings periodically with the developers
and other stakeholders and identifies issues critical to
commissioning of projects and helps in resolving them.
ii. A Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up by
the Ministry of Power for independent monitoring of Thermal
and Hydro Generation projects targeted for commissioning
during the 12th Plan and beyond.
iii. P roject authorities of Central Sector power projects are urged
to bring up the issues related to the delay in implementation
of the projects so that those projects can be reviewed under
PRAGATI platform as well.

22
iv . Secretary (Power) holds regular meetings with project
developers and equipment suppliers to resolve the issues in
delayed Central Sector power projects.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
The Committee note that against the target of 1,07,440 Ckm for
the 12th Five Year Plan period, the achievement till February, 2014 is
51,635 Ckm. The Committee also note that there has been a massive
generation capacity addition in the country and a number of power
generation project are under execution or at planning stage. Due to
advent of Private Sector in generation sector and enabling environment
for setting up of New and renewable Energy projects, the power sector
of the Country has set to grow at a rapid pace. Since, this huge
generation capacity will need transmission lines of the matching capacity
to distribute the electricity generated to all corners of the country. The
Committee also feel that the planning for transmission should not only
done with the generation projects but also the execution of the
transmission should be ahead of the generation. The Committee,
therefore, recommend to the Government to expedite the pace of work
to ensure that the targets set for the 12th Plan are fully achieved. The
Committee are also of the view that the Government should examine
the feasibility of identifying major/important transmission corridors
which will be needed in the coming years/decades and starting the
groundwork prospectively to ensure that inadequacy of transmission
capacity does not become a bottleneck for transmission of electricity
across the country.
Reply of the Government
Against the target of 1,07,440 Ckm for 12th Plan period, the
achievement till March, 2015 is 55,956 Ckm. The target for the balance
period of 12th Plan  i.e. during 2015-16 and 2016-17 is 23712 Ckm and
27,772 Ckm respectively.
Against the target of 2,82,750 MVA of transformation capacity for
12th Plan period, the achievement till March, 2015 is 1,86,549 MVA.
Additional 50,542 MVA and 45,659 MVA have been targeted to be
completed during the balance period of 12th Plan i.e. 2015-16 and
2016-17.
In order to facilitate integration of large scale renewable generation
capacity envisaged in 12th Plan, a comprehensive transmission plan

23
comprising intra-State and inter-State transmission system (ISTS)
strengthening has been identified and taken for implementation as part
of “Green Energy Corridors-I (GECs) ”. Intra-State transmission scheme
under GECs is being implemented by the respective States, whereas
ISTS is being implemented by POWERGRID. These are under various
stages of implementation.
Further , a 20 year perspective plan covering aspects of General
Network Access (GNA) is under preparation by CEA in consultation with
POWERGRID and States/ Stakeholders for the overall development of
transmission system. Under GNA approach, transmission systems is
planned based on Generation/ Demand quantum and their location
without identification of the contracted source of purchase/sale and
generator and the States/Consumer could be given general network
access (GNA) to ISTS for the agreed quantum of power (MW). This
approach is expected to address the issues of congestion and enable
the execution of transmission system ahead of generation.
A number of high capacity power transmission corridors and Green
Energy Corridors have been identified/planned and are being
implemented to enable seamless transfer of power from generation
rich States to energy deficit states. These corridors include 765kV
transmission lines and ±800kV HVDC transmission systems.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Development of Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee note that the total installed generation capacity as
on 28 February, 2015 is 2,61,006.46 MW. As per the information provided
by the Ministry, the maximum power that could be generated by the
thermal power plants during preceding year (upto February 2015) has
been assessed to be 1,348.7 billion units had there been no shortage
of fuel for power stations. However , the actual generation in the
preceding year has only been 1,035.34, paucity of fuel being the prime
reason for the deficiency. Interestingly, the total energy requirement
during the preceding year has been calculated at 1,073.9 billion units.
It is apparent that had there been shortage of fuel for power stations,
there would have been a situation of surplus power in the country. The
power plants of the country are struggling with acute shortages of fuel
be it coal or gas. The overall Plant Load Factor has consistently been
falling from 78.6% in the year 2007-08 to 65.1% in 2014-15. The
Committee are deeply concerned with this state of affair as this not

24
only create energy deficiency in the country but also result in wastage
of generation capacity. Moreover, running of power stations at sub-
optimum level also increases the per unit generation cost. The Committee
believe that this situation is not good for energy starved country like
us. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
take up this matter at the earliest possible time at highest level to find
a long term solution rather ad hoc provision like importing increased
amount of coal for a year or two.
Reply of the Government
(a) As regards availability of coal, it is submitted that with the
concerted efforts of the Government, all India coal stock position at
the Power plants as on 5.05.2015 has reached an all time high of
around 30 MT . Since January, 2015 to till date, none of the power
plants have reported generation loss due to coal shortage.
There are 100 coal-based power plants whose coal stock position is
being monitored on daily basis in Central Electricity Authority. They are
monitored for critical and over critical coal stock. (Coal stock of less
than 7 days and less than 4 days for non-pit head. Coal stock of less
than 5 days and less than 3 days for pit head).
It is true that power utilities have been importing coal to bridge
the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal. For the year 2014-15,
to bridge the gap between demand and availability of indigenous coal
for the power plants designed on indigenous coal. 48.5 MT coal was
imported. In case of TPSs designed on imported coal, 42.7 MT was
imported. For the year 2015-16, it is envisaged that 73 MT would be
imported to bridge the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal.
In addition to this, 42 MT coal have been envisaged to be imported by
Power Plants designed on imported coal.
In order to ensure availability of domestic coal supply to the power
plants on the long term basis, the following steps are being taken by
the Government:
(i) Enhancement of domestic coal production to end dependency
on import of coal.
(ii) The availability of coal is being regularly monitored at the
highest level in the Government.
(iii) Auction of captive coal mines for their speedy development
and coal production.

25
(b) As regards the gas-based plants, a scheme for utilization of
Stranded Gas Based Plant Capacities for the years 2015-16 and
2016-17 has been approved by the Government. The scheme envisages
supply of imported spot RLNG to the stranded gas based plants selected
through reverse e-bidding process. It is expected that electricity
generation in the country would be enhanced by around 79 BU.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
The Committee are distressed to note that there is 27.000 MW of
gas-based power generation capacity in the country. Out of these
24,000 MW is connected to the grids which are presently operating at
0% to 60% PLF . The Committee have been apprised that as per Ministry
of Petroleum there is no possibility of increasing domestic gas production
for next two years. The Committee have been further informed that in
view of this the Cabinet has approved a scheme for reviving the stranded
gas-based power plants, wherein, all the stakeholders viz. Central
Government, State Governments, GAIL and the promoters have agreed
to sacrifice something to bring down the tariff of gas-based power
plants which are proposed to run on imported RLNG. The Ministry has
further informed the Committee that a provision of Rs 3,000 crore out
of Power System Development Fund has been made to provide assistance
to Discoms to purchase this power which has slightly higher tariff. The
Committee, considering that this scheme will give relief not only to
stranded gas-based power plants but will also provide additional power
generation to the country, endorse this scheme and expect its earliest
implementation.
Reply of the Government
(i) Government of India has sanctioned a scheme for importing spot
RLNG during 2015-16 and 2016-17 for the stranded gas-based power
plants as well as for plants receiving domestic gas upto the target PLF
selected through a reverse e-bidding process. The scheme provides for
financial support from PSDF (Power System Development Fund). The
outlay for the support from PSDF has been fixed at Rs. 7500 crore
(Rs. 3500 crore and Rs. 4,000 crore for the year 2015-16 and
2016-17 respectively).
(ii) The scheme also envisages sacrifices to be made collectively by
all stakeholders, including the Central State Government by way of
exemptions from certain applicable taxes and levies on the incremental
RLNG being imported for the purpose. Beside, gas transporters and

26
re-gasification terminals have agreed to reduce their transportation
tariff, marketing margin and re-gasification charges on the incremental
RLNG. Power developers would completely forego their return on equity.
Further , the Power generators have to commit to sell power below the
target price.
(iii) The grid connected gas-based power generation capacity in the
country is 24,150 MW. Of this, a capacity of 14,305 MW had no supply
of domestic gas and is completely stranded. These comprise 29 plants
of which 9 plants are yet to be commissioned. Further , a capacity of
9,845 MW had supply of some domestic gas and is currently operating
at an average PLF of 32.2%. These 9,845 MW comprise 23 plants of
which only 6 plants have a PLF higher than 35%. Thus of this 9,845 MW,
17 plants with a PLF of less than 35% were eligible to participate in the
auction process.
(iv) Auctions held for Stranded Gas Based Plants during the month
of May, 2015 will result in revival of a cumulative gas based generation
capacity of 10,270 MW resulting in generation of additional 5.70 billion
units of electricity during the peak summer months from 1st June 2015
to 30th Sept. 2015. This will involve Government support of Rs. 843.99
crore from the Power System Development Fund to the Discoms.
(v) Further auctions for the remaining period of the financial year
will be held shortly and are expected to contribute further to electricity
generation and the revival of the stranded gas-based power generation
capacities.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
The Committee note that the order of Government of India, which
has the provision that a Power Generating Company will provide
electricity within its vicinity of 5 kms, has been withdrawn due to its
non-implementability. In regard to reason for non-implementation of
this order, the Ministry has informed that since Power Plant Company
do not have distribution licenses, they have to depend on the Distribution
Companies for providing electricity in the vicinity of power plants.
However , the Discoms are not interested in doing so. The Ministry has
further informed that to address this issue they have proposed an
amendment in the Electricity Act 2003 which provides for obtaining of
distribution license by a generating company also. They have further
stated that once this amendment is incorporated in the Act, we will
make a provision that generation company ran do distribution work

27
within the radius of 5-10 kms. The Committee are in agreement with
the proposal of the Ministry and recommend its expeditious
implementation after incorporating of the proposed amendment in the
Act.
Reply of the Government
As per provision of Electricity Act, 2003, there is no restriction for
generators in carrying out the activity of distribution. The relevant
provisions in this regard are as below:
“Section 12-No-person shall—
(a) transmit electricity; or
(b) distribute electricity; or
(c) undertake trading in electricity,
unless he is authorised to do so by a licence issued under
section 14, or is exempt under section 13. ”
“Section 14 proviso 6—Provided also that the Appropriate Commission
may grant a licence to two or more persons for distribution of electricity
through their own distribution system within the same area, subject to
the conditions that the applicant for grant of licence within the same
area shall, without prejudice to the other conditions or requirements
under this Act, comply with the additional requirements relating to the
capital adequacy, credit-worthiness, or code of conduct as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and no such applicant who
complies with all the requirements for grant of licence, shall be refused
grant of licence on the ground that there already exists a licensee in
the same area for the same purpose:
Provided also that in a case where a distribution licensee proposes
to undertake distribution of electricity for a specified area within his
area of supply through another person, that person shall not be required
to obtain any separate licence from the concerned State Commission
and such distribution licensee shall be responsible for distribution of
electricity in his area of supply:
Provided also that where a person intends to generate and distribute
electricity in a rural area to be notified by the State Government, such
person shall not require any licence for such generation and distribution
of electricity, but he shall comply with the measures which may be
specified by the Authority under section 53: ”

28
“Section 42 (1)—It shall be the duty of a distribution licensee to
develop and maintain an efficient, co-ordinated and economical
distribution system in his area of supply and to supply electricity in
accordance with the provisions contained in this Act. ”
In view of aforesaid provisions of Indian Electricity Act, 2003, the
issue has been revisited. Power Generating can carry out the distribution
activity provided they develop and maintain an efficient, coordinated
and economical distribution system in their area of supply as provided
under Section 42(1) and get permission from the Appropriate Commission
in this regard.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/4/2015-Budget dated: 14/07/2015]

29
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-Nil-

30
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee also note that the Ministry still not have separate
data for Technical and Distribution losses. AT&C losses include technical
losses due to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipment used
for transmission, transmission and distribution of power , whereas,
commercial losses are due to pilferage of energy by hooking of lines and
bypassing the meters, defective meters, errors in meter reading, etc.
The technical losses are inherent in a system and cannot be  eliminated
entirely but can be reduced to a certain level while commercial losses
which have the major share in AT&C losses could be eliminated
completely. Since the AT&C losses are mix of these two, the Committee
believe that having separate data for technical losses and distribution
losses will be instrumental in reduction of avoidable commercial losses.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to expeditiously
prepare separate data for technical losses and commercial losses.
Reply of the Government
MoP appreciates the concern of Standing Committee that separate
data for technical and commercial losses shall enable calculations of
exact commercial losses, which are due to various reasons, such as,
pilferage, defective meters and errors in meter reading etc. State
utilities are being requested to provide said data along with quarterly
AT&C loss data submitted to nodal agency. Ministry of Power and PFC,
the Nodal Agency are regularly pursuing with them to provide the data.
It may however be submitted that segregation of losses into technical
and commercial losses is a complex and long drawn exercise. At best,
an assessment of these losses can be attempted on a pilot basis over
a sample network.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

31
Hydro Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
The Committee note that only 1,895 MW of hydro power generation
capacity could be added, whereas, in thermal sector the generation
capacity addition is as high as 51,488 MW during the 12th Plan so far.
The Committee have time and again been expressing their anguish over
sluggish execution of hydro generation capacity resulting into falling
share of hydro in total energy mix. The hydro power share in terms of
installed capacity (MW) was 43.50% in the year 1970. At present the
hydro power share is about 15.8%. The Committee have been informed
by the Ministry that since hydro projects have longer gestation period,
it takes longer time in their completion. Also most of the potential lies
in the remote reaches of Himalayas. The Ministry has also enumerated
the provisions made and the steps taken for the growth of hydro sector.
The Committee, however, finds that since, 11th Five Year Plan there
has been a visible slowdown in hydro sector. Even the Private Sector
whose performance in thermal sector as far as  capacity addition is
concern is par excellence, could manage to add a meagre 169 MW of
hydro power generation capacity so far in the 12th Plan. The Committee,
therefore, are inclined to infer that the present policies relating to
hydro power sector are ineffective as they have failed to bring any
positive change in the sector. The Committee recommend that the
Government should thoroughly review the present policies related to
hydro power sector to provide much needed impetus to this sector. The
Committee also recommend that if the hydro sector is that difficult to
develop and so unlucrative, then the Government should try to
incentivize this sector through various interventions.
Reply of the Government
It may be appreciated that the Hydro Power Projects are impacted
by issues such as long gestation period compared to thermal power
projects; geological surprises; inter-State issues; land acquisition;
environmental and forest clearances; finalization of rehabilitation and
resettlement issues; natural calamities; law and order problems; local
issues etc. Further , the share of hydro power in the installed capacity
(MW) has declined from 45.6% in 1966 i.e. from start of 4th Plan to
19.5% in 2012 i.e. start of 12th Plan and 15.49% at the end of
April, 2015. This decline in the share of hydro power in the energy mix
is an outcome of both the slower pace of development of hydro power
projects due to various reasons and the increasing share of thermal,
nuclear and renewable sources of energy. An alternative of development

32
of hydro power could be the percentage of the identified hydro power
potential developed. As on 30.4.2015, out of the identified potential
(above 25 MW) of 1,45,320 MW, 36,846.87 MW (25.35%) is developed
and 12,493 MW (8.59%) is under development.
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the progress of
under construction power projects through frequent site visits and
interaction with the developers and equipment suppliers. In addition,
a Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up by the Ministry
of Power for independent monitoring of Thermal and Hydro Generation
projects targeted for commissioning during the 12th Plan and beyond.
Regular reviews are also taken by the Ministry at various levels to
identify the problem areas and facilitate faster resolution of
inter-ministerial and other outstanding issues.
Water being a State subject, allotment of hydro projects is done by
the State Governments. To facilitate the expeditious implementation of
allotted projects, the Ministry of Power has taken up issues related to
environment and forest clearances with MoEF&CC and as a result, the
process for grant of EC/FC has been streamlined by that Ministry. Ministry
of Power has also taken up the issues of expeditious completion of
Cumulative Impact Assessment and Carrying Capacity Studies of the
river basins with MoEF and this has been pursued at the highest level
of Government. Completion of the Basin Studies and decision on their
recommendations by MoEF&CC will enable clarity on the optimum number
of projects in each river basin and also help to expedite the
environmental clearances.
Ministry of Power is also conducting regular reviews of progress on
identified roads/bridges required for development of HEPs in Arunachal
Pradesh, the State with the maximum identified hydro power potential,
to address the problem of inaccessibility of the sites.
To incentivise the hydro sector , the provision relating to 40% sale
as merchant power in the Hydro Policy for the private sector, was
extended to the public sector in 2011. Recognizing that time and cost
overrun in hydro power projects is often due to factors beyond the
control of the developers, it has been proposed to extend the cost plus
regime in the Tariff Policy for hydro projects till the end of the
13th Plan period i.e. 2022.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)

33
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
07 December, 2015 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

34
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2015-16) HELD ON 3rd DECEMBER, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1800 hrs. to 1830 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri M. Chandrakasi
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
6. Shrimati Krishna Raj
7. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
8. Shri Malyadri Sriram
9. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
11. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
12. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) Measures to Check Commercial Losses.

35
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the 43rd Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
‘Development of Hydro Sector ’.
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the 2nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2014-15.
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the 5th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2015-16.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports. The draft Report
on ‘Measures to Check Commercial Losses ’ was adopted with slight
modification. However, the remaining draft Action Taken Reports were
adopted without any change. The Committee authorized the Chairperson
to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament in the current Session.
4. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

36
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FIFTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 12
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12.
Total: 10
Percentage 83%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
SI. Nos. 6 and 9
Total: 02
Percentage 17%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total: 0
Percentage 0%