STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

ENERGY CONSERVATION

SEVENTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


SEVENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

ENERGY CONSERVATION

d to Lok Sabha on 41.08.2015

Presente’
ya Sabha on 41.08.2015

Laid in Raj

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


६.0. ६. No. 261 lo. 26

Price : ₹ 136.00

© 2015 By Lox SABHA Secretariar

Tocedure and Conduct
Of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by
Jainco Art India, New Dethi-110 005,


CONTENTS

Composition OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015) ..sseereererseessssreerenees®

INTRODUCTION

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in brief ....

REPORT
PART |
NARRATION ANALYSIS

CyapTer | Introductory ..
CuapTer Il Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC)........
(शहर Ill Energy Intensive IMGUStIieS ,..,०००००००००००*०*०*५*५*»*९००५***

Carter IV Light Emitting Diode (LED), Domestic & Street

Lighting

Cuapter ४ Energy Conservation in Agriculture Sector .....+++

Craprer VI State Designated Agencies (SDAS) ........००********

Cuapter VIL Promotion of the Concept of Energy

Conservation

Cuarter VIII Investment in Energy Conservation ००००० ० ०** बहन

CrapTer IX Other Important Aspects of Energy Conservation

Ml.

A. Energy Audit .....:cscssesesersersseneeneenserssnnes
8. AT&C Loses ..

PART Il

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee .....

ANNEXURES

_ List of State Designated Agencies ...-...-sssusrrrerrrerree
. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on

12.02.2015

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
17.03.2015

Pace

(ii)
(v)

13
22

oF
35
37

40
48

55
56

58

73

78

81
(i)



Iv.

Vi.

Vil.

Vill.

(ii)

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
1996:200:... ६ «+रतरसरत सर +«०«»»«नननन «नस लत रक9 ७५.3५

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
29 10,201 wsrseisvosisercernestessentussreossvire,

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
01.07.2015

Minutes of the Sitting Committee held on
07.07.2015...

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
14.07.2015 vssssessessecsorescecseesessetsssesevoescscs

- Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on

05.08.2015

Pace

84

86

88

91

95

98


2 en 9

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15)

Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Om Birla

Shri M. Chandrakasi

Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey

Shri Harish Chandra alias Harish Dwivedi
Shri Deepender Singh Hooda

Shri Saumitra Khan

Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar छः
Dr. Arun Kumar

Shri R.P. Marutharajaa

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shrimati Krishna Raj

Shri M.B, Rajesh

Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

Shri Purno Agitok Sangma

Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
Shri Malyadri Sriram

Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

(iti)



22,
23.
24,
25.
26.
27.
28.
29,
30.
31.

(५)

Rajya Sabha

Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Ram Jethmalani

Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri S. Muthukaruppan

Shri Javed Ali Khan

Dr. K.P. Ramalingam

Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
Shrimati Viplove Thakur

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan ~ Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalthing Haokip — Under Secretary
4, Shri Manish Kumar ~ Committee Assistant


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do
present this Report on Energy Conservation.

2. The Committee had extensive consultation with various
stakeholders viz. Ministries of Power [including Bureau of Energy
Efficiency (BEE) and Energy Efficiency Services Ltd. (EESL)], Finance,
Corporate Affairs, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, State
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh,
Regulators — Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), Delhi
Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC), Industry Forums —,
Confederation of Indian Industry (Cll), Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Private Manufacturing Associations/
Companies — The Electrical Lamp and Component Manufacturers
Association (ELCOMA), The Confederation of Real Estate Developers
Association of India (CREDAI), Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Manufacturers Association (RAMA), BSES and TATA Power. The Committee
also undertook a local study visit to an LED bulb manufacturing plant
in Noida, UP.

3. Energy Conservation project not only recovers their upfront cost
but result in substantive saving through energy saving over the period
of time. However, this upfront payment is one of the deterrents in
implementation of Energy Conservation programmes in the country.
Therefore, the role of Energy Service Companies (ESCO) becomes crucial
in this regard.

4. The Committee focussed on three broad sectors viz. Industry,
Buildings (residential and commercial) and Agriculture. After the series
of discussion and consultation, the Committee found that there is
immense scope of energy conservation, which would not only result in
substantive saving but also be helpful in bridging the gap between
energy requirement and its supply in the country. The observations/
recommendations, suggested by the Committee in this regard are given
in the following chapter.

5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 5th August, 2015.

(v)


6. The Committee wishes to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Power for valuable assistance.

New DELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(vi)


Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in brief

The Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation both goes together.
The Conservation and efficiency efforts additional investment which
can be used for furtherance of energy development or for the other
developments.

* Cooperation of all the stakeholders must.
* Need to evolve target for major important sector.

* Efficiency in construction of residential buildings, commercial
complexes, encouragement to green buildings.

+ Special efforts to bring efficiency in use of energy instrument
in agriculture.

* Better, renewal energy in the operation of agriculture pumps.

Recommendations

1. Major campaign by Ministry, Power PSUs, DISCOMs and also
industries involvement in power sector be asked to draft and implement
major awareness campaign on ‘Energy Efficiency and Energy
Conservation’.

2. With the help of consumer efforts, Ministry of Power and the
Ministry of Urban Development jointly evolve energy conservation
guidelines i.e. Energy Conservation Building Code which should become
part of National Building Code.

3. Action Plan for the improvement of millions of operating
agriculture pump sets, road map to convert the agriculture pump sets
into solar agriculture pump sets.

4, Guidelines for implementation of energy efficiency measures in:

« All the residential complexes above - Sq. Metres.

« All Malls, multiplexes should have energy efficiency plan/
Programme.

« Local Bodies be asked to make cooperation and make it
mandatory in the building plan guideline to implement energy
efficiency guideline.


The Ministry with the help of Industry Ministry must prepare
special energy efficiency guideline/code for all the major
industries.

+ Energy efficiency code for small cities,

* Special encouragement/incentive for green buildings.

5. A study may be undertaken to include few more industries in
the compulsory energy efficiency list.

6. Since last 25 years, companies are publishing/releasing measures/
data on energy efficiency measures taken by the company in the
Annual Report. Need to analyse the data.

7. The Ministry should prepare guideline and fix responsibility on
an agency to study/scrutinize the energy efficiency measures taken by
the companies which are reported in their Annual Reports. Such data
could be useful for planning and correcting the policies.

8. Energy Audit concept is implemented since the couple of years.
There is need to review the execution of providing energy efficiency
data in Audit Report by the companies and the implementation of
energy audit concept.

9. The Committee has observed that a lot of scope to improve
both the above concepts, the Ministry with the help of Corporate
Ministry and CERC, CEA can refresh the guideline and also evolve
system to scrutinize and use such data.

10. The Committee also feels the observations made in the energy
audit and also in the data released in the Annual Report by an Authority.
It seems presently no system is evolved to analyze the data and act
upon the same.

11. The Street Lights concept is 100 years old, The Technology
used is also needs to modernize recent initiative of the Power Ministry
to convert street lights into LED based Street Lights, needs in-depth
study and action plan.

12. The present initiative of the Ministry to encourage/motivate
the LED technology is appreciable. The Government after in-depth
study must plan an action plan to use the LED technology in different
schemes including residential.

13. Various suggestions/ observations have been received from the
Manufacturers, distributors, DISCOMs regarding implementation of LED
technology in India must be considered by the Power Ministry and take
necessary action.

2


14. The Power Ministry may take up with the Finance Ministry to
declare the conversion of Street Lights into LED based Street Lights
Project into Infrastructure Project.

15. Though AT&C losses are separate subject. The Committee feels
steps require to bring down the commercial ‘pilferage’.

Details of the Recommendations given in Part ॥ of the Report


REPORT
PART |
NARRATION ANALYSIS

CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

1.1 In view of the importance of energy efficiency and energy
Conservation, and of the cost-effective potential to implement it, the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Energy assessed the present
situation and challenges in this sector in a series of meetings. During
these Meetings, they held discussions with a wide range of stakeholders
such as Ministries/Departments; regulators; State Governments; utilities;
industry bodies; manufacturers, etc., and sought their views on
Opportunities and challenges to accelerate energy efficiency and energy
conservation activities.

1.2 The Ministry of Power and the Bureau of Energy Efficiency have
been assessing strategies to accelerate the pace of energy efficiency
gains, including through the incorporation of energy efficiency
enhancement actions as an integral part of the State-specific 24 x 7
Power-for-All plans that are currently under preparation.

1.3 Energy efficiency resources (i.e. energy savings) can be acquired
in short gestation periods and the investments required for a MW of
energy savings is only 20-30% that of the installation of a billion units
(BU) of energy with the co-benefit of the reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions.

1.4 The total electricity consumption during 2014-15 was 916 billion
units (BU). The Table below shows the actual savings achieved in
2012-13, 2013-14, and 2014-15:

(All Figures are in Billion Units)

Sl.No. Component 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
A Incremental Savings 7.68 7.73 9.17
2. Total Savings (considering 60.85 57.3 59.38

the energy saving
activities during the past
5 years)

3. % of total electricity consumption 19. 6.8 6.4



1.5 The accelerated pace of energy savings would be achieved by
a mixture of aggressive policy and regulatory actions, market-based
interventions (so as to create a market of energy efficiency business
models), and enhanced outreach (so as to bring awareness about energy
efficiency opportunities to energy consumers).

1.6 As a result of the interventions brought out, the expected
savings in the target sectors are:

Focus Areas Savings in 2018 (BU)
Buildings 8.04
LED Lighting 46.975
Industries 49.17
Appliances 14.28
Agriculture डा
Total 121.165

1.7 As per the Ministry’s report, the primary energy demand in
India has grown from about 450 million tons of oil equivalent (toe) in
2000 to about 770 million toe in 2012. This is expected to increase to
somewhere between 1250 (estimated by International Energy Agency)
and 1500 (estimated in the Integrated Energy Policy Report) million
toe by 2030. This increase is driven by a number of factors, the most
important of which are increasing incomes and economic growth which
lead to greater demand for energy services such as lighting, cooking,
space cooling, mobility, industrial production, office automation, etc.
This growth is also reflective of the current low level of energy supply
in India: the average annual energy supply in India in 2011 was only
0.6 toe per capita whereas the global average was 1.88 toe per capita.
It may also be noted that no country in the world has been able to
achieve a Human Development Index of 0.9 or more without an annual
energy supply of at least 4 toe per capita. Consequently, there is a
large latent demand for energy services that needs to be fulfilled in
order for people to have reasonable incomes and a decent quality of
life.

1.8 The Government of India has undertaken a two-pronged
approach to cater to the energy demands of the citizens while ensuring
minimum growth in CO, emissions, so that the global emissions do not
lead to an irreversible damage to the earth system. In the generation
side, the Government is promoting greater use of renewable in the

5


energy mix mainly through solar and wind and at the same time shifting
towards supercritical technologies for coal based power plants. Efforts
are also being made to efficiently use energy in the demand side
through various innovative policy measures under the overall ambit of
the Energy Conservation Act, 2001.

1.9 The Energy Conservation Act (EC Act) was enacted in 2001 with
the goal of reducing energy intensity of the Indian economy. The
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) was set up as a statutory body on
ist March 2002 at the central level to facilitate the implementation of
the EC Act. The Act provides regulatory mandate for: standards &
labeling of equipment and appliances; energy conservation building
codes for commercial buildings; and energy consumption norms for
energy intensive industries, The EC Act was amended in 2010 and the
main amendments of the Act are given below:

* The Union Government may issue energy savings certificate
to the designated consumer whose energy consumption is
less than the prescribed norms and standards in accordance
with the procedure as may be prescribed.

* The designated consumer whose energy consumption is more
than the prescribed norms and standards shall be entitled to
purchase the energy savings certificate to comply with the
prescribed norms and standards.

* The Union Government may, in consultation with the Bureau,
prescribe the value of per metric ton of oil equivalent of
energy consumed.

+ Commercial buildings which are having a connected load of
100 kW or contract demand of 120 kVA and above come
under the purview of ECBC under the EC Act.

1.10 The EC Act provides a legal framework for energy efficiency
initiatives in the country and has mandatory and promotional initiatives
which broadly relate to Designated Consumers, Standards and Labeling
Programme for equipment and appliances and Energy Conservation
Building Code (ECBC) for new commercial buildings. The BEE is
spearheading the task of improving energy efficiency in various sectors
of the economy through regulatory and promotional mechanism. The
Bureau also co-ordinates with designated consumers, State designated
agencies and other organizations; recognizes, and identifies and utilizes
the existing resources and infrastructure in performing the functions
assigned to it under the EC Act.

6


4.11 The Mission of the Bureau is to develop policy and strategies
with a thrust on self-regulation and market principles, within the overall
framework of the EC Act, 2001 with the primary objective of reducing
energy intensity of the Indian economy. The strategies of the BEE to
achieve the objective are:

* Coordinating policies and programmes on efficient use of
energy and its conservation with the involvement of
stakeholders.

* Planning, managing and implementing energy conservation
programmes as envisaged in the EC Act.

« Assuming leadership and providing policy framework and
direction to national energy efficiency and conservation
efforts and programmes.

« Demonstrating energy efficiency delivery mechanisms, as
envisaged in the EC Act, through Private-Public Partnership
(PPP).

« Establishing payments and procedures to measure, monitor
and verify energy efficiency results in individual sectors as
well as at the national level.

« Leveraging multi-lateral, bilateral and private sector support
in implementation of programmes and projects on efficient
use of energy and its conservation.

1.12 The Ministry of Power, through the BEE, has initiated a number
of energy efficiency initiatives in the areas of household lighting,
commercial buildings, standards and labeling of appliances. and demand
side management in agriculture/municipalities. These initiatives have
resulted in an avoided capacity generation of 27,736 MW as on
March, 2015.

1.13 The BEE translates its mission into action through regulatory
and promotion functions. These functions inter-alia include:

Regulatory

* Develop minimum energy consumption standards and labelling
for equipment and appliances.

* Develop specific energy conservation building codes (ECBC).
+ Activities focusing on designated consumers.

* Develop energy consumption norms.


* Certify energy managers and energy auditors.
* Accreditation of energy auditors.

* Define the manner and periodicity of mandatory energy
audits.

+ Develop reporting formats on energy consumption and action
taken on the recommendations of the energy auditors.

Promotional

* Create awareness and disseminate information on energy
efficiency and conservation.

+ Arrange and organize training of personnel and specialists in
the techniques for efficient use of energy and its
conservation.

* Strengthen consultancy services.

Promote research and development.

+ Develop testing and certification procedures and promote
testing facilities.

+ Formulate and facilitate implementation of pilot projects
and demonstration projects.

+ Promote use of energy efficient processes, equipment, devices
and systems.

* Take steps to encourage preferential treatment for use of
energy efficient equipment or appliances.

* Promote innovative financing of energy efficient projects.

* Give financial assistance to institutions for promoting efficient
use of energy and its conservation.

+ Prepare educational curriculum on efficient use of energy
and its conservation.

* Implement international co-operation programmes relating
to efficient use of energy and its conservation.

1.14 The Bureau of Energy Efficiency has already launched the
following voluntary and mandatory schemes for promoting Energy
Efficiency in India during the XII Plan:

1. Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY) Scheme
2. Standards and Labelling Scheme


Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC)
Energy Efficiency in Existing Buildings
Empanelment of ESCOs

sy pw

Agricultural (Ag DSM) and Municipal (Mu DSM) Demand Side
Management Programmes

=

Strengthening Institutional Capacity of SDAs

8. Contribution to State Energy Conservation Fund (SECF)
9. National Energy Conservation Award

10. Painting Competition on Energy Conservation

11. National Certification Examination for Energy Managers &
Energy Auditors

12. National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE)

13. Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme

1.15 The key objective of Standard & Labelling (S&L) programme
is to provide the consumer an informed choice about energy
consumption, and thereby the energy cost, of the product. The longer-
time objective of the energy efficiency labeling program is to reduce
the energy consumption of appliances, without diminishing the services
they provide to consumers.

1.16 Presently, 21 equipment/appliances are covered under the
labelling program, of which Room Air Conditioners, Fluorescent Tube
Lights, Frost Free Refrigerators, and Distribution Transformers are under
mandatory regime. The appliances namely Induction Motors, Direct
Cool Refrigerator, Electric storage type geyser, Ceiling fans, Color TVs,
Agricultural pump sets, LPG stoves, Washing machine, Laptops, Ballast,
Floor standing ACs, Office automation products, Diesel Generating sets,
Diesel operating pump-sets, Solid state inverters, LED lamps & Variable
capacity (Inverter type) air conditioners are presently under the
voluntary labeling phase. The energy efficiency labeling programs under
BEE are intended to reduce the energy consumption of appliance without
diminishing the services it provides to consumers.

1.17 Further, the standards and label for refrigerators and
air-conditioners have been periodically made more stringent. As a
result, the least-efficient products are removed from the market and
more efficient products are introduced. The most recent additions to
the list of labelled products are LED Lamps and Variable Capacity
(Inverter Type) Air Conditioners.


1.18 Keeping in view that the transport sector has become one of
the largest energy consuming sectors, the Corporate Average Fuel
Consumption Standards (CAFC) for passenger cars has been notified on
30th January, 2014 and amended on 23rd April, 2015.

1.19 From the wide ranging interaction that the Standing Committee
had with stakeholders, the main areas of focus that emerged are:
buildings, LED lighting, appliances, energy-intensive industries,
agriculture, municipalities, strengthening of institutional arrangements,
State Designated Agencies, Investment, Promotion and Integration with
renewable energy and some other important aspects of energy
conservation.

1.20 The Committee, during the discussion with various departments
of the Government, came to know that different programmes on the
subject are being implemented through diverse agencies which are
under the administrative control of different Ministries/Departments.

1.21 The interventions to enable the accelerated implementation
of energy efficiency have been identified for each sector. These are
grouped here for the purpose of consolidation and arranged according
to the primary institution (Ministry/Department/Agency/State
Government) which would be enabling the intervention. Each of these
interventions would be initiated by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency,
and coordinated by the Bureau and the Ministry of Power.

Ministry of Power/Bureau of Energy Efficiency—

- To include new sectors where energy audit is mandatory
(newly designated consumer sectors).

— Institutional strengthening of BEE, SDAs, and EESL.

- Link support under IPDS to the initiation of projects for
changeover to LED streetlights.

— Link support under the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti
Yojana to the initiation of project for energy efficiency
upgradation of agricultural pump-sets.

— Amendment of EC Act to include.

(i) Energy Conservation Building Code for residential
buildings; and

(ii) Inclusion of ULBs in the Schedule of EC Act listing
Energy Intensive Industries and Establishments.

10


Regulators — Central and State Electricity Regulatory Commission—

— Enable and require DISCOMs to invest in energy efficiency
demand side management projects

— Require DISCOMs to initiate LED programmes for households.
State Governments—

— Develop State-level action plans for implementing energy
efficiency projects.

— Establish SDAs as independent Directorates overseen by
Committee of Secretaries headed by the Chief Secretary.

Ministry of Finance—

Department of Economic Affairs: Infrastructure status and priority
sector-lending for energy-efficiency projects.

Department of Revenue/CBDT: Differential taxation for energy
efficient products, with lower taxes for high-efficient products.

Department of Expenditure: Transparent criteria and allocation for
energy efficiency projects to access the National Clean Energy
Fund.

Ministry of Urban Development—

— Link support to States and ULBs under central urban
development programmes to: notification of Energy
Conservation Building Code (include changing to LED
streetlights)

Public Works Development:
— direct that all new buildings should be ECBC compliant; and

— upgrade energy-consuming fixtures in Government buildings
to bring down their energy consumption.

Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation—

— Issue guidelines for thermal comfort in design of low income
housing.

— Direction to financial institutions to follow thermal-comfort
guidelines and BEE guidelines for multi-storey residential
buildings, while providing housing loans.

1


Ministry of Consumer Affairs/Bureau of Indian Standards—
— Increase testing infrastructure for LEDs and other energy-
efficient products and components. Partner in awareness
campaign.

Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion—

— Provision of support for manufacturing of LED chips under
Make in India programme.

Ministry of Corporate Affairs—

— To issue guidelines for reporting of energy use and energy
conservation in the Annual Reports of Companies.


CHAPTER II
ENERGY CONSERVATION BUILDING CODE (ECBC)

2.1 The Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was developed
by the Government of India for new commercial buildings on 27th May,
2007. ECBC sets minimum energy standards for new commercial buildings
having a connected load of 100kW or contract demand of 120 KVA and
above. According to the Ministry of Power, while the Union Government
has power under the EC Act, 2001, the State Governments have the
flexibility to modify the code to suit local or regional needs and notify
them. Currently eight States and Union territories (Rajasthan, 00918,
UT of Puducherry, Uttarakhand, Punjab, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana) have notified and adopted the code for their States.
The Bureau of Energy Efficiency has developed a voluntary Star Rating
Programme for commercial buildings which is based on the actual
performance of a building, in terms of energy usage in the building
over its area expressed in kWh/sq.m/year.

2.2 The buildings sector, comprising of residential and commercial,
presently utilizes about 34% of the overall electricity consumption
from utilities, of which 10% is in the commercial sector and 24% in
residential buildings. The demand for energy in the buildings sector is
expected to grow exponentially due to rapid urbanization and high
demand for infrastructure and buildings. It is estimated that about
460 million sq.metres of real estate space will be added annually till
2020, predominantly in the residential sector. The electricity saving
Potential through the various interventions has been estimated as under:

Commercial Saving Instruments

Buildings potential

New 25-35% Mandatory implementation of
Building Codes (ECBC)

Existing 10-15% Energy efficiency upgrades
through retrofits and Star
Labelling

Residential Buildings 20% Through appliance efficiency

and passive design features

13


14

2.3 Action Plan of the Ministry to accelerate saving potential in
3 years under ECBC:

All States to mandate ECBC with the objective that 75% of
all new starts of commercial buildings are ECBC compliant
by 2017.

Establishment of ECBC Cells in State Urban Development
Departments/PWDs to support and monitor progress.

Revision of existing code to include building-integrated
renewable and incorporate technological advancements to
achieve Nearly Zero Energy Buildings.

Extend the coverage of ECBC to the multi-storey residential
sector as well, with amendments to the EC Act.

Declare certain categories of energy intensive buildings as
Designated Consumers, with requirement for mandatory
reporting of energy-use data and periodic energy audits.

Mandatory energy efficiency upgrades through retrofits in
existing public buildings.

2.4 The key interventions to achieve goals as furnished by the
Ministry:

Amendment of EC Act to extend the coverage of ECBC to the
residential sector.

Mandate States to adopt ECBC in their building bye-laws to
avail benefits under Government National Missions such as
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation
(AMRUT), Smart Cities Mission, etc.

Constitute High Powered Committee under the Chairmanship
of Chief Secretary of the State to provide oversight to
implementation mechanism.

Notification of energy intensive buildings as Designated
Consumers.

Mandate green building practices in all upcoming Government
constructions.

Notification by the State authorities for mandatory energy
audits and implementation of energy efficiency upgrades in
existing buildings.


Widen scope of Star Labelling programme for commercial
buildings to cover multi-storey residential buildings as well.

Prepare guidelines for PWD and other owners of public
buildings to implement energy-efficiency upgrades.

Prepare guidelines for design of low-income housing so as to
optimize thermal comfort.

* Outreach programme for building owners and tenants about
energy-saving opportunities.

2.5 Energy Conservation Building Code being a new concept in
India, the Committee were desirous to know about the action being
taken by the Ministry to make it mandatory for all realty units to
comply with minimum standards of energy conservation. When asked,
the Ministry stated:

* Two-thirds of the commercial and high-rise buildings that
will exist by 2030 are yet to be built. Such rapid expansion
presents an opportunity to make a significant contribution
to both energy savings and tackling climate change.

+ Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was developed
and introduced in the 11th Plan. This code sets minimum
energy performance standards for commercial buildings KW
or above or contract 100 having a connected load of KVA or
above 120 demand of the main emphasis during the
11th Plan was concentrated on developing capacities and
putting enabling measures in place to support large scale
implementation of ECBC scheme. These included
(1) empanelment of ECBC expert architects, (2) development
of technical reference material such as ECBC User Guide
(3) development of conformance/compliance check tool
(ECOnirman) to help architects/design professionals and code
compliance officials to assess conformance with code
requirements, (4) Standard ECBC Training Modules covering
various aspects of the code (5) harmonization of ECBC with
National Building Code, (6) guidelines for integration of ECBC
within building bye-laws, and (7) amendments in Schedule
of Rates/Plinth Area Rates of CPWD.

2.6 Regarding the enforcement of the Energy Conservation Building
Code the Ministry stated:

The enforcement of ECBC lies with the State Governments as per
section of the Energy Conservation Act. Many States have gone

15


ahead with ECBC amendment and adoption for their States, the
status of which is given below:

Sl.No. Update Status Name of States/UTs

1. States where ECBC Rajasthan, Odisha, Uttarakhand,
has been notified Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,
Karnataka UT of Puducherry

Dy States which are in Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh,
the process of Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Haryana,
notification Maharashtra, West Bengal,

Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Assam,
Tripura, Jharkhand, Goa and
Madhya Pradesh

BEE is providing support to States for training and capacity building
of State Departments for adoption and enforcement of the code.

2.7 When asked about the mandate of the code for residential

sector, the Ministry, in a note stated:

“The Energy Conservation Act does not provide a mandate for a
code. The energy saving potential in homes is largely tapped through
the use of BEE Star labeled appliances. However, Design Guidelines
for ‘Energy-Efficient Multi-Storey Residential Buildings’ have also
been developed with the objective to provide a comprehensive
information on how to design energy-efficient multi-storey
residential buildings. The Guidelines take into account different
climatic conditions prevailing in the country. Current Guidelines
are applicable to Composite and Hot-Dry Climates of India. These
Guidelines have been circulated to States for adoption.”

2.8 When the Committee desired to know to what extent the ECBC

would be effective for energy saving and efficiency, the Ministry stated:

“The purpose of Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) is to
provide minimum requirements for energy-efficient design and
construction of buildings and their systems. For developing the
Code, building construction methods across the country were
reviewed and various energy-efficient designs and construction
practices were evaluated that could reduce energy consumption in
building. In addition, the detailed life-cycle cost analyses were
conducted to ensure that the Code requirements reflect cost-
effectiveness and practical efficiency measures across the five
climatic zones in India. While taking into account the five climatic
zones, the Code also addresses site orientation and specifies design


Practices and technologies that can reduce energy consumption
without sacrificing comfort and productivity of the occupants.

The provisions of the Code apply to:

+ Building envelopes, except for unconditioned storage spaces
or warehouses.

* Mechanical systems and equipment, including heating,
ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC).

+ Service hot water heating.
+ Interior and exterior lighting.

« Electrical power and motors.

2.9 On being queried about the energy conservation building code
prescribed for commercial buildings, the Ministry, in a note, stated:

“The Energy Conservation Building Code has been formulated for
new commercial buildings having a connected load of 100kW or
contract load of 120KVA. BEE has developed a voluntary Star Rating
Programme for existing buildings which is based on the actual
performance of a building, in terms of energy usage in the building
over its area expressed in kWh/sq. m/year. In addition, the Star
rating for existing buildings based on actual energy performance,
Manual for Energy Efficiency up-grades in existing buildings and
Design guidelines for Energy Efficient Multi-storey residential
buildings has also been developed with an objective to widen the
scope of energy efficiency under building sector.”

2.10 The Smart City Project was launched on 25th June, 2015 by
Hon'ble Prime Minister containing a wish list of infrastructure and
services to be contained therein. These cities to be developed under
the project shall invariably have the 4 pillars of comprehensive
development - institutional, physical, social and economic infrastructure
on energy efficiency. These Smart Cities will include electricity supply
under the Smart Solutions Energy Management (SSEM). Under this,
provisions for smart meters, managing renewable sources of energy
and energy efficient green buildings have been proposed.

2.11 When the Committee desired to know as to whether it would
be possible to make the existing realty units conservation friendly, the
Ministry replied:

“Energy Audit Studies have revealed a savings potential to the
extent of 40% in end use such as lighting, cooling, ventilation,
refrigeration, etc. Energy cost savings resulting from energy

17


efficiency retrofits directly benefit building owners and occupants
over the life cycle of the building. The retrofits, if carried out by
Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) on a Performance Contracting
model, ensure that there are no capital investments by the building
owner.

It is observed that since most buildings have nearly the same type
of electrical stock, the energy efficiency retrofits for the standard
equipment inventory can be institutionalized. These standard
inventory items, be it lighting, fans, air-conditioners, pumps, etc.,
can be suitably retrofitted with energy efficient options using
finances arranged by the ESCO on a deemed savings model with
annuity repayment to ESCO. This model circumvents the need for
initial capital investments as finance is arranged by the ESCO which
is repaid to ESCO over an agreed period of time (contract period)
in monthly or annuity repayments. The annuity payment modalities
are frozen at the start of the project based on the project financials
worked out on the stock installed.”

2.12 On being asked about the implementation of the energy

conservation measures on the existing units, the Ministry stated:

“The Bureau of Energy Efficiency in technical collaboration with
Energy Efficiency Services Ltd. (EESL), has recently concluded
implementation of energy conservation measures in two prominent
Ministry buildings - NIT] Aayog Bhawan (erstwhile Yojana Bhawan
building of the Planning Commission of India) and Shram Shakti
Bhawan (housing the Ministries of Power; Labour & Employment;
and Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation).
These projects have demonstrated energy savings in the range of
20 to 25% with additional cost savings towards equipment
maintenance and proven techno- commercial viability of undertaking
such energy conservation measures. Based on the experience of
these implementations, guidelines for carrying out energy efficiency
up-grades in existing buildings have been developed for their large
scale adoption and replication.”

2.13 On a query regarding building rating systems, the Ministry

stated:

18

“Building rating systems are a popular tool to add momentum in
achieving energy efficiency in buildings. These help in assessing
the level of performance of the building and provide opportunities
in reducing the O&M costs of the building besides creating a market
pull towards environmentally sustainable buildings. In order to


enable rapid transformation towards energy efficiency in buildings,
policies and measures that create a “supply push” (such as codes
and standards) need to be supplemented by policies and measures
that simultaneously create a “demand pull” as well. This “demand
pull” attracts building users towards energy efficient buildings,
and thus create a preferential market demand.

Therefore in order to promote a market pull for energy efficient
buildings, a voluntary Star Rating Programme for commercial
buildings based on its actual performance, in terms of energy
usage over its area expressed in kWh/sqm/year has also been
developed. Currently, four categories of commercial buildings
namely, Day Use Office buildings, BPO, Shopping Mall and Hospital
buildings have been covered under the BEE’s star rating of
commercial buildings.”

2.14 When the Committee asked the Ministry about the consultation
process with the States regarding the corresponding rules prepared for
energy conservation building codes, the Ministry, in a note, furnished
as under:

“The draft Rules for ECBC were prepared by BEE in consultation
with various stakeholders, including the States and discussed with
the States in National Workshops for SDAs where all SDAs
participated. The para wise provisions of these rules were discussed
in these Workshops and its softcopies shared.”

2.15 On Urban Development and Planning Issues, the Ministry
furnished:

“A vast amount of building infrastructure in the country is yet to
be built; it is estimated that two-thirds of the buildings that will
exist in 2030 have not yet been built. This provides opportunity to
ensure that every new building that is built is energy efficient. The
Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC), prepared by the Bureau
of Energy Efficiency under the provisions of the Energy Conservation
Act 2001 provides the norms and designs for building construction
so as to ensure low energy consumption during the operation of
the building. This ECBC has been circulated, through the Ministry
of Urban Development, to all the States along with model byelaws
which can be incorporated into the existing State and municipal
byelaws. Till date, 8 States have adopted the Code. The Code
adoption is limited because States and municipalities do not have
any direct benefits (or dis-benefits) related to the adoption of the
ECBC since energy savings accrue to the building owners and the
energy supply benefits accrue to the electricity distribution
companies.

19


Therefore the notification of the ECBC in a State should be
mandatory pre-condition to the provision of benefits under Central
Government Urban Development programmes, including new
proposed programmes in this area.”

2.16 On being further queried about the general perception and

response of the States on the rules, the Ministry stated:

“In the 12th Plan, all the States should notify the ECBC by the end
of the Plan period and 75% of all new starts of commercial buildings
should be ECBC compliant. Once the notification is issued in the
States, ECBC Cells will be created in the States. The primary
objective of the cell is to build the capacities of the PWD for
considering ECBC compliant construction and its inspections both
during construction and on compliance. Most of the States are in
agreement with the provisions mentioned in the rules.”

2.17 During the evidence, when the Committee asked about the

energy efficiency particularly about the energy efficient building, the
representative of the Ministry deposed before the Committee:

20

“The need for energy efficiency assumes all the importance for the
construction of new building, specifically commercial buildings
because the use of air-conditions has become more frequent in the
buildings now. We can minimise the need of air-condition by making
the efficient buildings. Today we have members from Rama, ELCOMA
and CREDAI who can share that what all they have done in this
regards but we are more interested to know from you on the
problems being faced on this front and what all can be done to
enhance energy efficiency. Electricity and air-conditions are used
in the buildings which consume energy. If we construct the building
in such a way that the heat from outside is restrained to the
minimum level viz. apply insulation in the valve and the windows
should also be made in such a way that it allows light but deters
the heat. As a result of this it would lead to less requirement of
air-conditions in the building and the air- conditioner of smaller
size would also serve the purpose. The consumption of electricity
can further be reduced by using the efficient air-conditioner. For
this purpose it was stated in the Energy conservation Act that
Energy Conservation Building code should be made. The buildings
being constructed under this code have been found to be consuming
almost half electricity from the conventional building. It was stated
in the Act that this code should be adopted by all the States one
by one. The buildings falls under either the State subject or under


the municipality subject. Presently eight States have notified it.
Hopefully, it would be adopted by all the States. Developers have
a major role to play in the construction of new building. It has
been notified in eight States and the work is in progress in the 15
other States towards its notification.”

21


CHAPTER III
ENERGY INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES

3.1 There are 478 energy intensive units in the country notified as
designated consumers. From the eight sectors, j.e., Aluminium, Chlor
Alkali, Pulp & Paper, Iron & Steel, Cement, Fertilizer, Thermal Power
Plants and Textiles. These units consume about 35% of the energy of
the country. Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) is a regulatory program
to reduce the specific energy consumption in energy intensive industries.
PAT is one of the flagship schemes under the National Mission on
Enhanced Energy Efficiency and India is the first emerging economy to
adopt an energy efficiency trading scheme that uses a market based
mechanism. When compared to the baseline energy consumption at
the beginning of the PAT scheme, the energy efficiency measures have
resulted in a savings of around 6% till 2010:

Sector Specific Energy Consumption (ToE/MT)
2005 2010 (% saving. 2017 (projected %
over 2005) saving over 2005)
Cement 0.08 0.075 (6%) 0.07 (9.63%)
Pulp and Paper 0.78 0.72 (7%) 0.67 (29.49%)
Iron and Steel 0.70 0.66 (6%) 0.63 (10.29%)
Fertilizers 0.63 0.59 (6%) 0.57 (11.11%)

3.2 Guidelines to Companies on Energy Consumption and
Conservation as furnished by the Ministry:—

+ All firms, registered under the Companies Act, are mandated
to disclose their annual energy and energy conservation
initiatives through the company’s annual report. Ministry of
Corporate Affairs through the companies (Disclosure of
Particulars in the Report of Board of Directors) Rules in
1988, applicable from 1989, mandated each company to
include an annexure after the Board of Directors Report on
annual basis information on energy consumption and
conservation of energy. The same provision was also included
jn Section 134(3) (m) of the Companies Act, 2013. The format

22


as prescribed in the Rules is quite comprehensive and specific
in the kind of information that has to be declared. There is
no exception given to any company registered under the
Companies Act and therefore it would be correct to say that
this has already created a data base for India Inc.

+ Unfortunately, ever since the format has been prescribed,
there does not seem to be any effort at either collating and
analyzing this data. Nor has there been any effort at fine
tuning or making it more focussed, as no Governmental
agency or department goes through this return except in a
cursory manner to see that the annexure is included. This
fact has led to the reports in the annexures getting
perfunctory and more semantic than hard data based.

* With the appropriate guidelines in place, the scope and
nature of data provided, including energy and energy
conservation data, will be more streamlined and robust.
This will also encourage companies to undertake energy
audits, identify energy intensive areas within the firm as
well as formulate energy efficiency measures to improve
energy savings.

* Outreach activities to consult with designated consumers
and technology providers including knowledge exchange
platform to share experiences within and between sectors.

3.3 When asked about the issues related to energy consumption by
the Energy Intensive Sector, the Ministry stated:—

“Under the Energy Conservation Act 2001, 15 energy intensive
sectors have been identified for which energy consumption standards
can be notified. At present, under the PAT programme, the BEE has
notified energy consumption norms for 8 sectors. These 8 sectors
together accounted for about 35% of the total energy consumption
in the country in 2010. Energy consumption norms should be notified
for other energy intensive sectors listed in the EC Act. The coverage
could increase to more than 50% of the energy consumption in the
country through the addition of large energy consuming sectors.”

3.4 Regarding the actions to accelerate industrial energy saving
potential, the Ministry stated:—

“In next three years, the industrial energy savings are targeted to
reach 10% through widening the scope of PAT scheme to new sectors

23



as well as increasing the penetration within the current sectors.
In addition, guidelines for mandatory disclosures on energy
consumption by companies, under the Companies Act, will help in
achieving the 10% targets.”

3.5 Regarding the key interventions in order to achieve the goals
under the PAT Scheme, the Ministry stated:—

« “Three new sectors shall be included starting from current
financial year, namely, Railways, Distribution Companies and
Petroleum Refineries.

« All firms, registered under the Companies Act, are mandated
to disclose their annual energy consumption and energy
conservation initiatives through the company’s annual report.
With the appropriate guidelines in place, the scope and
nature of data provided, including energy consumption and
energy conservation data, will be more streamlined and
robust. This will also encourage companies to undertake
energy audits, identify energy intensive areas within the
firm as well as formulate energy efficiency measures to
improve energy savings.

« Outreach activities to consult with designated consumers
and technology providers, including knowledge exchange
platform to share experiences within and between sectors.”

3.6 When the Committee asked the Ministry about the energy
consumption norms prescribed for energy intensive industries, viz.
instruments/mechanism in place to ensure its compliance and provision
for any penal action for its non-compliance, the Ministry, in a note,
furnished:—

“Under PAT scheme, compliance to the SEC target of DCs rests with
States. The State Designated Agencies (SDAs) initiates adjudication
process through SERCs. The penal provision under Section 26(1A)
of EC Act says: “If any person fails to comply with the provisions
of clause (n) of section 14, he shall be liable to a penalty which
shall not exceed ten lakh rupees and, in the case of continuing
failure, with an additional penalty which shall not be less than the
price of every metric ton of oil equivalent of energy, prescribed
under this Act, that is in excess of the prescribed norms”.”

3.7 On being asked about the comprehensiveness of the legal
framework of energy conservation in the areas of energy intensive
industries, appliances and commercial buildings in terms of electricity
consumption, the Ministry stated:—

“The broad areas covered under the legal framework of Energy
Conservation Act, are energy intensive industries, appliances, and

24



commercial buildings are comprehensive in nature as far as
electricity consumption is concerned. This is evident from the fact
that the 35.3% of electricity was consumed by Industries, 10.3% by
commercial buildings, 25.9% by domestic sector, 20.8% by Agriculture
and 2.0% by Railways in 2012-13.”

3.8 Detailing the initiatives taken for energy efficiency improvement
in the areas of industrial sector, the Ministry furnished:—

“Energy efficiency improvement initiatives in energy intensiv
industries are being undertaken through capacity building of energy
professionals (energy managers and energy auditors), undertaking
of energy audits, establishment of specific energy consumption
norms and standards. Among 15 Energy Intensive Industries as
specified in the Schedule to EC Act 2001, industries & establishments
(Railways), have been notified as Designated consumers under
Section 14 (e) of the EC Act, and selection of sectors was based
on the ranking prepared based on the energy consumed.

Industrial plants from the 8 sectors (aluminium, cement, chlor
alkali, fertilizer, iron and steel, pulp & paper, textile and thermal
power sector) were selected based on the threshold energy
consumption criteria [30,000 annual tonne of oil energy consumption
(toe) for cement, iron & steel, fertilizer, pulp & paper and thermal
power sector, 12,000 toe for Chlor alkali, 7500 toe for aluminium
and 3,000 toe for textile), in order to include major energy
consuming plants from these sectors to meet mandatory provisions
under the Act. 478 plants were identified using this criteria and
were notified as designated consumers. These DCs were covered
under Perform Achieve and Trade (PAT) scheme, for which energy
consumption norms and standards were fixed and mandated to
undertake mandatory energy audits. These designated consumers
had 165 million tonne of oil equivalent annual energy consumption
in 2009-10, which was 35% of total commercial energy (including
electricity) used in Indian industry.

Overall, the SEC reduction targets aim to secure 4.05% reduction
in energy consumption in these industries totalling an energy saving
of 6.686 million tonne of oil equivalent. BEE has already initiated
PAT deepening process to include more DCs both keeping the
threshold same and in some sectors such as Iron & Steel and Pulp
& Paper by reducing the threshold so that more and more industrial
units participate in scheme. Similarly, widening of PAT for inclusion
of 3 more sectors (Refinery, Railways and Electricity DISCOMs) for
including in PAT cycle-Il (2016-17 to 2018-19) has also been
initiated.”

25


3.9 When queried about the achievement made with regard to
energy conservation by the energy audit from energy intensive
industries, the Ministry stated that the result of mandatory energy
audit of Energy Intensive Industries will be available after
27th November, 2015, since the industries will be submitting their
energy audit reports up to 27th November, 2015.

3.10 On being enquired as to whether any study has been done
with regard to performance of similar set of energy intensive industries
abroad to assess the conservation efficiency, the Ministry stated that
the International Energy Agency (IEA) has published a few reports in
the past related to energy conservation potential like the Energy
Efficiency Indicators (2014) and the Energy Efficiency Market Report
(2013). Japan has carried out extensive work in the Iron and Steel
Industry. However, there is no comparable mechanism like PAT Scheme,
developed by India.

26


CHAPTER IV
LIGHT EMITTING DIODE (LED), DOMESTIC & STREET LIGHTING

4.1 The Ministry stated that with the Government initiatives to
promote LED lighting as well as changing consumer preferences, the
LED market is likely to grow to Rs. 37.6k crore by 2020. There will be
an exponential growth from Rs. 1,925 crore in 2013 to Rs. 37.6k crore
in 2020 due to the fact that the Government has decided to change
all street lights & lights in public spaces to LED lights, and initiated
making all LED specifications mandatory. Further, notifications to
commercial buildings to change existing lights exclusively to LED are
in progress. All existing Government schemes to distribute CFL are
being modified with LED lamp distribution.

4.2 The Ministry has also stated that while the Government and
industry are already taking steps to raise demand for energy efficient
lighting, there exist supply side weaknesses in LED lighting products
and LED Luminaries. This is because of limited testing capacity for LED
lighting and heavy dependence on imports for electronic components
and LED chips, as well as end product. Currently, their strength lies in
conventional Luminaries and complete range of lamp manufacture, as
well as availability of a strong labour force for assembling LED products.
However, the Ministry’s involvement in Luminaries design and research
needs strengthening and support.

4.3 According to the Ministry’s report, India has been very successful
in manufacturing CFL and this can be replicated in LED as well by
ensuring additional help in matching the incentives (e.g. cheap land,
lower interest rates) offered by some of our neighbouring countries
(like China, Sri Lanka) for manufacture of LEDs. Further, Indian
manufacturing has potential to become more cost competitive
vis-a-vis China with increasing labour costs in China compared to India.
Large volumes of low quality imports in recent years have affected
consumer confidence in new technologies, thus increasing the need for
quality-control on supply in the market.

4.4 Regarding vision for the sector, the Ministry stated that the
Indian lighting industry should focus on the following areas:—

- Create demand for energy efficient lighting products to
reduce India’s lighting power consumption.

27


- Expand domestic capacity for LED testing, to support this
increasing demand.

- Set Indian standards for all products and applications and
make these standards mandatory.

- Enhance manufacturing capabilities in LED Luminaries,
electronic components and LEDs and design capabilities for
Luminaries, control gear and systems.

- Support skill development across all disciplines required by
the lighting industry through R&D centres, educational
institutions and training centres.

Evaluate opportunities to optimize manufacturing and disposal
processes to reduce the environmental impact.

- Create demand for energy efficient products like LEDs by
using in all public spaces, promoting use of energy efficient
lighting through awareness programmes and financial
incentives, signing MoUs to export lighting products to
neighbouring countries, reviewing product-wise taxation (to
make LEDs/CFLs relatively lower price).

- Support local manufacturing over imports through subsidies
and incentives (manufacturing clusters with strong
infrastructure, tax-breaks, low interest capital availability,
anti-dumping duty, limited FDI restrictions, etc.)

4.5 The Ministry further stated that Regulators should create green
and IEC compliant standards for products and appliances and ensure
implementation by making standards mandatory; pass regulation to
phase out inefficient lighting sources like GLS lamps and magnetic
ballast; and make Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) more
stringent for large lighting users.

4.6 The Ministry has furnished details of similar initiatives taken
up to promote LEDs (even more energy efficient) as under:

- The Government plans to change all street lighting to LEDs
(potential of Rs. 12,000 crore of LEDs over the next 3 years
and another Rs. 39500 crore of LED lights from 2017 to
2020).

- The Government has initiated sending notifications to
commercial buildings to change existing lights exclusively to
LED.

28


- Under RGGVY scheme, the Government plans to provide LED
Lamps to BPL houses.

- Existing DSM schemes by State Governments for distribution
of CFLs are now being replaced with LED lamps.

4.7 Regarding initiatives taken for environmentally safer products,
the Ministry stated:

- Regulations have been introduced to make mercury containing
lamps by reducing their mercury content.

- CFL: Mercury content reduced from 15-20mg of liquid
mercury/ lamp, to <5mg of amalgamated mercury (by end
of 2014). Further plans to reduce to <3.5mg/lamp by 2015
and <2mg/lamp by 2020.

- Fluorescent lamps: Initiated steps to reduce mercury content
with amalgam pellets to <5mg/lamp by 2015 (from the current
15-16mg/lamp).

4.8 According to the Ministry, the sector will get an impetus from
the huge demand forecasted for all types of lighting products, specially
LED, driven by increasing awareness and rural electrification, large
distribution network with a huge number of retail outlets, availability
of huge manpower (skilled/unskilled), strong manufacturing, capability
and capacity for luminaries and light sources (GLS, CFL, FTL) which
are ready for conversion to LED manufacturing plants.

4.9 Regarding the challenges in the sector, the Ministry stated:

“The challenges which will be there are the Indian lighting industry
is less energy efficient compared to other countries; significant
scope for improvement, lack of exact data-base, low capability for
domestic production of electronics; majority of value-add for Indian
LED market is done outside India; and less Government support
compared to global competitors like China, which has become a
global manufacturing hub for LED/Electrical components through a
lot of Government support.”

4.10 The bottlenecks as identified by the Ministry are:

* Low R&D and Testing lab capability.
* Lack of skill development programmes and institutions.

* No availability of rare earth materials.

29


30

High cost of capital due to high interest rates.

Low consumer confidence, due to poor quality products in
the market.

Low awareness among consumers about benefits of LEDs/
CFLs, consumers scared by the cost without understanding
the benefits.

Poor power quality condition, requiring products to have
very strong specification.

Weak logistics infrastructure.

Inefficient & high transportation cost.

Potential to move to greater automation in lighting (including
dimmability option) via a strict and mandatory Energy
Conservation Building Code (ECBC). This would also leverage
India’s software skills for automation.

Low quality, cheap imports (e.g. from China) flooding the
market and competing with locally manufactured product.
Disruptive technological changes which could take time and
money for adoption by local manufacturing plants.
Adoption of Global Protectionist Policy by many countries,
closing out the option of exporting locally manufactured
products.

Imports of electronic components and chips which could be
developed in India, but with support of R&D facility.

4.11 Regarding initiatives taken on consumer demand for energy
efficient lighting products, the Ministry stated:

Conduct consumer awareness/education programmes to
educate about lifetime value of energy efficient lighting
products and not just upfront value.

Launch innovative financing schemes to make energy saving
LEDs affordable and attractive to all strata of consumers,
even in rural areas.

Develop affordable LED solutions suited to the lower income
strata in India.

Promote and subsidize use of solar powered LEDs in remote
locations with no access to power.

Design and make mandatory strict product specification
standards, compliant with IEC (covering Safety, Performance
and Reliability) for all products (LEDs/CFLs) to boost consumer
confidence.


* Make Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) more
stringent for large lighting users to promote use of LEDs.

* Create standardized labelling for lighting products to provide
consumers the right information for making decisions — lumen
output, lumen/watt, life (in hrs.), wattage, light appearance.

e Demand generation by Government (urban development,
NHAI, Municipal Corporations).

* Create differential taxation/VAT for lighting products based
on energy efficiency to promote green technology and reduce
power consumption (ELCOMA to propose, Government to
implement) - Reduce VAT to <5% for LED lighting product
(energy efficient product).

4.12 On LED testing facilities, the Ministry stated:

« Add NABL approved LED testing facilities to support growth
of LEDs established through funding support — Labs managed
by ELCOMA (in association with and funded by research/
educational institutes) — Labs funded by industry, Government
(MoP, DietY, etc.).

« Define lifetime testing specifications for all critical
components used in Lighting Fixtures (LED, ELCO, passive
components, MOFSET reflectivity, etc.) — e.g. test for driver,
aging test, Voltage, Surge, Switching Testing Criteria, etc.

« Abolish import duty on testing equipment.

* Ensure faster processing for NABL accreditation for testing
labs.

4.13 LED and LED Luminaries manufacturing capability as stated by
the Ministry:

« Promote local manufacturing by creating a manufacturing
cluster via. SEZ for all LED lighting related products
(Luminaries and assembling, LED encapsulation, electronic
components), with tax incentives and other benefits like —
cheap land, good infrastructure in the form of testing lab,
warehousing, uninterrupted cheap power, water, and smooth
logistics connectivity to ports and NHs (enabling reduction in
logistic cost).

e Provide fiscal incentives to increase capital inflow in
manufacturing set-ups through removing FDI restrictions and
providing low interest capital.

31


4.14 Regarding design hub for LED Luminaries, control gears and
systems, the Ministry stated:

* Set-up research and design facilities for LED Luminaries,
control gears and systems.

* Sign MoUs with strategic partners on technology sharing with
India.

Generate demand for improved designing and software
systems through awareness and stricter standards for lighting
in public areas, commercial complexes and industrial areas,
designed to save power (e.g. via. ECBC).

4.15 Research, education and training initiatives of the Ministry for
improvement of LED:

+ Set-up training centres for luminaries design and
manufacturing.

+ Set-up educational centres promoting study of lighting
technology and application.

+ Set-up R&D centres (in collaboration with premier educational
institutes) focussed on new and efficient lighting technologies,
with funding from industry participants and premier institutes.

4.16 Hon’ble Prime Minister launched the 100 cities National
Programme on 5th January, 2015 to convert all the conventional street
lights with smart and energy efficient LED street lights and the Domestic
Efficient Lighting Programme (DELP) to provide LED lights to domestic
households. DELP has been implemented in 4 districts of Andhra Pradesh
and in UT of Puducherry and has already replaced 62 lakh incandescent
lamps used by domestic households with LEDs. Around 92,000
conventional street lights has been replaced with LED street lights in
Vizag.

4.17 Goals of the Ministry to accelerate saving potential in 3 years
include:

Household Lighting:

About 77 crore incandescent bulbs are targeted to be replaced
with LED bulbs. This is likely to result in a total reduction in
connected load of 20 GW and energy savings of 100 BU annually.
The total annual savings in electricity bills will be around
Rs. 40,000 crore.

32


Street Lighting: The total connected load of the 3.5 crore street
lights across the country is around 3400 MW, which can be reduced
to 1400 MW by replacing them with LED based street lights. These
can lead to annual savings of around 9 BU and annual cost saving
of Rs. 5,500 crore to municipalities.

4.18 The key interventions of the Ministry to achieve the goals are:

Department of Revenue, Mlo Finance and CBDT may consider
reduction in excise duty for LED lamps to lower their prices
and increase market penetration. Also, clarify service tax
application so as to avoid double taxation.

Department of Revenue, Mlo Finance may consider providing
LED based energy efficiency projects infrastructure status
and priority sector lending.

Mlo Urban Development may consider linking support under
Central Urban development programmes to include
changeover to LED streetlights by municipalities.

Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion may facilitate
and support the setting up of LED chip and driver-on-board
chip manufacturing facilities in India, within the context of
the National Campaign of “Make in India”.

Mlo Consumer Affairs and BEE may facilitate setting up of
testing infrastructure for LED bulbs and street lights across
the country to ensure quality and credibility,

State Governments may formulate action plans to promote
the use of LED bulbs in households and streetlights in
municipalities in consultation with all stakeholders,

Department of Expenditure may consider allocating funds
for LED based energy efficiency projects from the National
Clean Energy Fund, especially those installed in heritage
sites.

State Electricity Regulatory Commissions may consider issuing
regulations to require DISCOMs to invest in LED based energy
efficiency DSM projects.

For LED based street lighting in municipalities, the cost
Fecovery model is such that the payouts are within the present
level of expenditure that the municipality incurs on energy
bill and maintenance cost. Parliament may consider
amendment of EC Act to include ULBs in the schedule as an
energy intensive sector to facilitate the switch over to LED
streetlights.

33


EESL to develop contents with distribution companies and
municipalities for LED programmes; also to support
development of other Energy Service Companies (ESCs).

Provision of higher-wattage LEDs in the market.

Research & Development of innovative advanced lighting
technologies.

Outreach programme about LED lighting projects.

4.19 Regarding disposal of LED bulbs, when queried by the

Committee during the evidence, the representative of the Ministry
replied:

34

“As regards disposal of LED bulbs, we have worked with the Ministry
of Environment and Forests so that LED bulbs come under e-waste
disposal rules where it is the responsibility of the manufacturer.
He has to recover and ensure its disposal. So we are putting it
there right in the beginning. It is under e-waste disposal rules of
the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The draft rules are already
out.”

4.20 The barriers in the sector as stated by the Ministry:

« Limited availability of LED technology in India

* High initial cost of LEDs that makes the pay-back period
very long

« Absence of national standards for LEDs — as a result, industry
is prone to import sub-standard products

« Consumer awareness very low

+ Lack of testing protocols, facilities and accredited laboratories
at the national level; no incentive either to set up
manufacturing facilities in India as is the case with China.


CHAPTER V
ENERGY CONSERVATION IN AGRICULTURE SECTOR

As reported by the Ministry of Power, India’s agriculture sector
consumes 19% of total national electricity consumption in the country
which has about 20 million pump-sets. Most of the pump-sets installed
are inefficient having 20-25% efficiency level, which in turn results in
wastage of electricity and higher agriculture electricity subsidy burden
on States. Significant energy saving (20-35%) potential exists in the
agriculture pumping sector which can be tapped easily through policy
instruments and rollout of business models for large-scale changeover.
In order to accelerate the adoption of energy-efficient irrigation pump-
sets, an agricultural Demand Side Management (DSM) programme has
been launched through which farmers get more energy efficient pumps.
The energy efficiency programme aims to help farmers to get more
energy efficient pumps with the help of utilities and Energy Service
Companies (ESCOs) without capital investment. The upfront capital
investment is recovered from the energy and cost savings for repayment
to the ESCO.

5.2 The Ministry has stated that in order to tap the energy saving
potential, an Agriculture Demand Side Management (AgDSM) programme
was initiated in the XI Plan by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency with an
objective to induce energy efficiency in agriculture sector by creating
market based framework for implementation of a few pilot projects
and create awareness among end users and other stakeholders for
adoption of energy efficient irrigation pump-sets (EEPS). Five pilot
AgDSM projects are being implemented through PPP mode in three
States, namely, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.

5.3 To accelerate the saving potential in the agricultural sector,
the Ministry has initiated actions as follows:

+ Establishment of a robust enforcement mechanism at the
State level to ensure use of Star Rated pump-sets for every
agricultural connection. In order to encourage farmers to
install energy efficient irrigation pump-sets reduction in
energy use in existing agricultural pump-sets by upgrades
through Public Private Partnerships.

+ Initiation of pump-set replacements programmes in locations
where feeder segregation has occurred.

35


5.4 The key interventions to achieve the goals under the agricultural

sector as furnished by the Ministry include:

* State Government to play a key role in implementation and
enforcement of Ag-DSM programmes. This includes
establishment of specific cells within the SDAs for ensuring
enforcement of various DSM activities under agriculture
sector.

* Differential taxation structure for energy efficient pump-
sets in order to encourage farmers for adopting them.

+ Link AgDSM programme to Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti
Yojana.

+ Provision of resources for incentives for manufacturing of
energy efficient pump-sets through National Clean Energy
Fund.

« Infrastructure status and priority sector lending for AgDSM
projects.

* EESL to enter into contracts with State electricity distribution
companies for changeover to energy efficient pump-sets on
a performance-contract model; also to encourage other ESCOs
to enter the market.

* Regulations to enable and require electricity distribution
companies to implement pump-sets demand-side management
programmes.

« Outreach campaign to sensitize consumers about opportunities
for energy savings.

5.5 On a query regarding the achievement of goals under the

agricultural sector in terms of energy saving, the Ministry stated:

36

“BEE will pursue with State Governments for issuing notifications
for mandatory use of star label EE pump-sets in new agriculture
connections and setting up of a robust enforcement mechanism be
put into place so that the use of minimum 4 star rated pump-sets
for every new agricultural connection is ensured. BEE and EESL are
in the process of carrying out projects in 5 States for large scale
replacement of inefficient pump-sets with energy efficient pump-
sets.”


CHAPTER VI
STATE DESIGNATED AGENCIES (SDAs)

According to the Ministry, the implementation and enforcement of
the provisions of the Energy Conservation Act in the States is to be
carried out by SDAs. The SDAs have been set up in 34 States/UTs by
designating one of the existing organizations as required under
section 15 (d) of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. These agencies
differ from State to State with the Renewable Energy Development
Agency (44%), Electrical Inspectorate (25%), Distribution Companies
(12%), Power Departments (16%) and others (3%). In order to kick-start
the energy conservation activities at the State level with an emphasis
on building institutional capacities of the SDAs, the Ministry of Power
had approved the scheme of providing financial assistance to the State
Designated Agencies for strengthening their institutional capacities and
capabilities during the XI Plan.

6.2 The Ministry has also stated that SDAs have been formed in the
States to give thrust to the conservation of energy. Currently, only two
SDAs are standalone energy efficiency organisations. In other States,
the SDAs are housed in the renewable energy development agency, the
electricity distribution companies or the electrical inspectorate. The
Ministry stated that based on current experience, the effectiveness of
the SDAs requires that States should consider establishing the SDAs for
energy efficiency as independent Directorates, overseen by a Committee
of Secretaries, headed by the Chief Secretary, which would ensure
both access of the SDA to policy makers in the State administration,
as well as inform policy makers about energy efficiency opportunities
in their respective Departments. Further, it would enable the
development of a work programme that is based on regulations and
the facilitation of commercial transactions for energy efficiency, rather
than on subsidy-driven programmes or as an energy sales-driven
organisation.

6.3 Regarding the SDAs, the Ministry further stated:

“The Energy Conservation Act, 2001 mandated the creation of a
two-tier organization structure to promote the efficient use of
energy and its conservation in the country with BEE as the nodal
agency at the central level and State Designated Agencies (SDAs)
as the nodal agencies at State/UT level. Since energy efficiency

37



was new for these organizations notified as SDAs at the State
level, initially, during the XI Plan, to kick-start the energy efficiency
movement, BEE/MoP disbursed financial assistance in a view to
strengthen their capacity. The various energy conservation and
energy efficiency activities undertaken by SDAs have reported an
avoided capacity addition of 1065 MW during the XI Plan.”

6.4 List of the State Designated Agencies (SDAs) is given at

Annexure-I.

6.5 When the Committee queried about the effectiveness of the

SDAs during the evidence, the representative of the Ministry deposed
before the Committee:

“As far as SDAs are concerned, they are there in all States. The
problem is that they are not very effective. Sitting in Delhi, we
cannot do it. It has to be on the ground. Unless State Designated
Agencies are effective this programme will not go anywhere.”

6.6 Insofar as, the major achievements in the implementation and

enforcement of the provisions of the Energy Conservation Act in the
States are concerned, the Ministry stated:

* Internet platform was developed by 26 SDAs.

+ 47 demonstration projects implemented in street lighting
and water pumping stations.

+ LED Village Campaign implemented by 28 States.

« Investment grade energy audit completed in 491 Government
buildings.

* During the XII Plan, thrust will be on establishment of the
enforcement machinery at the State level.

6.7 Regarding institutional issues including Demand Side Management

(DSM) programme, the Ministry submitted:

38

“Under the Energy Conservation Act, 2001, each State is to notify
an agency that would be responsible for the implementation of the
Act in the State. Most States have either notified the renewable
energy development agency, or the electricity distribution company,
or the electrical inspectorate for this purpose. Only 2 States have
notified standalone agencies for this purpose whose sole
responsibility is the promotion of the energy efficiency in the
State. The success and longer term continuity of energy efficiency
programmes is better in States where standalone agencies are in
place because of the exclusive institutional thrust for this matter.


Further, some States are implementing focussed DSM programmes
to reduce the electricity demand. These include programmes to
promote LED lighting, and energy efficient agricultural pump-sets.
However, large scale replications of these programmes across all
States is required. States also need to build these DSM programmes
into their electricity planning, including in the preparation of the
24 x 7 electricity supply action plans. All States should adopt the
model of standalone SDAs, and prepare and implement energy
efficiency action plans in their States.”

39


CHAPTER VII
PROMOTION OF THE CONCEPT OF ENERGY CONSERVATION

7.1 The Ministry, in a note, stated that considering the need to
make the next generation more aware regarding efficient use of energy
resources, it is necessary to introduce the subject to children during
their school education. In this regard, promotion of energy efficiency
in schools is being promoted through the establishment of Energy
Clubs. The Bureau of Energy Efficiency is implementing the Students
Capacity Building Programme under the Energy Conservation Awareness
Scheme for the 12th Five Year Plan and intends to prepare the text/
material on Energy Efficiency and Conservation for its proposed
incorporation in the existing science syllabi and science text books of
NCERT for classes 6th to 10th.

7.2 In an effort to spread the message of energy efficiency in the
country, the Government of India is promoting the adoption and use
of energy efficient LED bulbs. LED bulbs have a very long life, almost
50 times more than ordinary bulbs, and 8-10 times that of CFLs, and
therefore provide both energy and cost savings in the medium term.

7.3 Hon’ble PM launched a web-based system to enable consumers
in Delhi to register requests for procuring LED bulbs under the Domestic
Efficient Lighting Programme (DELP). Hon’ble PM also announced that
such programme will be replicated in cities across the country.

7.4 About 77 crore incandescent bulbs are sold in India for domestic
(household) lighting and if all of them are converted to LEDs, 25 billion
KWh (20,000 MW) of energy can be saved every year. Through bulk
procurement, the Government of India has been successful in bringing
down the cost of a 7W LED bulb from about Rs.400 per piece in 2013
to about Rs.90 per piece as on date. While 3 crore LED bulbs are
expected to be installed in the domestic sector by the end of 2015,
the number will increase to about 15 crore by the end of 2016 and
then to about 50 crore by 2020.

7.5 In the 12th Plan, the Ministry proposed to take forward all of
the schemes so as to continue to achieve the energy savings due to the
regulatory, financial and facilitative activities under these schemes.
New schemes are also being proposed to fast-forward the introduction
of “super-efficient equipment” through the provision of incentives for

40


every super-efficient equipment that is sold during a specified time
period and accelerate the deployment of energy efficient appliances
through electricity distribution company-led DSM programmes.

7.6 As far as energy efficient products and equipment (such as
refrigerators and air conditioners) are concerned, they cost more than
less-energy efficient products, and consequently buyers are reluctant
to purchase them because of the higher first-cost, even though the
additional cost is recovered over a short period of time due to the
lower energy consumption. Consequently, a strong financial signalling
mechanism is required in addition to the Star Label which provides
information to the consumers about the energy efficiency of the
products. Hence, the taxes and duties on energy efficient products
could be differentially lower than those of less efficient products. For
example, 5-star products could enjoy a lower rate of taxation than
1-star or 2-star products.

7.7 The Ministry has also proposed to promote the research,
development, and deployment of identified energy-efficient products
(which have potential to have large-scale impact on energy use) by
public and private sector enterprises. They have also proposed to enhance
the quantity and capacity of trained manpower for implementation of
energy efficiency projects in industry, buildings, and power stations.

7.8 The Ministry anticipated an avoided peak capacity of 12350
MW be achieved in the 12th Five Year Plan. Details of the approved
outlay and targeted savings in the 12th Plan, alongwith the physical
targt and achievement as furnished by the Ministry:-

S.No. Scheme Sub-Head Approved 12th Plan —Targetted
Outlay (Rs. in crore) Savings
(MW)
1 2 3 4 5
BEE Schemes
1, Standards, Codes & Standard & Labelling” 0.00 2308
Labelling for Appliances, 35.00
Buildings & Energy Energy Conservation 35.00 2422
Efficiency Research Building Codes &
Centre Existing Buildings

2. Strengthening of SDA SDA Strengthening 435.31
for Energy Efficiency Programme
Contribution to SECF 50.00 205.34
HRD Programme 20.00

41


1 2 3 4 5
3. Demand Side Designated Consumers 40.00 131
Management & SMEs
(Agriculture, Agriculture DSM 71.00 184.80
Municipal & Municipal DSM 25.00
SME) Capacity building of 48.80
DISCOMS
Total of (A) 425.11 425.11 4861
Ongoing EAP Scheme under “BEE” head
1, BEE-GEF-WB MSME BEE-GEF-WB MSME 7H 7
project project
(External Aided (External Aided
Project) from 2010-11 Project) from 2010-11
onwards for 5 years — onwards for 5 years
Total (B) 7.91 7.94
Total of “BEE Total of (A+B) 433.02 433.02 4861.00
Schemes”
Energy Conservation Schemes
1. Energy Conservation Energy Conservation 119.95 119.95 710
Awareness, Awards & Awareness, Awards &
Painting Competition Painting Competition
Scheme Scheme
2. NMEEE NMEEE 652.50 1350
Bachat Lamp Yojana 22.50 775,00 3781
Super Efficient 100.00 1648
Equipment Programme
Total of “Energy Total of (C) 894.95 894.95 7489.00
Conservation”
“Grand Total (BEE & EC) Grand Total (AvB*C) 1327.97 1327.97 2350.00
Physical Target & Achievement:
S.No, Scheme Sub-Head Targeted — Achievement
Savings (BU)

|, 10/' set
Plan (BU) 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

BEE Schemes

1. Standards, Codes & Standards & Labelling 13.95 2.41 2.86 34
Labelling for Energy Conservation, 6.81 0 0 0

42


1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Appliances, Buildings Building Codes &
& Energy Efficiency Existing Buildings
Research Centre Energy Efficiency
Research Centre for
Energy Consuming
Sectors
2. Strengthening of SDA SDA Strengthening Prog.
for Energy Efficiency Contribution to SECF
HRD Programme
3, Demand Side Designated Consumers 2.46 0 0 0
Management 8 SMEs
(Agriculture, Agriculture DSM 0.97 0 0 0
Municipal & SME) Municipal DSM 0.63 0 0 0
Capacity building of - - - -
DISCOMS
Total of (A) 24.82 241 2.86 3.45
Ongoing EAP Scheme under “BEE” head
1. BEE-GEF-WB MSE _BEE-GEF-WB MSE 0 0 0 0
Project (External project (External
Aided Project) from Aided Project) from
2010-11 onwards for 2010-11 onwards for
5 years 5 years
Total (B) 0 0 0 0
Total of “BEE Total of (A+B) 24,82 241 2.86 3.5
Schemes”
Energy Conservation Schemes
1, Energy Conservation Energy Conservation 4.58 4.64 4.84 5
‘Awareness, Awards & Awareness, Awards &
Painting Competition Painting Competition
Scheme Scheme
2... NMEEE NMEEE 16.06 0 0 0
Bachat Lamp Yojana 5.9. 0,63 0.03 0
Super Efficient Equipment 8.8 0 0 0
Programme
Total of “Energy 35.34 5.27 4.87 2
Conservation”
Grand Total (BEE & EC) Grand Total (A+B+C) 60.16 7.68 Tate 8.15

“TAD considered as 10% for EC Award and 23,97%.

43



7.9 According to the Ministry, the following main activities are

under progress:—

* Review the existing science syllabi and science text books of
NCERT for classes 6th to 10th and assess the need of level
of information on energy efficiency and conservation proposed
to be included.

+ Develop separate and exclusive draft text module (English
and Hindi version) for energy efficiency and conservation to
be included in science syllabi and science text books of
NCERT for classes 6th to 10th.

* Development of training module (English and Hindi version)
and conducting training of teaching staff.

7.10 The Ministry has further stated that through their project,

recommendations will also be made to the National Council of Education,
Research and Training (NCERT) to update the science text books of
classes VII to IX to include relevant chapters on Energy Efficiency in

the

school syllabus.

7.11 When asked about the initiatives taken for promotion of the

concept of energy conservation, the Ministry stated:—

the

“BEE has proposed executing a nationwide two year long consumer-
focused campaign on energy efficiency in India to promote efficient
utilization of energy among different categories of electricity
consumers, including households, institutions and industries. The
campaign will emphasize on generating interest, driving initiative
and conversation on a mass movement towards energy efficiency
in India, and thus facilitate the behavioural change among the
public via a mass movement. Through large scale awareness
campaign for energy consuming equipment and appliances, BEE is
superimposing the benefits of using good practices and energy
efficient technologies. These methods are expected to assist citizens
of the country to adopt energy efficiency as a way of life.”

7.12 Regarding the promotional activities on energy conservation,
Ministry further stated:—

“BEE annually organizes National Energy Conservation Award
recognize innovation and achievements in energy conservation by
the industries, buildings, zonal railways, state designated agencies;
manufacturers of BEE star labeled appliances, electricity distribution
companies, municipalities and raise awareness that energy


conservation plays a big part in India’s response to reducing global
warming through energy savings. The awards are also recognition
of their demonstrated commitment to energy conservation and
efficiency. The scheme has motivated industry and other
establishments to adopt energy efficiency measures. 39 sub-sectors
of Industry, thermal power stations, office buildings, BPO buildings,
hotels, hospitals, shopping malls, zonal railways, railway workshops,
railway stations, municipalities, State Designated Agencies and
manufacturers of BEE Star labelled appliances/equipment and
electricity distribution companies are included in the Awards. In
total there are 56 sub-sectors from the above main sectors. The
responses among the industrial and commercial units have become
very encouraging as is evident from the increasing participation
level (from 123 in 1999 to 1010 in 2014).”

7.13. The Ministry has further stated that keeping in view the fact
that children are the best agents of change we need to equip them
with the information and knowledge on energy conservation and create
interest among them on this important subject. In this regard, the
Ministry of Power has taken an initiative and has been organizing
Painting Competition on Energy Conservation for students since the
year 2005. The competition is held in three stages, namely, School,
State and National Level since 2005. The paintings drawn by children
reflected their interest in the energy conservation activities and their
concern about energy crises and climate change, and have effectively
conveyed inspiring ideas in their impressive paintings. The vibrant
designs, the confident depiction of the topic and remarkable composition
seen in these paintings reflect clear understanding of the subject
themes in the minds of these young children.

7.14 On the issue of promotion/publicity, the Secretary, Ministry of
Power, informed the Committee, during the course of evidence, as
under:—

“We accept that we have to go in for a high intensity publicity
campaign. So, we will chalk out the programme and do it. Sir,
there is also a need for incentive and disincentive to be built into
the systems. That is an area which we will look at but, Sir, what
you have pointed out is that for specific programmes like LED
bulb, we need to work out a detailed roadmap and an Action Plan
with financials. Since it is a massive programme, all the loose ends
should be tightened so that we know precisely how we are going
to finance it, how we move on that path and reach the target.”

45


7.15 On being enquired about the coordination of the Ministry with
State Designated Agencies in spreading awareness on energy
conservation in the States, the Ministry stated:—

“BEE is working closely with SDAs in spreading awareness on energy
efficiency and energy conservation in the States involving school
children, consumers, dealer networks, industry associations, etc.
through organizing exhibitions/workshops/conferences. Brochures
and leaflets on the information are normally printed both in English
as well as vernacular languages. In this regard, BEE has dedicated
financial allocation to specifically carry out awareness campaigns.
During the 12th plan, SDAs have been allocated financial assistance
of Rs. 13 crore to carry out publicity and awareness campaign.”

7.16 During the evidence, when the Committee desired to know
about the provision to promote LED in the budget, the representatives
of the Ministry of Finance stated:—

“We had 10% customers duty earlier. In certain items CBD was 12%
which was excise and 4% was SAD. Government has given lot of
concession. In certain items it was 26 which is reduced to 16, thus,
we are looser by 10 percent. The special addition duty has been
reduced by 4 percent. It has been made zero from 4 percent. The
countervailing duty in the LED driver has been made 6 percent
from 12 percent. The special addition duty has been made zero
from 4 percent. The excise duty or CBD has been made MRP bases
instead of actual cost, reduction cost. This is the only difference.”

7.17 Regarding technology upgradation in the sector for better
performance of electrical appliances and activities relating to Research
and Development, it was informed that there is need for creating a
strong information base and a technology platform. A lot of technologies
are coming up all over the world. We will be creating a technology
platform by which India can access these technologies and appropriately
fine-tune them and use them in the country.

7.18 The Committee desired to know the view of the Government
on the creation of separate time zones with a view to conserve the
energy. In response, the Government replied:—

“The Ministry of Power had received a request and the Bureau of
Energy Efficiency commissioned the Study which was carried by
the National Institute of Advanced Studies, Bangalore. They looked
at three alternatives. One was having two time zones. The second

46


was that for six months of the year, the clock goes ahead, daylight
savings time. The third was that the clock can be moved ahead—
the Indian Standard Time itself can be moved by about half-an-
hour or one hour. Sir, they looked at three options. The largest
energy savings were when we moved the clock ahead. The second
largest was that when the clock can be moved ahead for half-an-
hour or one hour ahead for six months of the year. There will be
the least energy savings but there will be still energy savings when
we moved to two time zones. On the basis of this, they came to
a conclusion that a half-hour advancement of Indian Standard Time
would probably be the best both for the reasons of providing more
light-working hours in the North East as well as for energy savings.
This Report was circulated to various Ministries. Right now, we
have been asked to have a consultation with the States and also
with the Ministries to get a view on what should be the next step.
Sir, we are in the process of doing so.”

7.19 When the Committee enquired about the ban on manufacturing
of high end power consuming electronic goods, the representative
deposed before the Committee:—

“In many things like refrigerator, air conditioners, tube lights,
transformers, etc. anything which is less than one star cannot be
manufactured. The second thing we do is that, we periodically
tighten the stars so that what was two stars yesterday becomes
one star today and old one star is out of the market. That is how,
the consumer keeps on getting the best products. We are bringing
colour televisions and geysers also in the mandatory list. We will
slowly keep on increasing the number of products that are part of
the mandatory labelling programme.”

47


CHAPTER VIII
INVESTMENT IN ENERGY CONSERVATION

8.1 According to the Ministry, estimation has been done about the
requirement of funds for achieving the targets under the National
Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE). The Mission, prepared
after extensive stakeholder consultations, seeks to create conducive
regulatory and policy regime to foster innovative and sustainable
business models to unlock this market. About 23 million tonnes oil
equivalent of fuel savings in coal, gas and petroleum products is likely
to be achieved along with an expected avoided capacity addition of
over 19,000 MW and as a consequence carbon dioxide emission reduction
is estimated to be 98.55 million tonnes annually.

8.2 When the Committee asked about the Government's proposal
to attract investment in this sector, the Ministry stated:—

“The Cabinet on June, 2010 approved the National Mission for
Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE) which focuses on enhancing
energy efficiency in all sectors — industry, commercial, buildings,
agriculture, etc. It seeks to unlock the immense market potential
for energy efficiency by a set of measures to enable vibrant markets
in these sectors. The implementation framework is comprehensive,
and addresses most of the critical issues relating to methodology,
delivery mechanisms, and monitoring and verification, while also
delineating clear deliverables in a time bound manner at the same
time attracting private investment. The Mission goals are market-
based approaches to unlock energy efficiency opportunities,
estimated to unlock energy efficiency opportunities to be about
Rs. 74,000 crore.”

8.3 On being asked the manner in which the Government will
realize its Mission, the Ministry, in a note, replied:—

“BEE being the nodal agency for implementation of the Mission. A
company [Energy Efficiency Services Ltd. (EESL) as a Joint Venture
of 4 CPSUs, viz. NTPC, PGCIL, REC and PFC] is created to provide
implementation leadership in the market to unlock the energy
efficiency potential of Rs. 74,000 crore to flow in.”

8.4 When asked about the Fiscal and Financing issues, the Ministry
stated:—

“Energy efficiency projects typically pay for themselves in as much
as that the savings in energy costs payback for the investments

48


over a short time period. However, it is difficult to find investments
for energy efficiency projects because banks and financial
institutions tend to look at these projects as less tangible since
they result in cost savings rather than additional revenue generation
which can be sequestered for loan repayment. Further, because of
interest rates in the 10 to 14% range, these projects tend to have
very long payback periods (7 to 9 years). Financial institutions are
uncomfortable as to whether borrowers would continue to repay
from savings over such a long period of time. In view of these
constraints, it is important that a financing regime is created in
which these risk perceptions can be minimized. Consequently, it
would be better if the energy efficiency projects can be considered
as infrastructure project to avail of the benefits under Section 80C
similar to benefits provided to energy generation projects.”

8.5 With a view to obtaining the views of the stakeholders, on
arranging the finances to give the desired thrust to the sector, the
Committee held discussion with representatives of FICCI, Cll, TATA
Power, BSES and Indian Captive Power Producers Association. One of
the stakeholders deposed before the Committee as under:—

“Financing and fiscal instruments of energy efficiency is another
one. Money is one thing which can make things happen. We would
strongly propose some sort of concessional finance for energy
conservation in the country. India is a country which is developing
and industries have got competing opportunities for increasing their
overall productivity and turnover. So, there is always a competition
for an industry in terms of investment between increasing production
and energy efficiency. So, there is an opportunity to create a
concessional finance for energy efficiency. We feel energy efficiency
can further accelerate and become a movement. There could be
opportunities like higher floor-air ratio for green buildings. This
has been implemented in some of the local bodies, This has created
lot of increase in green buildings. These are a few examples. We
can share with you some more suggestions on fiscal incentives
which can make energy efficiency go up further and accelerate.”

8.6 On being asked about the tax concession to the sector, a
representative of the Ministry of Finance informed the Committee as
under:—

“We are giving tax concessions to LED lights. For wind power, both
for parts and entire equipment, we have given concessional rates
of duty. We have also given concessional rates of duty for biogas

49


plants. For energy efficient vehicles we have given concessional
duty like for electric and hybrid vehicles. A range of concessions
have been given for energy conservation in both renewable energy
and for solar and wind and also for biogas or for energy efficient
vehicles. Whether it is compact Fluorescent Lamp or LED light, we
have given lots of concession in the central excise and custom duty
for energy conservation and device equipment. As far as Income
Tax issue is concerned, we have given a lot of concessions in this
80% depreciation is available on the energy savings device. 80%
accelerated depreciation is available on the energy savings non
conventional energy saving devices, solar energy, wind energy and
profit link deduction would be available for power sector for
10 years which includes non-conventional energy. Besides this, five
years tax benefit is available for conversion of biodegradable waste
into biogas, bio-fertilizers and bio-energy, 100% deduction is
available for five years.”

8.7 In this regard, the Committee was further informed by the
representative of Ministry of Finance that additional duty exemption
has been given for the imports and for parts and internal components
has also been given. If any specific request is received from the Ministry,
we shall look with that. There is no comprehensive study which has
been done at present. But we have given exemptions for the whole
range of LED manufacture. We have a large number of items for which
we have given accelerated depreciation. We can take the list from
them and examine. The basis of giving depreciation on accelerated
basis is the life as well as the obsolescence which it reaches over a
period of time. We can examine the list of components. Some of the
items which are there now, they might be already eligible for this
80 per cent depreciation. We can take all the components from them
and examine.

8.8 On the issue of availability of National Clean Energy Fund to
Energy Conservation drive, the representative of the Ministry of Finance
replied as under:—

“On behalf of the Department of Expenditure, we are very concerned
about disbursement and performance of NCEF. We have taken many
steps over the last one year or so to improve disbursement from
this Fund. Just to give you an update, the projects are sponsored
by the implementing Ministries and then they come to the Finance
Ministry where an Inter-Ministerial Group is set up for appraisal
and approval of such projects. Upto March, 2015, about Rs. 16,000
crore has been accumulated in the NCEF and 56 big projects from

50


various Ministries have been approved by the Government amounting
to a total expenditure of about Rs. 35,000 crore. So far, about
Rs. 10,000 crore has been disbursed. In the present Budget we
have simplified the disbursement mechanism because the Ministries
were finding it difficult to access and route it to the implementing
agencies. From this year onwards, we are routing this fund directly
into the budget of the respective Ministries so that for disbursement
and release, they do not have to come back to us. The Department
of Expenditure has an Integrated Finance Division in every Ministry.”

8.9 The Ministry furnished the four initiatives which they have
spelt out in National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE)
as follows:—

¢ Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT): On 30th March, 2012
energy saving targets for 478 designated consumers belonging
to 8 sectors were notified. Consultations are conducted
regularly post notification at state and sector level to
communicate and inform designated consumers about the
PAT implementation process, and to seek their views and
experiences. In the first cycle of PAT (ending in year 2014-
15), 478 industrial units in 8 sectors (Aluminum, Cement,
Chlor-Alkali, Fertilizer, Iron & Steel, Paper & Pulp, Thermal
Power, Textile) have been mandated to reduce their specific
energy consumption (SEC) 1.6. energy used per unit of
production. Overall, the SEC reduction targets aim to secure
4.05% reduction in energy consumption in these industries
totaling an energy saving of 6.686 million tonne of oil
equivalent. Units which are able to achieve SEC level that
are lower than their targets can receive energy savings
certificates (ESCerts) for their excess savings. The ESCerts
could be traded on the Power Exchanges and bought by
other units under PAT who can use them to meet their
compliance requirements. Units that are unable to meet the
targets either through their own actions or through purchase
of ESCerts are liable to financial penalty under the Energy
Conservation Act. This will be followed by 2nd and subsequent
cycles with more number of industrial sectors and units
participating with more stringent energy conservation norms
and standards. Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has prepared
Sector Specific Form-1 (annual energy return form) along
with Sector specific Normalization Factors to streamline the
monitoring and verification (M&V) process. The sector/sub-
sector specific Normalization Factors were developed to

51


52

neutralize the effects on Specific Energy Consumption (SEC)
in the assessment year as well as baseline year so that
undue advantages or disadvantages could not be imposed on
any DCs while assessing the target. BEE has put in place a
process of accreditation of Energy Auditors who will be
engaged to execute the M&V process of DCs to assess their
performances. PAT deepening process to include more DCs
both keeping the threshold same and in some sectors such
as Iron & Steel and Pulp & Paper by reducing the threshold
so that more and more industrial units participate in scheme.
Similarly, widening of PAT for inclusion of 3 more sectors
(Refinery, Railways and Electricity DISCOMs) for including in
PAT cycle-II (2016-17 to 2018-19) has been initiated.

Market Transformation for Energy Efficiency (MTEE): Under
MTEE, two programmes have been developed i.e. Bachat
Lamp Yojana (BLY) and Super Efficient Equipment Programme
(SEEP).

Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY): It is a public-private partnership
programme comprising of BEE, Distribution Companies
(DISCOMs) and private investors to accelerate market
transformation in energy efficient lighting. Under this
programme, over 29 million incandescent bulbs have been
replaced by CFLs. In the next phase of BLY, BEE will promote
use of LED lights using the institutional structure of BLY
Programme. BEE provides support to Rural Electrification
Corporation (REC) for framing technical specification and
monitoring and verification of the energy savings from the
LED bulbs distributed under RGVVY scheme to BPL households.
BEE will also undertake outreach activities to promote large
scale adoption of LEDs.

Super-Efficient Equipment Programme (SEEP): The other
component under MTEE is a new programme called Super-
Efficient Equipment Programme (SEEP). SEEP is a programme
designed to bring accelerated market transformation for
super-efficient appliances by providing financial stimulus
innovatively at critical points of intervention. Under this
programme, ceiling fan has been identified as the first
appliance to adopted. SEEP for ceiling fans aims to leapfrog
to an efficiency level which will be about 50% more efficient
than market average by providing a time bound incentive to
fan manufacturers to manufacture super-efficient (SE) fans


and sell the same at a discounted price. The goal is to
support the introduction and deployment of super-efficient
35W ceiling fans, as against the current average ceiling fan
sold in Indian market with about 70W rating. To avoid
inefficiency getting locked in economy for its life, this
programme aims to stimulate technological upgradation and
their accelerated introduction by manufacturers through an
incentive mechanism which would motivate manufactures to
manufacture such super-efficient fans and sell at competitive
price in a highly price sensitive fans market.

Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEFP): Under this
programme, MoUs have been signed with financial institutions
to work together for the development of energy efficiency
market and for the identification of issues related to this
market development. MoUs with M/s. PTC India Ltd.,
M/s. SIDBI, HSBC Bank, Tata Capital and IFCI Ltd. have been
signed by BEE to promote financing for energy efficiency
projects. BEE has developed training modules in collaboration
with HSBC and also conducted few training programmes for
financial institutions on energy efficiency project financing.

Framework for Energy Efficient Economic Development
(FEEED): Under this initiative two funds have been created
viz. Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency
(PRGFEE) and Venture Capital Fund for Energy Efficiency
(VCFEE). Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency
(PRGFEE) is risk sharing mechanism to provide commercial
banks with a partial coverage of risk involved in extending
loans for energy efficiency projects. The amount paid out
will be equal to the agreed-upon percentage of the
outstanding principal and will not cover the interest or other
fees owed to the bank. The Guarantee will not exceed
Rs. 3 crore per project or 50% of loan amount, whichever is
less. Initially the support was provided to only government
buildings and municipalities; however, in the Twelfth Plan it
has been extended to cover SMEs and industries too. Rules
for operationalization of Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for
Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE) were approved in April 2012,
subsequent to which Supervisory Committee for PRGFEE has
been constituted. Recently, the consortium of RECPDCL-REC-
EESL has been selected as the Implementing Agency for
operationalization of PRGFEE and revised rules of PRGFEE
have been sent to Ministry of Law for vetting of the
notification.

53


* The Venture Capital Fund for Energy Efficiency (VCFEE) is a
fund to provide equity capital for energy efficiency projects.
A single investment by the fund shall not exceed
INR 2 crore. The Fund shall provide last mile equity support
to specific energy efficiency projects, limited to a maximum
of 15% of total equity required, through Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV) or INR 2 Crores, whichever is less. The support
under VCFEE is limited to Government buildings and
municipalities. Rules for operationalization of Venture Capital
Fund for Energy Efficiency (VCFEE) were approved in April
2012, subsequent to which Board of Trustees has been
constituted for VCFEE Trust. Through the tendering process
Fund Manager has been identified for operationalization of
VCFEE and revised rules of VCFEE have been sent to Ministry
of Law for vetting of the notification.

8.10 When the Committee asked about the State Energy

Conservation Fund during the evidence, the representative responded: —

54

“On the State Energy Conservation Funds, 26 States have established
the Fund. The Government of India has given Rs. 2 crore to each
State for starting the Fund. Another 17 States have provided
Rs. 2 crore or more into the Fund and to these 17 States, we have
given Rs. 2 crore more also. But nine States and Union Territories
are yet to create the State Energy Conservation Fund. On the issue
of idea given by you regarding removing 100 watts bulb, we shall
work in tender with you that how it can be done.”


CHAPTER IX
OTHER IMPORTANT ASPECTS OF ENERGY CONSERVATION
A. Energy Audit

9.1 Energy audit is a technique used to establish pattern of energy
use; identify how and where loses are occurring; and suggest appropriate
economically viable engineering solutions to enhance energy efficiency
in the system studied. Instrumented and diagnostic energy audits (with
aims ranging from identifying ways of conserving energy to evolution
of a new blue print for the energy system) provide insight into the
modes of better utilization of fossil resources and high-grade energy
and exploration of renewable energy options.

9.2 As per the Energy Conservation Act, 2001, Energy Audit is
defined as “the verification, monitoring and analysis of use of energy
including submission of technical report containing recommendations
for improving energy efficiency with cost benefit analysis and an action
plan to reduce energy consumption”.

9.3 The general methodology of instrumented and diagnostic energy
audit consists of the following:—

¢ Preliminary data analysis.
« Measurement at site.
+ Data analysis.

« Recommendations based on economic viability-short term,
medium term & long-term measures.

¢ Report submission, discussion of recommendation with the
client & finalizing the report with the client.

9.4 The need for Energy Audit as stated by the Ministry:—

“In any industry, the three top operating expenses are often found
to be energy (both electrical and thermal), labour and materials.
If one were to relate to the manageability of the cost or potential
cost savings in each of the above components, energy would
invariably emerge as a top ranker, and thus energy management
function constitutes a strategic area for cost reduction. Energy

55


Audit will help to understand more about the ways energy and fuel
are used in any industry, and help in identifying the areas where
waste can occur and where scope for improvement exists”.

9.5 The Ministry also stated that the Energy Audit would give a
positive orientation to the energy cost reduction, preventive
maintenance and quality control programmes which are vital for
production and utility activities. Such an audit programme will help to
keep focus on variations which occur in the energy costs, availability
and reliability of supply of energy, decide on appropriate energy mix,
identify energy conservation technologies, retrofit for energy
conservation equipment, etc.

9.6 The Ministry further stated that in general, Energy Audit is the
translation of conservation ideas into realities, by lending technically
feasible solutions with economic and other organizational considerations
within a specified time-frame. The primary objective of Energy Audit
is to determine ways to reduce energy consumption per unit of product
output or to lower operating costs. Energy Audit provides a “bench-
mark” (Reference point) for managing energy in the organization and
also provides the basis for planning a more effective use of energy
throughout the organization.

9.7 Consequent to the Honourable Prime Minister’s announcement
that all Government Organisations should bring down their energy
consumption by 30% and private 52 organizations by 20%, over a period
of next 5 years, by conducting comprehensive energy audit studies,
the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), has identified about 10
Government buildings. These studies have identified major energy saving
potentials in Lighting system, HVAC system, Water pumping system,
etc,

8. AT&C Losses

9.8 Energy losses occur in the process of supplying electricity to
consumers on account of technical and commercial reasons. AT&C
losses are Aggregate Technical and Commercial losses. The technical
losses are due to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipment
used for transmission, transformation and distribution of power while
commercial losses are due to pilferage of energy by hooking of lines
and bypassing the meters, defective meters, errors in meter reading,
etc. These technical losses are inherent in a system and cannot be
eliminated entirely but can be reduced to a certain level. These losses

56


depend on the pattern of energy use, load density and configuration
of the transmission and distribution system.

Main Reasons for high technical Losses

(a) Overloading of existing lines and sub-station equipment.
(b) Absence of up-gradation of old lines and equipment.
(c) Low HT: LT lines ratio.

(d) Poor repair and maintenance of equipment.

(e) Non-installation of sufficient capacitors/reactive power
equipment.

Reasons for Commercial Losses

(a) Low metering/billing/collection efficiency.
(b) Theft, pilferage of electricity and tampering of meters.
(c) Low accountability of employees.

(d) Absence of Energy Accounting and Auditing.

57


PART ॥
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feel that both the Energy Efficiency and the
Energy Conservation go together. The Conservation and efficiency
efforts can avoid additional investment which can be used for
furtherance of energy development or for other developments. The
Committee while examining the subject felt that the following are
the essentials to achieve the objective of the energy conservation
and efficiency.

* Cooperation of all the stakeholders must.
+ Need to evolve targets for major important sectors,

« Ensuring energy efficiency in construction of residential
buildings, commercial complexes, encouragement to green
buildings.

¢ Special efforts to bring efficiency in energy instruments/
equipments of agriculture.

« Use of renewable energy in a better and efficient manner
for the operation of agriculture pump sets.

Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC)

2. The Committee note that the norms for energy standards for
commercial buildings having a connected load of 100 KW or contract
demand of 120 KVA and above were developed in May 2007. These
were known as Energy Conservation Building Code, giving flexibility
to the State Governments to modify the Code, based on their local
and regional needs. The Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has
developed a Voluntary Star Rating Programme for buildings based on
actual performance in terms of energy usages. The building sector
presently utilises about 34% of the overall electricity and it will
increase as this sector is set to grow due to rapid urbanization. The
current percentage of electricity utilization in the building sector
can be streamlined through various methods of energy efficiency.
These inter-alia include mandatory implementation of Building
Codes, energy efficiency upgradation through retrofits, star labelling,
appliance efficiencies and improved design features of the upcoming
buildings. To achieve the objective, States should be taken on board
to ensure that all buildings are ECBC compliant for which other
essential logistical arrangements may be made. Buildings using

58


electricity beyond the set parameters may be declared as designated
consumers having the mandatory reporting of energy use data and
Periodic energy audits. These measures will help in economizing
energy use in the building sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the following guidelines/measures should be
implemented for energy efficiency:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Guidelines for implementation of energy efficiency
measures in:

All the residential complexes above a certain area
should be covered for the purpose of energy
efficiency.

All Malls, multiplexes should have energy efficiency
plan/Programmes.

Local Bodies be asked to cooperate and make it
mandatory in the building plans to implement energy
efficiency guidelines.

The Ministry with the help of Industry Ministry must
prepare special energy efficiency guidelines/code
for all the major industries.

Energy efficiency code for small cities,
* Special encouragement/incentive for green buildings.

With the help of consumers, Ministry of Power and the
Ministry of Urban Development jointly evolve energy
conservation guidelines, i.e. Energy Conservation Building
Code which should become part of National Building Code.

The building sector should be accorded the desired
priority from the energy efficiency viewpoint and all
concerned, particularly State Governments and its
agencies, realtors, private developers, housing societies
and individuals, should be suitably informed about the
importance of the issue, with particular reference to
building design, stringent energy codes, appliance
standards, aggressive promotion of super-efficient
building products and systems, management of energy
and technologies and integration of renewable and storage
solutions.

They should also be sensitized about their role and
responsibilities in this regard, besides linking it with the
recently launched Smart Cities Mission so that the
objective of energy savings from the sector is effectively
achieved.

59


3. The Committee find that electricity use in the building sector
is likely to touch 50% from the current level of 34% in the next
decade. India is also likely to have an extremely high cooling load
in excess of 100 GW owing to its tropical climate, large population
and rising aspirations of the people. To tackle the problem, a
sustainable cooling initiative will have to be taken to cool the demand
by setting a target. For this, guidelines may be evolved for low
income housing to optimize thermal comfort. For supporting the
ECBC scheme, capacity should be developed and enabling measures
be put in place. States should also be informed about the benefits
under the Government National Missions, such as, the Atal Mission
for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), Smart Cities,
etc. The Committee note that a large number of States are yet to
notify the Conservation Codes. These States should be persuaded to
notify them without further delay. Besides, policy measures should
be put in place to have sustainable building designs, adaptive thermal
comfort standards validated by proper research, stringent notification
of air-conditioner efficiency standards, mainstreaming of non-vapour
based HVAC technology and adoption of Automated Demand Response
strategies to tide-over the peak demand. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that in view of the anticipated higher demand of
electricity in future in the building sector, adequate policy measures
having technical standards for upcoming buildings may be
formulated and notified expeditiously.

4. The Committee note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency in
technical cooperation with Energy Efficiency Services Ltd. has
concluded implementation of energy conservation measures in two
prominent Government buildings, i.e., 411 Aayog and Shram Shakti
Bhawan in New Delhi housing various Government Departments.
These projects have demonstrated energy savings in the range of
20% to 25% with additional cost savings towards equipment
maintenance and proven techno-commercial viability of undertaking
such energy conservation measures. Based on the experience of
these implementations, guidelines for carrying out energy efficiency
up-grades in existing buildings have been developed for their large
scale adoption and replication. The Committee are appreciative of
these efforts of the BEE in energy savings in the Government
buildings. However, it is felt that more is required to be done in
this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a time
bound target should be set to bring all Government buildings within
the purview of energy efficiency norms as about 25% of saving
electricity will help in substantial energy savings.

60


Energy Intensive Industries

5. The Committee note that there are 478 industrial units
categorized as energy intensive industries called designated
consumers from 8 sectors. They consume about 35% of the total
energy of the country. They are: Aluminium, Chlor Alkali, Pulp &
Paper, Iron & Steel, Cement, Fertilizer, Thermal Power Plants and
Textiles. However, there is no clarity about the norms defining an
industry as energy intensive industry; neither has there been any
practice specifying the consumption percentage of energy as
qualifying standards for energy intensive industry. The Committee
are also unclear about the number of units in the country which
have been described as designated consumers. In the absence of a
proper definition of energy intensive industry, it will be appropriate
to have some clear parameters to categorize an industry as being
energy intensive. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) A study may be undertaken to include few more industries
in the compulsory energy efficiency list.

(ii), There may be major campaign by Ministries, Power PSUs,
DISCOMs and also industries involve in power sector be
asked to draft and implement major awareness campaign
on ‘Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation’.

6. The Committee have taken note of the fact that there are a
large number of industries which should be categorized as energy
intensive industries based on their energy consumption. It has been
proposed to bring in Railways, Distribution Companies and Refineries
under the PAT scheme thereby implying their inclusion into the
energy intensive industry sector, Although this is a welcome step,
but it is limited in scope. A Survey should be conducted to identify
more such industries so that they can be dealt with accordingly for
the purpose of energy efficiency targets. Energy consumption norms
should be notified for other energy intensive sectors listed in the
Energy Conservation Act, 2001. This may increase the coverage to
more than 50% of the energy consumption in the country through
the addition of large energy consuming sectors. Besides, penetration
should also be increased and intensified for identifying the industries
within the current sectors so that near accurate number of designated
consumers in the country can be identified. For the purpose, a
drive may be initiated to be completed in a time-bound manner.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that more number of
industrial activities may be brought into the energy intensive
industry sector based on the defined criteria.

61


7. The Committee note that the Railways and some other
organizations are proposed to be brought within the category of
Designated Consumers for the purpose of energy conservation. This
is a welcome move, but it is a known fact that all designated
consumers have to report to State designated agencies and
adjudication for them is to be carried out by State Electricity
Regulatory Commission. As per the extent rules, the Railways being
a Central Government Department will be accountable to a State
level agency or undergo adjudication by a State level organization.
This will be inappropriate for Railways as well for the system. Similar
problems will arise once buildings are also included as designated
consumers. Central Public Works Department owing to the fact that
most of the Central Government office buildings across the country
are owned by this organization may become a Designated Consumer.
It will also face the similar situation as that of Railways. The
Committee, therefore, feel that all the Central Government
Ministries/Departments/agencies which are likely to be named as
designated consumers requiring reportage of their energy
consumption data should reporting the same to a Central Government
agency like Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) and any adjudication
arising out of such activities may be done by Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission. The Committee recommend that for the
purpose, if deemed essential, necessary amendments may be carried
out in the Energy Conservation Act, 2001.

8. The Committee observe that under the Companies Act, all
the registered firms are mandated to disclose their annual energy
consumption and conservation through the company’s annual report.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs, through the Companies (Disclosure
of Particulars in the Report of Board of Directors) Rules, mandated
each company to include an annexure after the Board of Directors
Report on annual basis information on energy consumption and
conservation. The same provisions were also included in
Section 134 (3)(m) of the Companies Act, 2013. There is no
exemption given to any company. This has been done with a view
to encouraging companies to have robust and streamlined
conservation data. This will also encourage them to undertake energy
audits, identify energy intensive areas within the firm and formulate
energy efficiency measures. However, these measures have not
yielded the desired results due to the lackadaisical approach of the
Government to take necessary follow up action. There does not
seem to be any serious effort at either collating or analyzing the
relevant data. It is also observed that no effort has been made to
fine tune them, leaving the Reports in the Annexures being
perfunctory and semantic, than data based. The Committee feel

62


that had proper action been taken on the data collected in the
companies report, it would have led to creation of a clear database
for energy efficiency purposes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:

(i) Since last 25 years, companies are publishing/releasing
data on energy efficiency measures taken by the company
in the Annual Report. There is need to analyse these
data.

(ii) Henceforth data collected in the annual report of
companies should be collated and analysed for the purpose
of formulating appropriate policy regarding energy
efficiency in the industries.

(iii) Designated consumers should also be mandated to provide
report about the action taken by them on the observations
made following analysis and collation of data supplied
by them in their annual report.

(iv) The Ministry should prepare guideline and fix
responsibility on an agency to study/scrutinize the energy
efficiency measures taken by the companies which are
reported in their Annual Reports. Such data could be
useful for planning and correcting the policies.

(v) There is a lot of scope to improve both the above
concepts, the Ministry with the help of Corporate Ministry,
CERC and CEA can refresh the guidelines and also evolve
system to scrutinize and use such data.

9. The Committee note that during the next three years, the
industrial energy savings are targeted to reach 10% through widening
the scope of PAT schemes to new sectors as well as increasing vigil
in the current sectors. In addition, guidelines for mandatory
disclosures on energy consumption by companies under the
Companies Act will help in achieving the 10% targets. The Committee
understand that the Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) is a regulatory
programme to reduce the specific energy consumption in energy
intensive industries with the use of tradable energy consumption
certificates. This is one of the flagship schemes under the National
Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency using a market based
mechanism. Under the scheme, which is the first cycle of PAT, the
designated consumers have been mandated to reduce their Specific
Energy Consumption (SEC) to 4.05%. Units which achieve SEC level
that are lower than their targets can receive energy saving certificate

63


for their excess savings. These certificates can be traded on power
exchanges and bought by other units under PAT who can use them
to meet their compliance requirements. Units that are unable to
meet the target either through their own actions or through
certificate purchases are liable for financial penalty under the
Conservation Act. This will be followed by the second and subsequent
cycles with more number of industrial sectors and units participating
with more stringent energy conservation norms and standards. The
Committee appreciate the steps taken for enforcing energy
efficiency in the industrial sector, even though these steps were
taken only in the year 2012. Still, a lot more can be done to make
the energy intensive industries energy efficient. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that instead of waiting for the second cycle
to identify the sectors and units for making them energy efficient
compliant, it would be better if this process is continued
uninterrupted till the prescribed standards for energy efficiency
are observed by the all industries, irrespective of their energy
intensity.

Light Emitting Diode (LED)

10. The Committee find that the Government has taken an
initiative to promote LED lighting in the country in a big way, changing
all street lights and lights in public spaces with LED lights. It is
estimated that by the year 2020, the LED market will grow to about
Rs, 37,000 crore from Rs. 1,925 crore in the year 2013. All existing
Government schemes to distribute CFL are being modified with LED
lamp distribution. Under the DDUGJ Scheme, the Government plans
to provide LED lamps to BPL houses, Existing DSM schemes by State
Governments for distribution of CFL are now being replaced with
LED lamps. All LED specifications have been made mandatory and
notifications are being issued to commercial buildings to change
existing lights to LED, The Committee welcome the initiative of the
Government for raising the demand of the energy efficient lighting.
However, the Committee are apprehensive about the realization of
the projections, in view of the prevailing ground realities, There
exist huge supply weakness, limited testing capacity and heavy
dependence on imports of electronic components and chips. Although
these factors are dampening and discouraging, yet there is also a
brighter side. India’s strength lies in conventional luminaries and
complete range of lamp manufacture as well as availability of strong
labour force for assembling LED products. Our success in CFL
manufacturing can be replicated in LED as well. This can be done
by providing help in the form of cheap land, lower interest rates

64


etc. Increasing labour cost in China can provide India an edge in
becoming a competitive player. The Committee feel that the
challenges of the sector can be transformed into opportunities by
commitment and untiring efforts. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:

(i) The Street Lights concept is 100 years old. There is need
to modernize and upgrade the technology. Recent initiative
of the Power Ministry to convert street lights into LED
based Street Lights, needs in-depth study and action plan.

(ii) Keeping in view the huge potential available for growth,
all efforts should be made to turn this into a national
opportunity so that energy efficiency in our household
and street lightings becomes a reality, thereby resulting
in substantial savings.

(iii) The present initiative of the Ministry to encourage/motivate
the LED technology is appreciable. The Government after
in-depth study must plan an action plan to use the LED
technology in different schemes including residential.

11. The Committee observe that large volumes of low quality
imports have affected consumer confidence in new technologies,
thus increasing the need for quality control on the imports and
supply. To enforce it, Indian standards for all products and
applications will have to be set and made mandatory, besides creating
demand for efficient lighting products. Also, manufacturing
capabilities in LED luminaries will have to be enhanced ensuring
high quality electronic components, control gear and design
capabilities. Local manufacturing should be supported over imports
through subsidies and incentives in the form of manufacturing
clusters with strong infrastructure, tax breaks, low interest capital,
anti-dumping duty and limited FDI restrictions. It will also have to
be ensured that optimization of manufacturing and disposal processes
do not have adverse environmental impact. Regulators should also
create green and IEC compliant standards for products and
applications, ensure implementation by making standards mandatory
and pass regulation to phase out inefficient lighting. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that in order to promote and strengthen
domestic LED manufacturing, a congenial environment with
reasonable assurance of stable support base and encouraging regime
should be made available to the entrepreneurs of the country.

65


12. The Committee observe that there are identifiable challenges
which are posing difficulties to the Indian Lighting Industry. These
inter-alia include low capability of domestic production of
electronics, less energy efficient products, lack of precise database,
majority of value addition for Indian LED market being done outside
India and less Government support to the sector. The most critical
impediment facing the sector is the woefully inadequate testing lab
facilities. Consumer confidence can be ensured only with quality
products, duly tested in approved laboratories. The backdrop in
which LED market is burgeoning further emphasizes the need for
adequate testing capabilities. Since this sector is set to grow
exponentially, corresponding facilities ensuring quality products to
instill confidence among the consumer have become all the more
necessary. This can be done only by making available sufficient
testing devices. The Committee have been informed that as of now
there are very limited testing facilities for LED lights available with
the BIS. The rates for such testings are also not uniform and
unreasonably high which is creating serious hindrances in the
development of the sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that:

(i) Immediate steps should be taken to make available
adequate and reliable testing facilities for LED lights in
the country. To achieve the objective, NABL approved
labs and other such apparatus may be considered for
empanelment so that the growth of the sector is not
impeded.

(ii) Also, rates may be prescribed for such testings to ensure
that exploitation does not take place and the prices of
the final product are reasonable and uniform all across
the country.

(iii) Life time testing specifications for all critical components
used in lighting fixtures, including LED, ELCO, MOFOST
reflectivity, aging test, etc., may also be defined.

13, The Committee observe that this is an upcoming market
with huge potential, yet having an uncertain and unreliable logistical
background. There is a conspicuous lack of educational training and
research in the field. If not dealt with properly, this may end up in
the weakening of the growth at the desired pace and also the
erosion of the confidence of the consumers. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:

(i) Training centres for luminaries, design and manufacturing,
educational centres promoting study of lighting technology
and application be set up immediately.

66


(ii) Research and development centres in collaboration with
premier educational institutes should also be established,
focusing on new and efficient lighting technologies.

(iii) Various suggestions/observations have been received from
the Manufacturers, distributors, DISCOMs regarding
implementation of LED technology in India must be
considered by the Power Ministry for necessary follow-up
action.

Energy Conservation in Agriculture Sector

14. The Committee note that India’s agriculture sector
consumption accounts for 19% of the total electricity consumption
of the country. There are about 20 million pump sets in the country
and most of them have efficiency level as low as 20%-25%. This is
a major contributor of wastage of electricity and higher agriculture
electricity subsidy burden on States. Since most of the States provide
free or highly subsidized electricity to agriculture sector, irrespective
of the size of the land holdings, the agriculturist hardly finds any
incentive to use more energy efficient pump sets which are costlier.
The Committee, therefore, believe that unless there is intervention
of the State in this matter, not much is going to change. The Ministry
has, however, reported that in order to accelerate the adoption of
energy-efficient irrigation pump sets, an agricultural Demand Side
Managament (DSM) programme has been launched through which
farmers get more energy efficient pumps with the help of utilities
and Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) without capital investment.
The upfront capital investment is recovered from the energy and
cost savings for repayment to the ESCO. The Committee while
welcoming this step, feel that:

(i) State Governments have to play a key role in the
implementation and enforcement of the Agriculture DSM
Programmes. Therefore, they should establish a specific
cell within the State Designated Agencies for ensuring
enforcement of various DSM activities in the agriculture
sector.

(ii) The Committee believe that in tandem with the above
mentioned pumps’ replacement programme, the policy of
incentivizing production and use of efficient pump sets
and discouraging inefficient pump sets through differential
taxation will also help in achieving energy efficiency in
this sector.

67


(iii) The Committee further recommend that there should be
outreach campaigns to sensitize consumers in this regard.

(iv) Action Plan for the improvement of millions of operating
agriculture pump sets, road map to convert the agriculture
pump sets into solar agriculture pump sets.

State Designated Agencies (SDAs)

15. The Committee note that the Energy Conservation Act, 2001
mandated the creation of a two-tier organizational structure to
promote the efficient use of energy and its conservation in the
country with BEE as the nodal agency at the Central level and State
Designated Agencies (SDAs) as the nodal agencies at State/Union
territory level. The Committee have been informed that so far 34
States/UTs have set up SDAs as required under section 15(d) of the
Energy Conservation Act, 2001 by designating one of the existing
organizations, be it Renewable Energy Development Agency,
Electricity Distribution Company or Electrical Inspectorate for this
purpose. It was further informed that currently only two SDAs are
standalone energy efficiency organizations. The Committee have
also noted the fact that the success and longer term continuity of
energy efficiency programmes is better in States where standalone
agencies are in place because of the exclusive institutional thrust
for this matter. The Committee are surprised to note that even
after 14 years of the enactment of the Energy Conservation Act,
2001, except for two, the remaining SDAs are not specialized
agencies with the sole responsibility of promotion of energy efficiency
in their States. Further, most SDAs are located in organisations
whose primary purpose are activities other than energy efficiency,
and consequently, there is neither organisational priority for energy
efficiency activities, nor any linkage to policy making at the level
of the State administration. The Committee being well aware of the
importance of these SDAs in the implementation of energy
conservation programme, feel that it is the high time to reinvigorate
them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) The Ministry should persuade all the States to establish
SDAs for energy efficiency as an independent standalone
agency, overseen by a Committee of Secretaries, headed
by the Chief Secretary which would ensure both access of
the SDA to policy makers in the State administration and
inform policy makers about energy efficiency opportunity
in their respective Departments.

(ii) The Committee also desire that sufficient funds be
allocated for the SDAs.

68


Promotion of the Concept of Energy Conservation

16. The Committee observe that a two-year long nationwide
campaign has been proposed on energy efficiency to promote
efficient utilization of energy among different category of electricity
consumers. It aims at behavioural change among the public by
generating interest, driving initiative, etc. The BEE is organizing
national energy conservation awards and recognizing innovation and
achievements in energy conservation by industries, building, railways,
State designated agencies, manufacturers of star-label appliances,
electricity distribution companies, etc. The Government has also
been organizing Painting Competitions for students since the year
2005. While these efforts are laudable, it appears that such
campaigns are not getting the due attention in the rural areas where
it is required the most. It is as though the rural areas do not figure
anywhere in the promotional campaign. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that for the purpose of promotion campaigns, the BEE
should closely work with SDAs in spreading awareness on energy
efficiency and conservation in the rural areas in the States, among
consumers, dealer networks, industry associations, etc.

Investment in Energy Conservation

17. The Committee observe that an estimation has been done
about the requirement of funds for achieving the targets under the
National Mission for Enhanced Efficiency (NMEE), The Mission seeks
to create a conducive, regulatory and policy regime to unlock the
market by focusing on enhancing energy efficiency in all sectors,
i.e., industry, buildings, commercials and agriculture. On fiscal issues,
the Committee have been informed that energy efficiency projects
pay for themselves through savings in the energy cost. However, it
is difficult to find investments for energy efficiency projects as
banks and financial institutions look at these projects as less tangible.
Further, the interest rates are also a deterrent to investments as
these projects have very long payback period. Moreover, there is no
comprehensive study which has been done at present to fulfil the
financial requirements of the sector. The financial support from the
Government is available to LED lights in the form of tax concessions.
The Committee are of the view that the available financial support
from the Government is not sufficient for the growth of the sector.
Therefore, it is recommended that:

(i) An enabling financing regime should be created in which
the risk perception with regard to energy efficiency
projects can be minimized.

69


(ii) Energy efficiency projects should be considerd at par with
energy generation projects.

(iii) Allocation of funds from the National Clean Energy Fund
(NCEF) may also be considered for energy efficiency
projects.

(iv) The Government may consider providing priority sector
lending status for energy efficiency projects, reduce excise
duty on LED lamps to lower their prices and increase
market penetration.

(v) The Power Ministry may take up with the Finance Ministry
to declare the conversion of Street Lights into LED based
Street Lights Project into Infrastructure Project.

18. The Committee note that the Government of India has given
Rs. 2 crore to each State for starting State Energy Conservation
Fund. 26 States have established the State Energy Conservation
Fund. Another 17 States have provided Rs. 2 crore or more into the
fund. However, 9 States and Union Territories are yet to create the
State Energy Conservation Fund. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should persuade these States to
establish State Energy Conservation Fund and ensure prompt and
adequate funding to these Conservation Funds.

19. The Committee note that finished LED lamps attract lesser
amount of duties as compared to its components, 1.6., LED chip,
Electronic part and Housing/fixture part. This makes import of
finished LED lamps cheaper than importing its components and
assembling it in the country. Keeping in view the huge demand of
LED lamps in the country, imports of these items can be one of the
options but this cannot be permitted at the cost of local enterprises.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that custom duty and CVD
on LED lamps and its components should be levied in such a manner
that it encourage local production and disincentives import of
finished LED products.

Energy Audit

20. The Committee note that as per Planning Commission, India
is the fourth largest consumer of energy in the world after USA,
China and Russia but it is not endowed with abundant energy
resources. Considering the acute shortages being faced by the
country, the Committee believe that we should pay utmost attention
towards efficient use of energy and its conservation, The Committee
also believe that Energy Audit is the pre-requisite of energy saving.
Energy Audit, as per the Energy Conservation Act, 2001, is the
verification, monitoring and analysis of use of energy, including

70


submission of technical report containing recommendations for
improving energy efficiency with cost benefit analysis and an action
plan to reduce energy consumption. The Committee also note that
in any industry, the three top operating expenses are often found
to be energy, labour and materials. Out of the three, the energy
component has the highest potential for cost saving. The Committee
was informed that in the Small and Medium Enterprises, wherever
Energy Audit has been undertaken, it has resulted in reduction of
at least 20% of energy consumption. They were further informed
that Energy Audit Studies have revealed a savings potential to the
extent of 40% in end use such as lighting, cooling, ventilation,
refrigeration, etc. The Committee have been apprised that reduction
of 3% of the total energy consumption of Delhi through use of
efficient equipment would result in a huge saving of Rs. 21,000
crore. The Committee, considering the findings of these limited
scale Energy Audit, believe that this is only the tip of the iceberg
in terms of the energy saving potential available in the country.
The Committee are aware that consequent to the Honourable
Prime Minister’s announcement to bring energy consumption by the
Government and Private Organizations by 30% and 20%, respectively,
the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has identified some buildings
for Energy Audit. The concept of energy audit was implemented by
the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. However, the Committee feel
that there is an urgent need for increasing the scope of Energy
Audit and the pace of its execution. Therefore, a system should be
established to compile, process, analyse and use data/observations.
The Committee, therefore, feel that there is need to review the
scope, provision of energy audit and also the concept to use the
same.

21. The Committee in regard to Energy/Audit also note that
under section 134 of the Companies Act, there is a requirement
that in the Annual Report of the Board of Directors, information
regarding the conservation of energy shall also be included. The
Secretary, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the sitting of the
Committee on the subject has deposed that the above provision has
further been expanded and now it further requires the information
on the steps taken for conservation of energy, the steps taken by
the company for utilizing alternate sources of energy, the capital
investment on energy conservation equipment. However, the Director
General, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, during the sitting pointed out
that the information provided by the companies, regarding energy
consumption as required by the Companies Act, often have
inconsistencies, thus it becomes difficult to use these information.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
issue fresh instructions/guidelines for the companies covered under
the Companies Act for stricter compliance of the provision of
disclosure of accurate and consistent information about energy
conservation.

vA)



AT&C Losses

22. The Committee note that the Aggregated Technical and
Commercial (AT&C) losses in the country is more than 25%. AT&C
have two components, one technical losses which are due to energy
dissipated in the conductors and equipment used for transmission,
transformation and distribution of power while the other, commercial
losses due to pilferage of energy by hooking of lines and bypassing
the meters, defective meters, errors in meter reading, etc. In other
words, more than 25% of the energy generated in the country is
lost or goes unaccounted. The Committee believe that conversion
of 25% losses in monetary loss will mean thousands of crores of
rupees. The Committee also find that in comparison to international
average, India’s AT&C losses are too high. Technical losses can be
reduced substantially by upgrading the existing old and inefficient
transmission system in the country. Reduced AT&C losses, besides
monetary gain, will also result in more availability of power for an
energy deficient country. The power distributing sector has always
been deprived of due investment and attention as compared to
other two sectors of power, i.e., generation and transmission. The
Committee are aware that the Government had taken an initiative
to address this issue as early as in 2000-01 when the Accelerated
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP) was launched
which was later restructured and rechristened as the Re-structured
APDRP. However, this also could not yield the desired results. Now,
the Government have revamped the programme and re-launched it
as the Indian Power Development Scheme (IPDS) which, besides
other things, aims at reducing AT&C losses to the level of 15%. The
Committee do understand that this is a Herculean task and requires
relentless efforts of the Centre as well as the cooperation of the
States. The Committee feel that though AT&C losses are separate
subject, nonetheless, step are required to bring down the
commercial ‘pilferage’.

New DELHI; DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA,
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

72


ANNEXURE |
(Vide para 6.4 of the Report)

LIST OF STATE DESIGNATED AGENCIES

Shri M. Kamalakar Babu

V.C. & Managing Director, New & Renewable Energy Development
Corporation of 8.2 Ltd., (NREDCAP)

5-8-207/2, Pisgah Complex,

Nampally, Hyderabad-500 001

Andhra Pradesh

Shri Marki Loya

Director

Arunachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency (APEDA)
Urja Bhawan, Tadar Tang Marg

Post Box No. 141, P.O. Itanagar-791 111,

Distt. Papum Pare, Arunachal Pradesh

Shri Surajit Baroora

Office of Chief Electrical Inspector-cum-Adviser
Government of Assam

150 floor, West End Block, Housefed Complex
Basistha Road, Dispur

Guwahati-781 003, Assam

Shri Dayanidhan Pandey

Director

Bihar Renewable Energy Development Agency (BREDA)
3rd Floor, Sone Bhawan,

Birchand Patel Marg, Patna-800 001

Shri $.K. Shukla

Director

Chhattisgarh State Renewable Energy Development Agency (CREDA)
2nd Floor, CSERC Building, Shanti Nagar, Raipur

Shri Vijaysinh A. Vaghela

Director

Gujarat Energy Development Agency (GEDA)
4th floor, Block No. 11 & 12

Udyog Bhavan, Sector-11, Gandhinagar-382 017
Gujarat

73


Shri N.N. Reddy

Superintending Engineer-|(S) & Nodal Officer-SDA
Elect. Circle-I, Elect. Department,

Margao, Goa

Shri Balraj Singh

Director

Renewable Energy Department, Haryana & HAREDA,
Akshay Urja Bhawan, Institutional Plot No. 1,
Sector 17, Panchkula-134 109

Haryana

Shri Ajay Sharma, IAS

Director (Energy)

Directorate of Energy (GoHP),
Phase-Ill, Sector-VI, New Shimla
Pincode-171 009, Himachal Pradesh

Shri K.K. Verma

Director

Jharkhand Renewable Energy Development Agency (JREDA)
328/B, Road No. 4, Ashok Nagar, Ranchi, Jharkhand-834 002

Shri 0.४. Balaram
Managing Director
Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited (KREDL)
39, Shanthi Gruha, Bharath Scouts & Guides, Palace Road,
Bangalore-560 001

Shri K. M. Dharesan Unnithan

Director - Energy Management Centre - Kerala,
Sreekrishna Nagar, Sreekaryam,
Thiruvananthapuram-695 017,

Kerala

Smt. Gauri Singh

Managing Director - MPUVNL
Urja Bhawan, Link Road No. 2
Shivaji Nagar, Bhopal

Madhya Pradesh-462 016

Shri. Pravin C. Darade : IAS : 1997

Director General

Maharashtra Energy Development Agency (MEDA)

MHADA Commercial Complex, 2nd Floor, Opp. Tridal Nagar,
Yerwada, Pune-411 006

74


Shri N. Sarat Singh

Chief Engineer (Power)

Office of the Chief Engineer (Power)
Secretariat: Power Department
Government of Manipur

Manipur

Shri P.K. Shullet

Senior Electrical Inspector

Inspectorate of Electricity, Government of Meghalaya,
Horse Shoe Building, Lower Lachumiere,

Shillong-793 001, Meghalaya

Shri Lalduhzuala Sailo

Chief Electrical Inspector

Power & Electricity Department, Electrical Inspectorate
Government of Mizoram

Zuangtui, Aizawl-796 017

Mizoram

Er. Rokozhalie Angami
Chief Electrical Inspector
Old Assembly Secretariat
Near Old Assembly Hostel
Kohima-797 001, Nagaland.

Shri R.K. Srivastav

Section Officer

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Management Centre
2nd Floor, E-Block, Vikas Bhawan-ll,

Near GPO Building, Civil Lines,

New Dethi-110055

Shri 5.5. Pati

Engineer-in-Chief (Electricity) - cum - Principal Chief Electrical
Inspector & State Designated Agency Odisha, Department of Energy
Government of Odisha

Power House Square, Bidyut Marg,

Bhubaneswar, Odisha-751 001

Shri Balour Singh Dr. Amarpal Singh, PCS
Director Chief Executive

Punjab Energy Development Punjab Energy Development
Agency (PEDA) Agency (PEDA)

Solar Passive Complex, Solar Passive Complex,

Plot No. 1-2, Sector 33-D, Plot No. 1-2, Sector 33-D,
Chandigarh (U.T.)-160 034 Chandigarh

75


Shri B.K. Doshi

Managing Director

Rajasthan Renewable Energy Corporation Ltd. (RRECL)
E-166, Yudhishthir Marg,

C-Scheme, Jaipur-302 005

Shri D.P. Deokota

Additional Chief Engineer cum Nodal Officer Sikkim SDA
Energy & Power Department

Government of Sikkim

Gangtok

Shri 5. Appavoo

Chief Electrical Inspector to Government of Tamil Nadu
Electrical Inspectorate Department, Government of Tamil Nadu
Thiru Vi.Ka. Industrial Estate, Guindy,

Chennai-600 032, Tamil Nadu

Shri Bijoy Kumar Hrangkhawl

Assistant General Manager (Planning)

Tripura State Electricity Corporation Ltd. (TSECL)
Bidyut Bhavan, North Banamalipur

Agartala-799 001

Tripura

Shri Asheesh Joshi, IAS : 2006

Director

Uttarakhand Renewable Energy Development Agency (UREDA)
Urja Park Campus, Industrial Area

Patel Nagar, Dehradun-248001

Uttarakhand

Shri A.P. Mishra

Managing Director

Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd. (UPPCL)
3rd Floor, Shakti Bhawan Extn, 14, Ashok Marg,
Lucknow-226 001

Shri Madhu Sudhan Pal

Chief Engineer : PTR Department & Chairman ECAT

West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. (WBSEDCL)
Vidyut Bhawan, 4th Floor, Block-DJ, Sector II

Bidhanagar (Salt Lake), Kolkata-700 091

West Bengal

76


Shri K.G. Ravindran

Executive Engineer

Andaman & Nicobar SDA

Electricity Department, A&N Administration
Vidyut Bhawan, Port Blair-744 101

Shri Rajinder Chaudhary

SE (Electrical)

Electrical Circle, Room No. 523,

5th Floor, Deluxe Building, U.T Sectt. Sector 9-D,
Chandigarh-160 009

Shri Ravi Chander
Superintending Engineer
Electricity Division Office

Union Territory of Lakshadweep,
Kavaratti-682 555

Smt. N. Sumathi

Managing Director

Renewable Energy Agency of Pondicherry
No. 10, Second Main Road,

Elango Nagar, Puducherry-605 011

Shri Arun Kumar Mehta, IAS : 1988
Principal Secretary to Government
Power Development Department,
Civil Secretariat, Srinagar

Jammu & Kashmir

Shri M.R. Ingle

Executive Engineer,

Electricity Department,

Plot No. 35, OIDC Corporate office
Near Fire Station, Somnath
Daman.

7


ANNEXURE ॥

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 12TH FEBRUARY, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

78

The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS.

Lok Sabha

. Shri Om Birla

» Shri M. Chandrakasi

» Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Harish Dwivedi

» Shri Saumitra Khan

» Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Smt. Krishna Raj

. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

SCP MONA DAR (०

pS

. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole

w

. Shri Malyadri Sriram

=

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha

15. Shri Oscar Fernandes

16. Shri 5. Muthukaruppan

17. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
18. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

19. Smt. Viplove Thakur


MINISTRY

SECRETARIAT

. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary

. Shri N.K. Pandey - Director

. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — — Additional Director

. Smt, L.N. Haokip — Under Secretary
WITNESSES

OF POWER

. Shri P.K. Sinha, Secretary
. Shri R.N. Choubey, Spl. Secretary

. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

1
2.
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry, Spl. Secretary
4
5

. Shri A.K, Singh, Joint Secretary

CENTRAL

ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY

1. Shri Sandesh Sharma, CE (legal)

PSU, AUTONOMOUS BODIES, STATUTORY BODIES, ETC.

1. Shri K.K. Sharma, Director, NTPC
2. Shri Ajay Mathur, DG, BEE

2. At

the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the

Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power to the

sitting of

the Committee and made known to them the provisions of

Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the

represen

tatives of the Ministry of Power made a power point

presentation on ‘Energy Conservation’.

4. In

course of the sitting, the Committee raised the following

important points with the representatives of the Ministry of Power:—

(i)

(ii)
(iif)

The Energy Conservation (EC) Act, 2001 and subsequent
amendment;

Issues relating to energy efficiency and energy conservation;

Mechanism to provide incentives to consumers to attract
them towards energy conservation;

79


(iv) Issues relating to financial resources, the market, the
production and manufacture;

(v) Energy audit; and

(vi) Initiatives/awareness programmes for promotion of energy
efficiency and energy conservation.

Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives of the Ministry responded
to the same. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be responded
to by them.

5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

80


ANNEXURE III

MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 17TH MARCH, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘139°, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1800 hrs. to 1945 hrs.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri M. Chandrakasi

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

» Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
. Shri Malyadri Sriram

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

9 6 ज्च ७ ए +> ० ७

छ-+>+>9ऊठ5

Rajya Sabha

13. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
15. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K, Pandey - Director
3, Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Additional Director

4, Smt. L.N. Haokip - Under Secretary

81



WITNESSES

MINISTRY OF POWER

1. Shri Satish Kumar Joint Secretary
2. Dr. Ajay Mathur DG, BEE
3. Shri Saurabh Kumar MD, EESL

ELCOMA - ELECTRIC LAMP & MANUFACTURER ASSOCIATION

4, Shri Shyam Sujan Secretary General (ELCOMA)

5. Shri $.M. Dhiman President (Lighting—Surya
Roshni Ltd.)

CREDAI - CONFEDERATION OF REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS’ ASSOCIATION
OF INDIA

6. Shri Atul Kumar Rai CEO & DG
7. Shri Dilip Kumar Member

RAMA - REFRIGERATION AND AIR CONDITIONING MANUFACTURERS
ASSOCIATION

8. Shri R.K. Mehta Executive Secretary
9. Shri Krishan Sachdev President

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the
Private Manufacturers to the sitting of the Committee and made known
to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. The Chairman, then apprised them about the concerns of the
Committee with regard to the Energy Efficiency and Conservation and
requested them to give the initiatives taken by them in this aspect and
also their suggestions on the issues involved. After introducing
themselves the representatives of the Private Manufacturers presented
the various initiatives taken by them in their respective venture and
also submitted their suggestions before the Committee on the subject
one by one.

4. The Committee, thereafter, inter-alia discussed the following
important points in connection with the examination of the subject:

(i) Issues relating to development/improvement of LED
technology in India;

82


(ii) Issues relating to “Make in India”;

(iii) Accreditation of more laboratories to expedite the
certification process;

(iv) Stress on development of Energy Efficient Buildings;
(v) Energy Efficient Models of electronic gadgets;

(vi) Measures to make price of energy efficiency products more
affordable.

5. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to
the subject and the representatives of the Ministry/Private
Manufacturers responded to the same. The Committee desired that
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by
them may be furnished.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

83



ANNEXURE IV

MINUTES OF THE 25TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON

84

ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 17TH JUNE, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘62’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Om Birla

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

. Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

ON AoA WN

eo)

10. Smt. Krishna Raj

11. Shri M.B. Rajesh

12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

13. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy

14. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
15. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

16. Shri Oscar Fernandes

17. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
18. Shri Javed Ali Khan

19. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
20. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh = Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey - Director
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power to the
sitting of the Committee and made known to them the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the Ministry of Power briefed the Committee on the
subject ‘Energy Conservation’ through a Power Point Presentation
covering the various issues involved. The Members raised certain queries
which were answered to by the representatives of Ministry of Power.

4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

(i) Need for a detailed and specific action plan on the part of
the Government to address the issue of energy conservation;

(ii) Measures to check the manufacturing of high consumption
electric appliances, particularly the Bulbs which are in
common use;

(ili) Strengthening of SDAs for ensuring better implementation of
policies and schemes promoting energy conservation;

(iv) Need to undertake a survey in order to finding and comparing
international standards for energy efficiency and
conservation;

(v) Need to increase public awareness for energy conservation
through targeted advertisements throughout the country;

(vi) Exploring the role of Renewable Energy in Energy
Conservation.

5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

85


ANNEXURE V

MINUTES OF THE 26TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 25TH JUNE, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

86

The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1710 hours.

9 anNnaurwn

na90

43),
. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
15.
16.
As
18.
193

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Om Birla

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Saumitra Khan

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

. Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Javed Ali Khan

Dr. K.P. Ramalingam

Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

Smt. Viplove Thakur


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh न Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey = Director
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik = — Director

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, FICCI, Cll,
TATA Power, BSES and Indian Captive Power Producers Association to
the sitting of the Committee and made known to them the provisions
of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the FICCI, Cll, TATA Power, BSES and Indian Captive
Power Producers Association briefed the Committee on the subject
‘Energy Conservation’ through a Power Point Presentation covering the
various issues involved. The Members raised certain queries which
were answered to by the representatives of Ministry of Power.

4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

(i) Need and scope for energy conservation;

(ii) Criteria and action plan for implementing Green Building
Code;

(iii) Need for giving thrust to advertisement of energy efficient
equipments;

(iv) Making energy efficient equipments available for agriculture
sector;

(v) Need to make legal provisions for ban on old and high energy
consuming heavy electric appliances;

(vi) Controlling of AT&C losses in order to save energy;

(vii) Focus on R&D for making more and more energy efficient
appliances;

(viii) Need for surveys to collect relevant data on energy
conservation — measures and methods, throughout the
country;

(ix) Need for distribution of LED Lights to consumers at mass
scale.

5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

87


ANNEXURE VI

MINUTES OF THE 27TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 1st JULY, 2015 IN COMMITTEE

88

ROOM ‘53’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1730 hours.

OonoaunkRwn

9

14.
8.
16.
7६
18.
19.
20.
21.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
» Shri Saumitra Khan

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
. Smt. Krishna Raj

. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
11.
12.
13;

Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri Javed Ali Khan

Dr. K.P. Ramalingam

Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

Smt. Viplove Thakur


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik

Additional Secretary
Director

Witnesses

MINISTRY OF POWER

. Shri Satish Kumar

. Smt, Jyoti Arora

. Dr. Ajay Mathur

. Shri Saurabh Kumar

. Shri Gireesh 8. Pradhan
. Smt. Shubha Sarma

UTTAR PRADESH

9 छा + ४० ७ =

7. Mr. Ravindra Kumar Sharma

MSEB
8. Shri Mukesh Khullar

9. Shri Prabhakar Shinde

10. Shri Hemantkumar H. Patil
11. Shri Prafulla Pathak

Joint Secretary
Joint Secretary
DG, BEE

MD, EESL
Chairperson, CERC
Secretary, CERC

Executive Director (Planning),
UPPCL

Principal Secretary, Government
of Maharashtra

Director (Project)
Electricity Distt. Co. Ltd.

Manager (Energy Conservation)
Resident Manager

State

DISTRIBUTION COMPANY OF MAHARASHTRA

12. Shri Mahesh Kapileshwari
13. Shri Pramod Dev

14. Shri Amol Bhutad

15. Shri M.B. Urunkar
ANDHRA PRADESH

16. Shri A. Chandra Sekhara
Reddy

Vice President, R. Infra

Additional Vice President, R.
Infra

Lead Engineer Tata Power Co.
Ltd.

Asst. G.M. BEST

Chief Executive Officer

DELHI ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSION

17. Shri P.D. Sudhakar
18. Shri J.P. Singh
19. Shri B.P. Singh

Chairman
Member

Member

89


2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, State
Government of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, DERC,
CERC and BEE and made known to them the provisions of Directions
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the Ministry of Power, State Government of Uttar
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, DERC, CERC and BEE briefed
the Committee on the subject ‘Energy Conservation’. The Members
raised certain queries which were answered to by the representatives
of Ministry of Power.

4, The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

Need and scope for energy conservation;

Criteria and Action Plan for implementing the Green Building
Code in various States;

Need for giving thrust to advertisement of energy efficient
equipment;

Making energy efficient equipment available to the agriculture
sector;

Need to make legal provisions for ban on old and high energy
consuming heavy electric appliances;

Controlling of AT&C losses in the States in order to save
energy;

Focus on R&D for making more and more energy efficient
appliances and replacing non star or low star electric
appliances by more efficient products;

Need for surveys to collect relevant data on energy
conservation — measures and methods, throughout the
country;

Need to extend the scheme launched for distribution of
around 4 lakh LED Lights to cover maximum number of
consumers;

Need to launch a drive throughout the country to replace all
the street lights by efficient LED lights.

5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

90

The Committee then adjourned.


ANNEXURE VII

MINUTES OF THE 28TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 7TH JULY, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘53’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1645 hours.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Ashwini Kumar Chaubey
. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Smt. Krishna Raj

. Shri M.B. Rajesh

७ PN aur wn

. Shri Purno Agitok Sangma

10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
11. Shri Malyadri Sriram.

12. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

13. Shri Oscar Fernandes
14. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
15. Shri 5. Muthukaruppan
16. Shri Javed Ali Khan
17. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
18. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
19. Smt. Viplove Thakur
91



SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.K. Pandey - Director
2. Smt. L.N. Haokip = Under Secretary

WITNESSES

MINISTRY OF POWER

. Shri Satish Kumar

. Smt. Jyoti Arora

. Shri Major Singh

. Dr. Ajay Mathur

. Shri Sanjay Seth

. Shri Saurabh Diddi
Shri Arijit Sengupta

NOU RWN

Joint Secretary

Joint Secretary
Chairperson, CEA

DG, BEE

Secretary, BEE

Energy Economist, BEE
Energy Economist, BEE

8. Shri Saurabh Kumar MD, EESL
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS

9. Ms. Anjuli Chib Duggar Secretary

10. Shri Pritam Singh Addl. Secretary

11. Shri Amardeep Singh Bhatia Joint Secretary

12. Smt. Sibani Swain
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPTT. OF REVENUE)

13. Shri Najib Shah
14, Shri A.K. Kaushal

Economic Adviser

Spl. Secretary & Chairman (CBEC)
Special Secretary & Members

(Customs)
15. Shri Alok Shukla JS (TRU-I)
16. Ms. P.S. Saxena JS (TPL-I)

18. Shri Abhijit Phukon

19. Shri A.N. Jha

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPTT. OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
17. Ms. Sharmila Chavaly

Joint Secretary
Joint Director

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPTT. OF EXPENDITURE)

Addl. Secretary

20. Smt. Annie George Mathew Joint Secretary

21. Shri Arunish Chawla

Joint Secretary


MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
22. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra Addl. Secretary

23. Shri Sameer Sharma Joint Secretary

24. Shri Neeraj Mandloi Joint Secretary

25. Shri Praveen Prakash Joint Secretary

26. Shri Diwakar Garg DG, CPWD

27. Shri Rajendra Chaudhari Director (Commercial), NBCC

28. Shri P.K. Seth Executive Director (PMG), NBCC
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION

29. Dr. Nandita Chatterjee Secretary (HUPA)

30. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Joint Secretary

31. Dr. Shailesh Kumar Aggarwal Executive Director, BMTPC

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, Ministry
of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Urban Development
and Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and made known
to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. All the witnesses introduced themselves to the Committee.
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
made a powerpoint presentation on the subject ‘Energy Conservation’.
The Members raised certain queries which were answered to by the
representatives of Ministries.

4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:
(i

(ii) Criteria and Action Plan for implementing the Green Building
Code;

(iii) Need for giving thrust to advertisement of energy efficient
equipment;

Need and scope for energy conservation;

(iv) Detailed Action Plan for giving thrust to Energy Conservation
in the upcoming Smart Cities launched under ‘AMRUT’;

(५

Need for a National Clean Energy Fund for promoting energy
conservation;

(vi) Disbursement of Funds in required time-frame and inadequate
allocation for energy efficient projects;

93


(vii) Focus on R&D for making more and more energy efficient
appliances;

(viii) Need for surveys to collect relevant data on energy
conservation — measures and methods, throughout the
country;

(ix) Financial Support to various Schemes and Programmes relating
to Energy Conservation.

5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

94


ANNEXURE VIII

MINUTES OF THE 29TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 14TH JULY, 2015 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘53’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1240 hours.

9 eRPNOuURWHN

ornas

14.
18.
16.
Zs
18.
19,
20.

PRESENT
Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MeNBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Om Birla

. Shri M. Chandrakasi

. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
. Shri M.B. Rajesh

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
. Shri Purno Agitok Sangma

. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

Shri V.P. Singh Badnore

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Ram Jethmalani

Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri 5. Muthukaruppan

Shri Javed Ali Khan

Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu

95


‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.K. Pandey = Director

2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik = — Director

3. Smt. L.N. Haokip = Under Secretary
WITNESSES

MINISTRY OF POWER

1. Shri P.K. Pujari Secretary

2. Shri Satish Kumar Joint Secretary

3. Shri B.K. Sharma Chief Engineer, CEA

4. Shri T.K. Barai Member (Thermal) CEA

5. Dr. Ajay Mathur DG, BEE

6. Shri Sanjay Seth Secretary, BEE

7. Shri Arijit Sengupta Asstt. Energy Economist, BEE
8. Shri Saurabh Kumar MD, EESL

9. Smt. Shubha Sarma Secretary, CERC

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and made
known to them the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions
by the Speaker.

3. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the Ministry of Power made a powerpoint presentation
on the subject ‘Energy Conservation’. The Members raised certain
queries which were answered to by the representatives of Ministry of
Power.

4. The following important points were discussed during the sitting:

(i) Need and scope for energy conservation;

(ii) Criteria and Action Plan for implementing the Green Building
Code;

(iii) Need to consider the applicability of different time zones in
the country for conservation of energy;

(iv) Making energy efficient equipment available for the
agriculture sector;

(v) To review the scope of Energy Audit and to make it a regular
mechanism;

96


(vi) Increasing the number of testing labs for efficient electrical
appliances;

(vii) Need for distribution of LED Lights to consumers on a mass
scale;

(viii) Need to give thrust to R&D activities in the sector; and

(ix) Need to reduce ATEC losses in pursuit of Energy Conservation.

5. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of Ministry of
Power for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject
and also asked them to furnish detailed notes on their Action Plan

concerning energy conservation, Energy Audit and various initiatives
taken by the State Governments on the issue.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

97


ANNEXURE IX

MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2014-15) HELD ON 5TH AUGUST, 2015 IN COMMITTEE

8

ROOM ‘139°, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1800 hrs. to 1840 hrs.

PRESENT

Dr. Kirit Somaiya — Chairperson
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Harish Dwivedi

. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

. Dr. Arun Kumar

. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa

. Shrimati Krishna Raj

. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh

9 anaurwn

» Shri Malyadri Sriram
10. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Rajya Sabha

11. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore

12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
13. Shri 5. Muthukaruppan

14. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam

15. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
16. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
3. Shri N.K, Pandey — Director
3. Shri Arun K, Kaushik — Director


2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration the following draft Reports:—

(i) 7th Report on ‘Energy Conservation’,

(ii) 8th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 1st Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year
2014-15.

3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with slight
amendment/changes in 7th Report. The 8th Report was, however,
adopted without any changes. The Committee also authorized the
Chairman to finalise the above-mentioned Reports and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session.

The Committee then adjourned.

99


Nees

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi
Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their
outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items
are available on the website mentioned above.”

—————— —————————— घन्‍ननननन->-भ-ञमममममम-त