STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
IMPACT OF RBI’s REVISED FRAMEWORK
FOR RESOLUTION OF STRESSED
ASSETS ON NPAs IN THE
ELECTRICITY SECTOR
FORTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018 /Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
40

FORTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF POWER
IMPACT OF RBI’s REVISED FRAMEWORK FOR
RESOLUTION OF STRESSED ASSETS ON
NPAs IN THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.8.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.8.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)

COE No. 299
Price : Rs. 129.00
© 2018 BY LOK S ABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18).............................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
I. Introductory................................................................................... 1
II. Non-Performing Assests in the Electricity Sector ................... 3
III.RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets..... 13
IV. Impact of RBI’s revised framework on NPAs in the Electricity
Sector............................................................................................... 32
V. Steps taken by the Government.................................................. 40
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee............... 49
ANNEXURES
I. Resolution of Stressed Assets — Revised Framework dated
February 12, 2018 .......................................................................... 62
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11th April,
2018.................................................................................................. 81
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12th June,
2018.................................................................................................. 85
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 5th July,
2018.................................................................................................. 88
V. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 2nd August,
2018.................................................................................................. 95

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P. Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur
31. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh —Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey —Director
3 Ms. Deepika —Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Fortieth Report on ‘Impact of RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution
of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity Sector’ pertaining to the
Ministry of Power.
2. The Committee had a series of discussions on the subject on
11th April, 2018, 12th June, 2018 and 5th July, 2018 with representatives
of the Ministry of Power, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Coal,
the Reserve Bank of India, Lending Banks and Developers/Promoters of
the Stressed Power Projects.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to representatives
of the Ministry of Power, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Coal,
the Reserve Bank of India, Lending Banks and the Developers/Promoters
of the Stressed Power Projects, for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing the desired information on the issues relating to the subject.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 2nd August, 2018.
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
2  August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
I. Introductory
1.1 37th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject
“Stressed/Non - Performing Assets in the Electricity Sector” was presented
to the Parliament after extensive deliberations with all the stakeholders
like the Ministry of Power, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Coal,
the Ministry of Railways, the Reserve Bank of India, lending Banks and
developers/promoters of the stressed power projects, etc. in order to
resolve the issue of NPA in electricity sector as per the extant RBI
Guidelines and other legal/financial/statutory provisions applicable at
that time. The said Report, inter alia, analysed Power Scenario in the
country, Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in the Electricity Sector and
reasons thereof, Role of RBI/Ministry of Finance/Banks in financing of
Power Projects, Role of the Ministry of Power/CEA/CERC/SERCs in
regulation and development of Power Sector, etc.
1.2 The Committee focussed on 34 coal-based thermal power plants
which were categorised as ‘stressed’ due to issues such as:—
• Non-availability of Fuel:
– Cancellation of coal block.
– Projects set up without Linkage.
• Lack of enough PPA by States.
• Inability of the Promoter to infuse the equity and working
capital.
• Contractual/Tariff related disputes.
• Issues related to Banks/Financial Institutions (FIs).

2
• Delay in project implementations leading to cost
overrun.
• Aggressive bidding by developers in PPA.
1.3 The Committee have been apprised that the total coal-based
power capacity in the private sector may be nearly 90,000 MW out of
which 75,000 MW is already operational. It is estimated by various
sources that approximately 60,000 MW to 65,000 MW of this capacity
may be under financial stress. Lenders have exposure of
approximately INR 3 Lakh Crore to such assets and it is imperiled due
to slow resolution process and tepid power procurement demand from
discoms in last 3 to 4 years. Stressed Power Assets have placed a major
pressure on the balance sheets of lenders including scheduled commercial
banks.
1.4 With a view to clean-up the books of the banks, RBI issued a
Revised framework which substituted the then existing guidelines with
a harmonised and simplified generic framework for resolution of stressed
assets. As per the Revised Framework, the extant instructions on
resolution of stressed assets such as Framework for Revitalizing Distressed
Assets, Corporate Debt Restructuring Scheme, Flexible Structuring
of Existing Long Term Project Loans, Strategic Debt Restructuring
Scheme (SDR), Change in Ownership outside SDR, and Scheme for
Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A) were withdrawn.
The Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) as an institutional mechanism for
resolution of stressed accounts has also been discontinued. Now, all
accounts, including such accounts where any of the schemes have been
invoked but not yet implemented, shall be governed by the revised
framework.
1.5 It may be noted that the ‘Revised Framework for Resolution
of Stressed Assets’ has been issued by the RBI in exercise of powers conferred
under Section 35A, 35AA (read with S.O.1435 (E) dated May 5, 2017
issued by the Government of India) and 35AB of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949; and Section 45(L) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
1.6 Due to the sectoral issues i.e. non-availability of adequate fuel,
delay in power sale agreement tie-ups and the like, the resolution plans
achieved under RBI frameworks and/or IBC are likely to be highly sub-
optimal and may lead to large haircuts for lenders which are State- owned
banks and also State owned companies i.e. Power Finance Corporation

3
Limited and Rural Electrification Corporation Limited. Given these asset
level issues, the number of buyers is also very small thus creating a near
fire sale situation.
1.7 The demand for electricity is said to have picked up pace as
reflected in the recent power tariff increases in spot and short term
markets. There is likelihood that this stressed capacity may be
meaningfully absorbed in power system in next 3 to 4 years. In this light
it is extremely critical to preserve the existing thermal power capacity
for current and future economic benefits.
1.8 As a result of the Revised Framework issued by RBI and to
evaluate the impact of this Revised Framework on NPA in the Electricity
Sector, the Committee had meetings with the representatives of the
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Coal. The
Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the Reserve
Bank of India and lending Banks/Institutions along with the promoters
of the stressed power plants.
II. Non-Performing Assests in the Electricity Sector
2.1 As per RBI, the high NPA ratio for Indian banks is a sector-
specific phenomenon and as such, most of the non-performing loans of
the banking system are concentrated in few sectors, viz., infrastructure,
power, iron and steel, textile etc., and different sectors are not similarly
placed with regard to the reasons for stress.
2.2 When asked about the reasons for stress in aforementioned
sectors, the Ministry of Finance, in its reply, stated as under:—
“(a)Coal linkage related issues, delay in implementation of
projects due to various reasons, non-availability of fuel, delay
in land/environment clearances, inability of promoters to
infuse additional funds, lower power generation due to
restrictions on release of water etc. have aggravated the
problems faced by the power industry. Weak financial health
of Distribution Companies (DISCOMS) have led to substantial
increase in receivables of borrowing groups (i.e., receivables
of Power Generating Companies), thus impacting their
liquidity position.

4
(b) Iron and steel industry has suffered and borrowing entities
have been restructured due to the problems of huge
capacity expansion with thinner equity cushion as well as
problems associated with the allocation of iron ore and coal
blocks.
(c) Industries like ship-building and shipyards have seen an
increased spate of restructuring on account of drying up of
global finances to this industry. Fall in commodity demand
and prices due to global crisis have resulted in fall/cancellation
of new orders. Cancellation of contracts leading to piling up
of inventory has been another cause for stress. On account
of global economic downturn, finances available to ship-
owners have dried up.
(d) The southern zone has seen textile industry getting visibly
affected due to fluctuation in the price of cotton and yarn.
Environmental issues created by treatment of effluent wastes
have also affected the textile industry.
(e) Recession in paper industry has resulted in several paper
mill accounts with banks turning NPAs.”
2.3 RBI submitted before the Committee that while the reasons for
stress may vary across sectors, the nominal principles of resolution of
such stress remain the same irrespective of the sector, as ultimately any
negotiation of debt is a restatement of a financial contract. It further
stated that given the sector-agnostic basic principles of stress resolution,
the revised framework provides a harmonized, flexible approach to apply
the same.
2.4 The Committee have been informed that the Gross NPAs in the
power sector have risen steadily over the past few quarters. As per
RBI, the total outstanding loans of scheduled commercial bank to the
power sector (including renewables) stood at Rs. 5.65 lac crore (as on
March 2018). Nearly 80 per cent of this amount is accounted for by
the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and almost a fifth of this exposure
is stressed on account of various structural factors plaguing the power
sector.

5
2.5 Given below is the present status of 34 stressed coal-based thermal power plants, as furnished by the Ministry
of Finance:—
Project Name Capacity Completed/ Completed Commer-FSA Tied PPA Tied Estimated Stage of
(MW) Under but not cially Up Up Project Insolvency
Construction Operational  commissio- Cost
ned and (Equity and
operational  Debt)
1 23456789
Adani Power Maharashtra3300 Completed NA Yes 3085 3085 19,788.00 Resolved
Limited
Adhunik Power and Natural 540 Completed NA Yes 0 3223,377.00 Resolved:
Resources Ltd.Sold to
ARC
Athena Chhattisgarh Power1200 Under NA NA 600 220 11,522.00Admitted to
Ltd.  Construction  NCLT
Avantha Power (Jhabua) 600 Completed NA Yes 600 2454,806.00
Avantha Power (Korba) 600 Completed NA Yes 600 04,929.00
Coastal Energen Pvt. Limited1200 Completed NA Yes NA 600 7,870.00
Damodar Valley Corporation1200 Completed NA Yes 550 550 7,957.00 Resolved
Raghunathpur
DB Power Limited1200 Completed NA Yes 600 518 8,965.00 Resolved

6
East Coast Energy Pvt. Ltd.1320 Under NA NA 0 100 9,975.00Admitted to
Construction NCLT
Essar Power Jharkhand Ltd.1200 Under NA NA 0 1050 10,441.00
Construction
Essar Power Mahaan Ltd.1200 Completed Unit 2 to Unit 1 is 0 2757,173.00
be commi-  commissi-
ssioned oned
GMR Chhattisgarh Energy1370 Completed NA Yes 0 69 11,643.00
Ltd.
GMR Kamalanga Energy1050 Completed NA Yes 500 887 6,519.00 Resolved
Ltd.
GMR Warora Energy Ltd. 600 Completed NA Yes 600 600 4,250.00
GVK Industries Ltd. 540 Completed NA Yes 0 5404,773.00 Resolved
(Goindwal Sahib)but under
stress
Ind Bharath (Utkal) Ltd. 700 Unit 1 is NA Unit 1 is NA 5004,797.00
operational; commissi-
Unit 2 is oned
under
construction
Jaypee Power Ventures Pvt. 540 Completed NA Yes 500 3503,575.00
Ltd. (Bina)
1 23456789

Jaypee Power Ventures Pvt.1320 Completed NA Yes 500 495 11,700.00
Ltd. (Nigrie)
Jindal India Thermal Power1200 Completed NA Yes 600 544 7,061.00
Ltd.
Kanti Bijlee Utpadan Nigam 390 Completed NA Yes 390 3904,778.00 Resolved
Ltd.
KSK Mahanadi Power Co.3600Phase 1 NA Phase 1 is 02270 27,080.00
Ltd. Completed; operational
Phase 2
Under
Construction
KVK Nilachal Power Ltd. 350 Under NA NA 350 882,992.00Referred to
Construction NCLT
Lanco Amarkantak Power1920Phase 1 NA Phase 11920 672 12,865.00
Ltd. Completed; (600MW) is
Phase 2 operational
Under
Construction
Lanco Anpara Power1200 Completed NA Yes 1200 1100 4,845.00
Ltd.
Lanco Babandh Power Ltd.1320 Under NA NA 660 545 13,400.00Referred to
Construction NCLT
1 23456789
7

Lanco Vidarbha Thermal1320 Under NA NA 0 0 10,443.00
Power Ltd. Construction
Monnet Power Co. Ltd.1050 Under NA NA 0 476 9,500.00Admitted to
Construction NCLT
Prayagraj Power Generation1980 Completed NA Yes 1980 1782 15,537.00
Company Ltd. (Jaypee)
Rattan India Power Ltd.1350 Completed NA Yes 1080 650 9,818.00
(Nasik)
RKM Powergen Private Ltd.1440 Unit 1, 2, 3 NA Unit 1, 2, 3 900 35012,608.00
Operational; Operational
Unit 4
Under
Construction
Simhapuri Energy Ltd. 600 Completed NA Yes NA 400 3,510.00
(Phase 1 and 2)
SKS Power Generation 600 Completed NA Yes 300 306,180.00
Chhattisgarh Ltd.
Vandana Vidhyut Ltd. 270 Completed Yes NA 0 141,949.00Admitted to
NCLT
Visa Power Ltd. 600 Under NA NA NA 6004,500.00Admitted to
Construction NCLT
38870 17515 20317 2,91,126
1 23456789
8

9
2.6 Explaining the status of above-mentioned under construction
Power Projects, Independent Power Producers submitted before the
Committee that:—
“Out of the 34 stressed projects, around 35% are under construction.
Project progress achieved in these under construction projects is
ranging from 45% to 85% with residual project completion time
lines between 9 months to 24 months from the date of Re-financing
and Re-mobilization.
Since 2012, construction work at these projects is stalled due to
various reasons beyond the control of developer. Disbursement
made by banks during the stalled period mostly served the IDC
component and a very small percentage of the disbursed amount,
which in many projects would be in single digit, was allowed by
banks to be utilized towards project construction. As a result, most
of the projects have an IDC component in excess of 50% of the total
project cost. These stalled under construction projects currently:
• Are servicing debt at a Rate of Interest between 15% to 17%
including penal charges of 2%,
• Have high tech thermal power plant equipment stored at
various ports and project sites without preservation because
of zero disbursements by banks post end of 2016,
• Are without basic insurance coverage like fire, burglary etc.,
due to paucity of funds.”
2.7 Suggesting the measures for resolution of under construction
stressed Power Projects, Independent Power Producers deposed that:—
“Any project which is in excess of 75 per cent completion, let the
project be funded and let them complete the project so that there
is a value which is retained and some amount of debt can be
protected. The interest for these projects has to be made reasonable.
Our suggestion is 10 per cent for going forward. If a promoter
brings in an additional equity during this construction period, then
you give him a value. Otherwise, no. The change in management
has to be done post commissioning because the existing promoter
could not continue with the project for various reasons. In respect
of the projects which have attained between 50 per cent and 75 per
cent progress, the lenders again have to provide the required fund.
But however, simultaneously, explore the possibility of change in

10
management, either through the RBI circular or through the IBC
provisions. Here, a slight premium has to be charged on the IDC
because these projects have attained less progress. In respect of
projects which have attained progress less than 50 per cent, the
first and the foremost priority is to preserve the equipment which
has been delivered.”
2.8 Commenting on the possibility of these stressed power projects
being revived, the CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation deposed before
the Committee that:—
“Those projects which are less than 50 per cent completed, there
is no hope of them being revived unless the promoter does
something outside the formal structure that exists today. There is
not much hope of a retrieval. They would have to go to the NCLT.
The projects of 16,000 MW perhaps have no scope but to go to
NCLT and be liquidated for whatever their value is or find an
alternate use. If there is a land available, maybe, that could become
a real estate option or it could be an industrial estate. There must
be other economic or commercial opportunities that exist. But it
may not be a power project. As a power project, we do not see
a viability for them but I am sure they would have other economic
opportunities that could find a place.”
2.9 As on May 31, 2018, out of 34 identified stressed cases, 7 projects
corresponding to installed capacity of 7,620 MW have reportedly been
resolved after allocation of coal under SHAKTI scheme.
2.10 Confirming about the 7 Power Projects that have been resolved,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power deposed that:—
“We had 34 projects at the point of time when we started discussion.
Out of them, seven projects have got resolved either due to SHAKTI
policy or the discoms issue settled and they are out of stress as
far as we are concerned.”
2.11 Explaining the reasons for stress in the Power Projects and
steps taken by the Government to alleviate them, the Secretary, Ministry
of Power deposed that:—
“These projects were in stress for different reasons. Everything
perhaps does not rest with the banks or the RBI per se. For example,
the cancellation of coal blocks led to non-availability. Then, there
was allotment of coal blocks and some of those coal blocks got into
dispute again because of aggressive bidding. So, situation has
reached again where the fuel became an issue in some of those
plants. So, SHAKTI policy addressed some issues.

11
Secondly, there was an issue of delayed payment by discoms. Again,
it leads to stress if the payment to power plants is delayed beyond
60 days. There are instances from some places of longer periods
of delay. This is another issue where bankers or RBI circular per
se does not have an any impact. This needs to be addressed. We
have been taking it up with the discoms regularly, requesting for
tariff revision and all that. Under UDAY, we have requested for
checking the losses and some improvement is visible on account
of discoms.
Here, I would like to mention that there are large amounts of money
which are outstanding from the Government Departments in some
of the States. That is a huge money. If that is available, these losses
can be easily written off or payments to generators can be made.
The other reason cited was lack of PPAs in the market. We had
done some analysis. We find that if the peak rated capacity is about
160-165 GW, the PPAs available with the State Governments are
of more than 230 GW. They are already having excess PPAs and
each PPA is a cost to them as far as fixed cost is concerned.
As regards the regulatory issues, the regulator has been addressing
them. With regard to the railway charges etc., all the charges have
been included in the freight. The notification was issued in January.
One part of that issue which was there, delay in incorporation of
increase in other charges other than freight, has been addressed
and they have now been included. Now onwards, it will be
addressed better. The regulator has brought out some other
improvements also. The indexation issue was there. So, it has been
already put for consultation by the regulator, CERC. We expect
that these are the issues which can be addressed quickly. We are
working on it and hopefully, we should be able to resolve some
of these issues in three months’ time.”
2.12 Explaining the status regarding coal supply with respect to
the stressed Power Projects, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal deposed that:—
“Out of the 34 assets that have been listed, there are 14 which have
issues with the coal. There are eight projects which had PPAs but
no coal linkage, the auction process was set into motion under
clause(b) of the SHAKTI Policy and coal supply has been started
to five of them. They have to get their PPA amended. Similarly,
in the three more cases where neither PPA was there nor the coal
linkage was there, they are being made eligible under the B-(III).
An inter-Ministerial Committee has been constituted and it has

12
worked out the modalities. Once it is approved by the Competent
Authority, the provision for providing coal will be made available.
There are three plants which had problem with the coal block
allocation and the cases regarding the same are pending in the
court. Out of that, two are clear from the court and we are making
provision for them under the B(III) clause of the policy. So, this
is only the limited issue as far as the coal sector is concerned. The
SHAKTI policy is quite comprehensive and will cater to the
requirements of these plants.”
2.13 When the Committee wanted to know the views of the Ministry
of Finance about the resolution of the stressed Power Projects, the Secretary,
Department of Financial Services deposed that:—
“There are few considerations which we have to keep in mind
while we are trying to resolve the situation. One, the entire economy
which is on a growth trajectory has to be fueled by the power. If
there is no power, all will suffer at some stage. We are also very
well aware that whatever gestation period is gone through these
projects, this must not be lost. We must try and do something that
these projects are, to the extent possible, resolved.
Secondly, these projects are at different stages and each project is
unique in itself and one situation cannot fit all. I will mention a
few points. They are in different stages because of physical progress,
the kind of clearances they have, the kind of PPAs they have, the
kind of availability of natural resources including the linkages they
have, promotors’ behaviour, lending, gold plating which cannot be
denied in many cases, possibility of a particular project coming out
of the stress, bank exposure, capacity of the bank to take that kind
of a hit at this stage or before going to the NCLT etc. These are
the various things which determine how you treat different
projects.”
2.14 When asked if there is some provisioning so that the above-
mentioned 7 Projects will not become stressed again, the Ministry of
Finance stated as under:—
“As far as the asset classification is concerned, it cannot be said that
any project will remain constant for times to come. In case projects
are not able to service their debt obligations then the possibility
of classification being downgraded remains. The classification of
an account is governed by the status/progress of the project and
the extant guidelines.”

13
2.15 In response to a query if these stressed coal-based Power
Projects can be made viable in future, keeping in view the fact that
renewable energy is being made available to the country at a very low
price, the Committee were apprised that:—
“Currently, roughly 1,70,000 MW is the peak electricity requirement
in the country. As per CEA projections and as per National Electricity
Plan, the growth will be roughly six per cent. That means every
year the demand will increase by 11,000 plus MW. No new coal
plant will get added except those which are under construction.
Currently, power plants worth 18,000 to 19,000 MW have no PPA.
The annual requirement is 11,000 MW which is incremental every
year.
In terms of renewables, as a country our peak requirement comes
in the evening and seasonally in some States during the monsoon.
The peak renewable energy from solar comes during the day time,
when the demand is not at its peak. No country will be able to
run its energy requirements through renewables, which can at best
contribute 15 per cent of the energy. It is because while the PLF
of coal plant can be 80 per cent, renewables run at 20 or 25 per
cent. So, without coal plant, energy needs cannot be met. This
current capacity overhang will clear in two to three years. As per
the MoEF recommendation, new FGD, and as per the CEA
calculations, 13,000 to 14,000 MW capacity of old plants have to
be retired. So, we believe that all these plants can be economic in
two to three years.”
2.16 When asked if the promoters have been allowed to go scot-
free under IBC 2016 for their role or contribution in making the asset
NPA or stressed, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“Under the IBC, the old promoters have to forego their ownership
and are also not allowed to participate in the bidding process as
per Sec. 29A. Forensic audit of NPA accounts continues even if a
case is referred under IBC. The liability of the promoter is not
linked to reference by creditors of the account to the NCLT under
the IBC.”
III. RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets
3.1 The Committee were apprised that the RBI with its new
guidelines dated February 12, 2018 (Annexure-I) has discontinued all
previous schemes for resolution of stressed assets and substituted the
same with generic framework for resolution. The circular stipulates that

14
default of even a single day in payment of interest/principal would trigger
formulation of resolution plan. This framework has provided deadline
of 180 days for implementation of resolution plan and if such resolution
is not implemented then lenders have to file insolvency application under
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 2016 within 15 days.
3.2 RBI stated that default is a lagging indicator of financial stress
in a borrower’s account and RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of
Stressed Assets is aimed at ensuring early resolution of stressed assets
in a transparent and time-bound manner so that maximum value could
be realized. Further, it allows banks to do restructuring of the asset with
complete flexibility to determine the contours of the restructuring plan.
3.3 Explaining the positive impact of the Revised Framework, the
Governor, RBI deposed that:—
“In effect, the revised framework has ensured timely recognition
of NPAs. Independent study by Crisil which is a rating agency that
we all know about, also corroborates the above and states that:
“The tide is slowly turning and Crisil expects moderation in
slippages, better recoveries from NPAs and improved provision
coverage to goad well for bank.” The expected pick up in loans
and advances concomitantly with all this happening in fiscal year
2018-19 and the resolution of stressed assets is expected to increase
the earnings on banking assets and help banks to strengthen their
transparent balance-sheets. It may be pertinent to note that the
growth in advances across banking routes has witnessed a pick up
over the past few months. The adjusted non-foot credit is up by
13 per cent.
Another positive result of the above measure has been that banks
have been able to increase the provision coverage ratio on the
stressed loans significantly in the year that has just ended from
58.9 per cent to 63.6 per cent which again should help banks in
better managing the incremental NPA.
International research has shown that higher and quicker build up
of provisions helps in faster resolution of stressed assets. The
stressed assets include throughout the sector, throughout the
economy. The infusion of capital by the Government of India has
been timed well to enable the banks to manage the transition while
not breaching any regulatory capital limits. It is a requirement when
we are in the international capital market. We have to follow the
rules that the rest of the world follows. We cannot be having separate
rules for the banking system which is integrated with the rest of

15
the world. If you include the budgeted amount for this year over
the last four years, the capital infusion into our banks will be
Rs. 2,15,000 crore, if my calculation is correct. The Reserve Bank
also committed to facilitate a smoother transition as much as
prudentially possible. In particular, banks were given additional
time to make provisions for cases referred under IBC on the RBI
direction which would include the power assets. It must be stressed
that as a result of the above measures, none of our public sector
banks barring one is in breach of the regulatory capital requirement
of nine per cent of capital adequacy ratio as on March 31, 2018 in
spite of recognizing much higher level of NPAs. These NPAs were
always there. We are now recognizing them. Further, it is expected
that the banks will have sufficient avenues to raise additional capital
so as not to face any capital constraints. As I just mentioned, the
Government has budgeted Rs. 65,000 crore for additional capital
infusion in 2018-19 alone which can be front-loaded. Further, post
re-capitalization, the scope for PSBs to raise additional market
borrowings continue. These measures are expected to assist the
PSBs in complying with the regulatory capital requirements and
in case of healthier PSBs to also have growth capital. Since
substantial parts of stressed assets have been recognized and
reasonably provisioned, any further accretion to capital is expected
to help any further asset quality stress in the short run and hopefully
and eventually support credit growth in the medium to long term
while preserving the financial health of our public sector banks.
Overall, therefore, we are of the view that the banking system in
general including the PSBs is getting stronger with the regulatory
and transparency measures undertaken by the RBI and other
regulators. The legislative changes brought about through the
enactment of IBC and the amendments that have taken place as
recently as last week and the financial support to the public-sector
banks by the Central Government goads well for the sector.”
3.4 When asked about the reasons and objectives of the new
guidelines regarding Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) issued by the RBI
on February 12, 2018, the Ministry of Finance, in its reply, stated as under:—
“As per the circular dated 12.2.2018 issued by the Reserve Bank
of India (RBI), in view of the enactment of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC), RBI decided to substitute the existing
guidelines and instructions for resolution of stressed assets,
including specific schemes introduced by RBI, with a harmonised
and simplified generic framework for resolution of stressed assets
(Revised Framework on Resolution of Stressed Assets).”

16
3.5 When asked if any review had been done to evaluate the
performance and achievement of earlier Guidelines, the Ministry of
Finance stated as under:—
“Various special resolution schemes introduced by RBI were used
by lenders more to address asset classification concerns rather than
to effectively resolve stressed assets. An internal review of SDR
and S4A schemes, which provided asset classification benefits to
banks, revealed that their adoption rate among eligible borrowers
was less than 20% and in case of SDR, the success rate was close
to zero where implemented, indicating that the schemes were not
really used for resolution of stressed assets.”
3.6 On being asked if the earlier guidelines had been withdrawn
because of their failure to provide the desired result, the Ministry of
Finance stated as under:—
“RBI has stated that various special schemes for resolution
introduced by it were used by lenders more to address asset
classification concerns rather than to effectively resolve stressed
assets, and that the enactment of a comprehensive bankruptcy law
in the country has obviated the need for such specific schemes.”
3.7 Explaining the reasons for failure of earlier guidelines, CMD,
Rural Electrification Corporation deposed that:—
• “JLF was an inefficient tool for resolution of stressed assets
due to various inter-creditor issues,
• Lenders’ efforts were driven by minimization of provisioning
rather than focussing on recovery/asset resolution,
• Weak regulatory response to change in costs aggravated
cashflow stress.”
3.8 When queried about the reasons for revision in the definition
of ‘Default’, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“As per RBI, the revised framework has aligned the definition of
default with the one used in IBC. The objective is to ensure prompt
action to cure stress in a borrower account as soon as default takes
place.”
3.9 When asked if the new concept of default has taken into account
the ground realities of different sectors and should the definition of default

17
be sector specific as more often the reasons for default remain beyond
the control of promoter, the Ministry of Finance stated that while the
causes for stress may be different, the nominal principles governing
resolution of stress are the same, regardless of the sector.
3.10 When asked if the new guidelines on NPA will not spur the
filing of insolvency proceedings with NCLT, the Ministry of Finance stated
as under:—
“As per RBI’s new guidelines, a stressed account of above Rs. 2,000
crore has to be referred to NCLT under IBC if the default continues
beyond 180 days.”
A. Early identification and reporting of Stress
3.11 RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets
has prescribed that the Lenders shall identify incipient stress in loan
accounts, immediately on default, by classifying stressed assets as special
mention accounts (SMA) as per the following categories:—
SMA Sub-categories Basis for classification – Principal or interest
payment or any other amount
wholly or partly overdue between
SMA-0 1-30 days
SMA-1 31-60 days
SMA-2 61-90 days
3.12 Further, in para 4, all lenders have been asked by the RBI to
put in place Board-approved policies for resolution of stressed assets
under this framework, including the timelines for resolution. As soon as
there is a default in the borrower entity’s account with any lender, all
lenders “ singly or jointly “ shall initiate steps to cure the default. The
Resolution Plan (RP) may involve any actions/plans/reorganization
including, but not limited to, regularization of the account by payment
of all over dues by the borrower entity, sale of the exposures to other
entities/investors, change in ownership, or restructuring. The RP shall be
clearly documented by all the lenders (even if there is no change in any
terms and conditions). Restructuring is defined by RBI as below:—
“Restructuring is an act in which a lender, for economic or legal
reasons relating to the borrower’s financial difficulty (An illustrative
non-exhaustive list of indicators of financial difficulty are given in
the Appendix to Annexure-I), grants concessions to the borrower.
Restructuring would normally involve modification of terms of the
advances/securities, which may include, among others, alteration

18
of repayment period/repayable amount/the amount of instalments/
rate of interest; rollover of credit facilities; sanction of additional
credit facility; enhancement of existing credit limits; and,
compromise settlements where time for payment of settlement
amount exceeds three months.”
B. Implementation Conditions for Resolution Plan (RP)
3.13 Para 5 of the RBI’s Revised Framework prescribes that a RP
in respect of borrower entities to whom the lenders continue to have
credit exposure, shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if the following
conditions are met:—
a. the borrower entity is no longer in default with any of the
lenders;
b. if the resolution involves restructuring; then
i) all related documentation, including execution of
necessary agreements between lenders and borrower/
creation of security charge/perfection of securities are
completed by all lenders; and
ii) the new capital structure and/or changes in the terms
of conditions of the existing loans get duly reflected in
the books of all the lenders and the borrower.
3.14 Additionally, Para 6 of the RBI’s Revised Framework stipulates
that the RPs involving restructuring/change in ownership in respect of
‘large’ accounts (i.e., accounts where the aggregate exposure of lenders
is Rs. 1 billion and above), shall require independent credit evaluation
(ICE) of the residual debt by credit rating agencies (CRAs) specifically
authorized by the Reserve Bank for this purpose. While accounts with
aggregate exposure of Rs. 5 billion and above shall require two such
ICEs, others shall require one ICE. Only such RPs which receive a credit
opinion of RP4 or better for the residual debt from one or two CRAs,
as the case may be, shall be considered for implementation.. Further,
ICEs shall be subject to the following:—
(a) The CRAs shall be directly engaged by the lenders and the
payment of fee for such assignments shall be made by the
lenders.
(b) If lenders obtain ICE from more than the required number
of CRAs, all such ICE opinions shall be RP4 or better for the
RP to be considered for implementation.

19
3.15 When asked about the reasons for independent credit
evaluation in the Resolution Plan involving restructuring/change in
ownership and if it would increase subjectivity in course of its functioning,
the Ministry of Finance stated as below:—
“RBI has stated that the credibility of the resolution plan is sought
to be ensured through the requirement of independent credit
evaluation by credit rating agencies. Such independent credit
evaluation would ensure that only sustainable or viable plans are
adopted by creditors and the borrower as resolution plans. RBI has
also stated that for credit rating agencies, the incentive to not give
erroneous or questionable credit opinion is its credibility and
reputation in the market, which is its main currency for sustained
business.”
C. Timelines for Stressed Accounts to be referred under IBC
3.16 According to the RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of
Stressed Assets, in respect of accounts with aggregate exposure of the
lenders at Rs. 20 billion and above, on or after March 1, 2018 (‘reference
date’), including accounts where resolution may have been initiated under
any of the existing schemes as well as accounts classified as restructured
standard assets which are currently in respective specified periods (as
per the previous guidelines), Resolution Plan shall be implemented as
per the following timelines:—
(i) If in default as on the reference date, then 180 days from the
reference date.
(ii) If in default after the reference date, then 180 days from the
date of first such default.
3.17 Further, if a Resolution Plan in respect of such large accounts
is not implemented as per the timelines specified in the above paragraph,
lenders shall file insolvency application, singly or jointly, under the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 2016 within 15 days from the
expiry of the said timeline.
3.18 RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets
also prescribe that in respect of such large accounts, where a RP involving
restructuring/change in ownership is implemented within the 180 days
period, the account should not be in default at any point of time during
the ‘specified period’, failing which the lenders shall file an insolvency
application, singly or jointly, under the IBC within 15 days from the date
of such default.

20
‘Specified period’ means the period from the date of implementation
of RP up to the date by which at least 20 per cent of the outstanding
principal debt as per the RP and interest capitalization sanctioned
as part of the restructuring, if any, is repaid. Provided that the
specified period can not end before one year from the
commencement of the first payment of interest or principal
(whichever is later) on the credit facility with longest period of
moratorium under the terms of RP.
3.19 Explaining the problem with the provision regarding ‘Specified
Period for the purpose of Restructuring of the Stressed Assets’,
Independent Power Producers deposed before the Committee that:—
“The RBI Circular gives a strong disincentive to the banks to
restructure loan even in deserving cases. It says that if any loan
is restructured, it will remain substandard till 20 per cent of the
loan is repaid. That 20 per cent loan for the power sector gets paid
over five years’ time. As per RBI’s own provisioning norms for a
substandard asset, once it crosses three years, over a period, 100
per cent of the loan has to be provided in the books. So, which
bank will restructure loan, even for a deserving candidate, if it has
to increase its provisioning in the books? It hits its profit and it
makes it an NPA. The same circular says that if you bring in a new
promoter and change in control, then the asset becomes standard.
It means that unwittingly, what RBI is doing is making the existing
promoters to be kicked out, who have spent sweat and blood to
invest and build up, and bring new promoters, and giving
concessions to them. So, if a new promoter comes, any restructuring,
any write off is fine, but it is not fine with the existing promoters.”
3.20 When asked if the timeline prescribed under Resolution Plan
is practical and implementable, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“RBI has stated that default is a lagging indicator of financial stress
in a borrower’s account. The framework provides for 180 days after
the lagging indicator to cure the stress, in the case of borrowers
with aggregate exposure of Rs. 2,000 crore and above, failing which
insolvency resolution process under IBC will be triggered, which
provides for another 270 days for resolution. Lenders need to be
proactive in monitoring their borrowers and be able to identify
financial stress using a combination of leading indicators and
renegotiation points in the form of loan covenants, rather than wait
for a borrower to default. Such early identification of stress and
loan modifications in response would provide sufficient time for
lenders to put in place the required resolution plan.”

21
3.21 Explaining the difficulties faced by the lenders with respect
to the strict timeline of 180 days, CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation
deposed that:—
“Exactly in 180 days to find an optimal solution and resolve is
almost impossible. We have submitted a timeline to the Ministry
that minimum, if no roadblocks come in between, 231 days are
required because you have to prepare bidding document, technical
and financial operation, then you have to invite bids and evaluate,
document it and create security also. All these aspects within
180 days is almost impossible. Ultimately solution is the NCLT
only. It means every project will ultimately land up in NCLT where
pipeline would be chocked. There are limited number of judges.
It will not be so easy”.
3.22 Regarding the strict timeline of 180 days, the representative
of SBI deposed before the Committee that:—
“As of now our deadline is 27th August not only for getting the
bids, but even this restructuring has to be reflected in the books
of the banks as well as in the books of the company. Now, this
deadline is approaching so fast. The bidding process takes time,
and then there are negotiations involved in it. If in the case of
power project 12 months’ time is given, then this can work smoothly
and also very efficiently. Hence, we want an extended time for
these.”
3.23 The Committee were apprised that the RBI’s Revised
Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets prescribes to identify and
implement a Resolution Plan within 180 days with 100% consensus
whereas the IBC, 2016 stipulates for consensus among 66 % of the Lenders.
Highlighting the difficulty in getting 100% consensus, CMD, Rural
Electrification Corporation deposed that:—
“Unfortunately 100 per cent consensus to be reached is difficult
because in some projects we are having as many as 27 banks.”
3.24 Regarding the same issue of 100 % consensus, Independent
Power Producers deposed that:—
“If there is a resolution plan which has been submitted and has
been approved by two-thirds, it should be carried on by other
people. Now, what can happen as per the RBI guidelines vis-à-vis
the IBC Code, even a person having 0.1 per cent share can stall

22
the Resolution Process. There is a dichotomy here. If the majority
is passing the resolution plan, it should be agreed to by other
banks.”
3.25 Explaining the provision regarding “One Day Default”, the
Deputy Governor, RBI deposed that:—
“One day default does not result in reference to NCLT at all. We
have maintained the 90 days definition for NPA classification as
it is. What we have said is that one day default should set in
motion a process to deal with the problem. From that day, within
180 days, the problem should be solved. If the problem is solved
within 180 days, the case does not go to NCLT.”
3.26 He further explained that:—
“There is no restriction for lending when a company is an SMA.
There is no restriction for lending even to an NPA account. If you
look at the circular, we have said it that as part of the resolution
plan, if additional funding is required, that additional funding is
treated as standard asset. So, we have actually provided adequate
provisions. As an account, SMA has no stigma. It is only to indicate
that the banks have to deal with the stressed asset.”
D. Joint Lending Forum
3.27 As per the RBI’s Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed
Assets, the Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) as an institutional mechanism for
resolution of stressed accounts stands discontinued.
3.28 As per RBI, the concept of Joint Lenders’ Forum was envisaged
as a part of the erstwhile Framework for Revitalizing Distressed Assets
in the economy, to function as a platform for efficient information-sharing
and decision-making. RBI has stated that in the absence of a bankruptcy
law, previous schemes/frameworks were designed to emulate desirable
features of a bankruptcy law and with the enactment of a comprehensive
bankruptcy law, the need for specific guidelines emulating bankruptcy
laws was obviated.
3.29 When asked if the Joint Lending Forum was an effective
platform for Resolution of NPAs in power sector and to what extent it
helped in making the NPA standard assets, the Ministry of Finance replied
as under:—
“RBI has stated that the Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) was envisaged
to serve as a platform for efficient information-sharing and decision-

23
making and that the existence of such a platform does not have
any bearing on the efficacy of the resolution plans adopted in each
case. RBI has further stated that while it no longer recognizes a
JLF, if lenders so desire and find it useful, they can form an informal
JLF.”
3.30 The Committee were apprised that according to the Resolution
Plan, as soon as there is a default in the borrowers entity account with
any lender, all lenders – singly or jointly – shall initiate steps to cure
the default. When asked about the rationale behind this provision when
there is no platform like Joint Lender Forum, the Ministry of Finance
stated as under:—
“According to RBI, the new framework does not seek unanimity
as it gives complete discretion and flexibility to banks to formulate
their own ground rules in dealing with borrowers who have
exposures with multiple banks and lenders can implement
resolution plans tailored to their internal policies and risk appetites.
However, if at the end of the 180 days of first default, the borrower
is in default to a bank, that bank is mandated to refer the case
under IBC.”
E. Committee of Creditors (CoC)
3.31 In response to a query regarding the composition of Committee
of Creditors, the Ministry of Finance submitted that the CoC comprises
all financial creditors of the corporate debtor.
3.32 It has been alleged that the creation, constitution and the
constituents of the Committee of Creditors are against the principle of
natural justice as in all likelihood Committee of Creditors may adopt a
scoot approach so as to absolve themselves of their accountability. When
asked about the details of the constitution of Committee of Creditors and
the purpose behind creation of CoC and if the constituents of Committee
of Creditors will be helpful in any objective analysis and fair assessment
of the value of NPA, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“The Committee of Creditors has been specified under Section 21
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 2016. Section 21 reads
as under: Committee of creditors
(1) The interim resolution professional shall after collation of all
claims received against the corporate debtor and
determination of the financial position of the corporate debtor,
constitute a committee of creditors.

24
(2) The committee of creditors shall comprise all financial
creditors of the corporate debtor:
Provided that a related party to whom a corporate debtor
owes a financial debt shall not have any right of
representation, participation or voting in a meeting of the
committee of creditors.
(3) Where the corporate debtor owes financial debts to two or
more financial creditors as part of a consortium or agreement,
each such financial creditor shall be part of the committee
of creditors and their voting share shall be determined on
the basis of the financial debts owed to them.
(4) Where any person is a financial creditor as well as an
operational creditor,—
(a) such person shall be a financial creditor to the extent
of the financial debt owed by the corporate debtor and
shall be included in the committee of creditors, with
voting share proportionate to the extent of financial debts
owed to such creditor;
(b) such person shall be considered to be an operational
creditor to the extent of the operational debt owed by
the corporate debtor to such creditor.
(5) Where an operational creditor has assigned or legally
transferred any operational debt to a financial creditor, the
assignee or transferee shall be considered as an operational
creditor to the extent of such assignment or legal transfer.
(6) Where the terms of the financial debt extended as part of a
consortium arrangement or syndicated facility or issued as
securities provide for a single trustee or agent to act for all
financial creditors, each financial creditor may—
(a) authorise the trustee or agent to act on his behalf in the
committee of creditors to the extent of his voting share;
(b) represent himself in the committee of creditors to the
extent of his voting share;
(c) appoint an insolvency professional (other than the
resolution professional) at his own cost to represent

25
himself in the committee of creditors to the extent of
his voting share; or
(d) exercise his right to vote to the extent of his voting share
with one or more financial creditors jointly or severally.
(7) The Board may specify the manner of determining the voting
share in respect of financial debts issued as securities under
sub-section (6).
(8) All decisions of the committee of creditors shall be taken by
a vote of not less than seventy-five per cent. of voting share
of the financial creditors:
Provided that where a corporate debtor does not have any
financial creditors, the committee of creditors shall be
constituted and comprise of such persons to exercise such
functions in such manner as may be specified by the Board.
(9) The committee of creditors shall have the right to require the
resolution professional to furnish any financial information
in relation to the corporate debtor at any time during the
corporate insolvency resolution process.
(10) The resolution professional shall make available any financial
information so required by the committee of creditors under
sub-section (9) within a period of seven days of such
requisition.”
3.33 On being asked about the powers conferred on Committee of
Creditors, the Ministry of Finance stated:—
“As per MCA, when default is established, the Adjudicating
Authority (AA) admits the application and appoints an Interim
Resolution Professional (IRP). The IRP runs the operations of
corporate as a going concern up to 30 days, during which he collects
claims and based on the same, forms a Committee of Creditors
(CoC). The corporate moves away from ‘debtor-in-possession’ to
‘creditor-in-control’. CoC appoints a resolution professional to run
the corporate as a going concern. CoC, in its first meeting, decides
either to appoint the IRP as Resolution Professional (RP) or to
replace the IRP with Insolvency Professional as RP. It endeavors
to resolve insolvency through a resolution plan. It invites resolution
plans from credible people. If it approves a resolution plan within
180 days with 75% majority, the resolution professional submits

26
the plan to the AA for approval. If the AA does not receive a
resolution plan within the scheduled time or does not approve a
resolution plan, the corporate debtor is liquidated.
During the corporate insolvency resolution process, the RP shall
not take any of the following actions without the prior approval
of CoC, namely:—
(a) raise any interim finance in excess of the amount as may be
decided by CoC;
(b) create any security interest over the assets of the corporate
debtor;
(c) change the capital structure of the corporate debtor, including
by way of issuance of additional securities, creating a new
class of securities or buying back or redemption of issued
securities in case the corporate debtor is a company;
(d) record any change in the ownership interest of the corporate
debtor;
(e) give instructions to financial institutions maintaining accounts
of the corporate debtor for a debit transaction from any such
accounts in excess of the amount as may be decided by the
committee of creditors in their meeting;
(f) undertake any related party transaction;
(g) amend any constitutional documents of the corporate debtor;
(h) delegate its authority to any other person;
(i) dispose of or permit the disposal of shares of any shareholder
of the corporate debtor or their nominees to third parties;
(j) make any change in the management of the corporate debtor
or its subsidiary;
(k) transfer rights or financial debts or operational debts under
material contracts otherwise than in the ordinary course of
business;
(l) make changes in the appointment or terms of contract
of such personnel as specified by the committee of creditors;
or

27
(m) make changes in the appointment or terms of contract of
statutory auditors or internal auditors of the corporate
debtor.”
3.34 When asked if there is any provision wherein Committee of
Creditors can allow equity to be paid before the debt, the Ministry of
Finance stated that there is no provision wherein CoC can allow equity
to be paid before the debt.
3.35 When asked about the safeguards that have been introduced
in IBC to preclude the possibility of Committee of Creditors colluding
with the possible purchaser/owner of the liquidated property/power plant,
the Ministry of Finance Stated as under:—
“As per amendments made recently to the IBC, any person who
has an account, or an account of a corporate debtor under the
management or control of such person or of whom such person
is a promoter, which is classified as non -performing asset are not
allowed to participate in the bidding process as per Section 29A.
Section 29A reads as under:—
29A. A person shall not be eligible to submit a resolution plan, if
such person, or any other person acting jointly or in concert with
such person—
(a) is an undischarged insolvent;
(b) is a wilful defaulter in accordance with the guidelines of the
Reserve Bank of India issued under the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949;
(c) has an account, or an account of a corporate debtor under
the management or control of such person or of whom such
person is a promoter, classified as non-performing asset in
accordance with the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India
issued under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and at least
a period of one year has lapsed from the date of such
classification till the date of commencement of the corporate
insolvency resolution process of the corporate debtor:—
Provided that the person shall be eligible to submit a
resolution plan if such person makes payment of all overdue
amounts with interest thereon and charges relating to non-
performing asset accounts before submission of resolution
plan;

28
(d) has been convicted for any offence punishable with
imprisonment for two years or more;
(e) is disqualified to act as a director under the Companies Act,
2013;
(f) is prohibited by the Securities and Exchange Board of India
from trading in securities or accessing the securities markets;
(g) has been a promoter or in the management or control of a
corporate debtor in which a preferential transaction,
undervalued transaction, extortionate credit transaction or
fraudulent transaction has taken place and in respect of which
an order has been made by the Adjudicating Authority under
this Code;
(h) has executed an enforceable guarantee in favour of a creditor
in respect of a corporate debtor against which an application
for insolvency resolution made by such creditor has been
admitted under this Code;
(i) has been subject to any disability, corresponding to clauses
(a) to (h), under any law in a jurisdiction outside India; or
(j) has a connected person not eligible under clauses (a) to (i).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression
“connected person” means—
(i) any person who is the promoter or in the management or
control of the resolution applicant; or
(ii)any person who shall be the promoter or in management or
control of the business of the corporate debtor during the
implementation of the resolution plan; or
(iii)the holding company, subsidiary company, associate company
or related party of a person referred to in clauses (i) and
(ii):
Provided that nothing in clause (iii) of this Explanation shall apply
to—
(A) a scheduled bank; or

29
(B) an asset reconstruction company registered with the RBI under
section 3 of the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; or
(C) an Alternate Investment Fund registered with the Securities
and Exchange Board of India.”
F. Roles and Responsibilities of the Banks/Lenders
3.36 When asked about the details regarding the provisioning norms
for secured assets that are referred to or are likely to be referred to NCLT,
the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“The provision required to be maintained by banks in respect of
borrowers referred for insolvency resolution process through NCLT
as a result of the revised guidelines would be governed by the
asset classification of each borrower with a particular bank. For
secured assets that turn NPAs, extant provisioning norms are as
follows:
Asset Classification Provisioning requirement
as a per cent of outstanding
Substandard Assets (NPA for less
than or equal to 12 months) 15%
Doubtful Assets
(Substandard for 12 months)
Doubtful up to 1 year 25%
Doubtful for more than 1 year
but not more than 3 years 40%
Doubtful for more than 3 years100%
Loss assets
(assets considered uncollectible) 100%
3.37 When asked if the Government had prescribed any guidelines
for the banks or financial institutions with regard to financial cap on the
cost per megawatt of Power plants and if not, what are the reasons for
such open and vast maneuvering landscape given to the banks for grant
of loan, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“Financing of projects, including in the power generation sector is
a commercial decision of Bank and governed by their board
approved policy encompassing all the relevant factors i.e. viability

30
of the power project through Techno Economic Viability (TEV)
Study/Detailed Project Report (DPR)/vetting by independent
engineers (Lenders Independent Engineers) etc.”
3.38 When asked if it can be inferred that the higher cost per
megawatt is a willful exercise of gold-platting and if the banks were
issued any tocsin in this regard for self-regulation with regard to the
sanction of large amount as loans, the Ministry of Finance stated as
under:—
“Banks Boards lay down policies for the bank to follow, monitor
performance, review adherence to policies and oversee compliance.
Further, as per RBI, guidelines are issued by it with regard to credit
exposure norms relating to single and group borrowers (entity and
sector-wise). Moreover, each Bank has its own board approved
lending policy, policy for ascertaining staff accountability etc. as
per extant RBI guidelines. RBI in its supervisory capacity determines
the risk profile of each banks off-site surveillance, targeted on-site
inspections, structured meetings with banks, commissioned external
audits, specific supervisory directions and new policy notices in
conjunction with close monitoring through a Monitorable Action
Plan (MAP) followed by enforcement action, as warranted. Reserve
Bank of India checks the implementation and enforcement of the
guidelines issued by it across all banks during the Annual Financial
Inspection (AFI) and Risk Based Supervision (RBS). The
non-compliances observed by the banks are communicated to the
banks and the banks are asked to comply with the guidelines making
required provisions, putting in place requisite monitoring and
control mechanisms to avoid such non-compliances in future.
Further, compliance to RBI instructions on income recognition, asset
classification and provisioning norms are verified by banks’ internal
audit, concurrent audit and statutory auditors.”
3.39 When asked if any assessment has been made with regard to
hair-cut that the banks are likely to have following the IBC and how the
Government propose to compensate the banks for huge hair-cut as a
result of IBC, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“In this regard, RBI has stated that the resolution envisaged under
IBC approximates a market-driven process, wherein the true value
of an asset is discovered through a public bidding process, and that
haircuts are a natural consequence of recognizing the true value
of investments.”

31
3.40 When asked if there should be some limit on the extent of
the amount which can be allowed to be taken as a hit (hair-cut) by the
banks/financial institutions, the Ministry of Finance stated:—
“IBC 2016 lays down a process for approval of a resolution plan
by the Committee of Creditors provided it confirms with the
stipulations laid down in Sec 30(2) of the IBC. Such a plan is
thereafter required to be approved by the Adjudicating Authority.”
3.41 When asked about the details of the collaterals obtained from
private power developers for the loan sanctioned to them, the Ministry
of Finance stated as under:—
“The securitization including collateral security is governed by the
extant guidelines. Usually, Project Financing is of non-recourse
nature and done inter alia on the basis of projected cash flows of
the Project being funded, primary security (project assets), pledge
of paid up equity shares of the promoter etc. Banks take their
commercial decisions as per extant policy.”
3.42 When asked if any of collateral guarantees had been
confiscated or encashed by the banks/financial institutions, the Ministry
of Finance stated that in some cases, the pledge of shares has already
been invoked.
3.43 On being queried about the status of non-banking financial
institutions which have invested money in various sectors of the economy
and are afflicted with the problem of NPA, the Ministry of Finance stated
as under:—
“As per MCA, non-banking finance companies (NBFCs) may fall
under the definition of financial creditors under IBC. Under section
7(1) of IBC, a financial creditor, either by itself or jointly with other
financial creditors, may file an application for initiating corporate
insolvency resolution process against a corporate debtor before the
Adjudicating Authority when a default has taken place. Once the
resolution process is initiated, the financial creditor joins the
Committee of Creditors, which either approves resolution plan for
insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor or liquidates the
corporate debtor.”
3.44 When asked about the rationale behind absolving the bankers
or the other officers responsible for sanctioning the loan which later

32
turned out as NPA and if any accountability has been visualized in the
entire process beginning from SMA to auction following the decision of
NCLT, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“The Banks carry out a detailed Staff Accountability study in all
cases of NPA Loans and where ever any deviation from Bank’s
extant guidelines are found, suitable penal action is taken against
the officials responsible for sanctioning the loan. Recently,
Government has directed that in all cases involving NPAs of
Rs. 50 Crore. and above examination for fraud is to be carried out
on mandatory basis.”
IV. Impact of RBI’s revised framework on NPAs in the Electricity
Sector
4.1 The Committee were apprised that about 66 GW of conventional
IPP capacity is under various degrees of financial stress in the Electricity
Sector which includes 54,805 MW of Coal based Power (44 Assets), 6831 MW
of Gas based Power (9 Assets) and 4571 MW of Hydro Power (13 Assets).
4.2 It was submitted by the Ministry of Power that the following
assets have already been referred for Chartered Insolvency and
Restructuring Professional (CIRP) under IBC:—
• Ind-Barath Energy (Utkal) Ltd.
• Lanco Amarkantak Power Ltd.
• Lanco Teesta Hydro Pvt. Ltd.
• Lanco Vidarbha Thermal Power Ltd.
• Ind-Barath (Madras) Ltd.
• Lanco Babandh Power Ltd.
4.3 The Ministry of Power submitted that the outcomes of RBI’s
Revised Framework with respect to the Electricity Sector are following:—
“Major Lenders to Power Sector IPPs have displayed significant
accretion to NPAs:
• Slippages Exceed Rs. 1.8 lakh crores in Q4 – FY 2018.
• Slippages in 6 major lenders exceed Rs. 61,000 crores on
account of revised RBI framework.”

33
4.4 On being asked if the Ministry of Power and other stakeholders
were consulted before finalizing the Revised Framework for Resolution
of Stressed Assets, the Secretary, Ministry of Power deposed that the RBI
had no formal consultations with the Ministry of Power on this.
4.5 It was stated before the Committee that the Lender’s actions
under IBC in order to resolve the stressed assets in the Electricity Sector
are inflicted with certain limitations such as:—
“(i) Sub-optimal Bid Outcome—
• 5 to 6 Change in Management bids have been conducted
by lenders.
• Bids of Rs. 1.02 crore per MW to Rs. 2.5 crore per MW.
• 46% to 19% recovery of principal.
(ii)Small buyer universe—
• Asset specific risks are not mitigated currently.
• Significant undisclosed liabilities risk buyer returns.
(iii) Weak commercial framework—
• Many commissioned assets without adequate PPA/FSA.
• Difficult to determine Market value for such assets.”
4.6 Giving an example of Sub-Optimal Bid Outcome, CMD, Power
Finance Corporation deposed before the Committee that:—
“The Chhattisgarh Project is a running project under operation. It
is a good project. Yet there is 70 per cent hair-cut. Against the debt
of Rs. 8300 crore, we have received the offer of Rs. 2500 crore only.”
4.7 Regarding Sub-Optimal Bid Outcome, the Independent Power
Producers also stated that:—
“Abhijit Group had a power plant in Jharkhand. It was bid out.
It got a bid of Rs. 35 lakh per MW whereas a new plant would
need five crore rupees. So, there are no bidders in the system.
Forcing to sell under the circular or NCLT will end up having a
big sacrifice of public money without having any benefit to the
economy or the Electricity sector because the new promoter will

34
have the same problem. Meenakshi Energy got restructured in such
a manner and again, it is in stress because if the existing promoters
cannot solve the systemic issues, how the new promoter will solve
them.”
4.8 On being asked if the measures introduced in fresh RBI
guidelines would help the electricity sector to overcome its NPA problem,
the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“Certain representations have been received regarding the Revised
Framework on Resolution of Stressed Assets from Indian Banks’
Association and other stakeholder organizations, expressing concern
regarding issues like one day default, referring of case under IBC
at the end of 180 days of first default, application of revised
guidelines in the cases where SDR/S4A/Overseas SDR have been
invoked but not implemented, withdrawal of circulars regarding
flexible structuring of loans to infrastructure and core industries,
applicability of the framework for overseas borrower, timelines for
reference of large accounts to IBC in case of default during specified
period, implementation of the RP within 180 days, etc. These
concerns have been referred to RBI.
With regard to whether the fresh RBI guidelines would help the
electricity sector overcome its NPA problem, RBI has stated that
though the causes of stress may vary, the notional principles of
resolution are sector-agnostic.”
4.9 When asked about the impact of new RBI guidelines on the
Electricity Sector as a whole and 34 stressed projects in particular, the
Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“As per RBI, the immediate impact of the revised framework would
be withdrawal of standstill in asset classification for accounts in
which the previous resolution schemes had been invoked but not
implemented. In these accounts, which may include a few accounts
from the 34 projects identified in the 37th Report of the Hon’ble
Standing Committee on Energy, the asset classification would be
as if the previous schemes had never been invoked in the first
place. However, another impact of the circular would be in
encouraging the banks to find a resolution within 180 days from
March 1, 2018. If the promoters and banks fail to find a viable
resolution within 180 days, banks have to file insolvency application
against those borrowers, where aggregate exposure of lenders is
Rs. 20 billion and above.

35
Of the 34 identified stressed asset cases, applications for admission
of cases under IBC, 2016 have already been filed with respect
to 9 cases.”
4.10 In response to same query as above, the Ministry of Power
stated as under:—
“Implication of the RBI circular is that:
• The stressed power project assets have to draw and implement
Resolution Plan within 180 days, else approach NCLT under
IBC, which means several stressed assets in power sector will
be restructured including exploring change of ownership
either under resolution plan (within 180days) or under IBC
in the immediate near term.
• Earlier Loan Accounts were becoming NPA after 90 days but
now, under revised framework, framing of Resolution Plan
is incumbent immediately after default.
• Even in case of default for a single loan the Resolution Plan
of the entire Company covering all Lenders is required.”
4.11 Explaining the non-suitability of new RBI guidelines for the
Electricity Sector, Independent Power Producers submitted that:—
“It appears that RBI has not considered the Macro-Economic issues
faced by the power sector, regulated nature of the business and the
fact that Electricity features in the concurrent list of the seventh
schedule of constitution before issuing the 12th Feb’18 policy. This
policy has served a death knell on revival prospects of many under
construction projects stressed for various reasons beyond their
control as power sale is completely regulated unlike other sectors
like Steel, Cement and Manufacturing.
The RBI Circular also treats heavily regulated sector like Electricity
on par with unregulated sectors which is arbitrary since it equates
un-equals. By equating solutions of stressed assets applicable for
other sectors with that of power sector, the new policy inadvertently
proceeds to damage the public investment in banks it seeks to
protect by this new policy.
There is also an anomaly in respect of the maximum period of
DCCO extension possible and the maximum amount of escalation

36
in the project cost allowed without downgrading the account. While
DCCO extension is possible for a maximum period of
4 (2+1+1) years in case of no change in management, a maximum
of 6 years is allowed with change in management, the project cost
(Non-IDC) escalation is allowed only to the extent of 10% without
down grading the account, which does not even provide for the
inflation (5%/annum) and currency escalation (approx. 45% since
2010) for the 4-6 year period as the case may be.”
4.12 Highlighting the need for synchronization between the RBI’s
Guidelines and the resolution of the systemic issues of the Electricity
Sector, the Chairman, SBI deposed that:—
“From the timeline point of view, even though the RBI circular has
the complete framework but its implementation might not give
enough results. The reason is, still we have problems with the coal
supplies, PPAs – because many plants do not have PPAs, they have
only partial PPAs. We have large regulatory recoverables. Unless
these three are resolved, any amount of changes we do to the RBI
framework would not pull the sector up. My request is, synchronize
the implementation of those with the RBI circular.”
4.13 Explaining the basis for seeking relief/exemption from the RBI
circular dated Feb. 12, 2018, the Independent Power Producers furnished
that the power projects are stressed due to the following policy issues
that are beyond the control of the developers:—
“1.Complete Absence of PPA bidding: There is complete
absence of planned power procurement by DISCOMS either
through Long Term or through Medium Term. The last
successful Long Term PPA bid won by a private developer
was in the year 2014-15 when Kerala concluded PPAs for
about 850 MW under the new DBFOO basis. Since then
though many State DISCOMS like UP, AP and Telangana had
conducted the bidding process, none of the bids have resulted
in concluded PPAs. The Pilot scheme for 2500 MW launched
by MoP is a good beginning. As individual States are not
forthcoming to procure power, such pooled power
procurement should be continued by central agencies at
regular intervals at least for next 2 to 3 years till demand
picks up owing to the various initiatives taken by Central
Government. However, the provisions of the Pilot Scheme
needs to be relooked into with regards to capping of fixed
cost at an unrealistic value of 1 paise, guaranteeing off-take

37
only to 55% and transfer of all escalation risks to sellers for
the PPA duration, particularly when this scheme was
introduced with a view to alleviate stress in the sector. Because
of such unrealistic bid conditions, Tariff discovered under
Pilot Scheme would be high when compared to recent
annulled Long Term bids under DBFOO and hence DISCOMS
may not be interested to avail this power defeating the whole
purpose for which this power procurement scheme was
launched.
Also these schemes will be helpful only if such Medium Term/
Short Term PPAs are considered for aggregating the tied up
capacity requirement by a company to avail CD/ED exemption
benefits under Mega Policy.
Needless to mention, a viable Long Term PPA would not
only protect the debt already disbursed but also encourages
lenders for further disbursement and investors will also be
interested.
2. Restrictions in Coal Usage Policy: The present policy
framework of Linkage Coal is very restrictive and allows
Linkage Coal only for Long and Medium Term PPAs, Linkage
coal will not be supplied by Coal companies for Short Term
PPAs. In the absence of Long Term or Medium Term PPA
bids in the market, sale of power through Short Term is the
only alternative for projects which are commissioned. Price
discovery in Short Term too is on the basis of approved
bidding guidelines by MoP hence, Coal may be supplied to
existing linkage holders for Short Term PPAs. This will help
in alleviating the stress in the sector for commissioned
projects. But would not give much needed relief to under
construction projects.
3. Disparity in PPAs between Government and Private Sector:
The power procurement policy currently in place is skewed
and does not provide a level playing field; it is discriminatory
in nature and favours CG and State sector generators. IPPs
are required to participate in competitive bidding to sell their
capacity whereas, power producers of Central Generating
and State follow the allocation route for capacity allocation
and their tariff is determined through Section 62 (Pass
Through) of the Act. Even, the recent proposed amendment
in Tariff Policy seeks to perpetuate this different treatment.

38
This discriminatory policy would be detrimental to attract
any private investments into sector.
4. Thermal Power Cross Subsidizing Renewable: Transmission
charges for renewable solar/wind power is Zero, whereas the
cost of transmission infrastructure incurred on this account
is ‘Shared’ by the Thermal sector, transmission charges are
forced upon Thermal Projects which are not ready or
supplying power because of various issues. The present policy
with regards to sharing of entire transmission charges is
discriminatory and growth of one sector is promoted at the
expense of another, pushing the Thermal sector further into
losses. Even though clean energy must be encouraged but
this anomaly should be slowly abolished before 2020.
5. Mega Power Benefit: GoI had extended the time period by
another 5 years in 2017 to secure PPA for a minimum quantum
of 85% of the installed capacity and the extended deadline
expires on Nov’ 2021. In the present context when all under
construction projects are in severe financial stress and there
is reluctance on part of DISCOMS to enter into long term
PPAs, the end date specified to avail the benefit may not be
met with, resulting in withdrawal of financial benefits under
Mega Power Policy leading to imposition of additional
financial burden on these already stressed assets. Hence, there
is a need to do away with the requirement of securing a
minimum % of long term PPA to avail the benefit.”
4.14 Explaining why the Electricity Sector should be treated
differently with respect to the Resolution of the Stressed Assets, CMD,
Rural Electrification Corporation while making a presentation before the
Committee, deposed that:—
“Power Sector is in a transition which is well known and we are
really moving in from a low demand, low supply situation to a
moderately high demand context. This is the transition period that
needs to be managed. The RBI framework or the other issues that
we have been talking about addresses only the financial issues. Of
course, as a financial institution that is our major concern but it
does not address a whole range of issues that are external to the
financing matters.

39
We have to take into consideration two major important contexts.
One is the need for a national energy security in the context of
managing the transition in the power sector. (Second,) these stressed
assets are national assets at the end of the day and need to be
preserved, protected and conserved.”
4.15 Further, he stated that the IBC is generally focussed on Capital
Structure Resolution only and the sectoral challenges can not be addressed
through IBC and thus the resolution may not be forthcoming as the Power
Assets have challenges extraneous to the Capital Structure like:—
• Shortages/Non-availability of Coal
• Delayed Power Procurement by Discoms
• Regulatory Issues
• Long working capital cycle with Discoms
• Level playing field not offered
4.16 Elaborating about the need for a separate framework for
Resolution of Stressed Assets in Electricity Sector, Independent Power
Producers deposed that:—
“RBI circular has not taken cognizance of the (ground realities of
the Electricity Sector) and it is heavily framed in such a way that
steel and all other industries have been put together and it tried
to address every sector together. But electricity is a very highly
regulated sector. So, comparing this sector with other sectors and
putting the same framework may not work. So, what we feel is
that there should be a separate framework as far as the power
sector is concerned.”
4.17 Highlighting the problem in formulating a separate framework
for Resolution of Stressed Assets in Electricity Sector, the Secretary,
Department of Financial Services deposed that:—
“The possibility of the similar demands (of exemption from RBI’s
Guidelines) from similarly placed sectors cannot be ruled out. It
could be shipping, cement, and more particularly MSMEs. MSMEs
are at a much worse situation at this stage than these projects and
for a much lesser fault of theirs. This demand can come from all
those sectors. So, should we have a separate sector-specific NPA
resolution regime or an overarching regime?”

40
V. Steps taken by the Government
5.1 The Ministry of Power furnished that the Government has taken
the following steps to resolve the stress in the Electricity Sector:—
“A. Fuel linkages under SHAKTI: Government on 17.05.17
approved new coal linkage allocation policy named SHAKTI
(Scheme for Harnessing and Allocating Koyala Transparently
in India). Under the scheme, auction of coal linkages for
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) with PPAs based on
domestic coal has been conducted on 12.09.2017. IPPs having
PPA but no coal linkages have participated in the auction
and linkages have been granted to 11549 MW capacity (10
projects) including five stressed projects of total 8490 MW
capacity, and these projects have been resolved. Under B(i)
provisions of SHAKTI policy, linkages have been granted to
State/Central Gencos-8870 MW for 10 projects. Further, CIL
is likely to conduct auction of coal linkages to plants without
PPA under clause B(iii) of SHAKTI scheme shortly.
B. Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power: A pilot
project has been launched for procurement of aggregated
2500 MW of power for three years (covered under medium
term). PFCCL, the nodal agency has invited bids in line with
the standard bidding documents issued by MoP for this pilot
scheme. Bids for 2200 MW are received from 8 developers
and 7 bidders (1900MW) have offered to match the lowest
bid (Rs 4.24/Kwh) The bidding formalities including signing
of PPAs are expected to be completed by July 18.
C. Under recovery due to anomalies in Coal Escalation Index:
Certain Generators were facing under recoveries due to
anomalies in the coal escalation index published by DIPP.
Now, CERC vide Notification dated June 1st, 2018 has
amended “Guidelines for determination of tariff by bidding
process of power procurement by distribution licensee” to
remove those anomalies and adopt a new series of Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) in non-coking coal (G7-G14) w.e.f. April
2012. On the basis of the new Notification of CERC, the
generators will be eligible for revised tariff w.e.f. 1st April,
2017 calculated on the basis of new series of WPI for non-
coking coal (G7 – G14).
This will largely take care of the issues of under recovery
of the generator’s dues.

41
Further, at present, there is a time lag of 12-18 months between
the revision of tariff and the escalation in the prices of coal.
The matter is under consideration of CERC and a staff paper
has been issued on 10/4/2018. Public hearing has been
conducted on 5/6/2018. The Commission is likely to decide
the matter soon.
D. Ministry has issued direction to CERC under 107 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 on 30th May to allow pass through of
increase in the cost of generation due to installation of FGDs.
E. Ministry of Power vide letter dated 30.05.2018 has proposed
amendments in Tariff Policy, 2016. As per Section 6.2.4 of the
proposed Tariff Policy it is stated that “After the award of
bids, if there is any change in domestic duties, levies, charges,
surcharges, cess and taxes imposed by Central Government,
State Governments/Union Territories or by any Government
instrumentality leading to corresponding changes in the cost,
the same may be treated as “Change in Law” and may unless
provided otherwise in the PPA, be allowed as pass through.
The Appropriate Commission shall lay down the principle
and procedure for the same.
F. A new App “PRAAPTI” (Payment Ratification and Analysis
in Power Procurement for bring in the transparency in
payment of Generators) has been launched by the Ministry
to bring more transparency in the system of payment of
DISCOMS. The Generators are being actively encouraged to
feed in their invoicing and payments data. This portal would
be expanded to include Transmission as well as Renewable
Generators as well.
G. DISCOM Reforms: The efforts of the Ministry for reforms
in the distribution system has also started bearing fruits.
AT&C losses has come down from 20.7% in FY 2016 to 20.2%
in FY 2017-18 which is likely to come down further to less
than 20% (19.08%) in FY 2018. In the first 9 months of FY
2018, 17 States have reduced their AT&C losses as compared
to that in the first 9 months of FY 2017.
Similarly, the difference between ACS and ARR has come
down from Rs. 0.59/kWh in FY16 to Rs. 0.41/kWh in FY 17.
It is likely to further come down below 25 paise in FY 2018.

42
The improvement of financial health will ease out the situation
of payment to the generators and also increase the purchasing
power of the DISCOMs to buy more power.
H. Steps taken to reduce the cost of generation: Reduction in
the cost of generation is likely to improve the ability of
DISCOMs purchasing more powers and thus create more
demand for power. Government has taken various steps to
reduce the cost of generation which are as under:—
• The introduction of third party sampling by CIMFR:
The Government has started Third Party Sampling of
Coal at both, loading and unloading end of Generators.
There has been considerable improvement in the quality
of coal supplied by the Coal India Limited. On an
average, due to improvement in coal quality and
improvement in the efficiency of plants, there has been
a reduction of 6.5% in specific coal consumption by coal
based thermal power plants (from 0.69 kg/kwh in
2013-14 to 0.645 kg/kwh in 2017-18).
• The coal linkage have been rationalised to optimise the
cost of transportation of coal and thus reducing the cost
of generation leading to savings of approx Rs. 900 crore
by NTPC .
• Flexibility utilization of domestic coal has also resulted
into substantial savings in the cost of generation. Annual
saving of Rs. 468 crore. by NTPC
• Regarding of mines by Coal controller has resulted in
a cost saving of 686 crore to NTPC alone for year
2017-18.
These saving has been passed on to the DISCOMs.
I. Other measures
• States have been impressed upon to make use of the
policy of flexibility in utilization of domestic coal for
reducing the cost of power generation i.e. use of linkage
coal of State Gencos in IPPs and get cheaper power
generated from such coal. Gujarat and Maharashtra have
already operationalised PPAs 500 MW and 400 MW,
respectively through this mechanism. Gujarat and
Maharashtra has further indicated to use this policy and

43
expected bidding by them is around 2800MW. Other
States have also requested to make use of this policy.
This will help IPPs to commence generation of power.
• Connecting all households under “Saubhagya” is likely
to increase demand for electricity in the country.
Above measures taken by Ministry of power, Government of India
will ease the stress on Generation projects.”
5.2 When asked if any concrete plan has been drawn by the
Government in the light of the latest guidelines of RBI for Resolution
of these NPAs, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:—
“Government has been making concerted efforts to resolve the
stressed assets situation. As informed by the Ministry of Power,
various steps have been undertaken to improve operations by units
in the power sector. These inter alia include fuel linkages under
SHAKTI, Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW Power,
Notification by CERC making generators eligible for revised tariff
calculated on the basis of new WPI for non-coking coal; pass through
of increase in the cost of generation due to installation of FGDs
(flue gas desulphurization), new App “PRAAPTI” (Payment
Ratification and Analysis in Power Procurement for bring in the
transparency in payment of Generators) to bring in more
transparency in the system of payment of DISCOMS, DISCOM
Reforms under UDAY, Introduction of third party sampling by
CIMFR for improving coal quality, connecting all households under
“Saubhagya” etc.
5.3 It was submitted before the Committee that the State Bank of
India has initiated SAMADHAN in view of RBI’s Revised Framework.
10 Electricity Sector Assets have already been referred under this scheme.
Some of the salient features of SAMADHAN includes:—
• Sustainable debt to be determined based on rating of RP4,
• Unsustainable debt to be converted into equity,
• Lenders to keep significant equity holding in the project,
• Investor to take 51% stake in project along with sustainable
debt,
• Investor to be selected through competitive bidding.

44
5.4 The Committee were apprised that the Rural Electrification
Corporation has formulated PARIWARTAN as a multi-track approach
that focusses on recovery, value-enhancement and quick disposal of
stressed assets wherein asset warehouse may be established to protect
value and revitalize assets. Some of the features of PARIWARTAN
includes:—
• Preserve potentially viable assets under PARIWARTAN,
• Provide institutional support at highest level to enhance value,
• Dispose assets at a pre-defined commercial structure level
(say a 60% PPA and Fuel arrangement),
• State Gencos to be encouraged to take over such assets,
• Appointment of specialized credible players, like NTPC, to
complete last mile construction
• Meet last mile funding requirement of the projects,
• Infuse capital to meet the working capital requirement of the
assets,
• Will outsource O&M/Contractual services to NTPC and/or
any other credible player through a transparent process,
• In house team of commercial experts to be recruited and
built as an institution,
• Investment committee to approve warehousing and monitor
implementation,
• On receipts of sale proceeds, warehousing receipts shall be
encashed by PARIWARTAN net of a suitable incentive.
5.5 It was also submitted that the asset acceptance criteria under
PARIVARTAN shall be determined by the Board of Directors in
consultation with Investment Committee and indicative Asset Acceptance
Criteria shall include:—
a. “Fundamental competitiveness of the asset,
b. Ability to enter into PPA/FSAs,
c. Extent of equity ownership enforceable by lenders,

45
d. Revitalization Potential,
e. Low outstanding operational creditor liabilities.”
5.6 The Capital Structure of PARIWARTAN, as furnished by the
Rural Electrification Corporation, is as below:—
“(i) Likely Equity Participants — Key power sector players and
large lenders can be equity participants.
• Initial Participants
— Power sector lenders to float the Company with basic
capital.
— NTPC/PFC/REC/SBI/PNB/Axis/ICICI/Bank of Baroda
to be invited for equity participation.
• NIIF/Private Investors
— Government to evaluate role of private sector
investors/NIIF in the ‘PARIWARTAN’ as equity
investors.
(ii)Capital Requirements - PARIWARTAN Capital requirements
are in a phased manner.
• Phase-I
— PARIWARTAN accepts operational assets only.
— Capital requirements of INR 500 crore to 1000 crore
of equity.
— Capital requirement largely for margin money for
working capital.
• Phase-II
— PARIWARTAN accepts under construction assets.
— Capital requirements of INR 1500 Crore to INR 2000
Crore.
— Deployment of capital towards last mile equity.

46
(iii)Lender Support - Debt Support required from lenders for
asset revitalization.
• Working Capital.
— Sanction of working capital limits to enable plant
operations.
— Margin money to be provided by PARIWARTAN.
• Last Mile debt funding.
— For assets under construction, lenders to provide
debt facilities towards completion.
— Smaller participating lenders may cede priority
charge to facilitate plant completion in the event of
inability to provide completion debt.”
5.7 CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation deposed that to facilitate
the implementation of PARIWARTAN, the following relaxation are
required from RBI:—
• “Sunset Date of Warehousing Receipts should be 60 months.
• The ARC regulations may need to be amended as below to
facilitate the implementation:
The ARC may be exempted from the requirement of “SC/RC
shall by transferring funds, invest a minimum of 15% of the
SRs of each class issued by them under each scheme on an
ongoing basis till the redemption of all the SRs issued under
such scheme”.
The ARC may be exempted from the requirement of
“valuation procedure ensuring that the assets acquired have
realisable value which is capable of being reasonably
estimated and independently valued”.
The PARIWARTAN ARC may be exempted from the
requirement of “Every SC/RC shall obtain initial rating/
grading of SRs from an approved CRA within a period of
six months from the date of acquisition of assets and declare
forthwith, the NAV of the SRs issued by it. Thereafter,
SCs/RCs will get the rating/grading of SRs reviewed from an
approved CRA as on June 30, and December 31 every year

47
and declare the NAV of SRs forthwith, to enable the QIBs
to value their investment in SRs. For arriving at NAV,
SC/RC shall get the SRs rated on ‘recovery rating scale’ and
require the rating agencies to disclose the rationale for rating”.
5.8 After having a detailed discussion, as per the direction of
Hon’ble High Court, with all the stakeholders like Ministry of Power,
Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Reserve Bank
of India, Rural Electrification Corporation, National Thermal Power
Corporation, Independent Power Producers Association, etc., the Secretary,
Department of Financial Services, presented an overview of the problem
of NPAs in the Electricity Sector before the Committee, as stated below:—
“As I have understood the entire thing after hearing it for the first
time from everybody involved, I would like to divide them into
four major verticals. The first vertical essentially is the economic
growth, the increasing needs of power, and the power being the
engine to fuel the growth of the country, the necessity of not
allowing any asset to go waste to the extent possible. That is the
first vertical. The first objective of whatever decision we take is that
the power needs of not only the present which are increasing but
also the future must be taken care of before any decision is taken.
The second vertical is the sectoral problems within the power sector
which are multifarious and multi-agency. It includes coal, fuel, gas,
Discoms, PPAs, transmission lines, imported coal v/s domestic coal,
boiler capacity, etc. It has a whole lot of sectoral issues within
which the second vertical is to be looked at. The second vertical
also has a very specific further sub-vertical which is that it is
managed within some monopolies, some private space and in some
form of the customer interest. So, when we reconcile the sectoral
aspects it has to deal with also the private space, the space occupied
by the monopolies of the PSUs and also how the customer benefits
by the decisions we take.
The third vertical is the overall credit culture, the promoters and
the health of these power plants under stress, which we are talking
about. Some are already NPAs and some are going to be NPAs.
So, we have issues of gold-plating, of how much of this stress is
accounted towards that and how much is towards the sectoral
problems which the sector has.
The entire credit culture in this country is under a tremendous
change. That is, if you are taking credit, you have to be responsible;

48
if you are in the business of giving credit, hedge your risk and be
responsible. And if somehow because of some reason you are not
able to do that, then the Government under the Parliamentary
legislation has introduced the fourth vertical which is an exit route
of the IBC.
So, the essential question is, how does one weave all these four
verticals together and reach to a solution without disturbing anyone
within the constraints of the sectoral issues which are not going
to be solved in the short term, within the objective of saving these
power projects, apportioning the kind of responsibilities on the
promoter to the extent it is there, to the other extraneous sectoral
issues which are there and keeping the sanctity of IBC in picture.”

49
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Introductory
1. The Committee note that the RBI has issued Revised
Framework with a view to resolve Stressed Assets in all the Sectors
of the Economy. The Electricity Sector is one of the sectors which have
been affected by this framework. Under the New Guidelines, the
definition of the default has been revised with far reaching
consequences. The Committee also note that the New Guidelines of
the RBI will only deepen the crisis of the Electricity sector as its leitmotif
is distinct, peculiar and sector specific without any generic underpinning
with other sectors of the economy. The Committee observe that the
efforts of the private players in developing the Electricity Sector of this
country has not been given due recognition otherwise their genuine
constraints that have led to stress might have been addressed. The
Committee feel that the seminal significance and epochal importance
of this sector has been conveniently given a go by. The committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should be sensitive to this
vital sector of our economy which acts as a core to shoulder the other
engines of the economy and thus the Committee postulate that the
specific and realities of the sector should be taken into account for
appropriate modulation of the RBI Guidelines.
2. The Committee note that the Reserve Bank of India in exercise
of its powers under relevant sections of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949 and Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, has issued a Revised
Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets. The Committee feel that
as a result of this Revised Framework, the Electricity Sector has been
forced towards NPA. During deliberations with the relevant quarters
of the Government and all the other stakeholders, the Committee have
been informed that the causes for stress in different sectors are different,
however, the nominal principles governing Resolution of the Stress are
the same irrespective of the sector. The Committee observe that the
one of the objectives of the Revised Framework is to ensure prompt

50
action to cure stress in a borrower’s account as soon as default takes
place. The Committee find that the nominal principles for resolution
are more chimerical than practical as on the one hand, it is
acknowledged that reasons for stress are not identical while on the
other hand similar and identical tools are taken recourse to, to remedy
the malady. According to the Committee, this is vapid and capable of
crippling the Electricity Sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that appropriate, relevant and sector specific measures should be
explored to address the issue. The Committee, per-se, are not averse
to the idea of cure but it should be efficacious enough to energize the
sector and not to extirpate it.
Stressed/non-performing assets in electricity sector
3. The Committee note that the high rate of NPA in Indian Banks
is sector specific phenomena and most of the non-performing loans are
concentrated in few sectors viz. infrastructure, power, iron, steel, textile
etc. and the reasons of stress in these sectors are separate and varying.
The Committee observe that for Power Sector, factors like coal linkage
related issues, delay in implementation of projects due to various
reasons, non-availability of fuel, delay in land/environment clearances,
inability of promoters to infuse additional funds, etc. have aggravated
the problem and weak financial health of Distribution Companies
(DISCOMS) have led to substantial increase in receivables of borrowing
groups (i.e., receivables of Power Generating Companies), thus
impacting their liquidity position. The Committee also observe that
the Government have accepted that the reasons responsible for stress
in Power Sector are at variance with the reasons responsible for stress
in other sectors of the Economy. But even after acknowledging the
differentials in reasons for sectoral sickness, uniform principles of
resolution have been introduced across the sectors and this has been
done on the premise that ultimately any negotiation of debt is a
restatement of financial contract. The Committee have been apprised
that given the sector agnostic basic principles of resolution, revised
framework provide a harmonized and flexible approach. However, the
Committee are not convinced with the reasons given by the Government
to justify their formula for Resolution of stress because different
ailments can be cured only with ailment specific remedies and if a
single remedy is taken as panacea for all maladies and applied
uniformly all across, it is bound to be counter productive and is sure
to aggravate the problem. The Committee, therefore, recommend

51
that instead of adopting a sector agnostic approach for stress
Resolution, more penetrative and sector friendly measures should be
adopted.
RBI’s Revised Framework for resolution of Stressed Assets
4. The Committee note that the Reserve Bank of India substituted
the previous guidelines with a harmonized and simplified generic
framework for resolution of stressed assets in view of the enactment
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. Although the new
guidelines have been termed as harmonized and simplified generic
framework, yet they are far from being so. Prior to these guidelines,
an asset was classified as NPA if a loan or an advance where interest
or installment of principal remains overdue for a period of 90 days in
respect of term loan. Similarly, stressed assets were accounts where
there has been delay in payment of interest and/or payment as against
the repayment schedule on account of financial difficulties of the
borrower. Under the previous framework, failure of an asset to serve
its debt obligation within the prescribed time was taken to be
symptomatic of an incipient stress of potential NPA and consequently,
corrective measures of various grades, i.e., rectification, restructuring
and recovery were the options keeping in view the totality of the
situation. However, the new regime have dispensed with all such
measures and any failure beyond the duration of SMA (Special Mention
Accounts) will directly and immediately invoke the provisions of
resolution plan, making the revival extremely difficult. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that in the interest of the economy in general
and the Electricity Sector in particular, the revised guidelines should
be “harmonized and simplified” in the real sense.
5. The Committee note that the framework which was in vogue
prior to issuance of these guidelines by RBI was more generic, sector
friendly and harmonized. The previous Guidelines, inter-alia, included
the framework of revitalizing the stressed assets, corporate debt
restructuring scheme, flexible structuring of existing long-term project
loans, strategic restructuring, debt restructuring scheme, change in
ownership outside SDR, scheme for sustainable structuring of stressed
assets and the Joint Lenders’ Forum was an effective institutional
mechanism for resolution of stressed accounts. However, these have
all been withdrawn and replaced with more stringent guidelines

52
unmindful of the problems of the Electricity Sector. The Committee
are informed that the previous Guidelines have been withdrawn by
the RBI as various special schemes for resolution introduced earlier
were used by lenders more to address asset classification concerns
rather than to affectively resolve the stressed assets and the enactment
of a comprehensive Bankruptcy Law in the country has obviated the
need for such specific schemes. The Committee feel that even if the
previous schemes were used for the purpose of asset classification,
they cannot be termed to be useless as asset classification and
categorization are the basis for implementation of any of the schemes
for restructuring. The Committee are of the view that one can bring
new additions, replace old ones, modify existing ones, keeping in view
the problems and their ramifications, but it should not be done in a
cavalier manner, shorn of prevailing realities. The Committee express
their anguish about the manner in which the entire exercise has been
undertaken turning a Nelson’s eye towards the issues and necessities
of the Electricity Sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that it will be more appropriate if a reasoned view and seasoned
approach are taken vis-á-vis the Revised Framework of RBI to
emancipate the emaciated Power Sector.
6. The Committee note that the Revised Framework of RBI
provide for early identification and reporting of assets, implementation
of resolution plan, implementation condition for resolution plan,
timelines for large accounts to be referred under IBC etc. It inter-alia
stipulates that the lenders shall identify incipient stress in loan accounts
immediately on default by classifying stressed assets as Special Mention
Accounts as per the prescribed criteria. It also prescribes that all lenders
must put in place Board-approved policies for resolution of stressed
assets under this framework, including the timelines for resolution
and as soon as there is a default in the borrower entity’s account with
any lender, all lenders – single or jointly – are asked to initiate steps
to cure the default. The Committee observe that the Resolution Plan
(RP) may involve any actions/plans/reorganization including, but not
limited to, regularization of the account by payment of all over dues
by the borrower entity, sale of the exposures to other entities/investors,
change in ownership, or restructuring. The Committee feel that the
various options as introduced in the Resolution Plan are not consistent
in their order for curing the stress and all of them can be jointly or
severaly invoked for resolving the stress. The Committee also note that

53
one of the options provided is of restructuring which has been defined
as an act in which a lender, for economic or legal reasons relating to
the borrower’s financial difficulty grants concessions to the borrower
and Restructuring would normally involve modification in terms of
the advances/securities, which may include, among others, alteration
of repayment period/repayable amount/the amount of installments/rate
of interest; roll over of credit facilities; sanction of additional credit
facility; enhancement of existing credit limits; and, compromise
settlements where time for payment of settlement amount exceeds three
months. The Committee find that the restructuring is more generous
and flexible concept as against the other options like regularization
of the account by payment of all dues by the borrower entity, sale of
the exposure to other entities/investors, change in ownership etc. The
Committee are of the opinion that the coinage of restructuring in
resolution plan is hollow without having any serious meaning or
business which only reflects the blurred vision of RBI in understanding
and appreciating the problems. The Committee expect that clarity of
thought and transparency in approach should be the guiding factor to
streamline and strengthen the sector squirming under ineluctable
hardships.
7. The Committee note that the implementation conditions of
the resolution plans are very stringent as the process of Resolution
Plan is set in motion on default of debt service obligations even by
a day. The Committee also note that the definition of default has been
revised and the same has been aligned to the definition of default
given in IBC. The Committee observe that the objective of the Revised
Framework is to ensure prompt action to cure stress in a borrower
account as soon as default takes place and the Resolution Plan should
be implemented within a specified timeline of 180 days from the date
of first such default failing which lenders shall have to file insolvency
application, single or jointly, under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code 2016(IBC) within 15 days from the expiry of the said timeline.
The committee have been apprised that finding an optimal solution
exactly in 180 days is almost impossible and if no road blocks come
in the way, at least 231 days are required to complete the process which
includes preparation of bidding documents, technical and financial
operations, invitation of bids, evaluating them and creating security
etc. The representatives of the banks/lending institutions also echoed
the same sentiments and stated that in case of power projects, 12 months

54
are needed for a smooth and efficient resolution. The Committee feel
that going by the prescribed timelines, every stressed project of the
Power Sector will ultimately land in NCLT. The Committee observe
that even the degree of consensus among the lenders for the purpose
of resolution plan is a bone of contention, as RBI guidelines and IBC
Code significantly differ on the percentage of consensus. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be unanimity
among the different arms of the Government on such crucial issues
like timeline and consensus percentage for resolution and they should
be flexible enough to address the problem in the proper perspective
and resolve it in the positive manner.
8. The Committee note that the Revised Framework for
Resolution of Stressed Assets prescribes that in respect of large accounts
where resolution process involving restructuring/change in ownership
is implemented within 180 days, the account should not be in default
at any point of time during the ‘specified period’, failing which the
lenders shall have to file an insolvency application, single or jointly,
under the IBC within 15 days from the date of such default. The
‘Specified period has been explained as the period from the date of
implementation of RP up to the date by which at least 20 per cent of
the outstanding principal debt as per the RP and interest capitalization
sanctioned as part of the restructuring, if any, is repaid. However, the
Committee have been apprised that the RBI guidelines disincentivize
the banks against restructuring a loan with the existing promoter even
in most genuine cases as the condition of 20% repayment of loan upfront
is impracticable and it will force existing promoters out of the projects
even in cases where they are not at fault. The Committee feel that
the timeline for payment of 20% is not synchronous with the RBI’s
own provisional norms for substandard assets and there is no
guarantee that the new promoters will bail out the project with the
concession that are being offered to them. In the opinion of the
Committee, the circular of RBI is discriminatory in approach to the
existing promoters without being certain about the resolution of the
issue. The Committee also feel that this kind of approach will not help
in addressing the real issues. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the RBI should accordingly amend its Guidelines to make them
amenable in an unbiased manner so that the problems are addressed
adequately.

55
9. The Committee note that the concept and definition of default
in Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 as well as in new guidelines
of RBI has been given a new dimension and this has led to difficulties
in tackling the issue of NPA in a holistic manner. The Committee have
been apprised that one day default does not result in reference to
NCLT at all and the 90 days definition for NPA classification has been
maintained as it is. As per RBI, the one day default will set in motion
a process to deal with the problem within 180 days and if the problem
is solved within 180 days, the case does not go to NCLT. The Committee
observe that there is no restrictions on lending if an account is an SMA
or even an NPA. The Committee have been apprised that being an
SMA is no stigma and it is only to indicate that the banks have to deal
with the stressed asset. The Committee understand the spirit of the
Guidelines of RBI, but its implementation on the ground is far from
being real and workable. The Committee find that once the account
is classified as NPA, even if the project is functioning and generating
power, Banks do not support them for working capital. Despite Reserve
Bank of India’s categorical stand that Banks have never been asked
to stop financing these projects, the banks maintain that once projects
are specified as NPA, they can not give any more finance. This, according
to the Committee, is a catch 22 situation, so clear and conclusive
instructions are required in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that to salvage the commercially operational stressed
projects, necessary instructions should be issued regarding the
availability of working capital or other financial requirements of the
projects that will help them to float and become standard again.
10. The Committee note that consequent to default in debt
services obligation, the interim resolution professional shall constitute
a Committee of Creditors comprising all financial creditors of the
corporate debtors. The Committee observe that the Committee of
Creditors endeavors to resolve insolvency through resolution plans and
have been vested with wide ranging powers that include raising of
interim finance, creating security interest over the asset of corporate
debtor and changing the capital structure etc. as well. The Committee
feel that the reply furnished by the Government, in response to a
query regarding the purpose behind creation of CoC and if the creation,
constitution and constituents of CoC are against the principle of natural
justice as in all likelihood it may adopt a scoot approach so as to
absolve themselves from any accountability, is unsatisfactory. The

56
Committee feel that these guidelines have led to a situation wherein
insolvency proceedings have been taken as fate accompli by the bankers
and the role, responsibility and accountability of the bankers has been
willfully sidelined as they prefer the option of insolvency as a better
way to shed their responsibilities and dodge their accountability. The
Committee are of the opinion that CoC is a perfect case of being Judge,
Jury and Executioner in itself. The Committee as such are not against
the CoC but feel there should be some safeguards or provisions wherein
a judicious and justiciable regime is established to deal with the matter.
The Committee therefore recommend that any scheme or system for
resolution of NPA problem should be just, transparent, accountable
and trustworthy in the eyes of the people.
11. The Committee note that the Committee of Creditors has been
given wide scope and vast landscape to maneuver. In the given
circumstances, it may be necessary, but it would have been more prudent
had some hedging been done to strike a balance so as to do away with
any possibility of misdemeanor or misadventure. In response to a query
about the safeguards that have been introduced to preclude the
possibility of CoC colluding with possible purchasers/owner of the
liquidated property/power plant, it has been submitted that as per
amendments made to the IBC, any person who has an account, or an
account of a corporate debtor under the management or control of such
person or of whom such person is a promoter, which is classified as
non-performing asset are not allowed to participate in the bidding
process as per Section 29A. The Committee feel that the reply of the
Government is not satisfactory as it speaks only about those who have
become the defaulters as per the provisions of RBI Guidelines or IBC
2016. The Committee find that the Committee of Creditors is in an
enviable position with regard to the resolution of NPA and hence its
functioning should be unimpeachable. The Committee, therefore
recommend that suitable safeguard should be introduced to make the
CoC irreproachable.
Impact of RBI’s revised framework on NPAs in the electricity sector
12. The Committee note that about 66 GW of conventional energy
is under various degrees of financial stress which include 54805 MW
of Coal based Power (44 assets), 6831 MW of Gas based Power (9 assets)
and 4571 MW of Hydro power (13 assets). In addition, certain assets

57
from Power Sector have already been referred for CIRP under IBC. The
Committee also note that the outcomes of RBI’s Revised Framework
with respect to the Electricity Sector have been very disappointing
with major lenders to power sector IPPs displaying significant accretion
to NPAs and their slippages have exceeded Rs. 1.8 lakh crores in
Q 4- FY 2018 and slippages of 6 major lenders have exceeded Rs. 61,000
crores. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Power was never
formally consulted by the RBI for revision of the Guidelines. The
Committee also observe that the lenders’ action for resolving stressed
assets in the Electricity Sector are beset with glaring limitations like
Sub-optimal Bid Outcome, small buyer universe and weak commercial
framework. For a Power Project in Chhattisgarh, against the debt of
Rs. 8300 crores, an offer of only Rs. 2500 crores has been made i.e. a
hair-cut of about 70 per cent has to be incurred and a Power Plant in
Jharkhand got a bid of Rs. 35 lakh per MW. One of the stressed plants
have been restructured but it is still in stress because the promoters
cannot solve the systemic issues. The Committee are of the opinion
that forced sale under the NCLT will end up causing a big sacrifice
of public money without any benefit to the Economy or to the Electricity
Sector which would be baffling and disastrous. The Committee feel
that this entire exercise seems to have failed in its Mission and rendered
the new framework worthless. The Committee express its deep anguish
over the situation and expect that RBI should have considered macro
issues of Electricity Sector before finalizing the guidelines as the
Revised Framework of RBI will not help the Electricity Sector in its
revival prospects. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that RBI should consider the problems of the Electricity Sector which
are responsible for stress rather than concentrating on the management
of NPA only and should accordingly synchronize its efforts and
directives.
13. The Committee presented their 37th Report to help resolve
the NPA problem of the Electricity Sector, suggesting workable
preposition keeping in view the legal/financial/statutory provisions then
in vogue. However, the new guidelines of RBI have created
extraordinary and worrisome situation for the Electricity Sector of the
country. These guidelines were issued to address the problem of stressed
assets in the Economy irrespective of the sectoral concerns and confines.
Consequently, the Electricity Sector today is in a marshy condition. In
addition to under construction power plants, even the operational and

58
functional units are on the verge of becoming NPA. It is the fallout
of knee-jerk response of the RBI. The turbulent headwinds in which
the Electricity Sector is in today, is the systemic offshoot and if not
navigated carefully the sailing will not only be tumultuous but has
the potential of crash-landing also. The investment in the Electricity
Sector whether private or otherwise is Public Money and everybody
is concerned for it. The discretion of RBI should coordinate and
cooperate with other factors which are integral part of the problem and
well within the realm of resolution. The Committee find that the efforts
made so far has been part of our national endeavor to achieve
self-sufficiency in the field of Energy. Financing of these activities is
one among the other chapters of the entire Plan. Though, very vital
for successful completion of the project, but the finances should not
be allowed to hijack or stymie the other efforts. The Committee
therefore, recommend that a holistic view should be taken about the
systemic constraints rather than a lopsided approach looking at
management of NPA only without addressing the genesis of the
problem.
14. The Committee observe that the Electricity Sector is in a
transitional phase and is moving from a low demand-low supply
situation to a moderately high demand context. The Committee feel
that the RBI framework is ignorant as well as unmindful of prevailing
reality of the Electricity sector and that is why it addresses only the
financial issues ignoring the whole range of vital issues of the Electricity
sector. The Committee are of the view that two major important contexts
should be taken into consideration — one is the need for a national
energy security in the context of managing the transition in the
Electricity Sector and the other is the need to preserve, protect and
conserve these stressed assets as these are national assets at the end
of the day. There are doubts that all the stressed power projects would
ultimately be referred to NCLT whereinafter they will be auctioned
at throw away prices. The Committee are not in favour of such procedure
which is more for dissolution rather than resolution of stressed assets.
The Committee caution about the intrinsic weakness of the proposed
system because taking a cue, the deep pockets may enter the fray, stake
their bids, pocket the projects and later when the demand for the
electricity goes up, they will sell these projects at high prices and
siphon off the money without doing anything. At the end, it will be
the public which have to take the hit which has been conveniently

59
facilitated by the revised framework of the RBI. The Committee feel
that even the under construction projects should not be put under the
resolution process as the construction of a power plant begins only
after the completion of lot many complicated procedures and
formalities and hence in addition to the money, all the efforts
invested on these formalities will also go in waste. The Committee
therefore, strongly recommend that with a view to ensure power
security and also to avoid wastage of collective efforts, a new
framework should be put in place which safeguards the transient
sagging situation of the Electricity Sector and provides the much needed
stimulus.
15. The Committee note that the Revised Framework of RBI has
stipulated rigorous procedure and stiff timeline for resolution of stressed
assets without specifying the minimum quantum of retrievable value
of such assets. The duration of various stages of SMAs and resolution
plan are prescribed and defined. However, upon reference to NCLT,
the timeline provision seems to be of no essence to the Government.
During the currency of resolution plan, the assets can be extremely
devalued resulting into loss of public money in the form of HAIR-
CUT. Similarly, NCLT proceedings will also result in similar situation
albeit adopting a quasi judicial approach. The Committee feel that the
HAIR-CUT as envisaged under the framework is nothing but a deep
economic wound with festering ramifications. The functioning and
workload of NCLT may create unpredictable situations, the
consequences of which can be quantified in monetary terms only after
the finality of the issue. But the factors associated with the process are
not infallible and thus the consequences may be enormous. If these
resultant consequences of Resolution and NCLT process are put
together and weighed against the efforts and consequences of reviving
the power plants of whatsoever nature and character, the Committee
are sure the latter will definitely be the less burdensome and relatively
more fructuous for the Economy and the Nation. This is more so when
there is no ceiling on the proposed HAIR-CUT which is a euphemism
for front and deep economic wound. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the power sector, being the nucleus for growth of
Economy and development of the Nation, should be protected from
this temporary phase of uncertainty so that these Power Plants can be
put to use at the time of need which is certain to happen sooner
than later.

60
Steps taken by the Government
16. The Committee appreciate the Ministry of Power for their
painstaking efforts to address the issue in a holistic manner. The
Committee have been apprised in detail about the multi-track approach
culminating into PARIVARTAN which provides the workable solution
to the problem in the given circumstances. It inter alia focuses on
recovery, value-enhancement and quick disposal of stressed assets
wherein asset warehouse will be established to protect value and
revitalize assets. The scheme can be helpful in revitalizing the assets
and it aims at pooling the efforts, talents, expertise and finances from
the desired quarters. Similarly, the State Bank of India has also proposed
a scheme named SAMADHAN in light of the revised framework of
the RBI. The Committee feel that both the schemes intend to resolve
the issue of stressed assets of the Electricity Sector and deserve objective
and careful attention of the Government with positive mindset. The
Committee therefore recommend that all out efforts should be made
from every quarter to see that a genuine initiative is taken under these
schemes for resolution of stressed assets in the Electricity Sector.
17. The Committee note that efforts are being made from all the
quarters to address the issue of NPA/stressed assets. The representative
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) attempted
to explain the situation through four verticals. But the Committee find
that the four verticals are not in consonance with one another. The first
vertical of economic growth, second vertical of increasing need of power
being the engine to fuel the growth and the necessity to not allow any
asset to go waste to the extent possible are not in coherence with the
fourth vertical of exit route of IBC. We have to solve the sectoral
problems of the Electricity Sector as explained in the second vertical.
The third vertical which speaks about credit culture is linked with the
second vertical which deals with the reasons responsible for stress in
the Electricity Sector. The Committee are in full agreement with the
fact that the entire credit culture in the country is under a tremendous
change and if one takes credit, one should be responsible and if one
gives credit, one should hedge one’s risk and responsibilities. However,
the Committee feel that the most important vertical should be the
revival of stressed power plants as nothing stops the Government from
taking effective measures. Promoters can be divested of their equity,
management can be replaced or capital structure can be modified. But,

61
this all should be done with the focus on revival and revival only. To
divide it into segments with the thrust on liquidation will nullify the
efforts made so far and kill the zeal required to address the problem.
The Committee are of the opinion that the constraints of sectoral issues
should be taken into account otherwise the whole exercise will remain
only a sophistry. The Committee expect the Ministry of Finance to be
more serious, sincere and sensitive towards the prevailing hardships
of the Electricity Sector for their genuine resolution rather than smarting
under a compulsive situation with the intent to shrug-off the pressure
and let the situation remain unattended.
N
EW DELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
2  August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

62
ANNEXURE I
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
RBI/2017-18/131
DBR.No.BP.BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18
February 12, 2018
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
[Excluding Regional Rural Banks (RRB)],
All-India Financial Institutions
(Exim Bank, NABARD, NHB and SIDBI)
Dear Sir/Madam,
Resolution of Stressed Assets — Revised Framework
1. The Reserve Bank of India has issued various instructions aimed
at resolution of stressed assets in the economy, including introduction
of certain specific schemes at different points of time. In view of the
enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC), it has
been decided to substitute the existing guidelines with a harmonised and
simplified generic framework for resolution of stressed assets. The details
of the revised framework are elaborated in the following paragraphs.
I. Revised Framework
A. Early identification and reporting of stress
2. Lenders
1 shall identify incipient stress in loan accounts,
immediately on default2, by classifying stressed assets as special mention
1 Lenders under these guidelines would generally include all scheduled commercial banks
(excluding RRBs) and All India Financial Institutions, unless specified otherwise.
2 ‘Default’ means non-payment of debt when whole or any part or installment of the
amount of debt has become due and payable and is not repaid by the debtor or the
corporate debtor, as the case may be. For revolving facilities like cash credit, default
would also mean, without prejudice to the above, the outstanding balance remaining
continuously in excess of the sanctioned limit or drawing power, whichever is lower, for
more than 30 days.

63
accounts (SMA) as per the following categories:—
SMA Sub-categories Basis for classification — Principal or interest
payment or any other amount
wholly or partly overdue between
SMA-0 1-30 days
SMA-1 31-60 days
SMA-2 61-90 days
3. As provided in terms of the circular DBS.OSMOS.No.14703/
33.01.001/2013-14 dated May 22, 2014 and subsequent amendments thereto,
lenders shall report credit information, including classification of an
account as SMA to Central Repository of Information on Large Credits
(CRILC) on all borrower entities having aggregate exposure
3 of Rs. 50
million and above with them. The CRILC-Main Report will now be
required to be submitted on a monthly basis effective April 1, 2018. In
addition, the lenders shall report to CRILC, all borrower entities in default
(with aggregate exposure of Rs. 50 million and above), on a weekly basis,
at the close of business on every Friday, or the preceding working day
if Friday happens to be a holiday. The first such weekly report shall be
submitted for the week ending February 23, 2018.
B. Implementation of Resolution Plan
4. All lenders must put in place Board-approved policies for
resolution of stressed assets under this framework, including the timelines
for resolution.
As soon as there is a default in the borrower entity’s account with
any lender, all lenders “singly or jointly” shall initiate steps to cure the
default. The Resolution Plan (RP) may involve any actions/plans/
reorganization including, but not limited to, regularisation of the account
by payment of all over dues by the borrower entity, sale of the exposures
to other entities/investors, change in ownership, or restructuring
4. The
3 Aggregate exposure under the guidelines would include all fund based and non-fund
based exposure with the lenders.
4 Restructuring is an act in which a lender, for economic or legal reasons relating to the
borrower’s financial difficulty (An illustrative non-exhaustive list of indicators of financial
difficulty are given in the Appendix to Annex-A ), grants concessions to the borrower.
Restructuring would normally involve modification of terms of the advances/securities,
which may include, among others, alteration of repayment period/repayable amount/the
amount of instalments/rate of interest; roll over of credit facilities; sanction of additional
credit facility; enhancement of existing credit limits; and, compromise settlements where
time for payment of settlement amount exceeds three months.

64
RP shall be clearly documented by all the lenders (even if there is no
change in any terms and conditions).
C. Implementation Conditions for RP
5. A RP in respect of borrower entities to whom the lenders continue
to have credit exposure, shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if the
following conditions are met:—
a. the borrower entity is no longer in default with any of the
lenders;
b. if the resolution involves restructuring; then
i. all related documentation, including execution of
necessary agreements between lenders and borrower/
creation of security charge/perfection of securities are
completed by all lenders; and
ii. the new capital structure and/or changes in the terms
of conditions of the existing loans get duly reflected in
the books of all the lenders and the borrower.
6. Additionally, RPs involving restructuring/change in ownership
in respect of ‘large’ accounts (i.e., accounts where the aggregate exposure
of lenders is Rs. 1 billion and above), shall require Independent Credit
Evaluation (ICE) of the residual debt
5 by Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs)
specifically authorised by the Reserve Bank for this purpose. While
accounts with aggregate exposure of Rs. 5 billion and above shall require
two such ICEs, others shall require one ICE. Only such RPs which receive
a credit opinion of RP46 or better for the residual debt from one or two
CRAs, as the case may be, shall be considered for implementation. Further,
ICEs shall be subject to the following:—
(a) The CRAs shall be directly engaged by the lenders and the
payment of fee for such assignments shall be made by the
lenders.
5 The residual debt of the borrower entity, in this context, means the aggregate debt (fund
based as well as non-fund based) envisaged to be held by all the lenders as per the
proposed RP.
6 Annex – B  provides list of RP symbols that can be provided by CRAs as ICE and their
meanings.

65
(b) If lenders obtain ICE from more than the required number
of CRAs, all such ICE opinions shall be RP4 or better for the
RP to be considered for implementation.
7. The above requirement of ICE shall be applicable to restructuring
of all large accounts implemented from the date of this circular, even if
the restructuring is carried out before the ‘reference date’ stipulated in
paragraph 8.
D. Timelines for Large Accounts to be Referred under IBC
8. In respect of accounts with aggregate exposure of the lenders
at Rs. 20 billion and above, on or after March 1, 2018 (‘reference date’),
including accounts where resolution may have been initiated under any
of the existing schemes as well as accounts classified as restructured
standard assets which are currently in respective specified periods (as
per the previous guidelines), RP shall be implemented as per the following
timelines:—
(i) If in default as on the reference date, then 180 days from the
reference date.
(ii) If in default after the reference date, then 180 days from the
date of first such default.
9. If a RP in respect of such large accounts is not implemented as
per the timelines specified in paragraph 8, lenders shall file insolvency
application, singly or jointly, under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
2016 (IBC)
7 within 15 days from the expiry of the said timeline8.
10. In respect of such large accounts, where a RP involving
restructuring/change in ownership is implemented within the 180-day
period, the account should not be in default at any point of time during
the ‘specified period’, failing which the lenders shall file an insolvency
application, singly or jointly, under the IBC within 15 days from the date
of such default.
‘Specified period’ means the period from the date of implementation
of RP up to the date by which at least 20 per cent of the outstanding
principal debt as per the RP and interest capitalisation sanctioned
as part of the restructuring, if any, is repaid.
7 Applicable in respect of entities notified under IBC.
8 The prescribed timelines are the upper limits. Lenders are free to file insolvency petitions
under the IBC against borrowers even before the expiry of the timelines, or even without
attempting a RP outside IBC.

66
Provided that the specified period cannot end before one year from
the commencement of the first payment of interest or principal
(whichever is later) on the credit facility with longest period of
moratorium under the terms of RP.
11. Any default in payment after the expiry of the specified period
shall be reckoned as a fresh default for the purpose of this framework.
12. For other accounts with aggregate exposure of the lenders below
Rs. 20 billion and, at or above Rs. 1 billion, the Reserve Bank intends
to announce, over a two-year period, reference dates for implementing
the RP to ensure calibrated, time-bound resolution of all such accounts
in default.
13. It is, however, clarified that the said transition arrangement
shall not be available for borrower entities in respect of which specific
instructions have already been issued by the Reserve Bank to the banks
for reference under IBC. Lenders shall continue to pursue such cases as
per the earlier instructions.
E. Prudential Norms
14. The revised prudential norms applicable to any restructuring,
whether under the IBC framework or outside the IBC, are contained in
Annex-A
9 . The provisioning in respect of exposure to borrower entities
against whom insolvency applications are filed under the IBC shall be
as per their asset classification in terms of the Master Circular on
Prudential norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and
Provisioning, as amended from time to time.
10
II. Supervisory Review
15. Any failure on the part of lenders in meeting the prescribed
timelines or any actions by lenders with an intent to conceal the actual
status of accounts or evergreen the stressed accounts, will be subjected
to stringent supervisory/enforcement actions as deemed appropriate by
the Reserve Bank, including, but not limited to, higher provisioning on
such accounts and monetary penalties
11.
9 During the period when the RP is being finalised and implemented, the usual asset
classification norms would continue to apply. The process of re-classification of an asset
should not stop merely because RP is under consideration.
10 Accounts in respect of which banks have already been specifically issued instructions
to initiate insolvency resolution proceedings under the IBC, minimum provisions as already
advised shall be maintained.
11 This may be in addition to direction to banks to file insolvency application under the
Insolvency and bankruptcy Code 2016.

67
III. Disclosures
16. Banks shall make appropriate disclosures in their financial
statements, under ‘Notes on Accounts’, relating to resolution plans
implemented. Detailed guidelines will be issued separately.
IV. Exceptions
17. Restructuring in respect of projects under implementation
involving Deferment of Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations
(DCCO), shall continue to be covered under the guidelines contained at
paragraph 4.2.15 of the Master Circular No. DBR.No.BP.BC.2/21.04.048/
2015-16 dated July 1, 2015 on ‘Prudential norms on Income Recognition,
Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances’.
V. Withdrawal of extant instructions
18. The extant instructions on resolution of stressed assets such as
Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets, Corporate Debt
Restructuring Scheme, Flexible Structuring of Existing Long Term Project
Loans, Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme (SDR), Change in Ownership
outside SDR, and Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets
(S4A) stand withdrawn with immediate effect. Accordingly, the Joint
Lenders’ Forum (JLF) as an institutional mechanism for resolution of
stressed accounts also stands discontinued. All accounts, including such
accounts where any of the schemes have been invoked but not yet
implemented, shall be governed by the revised framework.
19. The list of circulars/directions/guidelines subsumed in this
circular and thereby stand repealed from the date of this circular is given
in Annex-C.
20. The above guidelines are issued in exercise of powers conferred
under Section 35A, 35AA (read with S.O.1435 (E) dated May 5, 2017
issued by the Government of India) and 35AB of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949; and, Section 45(L) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
Yours faithfully,
(Saurav Sinha)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge

68
Annexure A
NORMS APPLICABLE TO RESTRUCTURING
1. Restructuring is an act in which a lender, for economic or legal
reasons relating to the borrower’s financial difficulty12, grants concessions
to the borrower. Restructuring would normally involve modification of
terms of the advances/securities, which would generally include, among
others, alteration of repayment period/repayable amount/the amount of
installments/rate of interest/roll over of credit facilities/sanction of
additional credit facility/enhancement of existing credit limits/compromise
settlements where time for payment of settlement amount exceeds three
months.
I. Prudential Norms
13
A. Asset Classification
2. In case of restructuring, the accounts classified as ‘standard’ shall
be immediately downgraded as non-performing assets (NPAs), i.e., ‘sub-
standard’ to begin with. The non-performing assets, upon restructuring,
would continue to have the same asset classification as prior to
restructuring. In both cases, the asset classification shall continue to be
governed by the ageing criteria as per extant asset classification norms.
B. Conditions for Upgrade
3. Standard accounts classified as NPA and NPA accounts retained
in the same category on restructuring by the lenders may be upgraded
only when all the outstanding loan/facilities in the account demonstrate
‘satisfactory performance’ (i.e., the payments in respect of borrower entity
are not in default at any point of time) during the ‘specified period’ (as
defined in paragraph 10 of the covering circular)14.
12 An illustrative (but not exhaustive) list of indicators of financial difficulty are in Appendix.
13 Applicable to all resolution plans, including those undertaken under IBC.
14 For accounts under IBC, the specified period shall be deemed to commence from the
date of implementation of the resolution plan as approved by the Adjudicating Authority.

69
4. For the large accounts (i.e., accounts where the aggregate exposure
of lenders is Rs. 1 billion and above) to qualify for an upgrade, in addition
to demonstration of satisfactory performance, the credit facilities of the
borrower shall also be rated as investment grade15 (BBB- or better) as
at the end of the ‘specified period’ by CRAs accredited by the Reserve
Bank for the purpose of bank loan ratings. While accounts with aggregate
exposure of Rs. 5 billion and above shall require two ratings, those below
Rs. 5 billion shall require one rating. If the ratings are obtained from
more than the required number of CRAs, all such ratings shall be
investment grade to qualify for an upgrade.
5. In case satisfactory performance during the specified period is
not demonstrated, the account shall, immediately on such default, be
reclassified as per the repayment schedule that existed before the
restructuring16. Any future upgrade for such accounts shall be contingent
on implementation of a fresh RP and demonstration of satisfactory
performance thereafter.
C. Provisioning Norms
6. Accounts restructured under the revised framework shall attract
provisioning as per the asset classification category as laid out in the
Master Circular on Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset
Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances dated July 1, 2015,
as amended from time to time. However, the provisions made in respect
of accounts restructured before the date of the circular under any of the
earlier schemes shall continue to be held as per the requirements specified
therein.
D. Additional Finance
7. Any additional finance approved under the RP (including any
resolution plan approved by the Adjudicating Authority under IBC) may
be treated as ‘standard asset’ during the specified period under the
approved RP, provided the account performs satisfactorily (as defined in
paragraphs 3-5 above) during the specified period. If the restructured
asset fails to perform satisfactorily during the specified period or does
not qualify for upgradation at the end of the specified period, the
15 These ratings shall be the normal ratings provided by the CRAs and not ICEs referred
to in paragraph 6 of the covering circular.
16 For large accounts, this will be in addition to mandatory IBC filing.

70
additional finance shall be placed in the same asset classification category
as the restructured debt.
E. Income recognition norms
8. Interest income in respect of restructured accounts classified as
‘standard assets’ may be recognized on accrual basis and that in respect
of the restructured accounts classified as ‘non-performing assets’ shall be
recognised on cash basis.
9. In the case of additional finance in accounts where the pre-
restructuring facilities were classified as NPA, the interest income shall
be recognised only on cash basis except when the restructuring is
accompanied by a change in ownership.
F. Conversion of Principal into Debt/Equity and Unpaid Interest
into ‘Funded Interest Term Loan’ (FITL), Debt or Equity
Instruments
10. The FITL/debt/equity instruments created by conversion of part
of principal/unpaid interest, as the case may be, will be placed in the
same asset classification category in which the restructured advance has
been classified.
11. These instruments shall be valued as per usual valuation norms
and marked to market. Equity instruments, whether classified as standard
or NPA, shall be valued at market value, if quoted, or else at break-up
value (without considering the revaluation reserve, if any) as ascertained
from the company’s balance sheet as on March 31st of the immediate
preceding financial year. In case balance sheet as on March 31st of the
immediate preceding financial year is not available, the entire portfolio
of equity shares of the company held by the bank shall be valued at Re.1.
Depreciation on these instruments shall not be offset against the
appreciation in any other securities held under the AFS category.
12. The unrealised income represented by FITL/Debt or equity
instrument can only be recognised in the profit and loss account as
under:—
a. FITL/debt instruments: only on sale or redemption, as the
case may be;
b. Unquoted equity/quoted equity (where classified as NPA):
only on sale;

71
c. Quoted equity (where classified as standard): market value
of the equity as on the date of upgradation, not exceeding
the amount of unrealised income converted to such equity.
Subsequent changes to value of the equity will be dealt as
per the extant prudential norms on investment portfolio of
banks.
G. Change in Ownership
13. In case of change in ownership of the borrowing entities, credit
facilities of the concerned borrowing entities may be continued/upgraded
as ‘standard’ after the change in ownership is implemented, either under
the IBC or under this framework.
If the change in ownership is implemented under this framework,
then the classification as ‘standard’ shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(i) Banks shall conduct necessary due diligence in this regard
and clearly establish that the acquirer is not a person
disqualified in terms of Section 29A of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
(ii) The new promoter shall have acquired at least 26 per cent
of the paid up equity capital of the borrower entity and shall
be the single largest shareholder of the borrower entity.
(iii)The new promoter shall be in ‘control’ of the borrower entity
as per the definition of ‘control’ in the Companies Act, 2013/
Regulations issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India/any other applicable regulations/accounting standards
as the case may be.
(iv) The conditions for implementation of RP as per Section I-C
of the covering circular are complied with.
14. For such accounts to continue to be classified as standard, all
the outstanding loans/credit facilities of the borrowing entity need to
demonstrate satisfactory performance (as defined above in paragraph 3
above) during the specified period. If the account fails to perform
satisfactorily at any point of time during the specified period, the credit
facilities shall be immediately downgraded as non-performing assets
(NPAs) i.e., ‘sub-standard’. Any future upgrade for such accounts shall
be contingent on implementation of a fresh RP (either under IBC, wherever

72
mandatory filings are applicable or initiated voluntarily by the lenders,
or outside IBC) and demonstration of satisfactory performance thereafter.
15. Further, the quantum of provisions held by the bank against
the said account as on the date of change in ownership of the borrowing
entities can be reversed only after satisfactory performance during the
specified period.
II. Principles on classification of sale and lease back transactions
as restructuring
16. A sale and leaseback transaction of the assets of a borrower or
other transactions of similar nature will be treated as an event of
restructuring for the purpose of asset classification and provisioning in
the books of banks with regard to the residual debt of the seller as well
as the debt of the buyer if all the following conditions are met:
(i) The seller of the assets is in financial difficulty;
(ii)Significant portion, i.e. more than 50 per cent, of the revenues
of the buyer from the specific asset is dependent upon the
cash flows from the seller;
(iii) 25 per cent or more of the loans availed by the buyer for the
purchase of the specific asset is funded by the lenders who
already have a credit exposure to the seller.
III.Prudential Norms relating to Refinancing of Exposures to
Borrowers in different currency
17. If foreign currency borrowings/export advances for the purpose
of repayment/refinancing of rupee loans are obtained from:
a. lenders who are part of Indian banking system (where
permitted); or
b. with support (where permitted) from the Indian banking
system in the form of Guarantees/Standby Letters of Credit/
Letters of Comfort, etc., such events shall be treated as
‘restructuring’ if the borrower concerned is under financial
difficulty.
18. Similarly, rupee loans for repayment/refinancing of foreign
currency borrowings/export advances will also be treated as ‘restructuring’
if such rupee loans are extended to a borrower who is under financial
difficulty.

73
IV. Regulatory Exemptions
Exemptions from RBI Regulations
19. Acquisition of non-SLR securities by way of conversion of debt
is exempted from the restrictions and the prudential limit on investment
in unlisted non-SLR securities prescribed by the RBI.
20. Acquisition of shares due to conversion of debt to equity during
a restructuring process will be exempted from regulatory ceilings/
restrictions on Capital Market Exposures, investment in Para-Banking
activities and intra-group exposure. However, these will require reporting
to RBI (reporting to DBS, CO every month along with the regular DSB
Return on Asset Quality) and disclosure by banks in the Notes to Accounts
in Annual Financial Statements. Nonetheless, banks will have to comply
with the provisions of Section 19(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
Exemptions from Regulations of Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI)
21. SEBI has provided exemptions, under certain conditions, from
the requirements of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) (Issue
of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) (ICDR) Regulations, 2009 as
well as SEBI (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) (SAST)
Regulations, 2011 for restructurings carried out as per the regulations
issued by the Reserve Bank.
22. With reference to the requirements contained in sub-regulations
70 (5) (a) and 70 (6) (a) of ICDR Regulations, 2009, the issue price of the
equity shall be the lower of (i) or (ii) below:
(i) The average of the weekly high and low of the volume
weighted average price of the related equity shares quoted
on the recognised stock 7 exchange during the twenty six
weeks preceding the ‘reference date’ or the average of the
weekly high and low of the volume weighted average prices
of the related equity shares quoted on a recognised stock
exchange during the two weeks preceding the ‘reference date’,
whichever is lower; and
(ii)Book value: Book value per share to be calculated from the
audited balance sheet as on March 31st of the immediate
preceding financial year (without considering ‘revaluation
reserves’, if any) adjusted for cash flows and financials post
the earlier restructuring, if any. The balance sheet shall not

74
be more than a year old. In case the audited balance sheet
as on March 31st of the immediate preceding financial year
is not available the total book value of the borrower company
shall be reckoned at Re. 1.
23. In the case of conversion of debt into equities, the ‘reference
date’ shall be the date on which the bank approves the restructuring
scheme. In the case of conversion of convertible securities into equities,
the ‘reference date’ shall be the date on which the bank approves the
conversion of the convertible securities into equities. In case of issuance
of fresh shares to the new promoter, the ‘reference date’ shall be the date
of signing of the binding agreement between the bank and the new
promoter.
24. With reference to the requirements contained in sub-regulations
10 (1) (ia) (a) of the SAST Regulations, 2001, at the time of selling the
equity instruments acquired by banks (as part of a restructuring exercise)
in favour of a new promoter, the selling price may be a negotiated price.
However, the selling price shall not be lower than the ‘fair value’, which
shall be the higher of (i) and (ii) below:
(i) The average of the weekly high and low of the volume
weighted average price of the related equity shares quoted
on the recognised stock exchange during the twenty six weeks
preceding the ‘reference date’ or the average of the weekly
high and low of the volume weighted average prices of the
related equity shares quoted on a recognised stock exchange
during the two weeks preceding the ‘reference date’,
whichever is higher; and
(ii)Book value: Book value per share to be calculated from the
company’s latest audited balance sheet (without considering
‘revaluation reserves’, if any) adjusted for cash flows and
financials post the earlier restructuring, if any.
25. In case of sale of equity held by banks as a result of conversion/
invocation of pledge, the ‘reference date’ shall be the date on which the
share purchase agreement between the bank and the new promoter is
executed.
V. Non-applicability of these guidelines
26. The revival and rehabilitation of MSMEs as defined under
‘The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006’
shall continue to be guided by the instructions contained in Circular

75
No. FIDD.MSME and NFS.BC.No.21/06.02.31/2015-16 dated March 17,
2016, as amended from time to time.
27. Restructuring of loans in the event of a natural calamity shall
continue to be as per the directions contained in the Master Directions
FIDD.CO.FSD.BC No.8/05.10.001/2017-18, as amended from time to time.
VI. Cases of frauds/wilful defaulters.
28. Borrowers who have committed frauds/malfeasance/wilful
default will remain ineligible for restructuring. However, in cases where
the existing promoters are replaced by new promoters, and the borrower
company is totally delinked from such erstwhile promoters/management,
lenders may take a view on restructuring such accounts based on their
viability, without prejudice to the continuance of criminal action against
the erstwhile promoters/management.

76
APPENDIX
NON–EXHAUSTIVE INDICATIVE LIST OF SIGNS
OF FINANCIAL DIFFICULTY
• Irregularities in cash credit/overdraft accounts such as inability to
maintain stipulated margin basis or drawings exceeding sanctioned
limits, periodic interest debited remaining unrealised;
• Failure/anticipated failure to make timely payment of instalments
of principal and interest on term loans;
• Delay in meeting commitments towards payments of instalments
due, crystallized liabilities under LC/BGs, etc.;
• Excessive leverage;
• Inability to adhere to financial loan covenants;
• Failure to pay statutory liabilities, non-payment of bills to
operational creditors, etc.;
• Non-submission or undue delay in submission or submission of
incorrect stock statements and other control statements, delay in
publication of financial statements and adversely qualified financial
statements;
• Steep decline in production figures, downward trends in sales and
fall in profits, margin erosion etc.;
• Elongation of working capital cycle, excessive inventory build-up;
• Significant delay in project implementation;
• Downward migration of internal/external ratings/rating outlook.

77
Annexure B
ICE Symbols Definition
RP1 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have the highest degree of safety regarding timely servicing
of financial obligations. Such debt facilities/instruments carry
lowest credit risk.
RP2 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have high degree of safety regarding timely servicing of
financial obligations. Such debt facilities/instruments carry
very low credit risk.
RP3Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have adequate degree of safety regarding timely servicing
of financial obligations. Such debt facilities/instruments carry
low credit risk.
RP4 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have moderate degree of safety regarding timely servicing
of financial obligations. Such debt facilities/instruments carry
moderate credit risk.
RP5 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have moderate risk of default regarding timely servicing
of financial obligations.
RP6 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have high risk of default regarding timely servicing of
financial obligations.
RP7 Debt facilities/instruments with this symbol are considered
to have very high risk of default regarding timely servicing
of financial obligations.

78
Annexure C
LIST OF CIRCULARS REPEALED
S. Circular number
No.
12
1. BR.BP.BC.No.67/
21.04.048/2016-17
2. DBR.No.BP.BC.33/
21.04.132/2016-17
3. DBR.No.BP.BC.34/
21.04.132/2016-17
(Excluding instructions
on deferment of DCCO)
4. DBR.No.BP.BC.103/
21.04.132/2015-16
5. DBR.BP.BC.No.82/
21.04.132/2015-16
(Excluding Part E on
Sale of Financial Assets
to SCs/RCs)
6. DBR.BP.BC.No.41/
21.04.048/2015-16
7. DBR.BP.BC.No.39/
21.04.132/2015-16
8. DBR.No.BP.BC.101/
21.04.132/2014-15
9. DBR.No.BP.BC.53/
21.04.048/2014-15
10. DBOD.No.BP.BC.45/
21.04.13 2/2014-15
Date of Subject
issue
34
05.05.2017Timelines for Stressed Assets
Resolution
10.11.2016Scheme for Sustainable
Structuring of Stressed Assets –
Revisions
10.11.2016 Schemes for Stressed Assets –
Revisions
13.06.2016Scheme for Sustainable
Structuring of Stressed Assets
25.02.2016Review of Prudential
Guidelines — Revitalising
Stressed Assets in the Economy
24.09.2015Prudential Norms on Change in
Ownership of Borrowing
Entities (Outside Strategic Debt
Restructuring Scheme)
24.09.2015Framework for Revitalising
Distressed Assets in the
Economy — Review of the
Guidelines on Joint Lenders’
Forum (JLF) and Corrective
Action Plan (CAP)
08.06.2015Strategic Debt Restructuring
Scheme
15.12.2014Flexible Structuring of Existing
Long Term Project Loans to
Infrastructure and Core
Industries
21.10.2014Framework for Revitalising
Distressed Assets in the

79
12 34
11. DBOD.No.BP.BC.31/
21.04.13 2/2014-15
12. DBOD.No.BP.BC.24/
21.04.13 2/2014-15
13. DBOD.No.BP.BC.97/
21.04.13 2/2013-14
(Excluding para 8 on
‘Wilful Defaulters and
Non-cooperative
Borrowers’ and para 9
on ‘Dissemination of
Information’)
14. Para 2 of circular
DBOD.BP.BC.No. 98/
21.04.13 2/2013-14
15. DBOD.No.BP.BC-99/
21.04.048/2012-13
(Excluding paragraph 2
on change in DCCO)
16. DBOD.BP.BC.No.80/
21.04.13 2/2012-13
17. DBOD.No.BP.BC-63/
21.04.048/2012-13
18. DBOD.BP.BC. No.99/
21.04.13 2/2010-11
19. DBOD.BP.BC. No.74/
21.04.13 2/2010-11
20. DBOD.BP.No.49/21.04.13
2/2010-11
21. DBOD.No.BP.BC.No.124/
21.04.13 2/2008-09
Economy – Review of the
Guidelines on Joint Lenders
Forum (JLF) and Corrective
Action Plan CAP)
07.08.2014Refinancing of Project Loans
15.07.2014Flexible Structuring of Long
Term Project Loans to
Infrastructure and Core
Industries
26.02.2014Framework for Revitalising
Distressed Assets in the
Economy – Guidelines on Joint
Lenders Forum (JLF) and
Corrective Action Plan
26.02.2014Framework for Revitalising
Distressed Assets in the
Economy - Refinancing of
Project Loans, Sale of NPA and
Other Regulatory Measures
30.05.2013Review of Prudential
Guidelines on Restructuring of
Advances by Banks and
Financial Institutions
31.01.2013Disclosure Requirements on
Advances Restructured by
Banks and Financial Institutions
26.11.2012Review of Prudential
Guidelines on Restructuring of
Advances by Banks and
Financial Institutions
10.06.2011Prudential Guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances by
Banks
19.01.2011Credit Support to Micro Finance
Institutions
07.10.2010Prudential Guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances by
Banks
17.04.2009Prudential Guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances

80
12 34
22. DBOD.BP.BC.121/
21.04.13 2/2008-09
23. DBOD.BP.BC.76/21.04.13
2/2008-09
24. DBOD.BP.BC.58/
21.04.048/2008-09
25. DBOD.BP.BC.37/21.04.13
2/2008-09
26. DBOD.No.BP.BC.45/
21.04 21.04.048/2005-06
27. DBOD No.BP.BC.101/
21.01.002/2001-02
28. DBOD No.BP.BC.15/2o1/
04/114/2000-2001
09.04.2009Prudential guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances 13
03.11.2008Prudential guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances
13.10.2008 (i) Disbursal of Loans against
Sanctioned Limits
(ii) Restructuring of Dues of the
Small and Medium
Enterprises(SMEs)
27.08.2008Prudential guidelines on
Restructuring of Advances-
comprehensive guidelines
10.11.2005Revised Guidelines on
Corporate Debt Restructuring
(CDR) Mechanism
09.05.2002 Corporate Debt Restructuring
23.08.2001 Corporate Debt Restructuring

81
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 11 TH APRIL,
2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘G-074’, PARLIAMENT
LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
3. Dr. Arun Kumar
4. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
5. Shri M.B. Rajesh
6. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
7. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
9. Shri Manish Gupta
10. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
11. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh —Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey —Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip —Under Secretary

82
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla Secretary
2. Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary
Ministry of Coal
1. Shri Suresh Kumar Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashish Upadhyaya Joint Secretary
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha Joint Secretary
PSUs/Autonomous Body/Statutory Body
1. Shri R.K. Verma Chairperson, CEA
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma CMD, PFC
3. Shri P.V. Ramesh CMD, REC
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the
Ministry of Coal to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of
the agenda and focus area for the discussion and the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Power deposed before the Committee
that there were 34 stressed projects in Power Sector, out of them, seven
projects have got resolved. He informed the Committee that these projects
were in stress for different reasons like:—
• Cancellation of Coal Blocks and dispute over allocation of
Coal Blocks due to aggressive bidding. SHAKTI policy has
addressed some of these issues.
• Delayed payment by Discoms: A large amount of money has
been outstanding from the Government Departments in some
of the States. If that is made available, Discoms’ losses can
be easily written off or payments to generators can be made.
UDAY has brought in some improvement in this regard.
• Lack of PPAs in the market: If the peak rated capacity is
about 160-165 GW, the PPAs available with the State

83
Governments are of more than 230 GW. States are already
having excess PPAs and each PPA is a cost to them as far
as fixed cost is concerned.
• Regulatory issues: With regard to the railway charges etc.,
all the charges have been included in the freight. CERC has
already put up for consultation the indexation issue.
4. He further informed the Committee that the Ministry has notified
a scheme for procurement of 2,500 MW as a pilot, using PFC as the
aggregator for aggregating power on behalf of Discoms and then opening
the market for generators. The Coal Ministry has been requested for
putting some coal linkage on auction for this purpose.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Power submitted that the RBI had no
formal consultations with the Ministry of Power before notifying the
“New Guidelines” regarding resolution of Non-Performing Projects. He
further stated that REC and PFC were in the process of restructuring over
a longer period of time, but they have not been able to resolve any project
leaving aside one or two. Now the RBI has put a lid over it and said
that beyond a point, one cannot keep on doing restructuring. The Ministry
felt that in the power sector, at this stage, this kind of resolution (RBI’s
Resolution Plan) would not come through very quickly because there is
hardly any PPA in the market. So, any model of restructuring, either with
or without the RBI guidelines, cannot give much benefit to the Power
Sector.
6. The CMD, REC deposed before the Committee that REC has a
loan book of about Rs. 2,40,000 crore, of which private sector exposure
has been about 13 %. REC’s total NPAs (12 projects) have been 2.1 % as
on 1st March, 2018. The impact of RBI’s guidelines on REC’s balance
sheet would be to the tune of Rs. 15,000 crore.
7. The CMD, REC further submitted that the power sector financing
has been a long-term investment having the tenure of 15-20 years and
there has always been involvement of a consortium of financiers. In some
projects there have been a consortium of as many as 27 banks where it
would become difficult to achieve 100 % consensus. To find an optimal
solution and resolution would be almost impossible in 180 days which
means every project will ultimately land up in NCLT. A timeline has been
submitted to the Ministry that a minimum of 231 days are required for
the resolution process to be completed.
8. The Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points
related to the subject — “Impact of new RBI Guidelines on

84
Non- Performing Assets in Power Sector” with the representatives of the
Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Coal:—
(i) If the measures introduced in fresh RBI guidelines will help
the electricity sector to overcome its NPA problem in a realistic
and pragmatic manner?
(ii) What will be effect of these guidelines on the stressed Power
Projects?
(iii) If the timeline of 180 days suggested in the Resolution Plan
will be adequate for all the actions to be completed under
the plan?
(iv) If the role and responsibility of the members of lending
consortium in filing insolvency proceedings have been clearly
demarcated and defined?
(v) Whether the stakeholders, i.e., Ministry of Power, Ministry
of Coal, lending banks and financial institutions, independent
power producers were consulted before framing of the
guidelines by the RBI?
(vi) Impact of these guidelines on the supply of coal to the power
plants, which may become unviable in near future.
(vii)Whether there is still demand for FSA by the running/
upcoming power plants and in what manner will it affect the
coal supply?
(viii) Will the Ministry of Coal be in a position to improve supply
of coal as a result of these guidelines?
(ix) Coordination system among Regulators, Government, Banks,
promoters and other stakeholders.
9. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives concerned responded to
the same. The Committee directed the representatives concerned to furnish
written replies to those queries which could not be readily responded
to by them.
10. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

85
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 12 TH JUNE,
2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘3’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE EXTN., NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Dr. Arun Kumar
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
6. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
7. Shri M.B. Rajesh
8. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
9. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
11. Shri Manish Gupta
12. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
13. Smt. Viplove Thakur
14. Shri Narain Das Gupta
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh —Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey —Director

86
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla Secretary
2. Shri Sanjiv Nandan Sahai Additional Secretary
3. Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance
1. Shri Rajiv Kumar Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj Jain Joint Secretary
Reserve Bank of India
1. Dr. Urjit R. Patel Governor
2. Shri N.S. Vishwanathan Deputy Governor
3. Dr. Viral V. Acharya Deputy Governor
PSUs/Autonomous Body/Statutory Body
1. Shri R.K. Verma Chairperson, CEA
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma CMD, PFC
3. Shri P.V. Ramesh CMD, REC
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, Department
of Financial Services, Reserve Bank of India, Central Electricity Authority,
Power Finance Corporation and Rural Electrification Corporation to the
sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda and focus area
for the discussion and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee inter-alia also deliberated upon the following
points related to the subject — “Impact of new RBI Guidelines on Non-
Performing Assets in Power Sector” with the representatives of the
Ministry of Power, Department of Financial Services, Reserve Bank of
India, etc:
(i) Reasons for introduction of “New” Guidelines for resolution
of Non-Performing Assets?
(ii) How the RBI’s new guidelines will help the Electricity Sector
to overcome its NPA problem?

87
(iii) What will be effect of these guidelines on the stressed Power
Projects?
(iv) Whether the timeline of 180 days suggested in the Resolution
Plan will be adequate for all the actions to be completed
under the Plan?
(v) The amount of hair-cut that the Banks are likely to take
following the IBC Act.
(vi) Reasons for abolition of Joint Lending/Consortium Forum.
(vii) Justification for requirement of independent credit evaluation
in the Resolution Plan?
(viii) Will the new Guidelines on NPA not spur the filing of
insolvency proceedings with NCLT?
(ix) Accountability and responsibility of the Lenders under the
Plan?
(x) Coordination system among Regulators, Government, Banks,
promoters and other stake holders.
4. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives concerned responded to
the same. The Committee directed the representatives concerned to furnish
written replies to those queries which could not be readily responded
to by them.
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Not related to this Report.

88
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 5 TH JUL Y ,
2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. and from 1430 hrs.
to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi
4. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri M.B. Rajesh
8. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
9. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
12. Shri Oscar Fernandes
13. Shri Manish Gupta
14. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
15. Shri Narain Das Gupta

89
S ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh —Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey —Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power/PSUs/Autonomous Bodies
1. Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary, MoP
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma CMD, PFC
3. Shri P.V. Ramesh CMD, REC
4. Shri Gurdeep Singh CMD, NTPC
5. Shri P.K. Mukopadhyay Chairman, DVC
6. Shri Pankaj Batra Chairman, CEA
Public and Private Sector Banks
7. Shri Rajnish Kumar Chairman, SBI
8. Shri Sunil Mehta MD and CEO, Punjab
National Bank
9. Shri R.A. Sankara Narayanan MD and CEO, Vijaya
Bank
10. Shri Rakesh Sharma MD and CEO, Canara
Bank
11. Shri Jai Kumar Garg MD and CEO,
Corporation Bank
12. Shri Mukesh Kumar Jain MD and CEO, Oriental
Bank of Commerce
13. Shri Pawan Bajaj MD and CEO, United
Bank of India
14. Shri Rajeev Rishi MD and CEO, Central
Bank of India
15. Shri Kishor Kharat MD and CEO, Indian
Bank
16. Shri R. Subramania Kumar MD and CEO, IOB
17. Shri P.S. Jayakumar MD and CEO, BOB

90
18. Shri Rajkiran Rai G. MD and CEO, Union
Bank of India
19. Shri Manjul Chawla Head, IDFC
20. Shri B. Sriram MD and CEO, IDBI
21. Shri Arun Kumar Manda General Manager, Bank
of India
22. Mrs. Vishakha Mulye Executive Director, ICICI
Bank
23. Shri Kulbhushan Jain ED, Andhra Bank
24. Shri Charan Singh ED, UCO Bank
25. Shri R.K. Yadhuvanshi ED, Dena Bank
26. Shri N.K. Sahoo ED, Allahabad Bank
27. Shri S. Krishnan ED, Syndicate Bank
28. Shri A.C. Rout ED, Bank of Maharashtra
29. Dr. Fareed Ahmed ED, PSB
Independent Power Producers
30. Shri Pradeep MittalExecutive Vice Chairman,
Essar Power Ltd.
31. Shri B.R. JajuChief Financial Officer,
D. B. Power Baradhara
32. Shri A. Issac George GVK Power Goindwal
Sahib Ltd.
33. Shri Suresh Jain Managing Director, JPVL
34. Shri S.K. Bagai President Prayagraj
Power General Company
Ltd.
35. Shri Gattu Rambhav Chief Operating Officer,
Korba West Power
Company Ltd.
36. Shri R. Raveendra Nathan Nair CEO, Jindal India
Thermal Power Ltd.
37. Shri Ismail Kamal Promotor Group, Coastal
Energen Pvt. Ltd.

91
38. Shri M. Narasimha Murthy President, Lanco
Babandh Power Ltd. and
Lanco Vidarbha Thermal
Power Ltd.
39. Shri M. Chandrasekhar Reddy Dy. CEO, Lanco
Amarkantak Power Ltd.
and Lanco Anpara
Power Ltd.
40. Shri Ashish Bansal Edelweiss Alternative
Asset Advisors Ltd.
41. Shri Sameer GanjuAdani Power
Maharashtra Ltd. Tiroda
Plant
42. Shri Ashish BasuCEO, GMR
43. Shri Vibhuti Handoo DGM, Lanco
44. Shri R. Srinivasan Advisor, RKM Powergen
Pvt. Ltd.
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power, Central
Electricity Authority, Power Finance Corporation, Rural Electrification
Corporation, National Thermal Power Corporation, Public and Private
Sector Banks, Independent Power Producers, etc. to the sitting of the
Committee and apprised them of the agenda and focus area for the
discussion and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions
by the Speaker.
3. During the discussion, the CMD, Rural Electrification
Corporation made a presentation on the subject “Stressed Power
Projects — A Framework for Sustainable Management” which, inter alia,
covered Electricity Act 2003 : A watershed for Industry Transformation,
Conventional IPP Capacity under Stress, Explanation of Stress, Historical
Resolution Approaches, Revised Resolution Approach, Sectoral Challenges
and Efficacy, Potential Outcome of Revised Approach, Lender’s Action
in view of RBI Framework, Limitation of Lender’s Actions, Need for a
Warehousing Approach, Multi-track Resolution Framework, Warehousing
of Power Assets, Key Objectives of Warehousing, Power Asset Revival
Focused Warehousing and Revitalization (PARIWARTAN), Mode of
Transfer of Assets, Operational Details, Regulatory Aspects, Regulatory
Forbearance Required, Capital Structure of PARIWARTAN, Key Support
Required, etc.

92
4. The Committee inter alia also deliberated upon the following
points related to the subject — “Impact of new RBI Guidelines on Non-
Performing Assets in Power Sector” with the representatives of the
Ministry of Power, Power Finance Corporation, Rural Electrification
Corporation, Public and Private Sector Banks, Independent Power
Producers, etc.
(i) How the RBI’s new guidelines will help the Electricity Sector
to overcome its NPA problem?
(ii) What will be the effect of these guidelines on the stressed
Power Projects?
(iii) Whether the timeline of 180 days suggested in the Resolution
Plan should be increased?
(iv) The amount of hair-cut that the Banks are likely to take
following the IBC Act.
(v) Need for a separate Framework for resolution of the Stressed
Assets in the Electricity Sector.
(vi) Need to modify the condition regarding consensus among
all the Lenders for implementation of Resolution Plan so as
to get it aligned with IBC.
(vii) Will the new Guidelines on NPA not spur the filing of
insolvency proceedings with NCLT?
(viii) If the Revised Framework disincentivizes the Banks in
carrying out Resolution of a Stressed Projects with the existing
Promoter?
(ix) Need to preserve at least those Stressed Power Projects that
are functional so as not to jeopardize the Energy Security of
the Nation.
(x) Need to create an alternative mechanism to ensure timely
payment from Discoms.
(xi) Need for the Government Agencies like Railways to take over
some of the Stressed Power Projects.
(xii) Need to make use of the DBT Mechanism for transferring
electricity subsidy to the consumers.
(xiii)Need to synchronize the resolution of Sectoral Issues with
the RBI’s Guidelines.
(xiv) Accountability and responsibility of the Lenders under the
Plan?

93
(xv) Coordination system among Regulators, Government, Banks,
promoters and other stakeholders.
5. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives concerned responded to
the same. The Committee directed the representatives concerned to furnish
written replies to those queries which could not be readily responded
to by them.
The Committee then took a lunch-break.
The above mentioned witnesses withdrew.
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla Secretary
2. Shri Sanjiv Nandan Sahai Additional Secretary
3. Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Secretary
5. Shri Ravi Mittal Additional Secretary
6. Shri Pankaj Jain Joint Secretary
Ministry of Coal
7. Shri Ashish Upadhyaya Joint Secretary
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha Joint Secretary
PSUs/Autonomous Body/Statutory Body
9. Shri Pankaj Batra Chairperson, CEA
10. Shri Rajeev Sharma CMD, PFC
11. Shri P.V. Ramesh CMD, REC
12. Shri Gurdeep Singh CMD, NTPC
13. Shri P.K. Mukopadhyay Chairman, DVC
14. Shri Anil Kumar Jha Chairman, CIL

94
6. After the lunch, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Power, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Coal etc. to
the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda and focus
area for the discussion and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
7. The Committee inter alia also deliberated upon the following
points related to the subject — “Impact of new RBI Guidelines on Non-
Performing Assets in Power Sector” with the representatives of the
Ministry of Power, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Coal,
etc:
(i) The number of stressed Power Projects that have been
provided Coal-linkages since December, 2017.
(ii) Whether the production of coal in the country is now
sufficient to fully cater the demand of power sector?
(iii) Whether the problem of rail rakes for transportation of coal
has been sorted out completely?
(iv) Are the power plants maintaining the normative coal stocks?
(v) Feasibility of the proposal that 14th Finance Commission
grants to the defaulting local bodies may be given directly
to the DISCOMs.
(vi) Need for allowing all the coast-based thermal plants to import
the coal so that the load on the railways and on Coal India
can be reduced.
8. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives concerned responded to
the same. The Committee directed the representatives concerned to furnish
written replies to those queries which could not be readily responded
to by them.
9. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were
kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

95
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 2 ND AUGUST,
2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Shri Malyadri Sriram
7. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
13. Shri Oscar Fernandes
14. Shri Manish Gupta
15. Shri Narain Das Gupta

96
S ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Pandey —Director
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip —Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised
them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(a) Draft Report on “Impact of RBI’s Revised Framework for
Resolution of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity
Sector”.
(b) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Power.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize
the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament in the current session.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Not related to this Report.