STANDING COMMITTEE ON

ENERGY
3 1 (2017-2018)

SIXTEENTH LOK SA

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Evaluation of Role, Performance
and Functioning of the Power Exchanges']

THIRTY FIRST REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)


THIRTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Evaluation
of Role, Performance and Functioning of
the Power Exchanges']

Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.03.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.03.2018

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phaiguna, 1939 (Saka)


COE NO. 290

Price : Rs. 104.00

© 2018 By Lok Saba SecrETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business

in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. Akashdeep, New Delhi
110 002.


Composition OF THE CommitTgE (2017-18)

CONTENTS

Pace No.

INTRODUCTION

Cuarter-l

Cuaprer-II

Cuarrer-IIL

Cuaprer-[V

Crapter-V

Report...

Observations/Recommendations which 18५6 been
accepted by the 00एथआगाशा।................-- ५५००

Obseryations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the.Government's
replies...

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration,

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the final replies of the Government are still awaited...

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
February 15, 2018

Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
14th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy.

(iii)
(v)

23

58

59

72

73

76

@


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2017-18)

Lok Sabha

Dr, Kambhampati Hari Babu — Chairperson

22,
33.

MEMBERS

Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
Shri Om Birla
Shri M. Chandrakasi
Shri Harish Dwivedi
Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
Dr. Arun Kumar
Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
Shri Malyadri Sriram
Shri R.P, Marutharajaa
Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
Shri M.B. Rajesh
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan

Rajya Sabha
Shri T.K.S. Elangovan

Shri Oscar Fernandes


(iv)

Shri Manish Gupta

Shri Ram Jethmalani

Dr. Prabhakar Kore

Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
Shri S. Muthukaruppan

Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani

Smt. Viplove Thakur

SECRETARIAT
1, Shri A.K. Singh ना Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K, Pandey _ Director
3. Ms. Deepika ते Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been
authorized by the Committee to Present the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirty First Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 14th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy on the subject 'Evaluation of Role, Performance and Functioning
of the Power Exchanges',

2. The 14th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27th April,
2016 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in this Report
Were received on 28th July, 2017,

3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on February 15, 2018.

4, An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 14th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II,

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
tecommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report,

New Dewy; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARI BABU,
March 05, 2018 Chairperson,
Phalguna 14, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

)



CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with Action
Taken by the Ministry of Power on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
(2015-16) on the subject 'Evaluation of Role, Performance and F unctioning
of the Power Exchanges’.

2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
27th April, 2016 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the same
day, The Report contained 17 Recommendations/Observations.

3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government, These have been categorized as follows:—

(i) | Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:

Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 17.

Total - 13

Chapter-II

(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies;

Nil. Total ~ 00
Chapter-HL
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in tespect of which the replies

of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:

Serial Nos. 2, 10, 14 and 16, Total - 04
Chapter-IV.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited: दि

Nil. Total - 00
Chapter-V



4. The Committee draw attention of the Ministry towards the
fact that the 14th Report of the Committee on the Subject "Evaluation
of Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power Exchanges’ was
presented to the Parliament on April 27, 2016 and the Ministry was
expected to furnish Action Taken Replies regarding the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the that Report within
three months of its presentation to the Parliament. However, the
Action Taken Replies were furnished on 28th July 2017 £¢. the Ministry
took 18 Months to furnish the replies. The Committee have taken a
serious view of this delay and they expeet the Minis
the prescribed time limit.

y to adhere to

5. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-f of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.

Recommendation (SI. No, 2)

6. The Committee were informed that one of the objectives behind
the setting up of the Power Exchanges was to promote competition in the
power market. The Electricity Act, 2003 envisages development of a
competitive power market for promoting efficiency, economy and for
mobilization of new investments in the Power Sector, However, the
Committee had noted that there were only wo Power Exchanges in the
country of which one had monopoly in the Power Trading, which according
to the Committee, w

not in the interest of the sector. 96 per cent of the

Power Market was owned by one Excharige 1.९. IEX and the owner of this
very Exchange had been debarred from the Commodity Exchanges, That

was undoubtedly a very anomalous situation as the Exchan,

¢ against which
action had to be taken was, in fact, running the whole Power Market,

The Committee had found that the objective of ensuring competition
in the Power Market had not been followed scrupulously. Rather, consciously
or otherwise, one Exchange had heen allowed to monopolize the Market.
This had led to perception that the Regulations, Contracts and other
Guidelines had been tailor-made to suit the requirements of one Power
Exchange.


With a view to addressing the need for elimination of this anomaly in
the Power Market which was not conducive to the concept of competitive
economy, the Committee had recommended that:—

@)

(ii)

We
under:—

The Ministry and the CERC must come up with clear and
effective Guidelines so as to ensure healthy competition in the
Power Market and also to eliminate the monopoly of one Power
Exchange so that the diminishing trust of the stakeholders in the
system can be restored.

The Ministry should work out an Action Plan on setting up of
the Power Exchanges in every zone (North Zone, South Zone,
East Zone, West Zone, Central Zone and North East Zone) of

India, to facilitate competition in the Market which will benefit
the consumer.

In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as

"(i) The over-arching objective of the Electricity Act, 2003 is to
encourage competition, induce efficiency improvements, with a view
to ensuring quality supply of electricity to consumers at competitive
rates, The Central Commission evolved an enabling framework for
operation of power exchanges through its Power Market Regulations,
2010. The power exchange is a platform which can be located
anywhere, irrespective of the geographical area where physical power
transactions are being made, there would be no need to have regional
power exchanges physically. If it is seen by the CERC that there are
sufficient regional transactions within a region, the regional power
exchange can also be operated in the existing power exchanges, which
would save in infrastructure cost, or, could be set up on Region-wise
basis. At present, since the day ahead transactions are to an average
extent of about 4,000 MW, out of a total all-India peak demand of
about 1,50,000 MW, it is felt that if regional exchanges are implemented,
the transactions per exchange would go down and this would lead to
non-optimization of the available surplus power being bought by deficit
States.

The framework for operation of power exchanges through its Power
Market Regulations, 2010 addresses the issues around monopoly of


a single power exchange. The relevant extracts of the Power Market
Regulations, 2010, the Explanatory Memorandum and the Statement
of Reasons to the said Regulations are reproduced belaw:-

CERC (Power Market) Regulations, 2010

35. A Power Exchange which has less than 20% market share for
continuously two financial years falling after a period of two years of
commencement of its operations shall close operations or merge with
an existing Power Exchange with in a period of next six months. (For.
this purpose Market size is defined as the total Annual Turnover in
Million Units of all contracts transacted in all the Power Exchanges
in each financial year) Provided that this regulation shall not apply if
there are only two Power Exchanges in operation.

Explanatory Memorandum — Power Market Regulations

9. After two years of operations, any exchange with a market share
less than 20% for a continuous period of 2 years shall need to close
or merge with other exchange. This will not be applicable in case
there are only of two exchanges operational. The rationale behind this
stipulation is to concentrate liquidity for improved pricing of contracts
while at the same time avoiding monopoly of a single exchange.

Statement of Objects and Reasons — CERC (Power Market)
Regulations, 2010

8.19.2 The rationale behind this provision in the regulations is to
concentrate liquidity in Power Exchanges for improved pricing of
standardized contracts, Numerous spot prices with low volume will
provide confusing signals and not serve the intended purpose of Power
Exchange providing investment signals. It shall also complicate corridor
allocation process adopted by NLDC and have a negative impact on
social welfare maximization. Sufficient care has been taken to ensure
that a situation where monopoly of a single Power Exchange occur
does not happen by allowing two Exchanges to always co exis

. CERC issued the Second Amendment to the Open Access
Regulations on 11.09.2013, wherein, SLDCs were asked to
provide an exchange neutral NOC to the market participants to
help creating a level playing ficld between the two power
exchanges,


. CERC notified Third Amendment of the Open Access Regulations
on 12.05.2015 reducing the NLDC Operating charges Payable

° Further, CERC vide order in Petition No.158/MP/2013, directed
allocation of upto 10% of the Constrained corridor to the smaller

seller in case of collective transaction, for a day, shall be capped
to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 200 per day,

(ii) The Electricity Act 2003 Provides that development of the market
is Vested with the Appropriate Commission, The CERC (Power Market)
Regulations allow the setting up of multiple Power exchanges, subject
to the provision that each power exchange must have a market share
of at least 20% and subject to at least two power exchanges being
in operation, for which this provision of 20% market share does not
apply. For the 20% condition, if the market share remains less than
20% for two continuous financial years falling after a period of two
years of commencement of operation, then it is to close its Operations

exchanges in operation, Worldwide, it is Seen that there is normally
one power exchange for a country, which js regulated by the
Appropriate Regulator, P


Further, the Central Commission vide CERC's Power Market
Regulations and related orders do not prohibit setting up of Power
Exchanges in every zone. Regulation 301) of Power Market Regulations
defines Power Exchange Market and part 3 of the Power Market
Regulations provides for Approval/suspension of the contracts by the
Commission. Any cligible entity fully compliant to the regulations
notified by CERC can set up and run a Power Exchange, with prior
approval of the Commission.

In India, CERC has provided for multiple Power Exchanges to exist
simultaneously in one physical market, This allows for competition
amongst the existing Power Exchanges and an automatic system of
checks and balances. The market participants stand to benefit from
the innovative process of Exchanges vying with each other for
providing, superior quality of service. A stakeholder Jocated in any
corner of the country can transact locally on the pan-India power
exchange platform. Worldwide, it is seen that there is only one power
exchange in a country such as European Energy Exchange (EEX) in
Germany, Power next in France and Belgium Power Exchange (Belpex)
in Belgium etc. Also, a single exchange named Nord Pool operates
Spot and Balancing Market segments in three countries namely Norway,
Sweden and Finland.

Two power exchanges viz. Indian Energy Exchange (IEX), Delhi and
Power Exchange India Ltd (PXIL), Mumbai commenced operations
from 27.06.2008 and 22.10.2008 respectively after approval of CERC.

Pursuant to the application filed by NTPC Ltd. seeking permission to
set up and operate Power Exchange, the CERC granted in-principle
approval to establish a National Power Exchange, subject to compliance
of certain directions vide Order dated 1.7.2009 in Petition No.
91/2007. Thereafter, CERC approved the Rules, By-laws and Business
Rules of National Power Exchange Limited (NPEX) for setting up and
operation of Power Exchange on 24,2.2012. Thereafter, NPEX Board
approved the ‘Business Plan’ for setting up of Power Exchange and
‘Vision Document’ was prepared encompassing various future market
scenarios.

NPEX was engaged in a process to ascertain the ‘business viability’
under changed market scenario and the promoters were in the process


of revisiting the issue to study feasibility of 3rd Power Exchange in
the Indian power market, In the meantime, NTPC, one of the promoters
of NPEX, decided to exit from NPEX deriving no Strategic advantage
by investing in the Power exchange, Thereafter, the group of promoters
of NPEX has voluntarily recommended for winding up of the Company.
Therefore, the Commission vide Order dated 17.4.2014 in Petition
No. 262/SM/2014. has withdrawn the approval of National Power
Exchange with effect from 1.4.2014,

Also, in November, 2011, Marquis Energy Exchange Limited filed
Application under CERC (Power Market) Regulations, 2010 seeking
permission for setting up and Operation of a Power Exchange. Vide
order dated 16.01.2013 in the Petition No. 216/PX/2011, CERC rejected
the application of Marquis Energy E

change Limited as the company
did not meet the net worth criteria required under the Power Market
Regulations for registration for selling up and operation of 8 Power
Exchange, However, the Fecommendation of the Committee has been
Noted."

8. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee that
the Ministry and the CERC must come up with clear and effective
guidelines so as to ensure healthy competition in the power market
and also to eliminate the monopoly of one power exchange so that the
diminishing trust of the stakeholders in the system can be restored,
the Government has Stated that the Power Market Regulations, 2010
address the issues around monopoly of a single power exchange,
wherein a power exchange which has less than 20% market share for
continuously two financial years falling after a period of two years of
commencement of its operations shall close Operations or merge with
an existing Power Exchange within a Period of next six months,
provided that this regulation shall not apply if there are only two
Power Exchanges in operation,

It has been submitted that the rationale behind this stipulation
is to concentrate liquidity for improved pricing of contracts While at
the same time avoiding monopoly of a Single exchange and sufficient
care has been taken to ensure that a situation does not occur where
monopoly of a single Power Exchange is established by allowing two
Exchanges to always co-exist, It has also been stated that the CERC


has notified four amendments to the Power Market Regulations,
2010 in order to further competition between the Power Exchanges.

The Committee note that despite the above mentioned efforts of
the CERC, the situation on the round remains the same ie. one
power exchange (IEX) has monopoly controlling 96% of the power
trading at the power exchanges. The Committee feel that the Power
Market Regulations, 2010 and the subsequent amendments have failed
to deliver desired results as these regulations have not been able to
address the issues regarding monopoly of a single power exchange.

The Committee are of the view that the objective of ensuring
competition in the power market has not been followed scrupulously.
Rather, one exchange has been allowed to monopolize the market
which has eroded the spirit of Electricity Act, 2003. With a view to
address the need for elimination of this anomaly in the power market
which is not conducive to the concept of competitive economy, the
Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry and the
CERC must come up with clear and effective Guidelines so as to
ensure healthy competition in the Power Market and also to eliminate
the monopoly of one Power Exchange so that the diminishing trust of
the stakeholders in the system can be restored.

Recommendation (SL. No. 6)

9, The Committee had noted that functions of the Power Exchanges,
among others, included:

(i) Providing fair, transparent and neutral platform for trading of
electricity;

(ii) Matching algorithm on the principle of social welfare
maximization,

(iii) Scheduling power through merit order dispatch across the
country;

(iv) Splitting of market to alleviate congestion for delivery of power;
(v) Providing access to smaller consumers located in remote comers;

(vi) Having provisions of clearing and settlement mechanism,


(vii)

(viii)
(ix)

(x)

(xi)
(xii)

(xiii)

Round the clock access with introduction of contracts which
operate as close as 3 hours to the actual delivery;

Monthly operation of renewable energy certificate market;

Information dissemination regarding prices discovered for the
next day;

Providing pan India electronic platform for anonymous bids by
buyers and sellers;

Portfolio optimization by distribution utilities;
Facilitating open access as envisaged in the Electricity Act, 2003;

Ensuring a robust payment security mechanism.

The functions were varied and meant for development of fair and
transparent system. However, it had also led to various problems which
were inherent and related to the working of the Power Exchanges. The
temporal nature of prices, seasonality of supply and demand dynamics,
inadequate transmission network, scope of participant's ability to influence
prices, etc, had also been brought to the fore which require immediate
remedial attention, The Comittee, therefore, had recommended that:

@

ci)

(iii)

10.

The areas of functioning of the Power Exchanges need to be
safeguarded from external interventions,

Functioning of the Power Exchanges should be thoroughly
reviewed,

Clearing and settlement mechanism needs to be more simple and
transparent,

In its reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under;

"(i) It is mentioned that power exchanges should be safeguarded from
external interventions, for e.g. a participant's ability to influence prices.
It may be stated that whenever any rules are made, there is always
a scope for gaming by participants, whether in India or in any other
country. Regulations for adequate safeguards have been provided
through market oversight. In case it is detected that some participant
is trying to influence market prices for its own benefit, there are


provisions for taking action against the same, including cancelling of
the Membership of the member of the Exchange and in case of
malpractice of the Exchange, cancellation of the Registration of the
Exchange by CERC. CERC Regulations provide for such safeguards.
Part 4 of Power Market Regulations spells out the principles of Market
and Market Design. Under regulation 25(iii) of Power Market
Regulations, the Power Exchanges constitute a Market Surveillance
committee headed by an independent director of the board and having
members from the executive team of the Power Exchange. No member
of this committee is a Member of the Power Exchange. The exchanges
submit a surveillance report quarterly to CERC. The report is analysed
by CERC and exceptions in the functioning of power exchanges, if
any, are taken up with the power exchanges for suitable corrective
measures.

(ii) As per information made available by CERC, it has initiated and
completed the exercise of carrying out review of Power Exchanges.
The auditors, M/s KPMG and M/s Deloitte were engaged for review
of Power Exchanges PXIL and IEX respectively. CERC has received
a comprehensive report from both the auditors and based on the
report CERC is taking actions to ensure transparency and compliance
to Power Market Regulations. The Commission has also initiated IT
audit of Power Exchanges.

(iii) The clearing and settlement mechanism of both Power Exchanges
is as per the bye laws and business rules as approved by the
Commission. Multiple clauses of the Bye Laws of IEX (one of the
exchanges) spell out the Clearing and settlement process undertaken
by IEX as approved by CERC. Chapter 5 of the Business rules of
PXIL (one of the exchanges) cxplains the clearing and settlement of
funds at PXIL as approved by CERC. Vide Order in Petition No. 175/
RC/2015, CERC has approved a modified trading platform for PXIL
called P-NEST."

11. The Committee are satisfied to note that the regulations
for adequate safeguards against external interventions have been
previded and in case it is detected that some participant is trying to
influence market prices for its own benefit, there are provisions for
taking action against the same, including cancelling of the Membership

10


of the member of the Exchange and in case of malpractice of the
Exchange, cancellation of the Registration of the Exchange by the
CERC.

The Committee have also noted that the exchanges subinit a
surveillance report quarterly to CERC and the report is analyzed and
exceptions in the functioning of power exchanges, if any, are taken
up with the power exchanges for suitable corrective measures and the
clearing and settlement mechanism of both the Power Exchanges is
as per the bye laws and business rules as approved by the Commission,

The Committee appreciate the fact that the CERC has initiated
and completed the exercise of carrying out review of Power Exchanges
and IT audit of Power Exchanges has also been initiated. However,
the Committee want the CERC to furnish before them the report
from the auditors M/s KPMG and M/s Deloitte. The Committee would
also like to know about the actions taken by the CERC based on
these reports to ensure transparency and compliance of Power Market
Regulations.

Recommendation (SI. No. 10)

12. The Committee had noted that Regulation 22 of the Power
Market Regulations, 2010 governed the broad structure of the Power
Exchanges and Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010
specifies the share holding pattern of the Power Exchanges. Regulation 19
notes that any shareholder other than a member of the Power Exchanges
can have a maximum of 25 per cent shareholding; for a member, the limit
has been fixed at 5 per cent. In total, a Power Exchange can have a
maximum of 49 per cent of its total shareholding owned by entities (whether
directly or indirectly) which are members of the Power Exchanges. The
reason given for share holding pattern was that the Power Exchange should
be a demutualised and ring fenced organization and hence a power sector
participant may have the stake in the power sector only upto 5 per cent
of the total shareholding. The Committee had found that despite precautions,
the Regulations for share holding pattern of the Power Exchange provided
an opportunity for control of the Exchanges and had led to their mutualisation.
The over-bearing presence of one exchange in the electricity sector and its
complete command and control exemplified that the rationale behind the

an


Regulations for share holding pattern of the Power Exchange did not
deliver the desired results. The Committee, therefore, had recommended

that:

12

(i) Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 should be
revised to find out as to why it has failed in its objective.

(ii) Share holding pattern of the Power Exchanges need to be made
wide ranging and demutualised with the involvement of stake
holders of every segment of the electricity sector,

13. The Ministry of Power, in its reply, has stated as under:

"The provisions of the Power Market Regulations already ensure
demutualisation and enables involvement of any stakeholder of electricity
sector subject to the conditions specified therein. Regulation 19 of the
Power Market Regulations, 2010 specifies the shareholding pattern of
the power exchanges. There it is specified that any shareholder other
than the member of the power exchange can have a maximum of
25% shareholding. For a member the limit has been fixed at 5%, The
relevant extract is excerpted below:—

19, Shareholding Pattern of Power Exchange

(1). The shareholding pattern for equity holders in the Power Exchange
shall be as follows:

° Any shareholder other than a Member of the Power Exchange
can have a maximum (whether directly or indirectly) of 25%
shareholding in the Power Exchange.

. A Member of the Power Exchange can have a maximum (whether
directly or indirectly) of 5% shareholding in the Power Exchange.

. In total, a Power Exchange can have a maximum of 49% of its
total shareholding owned by entities (whether directly or
indirectly) which are Members of the Power Exchange,

The statement and object of reasons for Power Market

Regulations, 2010 provides the rationale for these limits. It is reproduced

below for clarification:

8.5.2 Decision and rationale

(i) | The Commission has considered the views of all stakeholders.
The Commission maintains the view that Power Exchange is


market based institution and hence should be a widely held
organization. The commission is also of the view that Power
Exchange should be fully demutualised and ring fenced
organization and hence a power sector participant may have
equity stake in the Power Exchange (as is an internationally
practice) but limited to 5% of total shareholding.

8.5.3 In view of the reasons given in the above paragraphs, the
shareholding pattern in the final version of the regulations is as briefly
described below:

(i) Any shareholder (in case of a corporate this is including its
subsidiaries and cross holding in other companies and associate
companies) other than member of the Power Exchange can
have a maximum of 25% shareholding in the Power Exchange.
(Earlier in guidelines it was required that 51% of the equity
share capital of the PX should be held by the public other than
the shareholder having trading rights in the Exchange).

(ii) A member of the Power Exchange can have maximum of 5%
shareholding in the Power Exchange, (Earlier there was no limit
on individual member's shareholding in the Power Exchange)."

14. In response to the recommendation of the Committee that
Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 should be
revisited in order to find out why it has failed in its objective and
share holding pattern of the Power Exchanges need to be made wide
ranging and demutualised with the involvement of stakeholders of
every segment of the electricity sector, the Government in its reply
has stated that the provisions of the Power Market Regulations already
ensure de-mutualisation and enables involvement of any stakeholder
of electricity sector subject to the conditions specified therein and has
quoted regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 which
was furnished to this Committee earlier also and forms part of the
main report on this subject,

The Committee expect a Action Taken Note in respect to their
recommendation and not a repetition of the information that has
already been incorporated by the Committee themselves in their
main report and which forms a background to this recommendation

13


of the Committee. The Government in its reply has merely provided
a part of Power Market Regulation, 2010 which cannot be regarded
as action taken by the Government on the recommendation of the
Committee.

The Committee are of the view that despite precautions, the
Regulations for share holding pattern of the Power Exchange provide
an opportunity for control of the Exchanges and haye led to their
mutualisation. The over-bearing presence of one exchange in the
electricity sector and its complete command and control exemplifies
that the Regulations for share holding pattern of the Power Exchange
did not deliver the desired results. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their recommendation that:

(i) Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 should
be revised to find out as to why it has failed in its objective.

(ii) Share holding pattern of the Power Exchanges need to be
made wide ranging and demutualised with the involvement
of stake holders of every segment of the electricity sector,

Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)

15. The Committee had noted that the regulators had been entrusted
with the responsibility of development of the Power Market as laid down
in the Electricity Act which specifies that the appropriate Commission shall
endeavour to promote the development of a market (including trading) in
power in such a manner as may be specified, and shall be guided by the
National Electricity Policy. The National Policy enjoins upon the appropriate
Commission to undertake consultation for the development of market and
to provide regulation for the Power Exchanges. Accordingly, the Commission
had taken a series of steps, including issuance of guidelines and notification
of market regulations. These regulations also provide for qualification and
disqualification for the appointment of Director in the Board of a Power
Exchange. It inter alia includes Risk Management Mechanism Requirement
and framework for market oversight and surveillance. The regulations of
the regulator are extended to Day Ahead Markets, Term Ahead Markets,
Renewable Energy Certificates, ctc. The Committee has been apprised that
these regulations have ensured that the market functions in a fair and
transparent manner. The market intermediaries like electricity traders and

14


market infrastructure like the power exchanges are regulated through these
regulations. In addition, the CERC has notified a series of enabling regulations
for the development of the Power Market and for promoting power trading.
The Committee had also been apprised that absence of market access for
buyers and sellers of electricity, evacuation infrastructure for seamless
flow of electricity, safe and secure operation of the grid are some of the
major bottlenecks that are hindering the growth of the electricity sector,
The Committee had found that despite wide ranging regulations in this
regard, the problems afflicting the sector were very evident. Inaccessibility
to the market for buyers and sellers, evacuation inadequacy, etc., were not
insurmountable problems, If this was hampering the growth of the market,
then the regulations of the CERC seemed to have failed in achieving the
desired objective, The Committee, therefore, had recommended that:

(i) ॥ should be ascertained as to why the regulations of the CERC
have not yielded the desired results and whether these regulations
are conducive for the development of the market,

(ii) In what manner the sector can be eased from over regulations,
and it is left to develop on its intrinsic strength,

16. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:

"(i) In pursuance of the provisions contained in Section 66 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 along with the overarching principles laid down
in the National Electricity Policy, the CERC has taken a number of
regulatory interventions to promote the development of power market.
The regulatory interventions/initiatives by the CERC from time to time
have resulted in significant development of the clectricity markets.
This is borne out by the facts given below:

1... The volume of electricity transacted through traders has increased
from 21.92 BUs in 2008-09 to 34.56 BUs in 2014-15, The
weighted average price of electricity transacted through traders
declined from Rs.7.29/kWh in 2008-09 to Rs.4.28/kWh in
2014-15,

2... The volume of electricity transacted through power exchanges
has increased from 2.77 BUs in 2008-09 to 29.40 BUs in
2014-15, The weighted average price of electricity transacted

15


through power exchanges declined from Rs. 7.49/kWh in 2008-
09 to Rs. 3.50/kWh in 2014-15.

we

Grid Code provided range of operation of frequency within
specific band which is at present 49.9 Hz to 50.05 Hz. To
supplement the Grid Code towards secure and reliable grid
operation, the Commission has issued Deviation Settlement
Mechanism (DSM) Regulations which provide inter alia for
deterrents in the form of Unscheduled Interchange (Ul) charges
for deviation from schedule. The tightening of grid frequency
and DSM Regulations issued by the Commission has improved
grid discipline.

4 Thus, the regulatory initiatives taken by the CERC have resulted
in providing conducive development of electricity markets.

(ii) Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that 'The
Appropriate Commission shall endeavour to promote the development
of a market (including trading) in power in such manner as may be
specified and shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy referred

to in section 3 in this regard’.

Accordingly, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)
has created a conducive regulatory framework for development of
short term market and also institutionalized trading avenues through
traders and power exchanges. Prior to the regulatory initiatives taken
by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, major bottlenecks
that were hindering growth of the electricity sector inter alia included
absence of market access for buyers and sellers of electricity,
evacuation infrastructure for seamless flow of electricity, safe and
secure operation of the grid ete.

The CERC while drawing powers from the provisions Section 66 of
the Electricity Act, 2003 for promoting and development of market
(including trading) in power and adhering to the over-arching principles
laid down in the National Electricity Policy, has taken a number of
initiatives to strengthen the power markets.

‘The regulations issued by CERC have ensured that the market functions
in a fair and transparent manner. The market intermediaries like
clectricity traders, market infrastructure like power exchanges are
regulated through these regulations. The market rules, risk management


are defined through these regulations, The CERC, through its regulations
has ensured that Open Access becomes a reality.

The initiatives taken by the CERC cannot be termed as over regulation
of the sector. A well functioning market ensures that the confidence
of participants in market is built. The regulatory interventions of the
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission have at pan-India level
helped in resource optimization by facilitating the transfer of surplus
power to deficit regions in the country."

17. The Committee have been given an impression that the
CERC's regulatory jatiyes/interyentions have resulted in significant
development of the electricity market. It has been furnished that
CERC has created a conducive regulatory framework and has ensured

that the market functions in a fair and transparent manner, claiming
that the CERC, though its regulations has ensured that open access
becomes a reality,

It has been asserted that the initiatives taken by the CERC
cannot be termed as over regulation of the Sector and regulatory
interventions of the CERC have, at pan-India level, helped in resource
optimization by facilitating the transfer of surplus power to deficit
regions in the country,

The Committee agree with the view of the Government that a
well functioning market ensures that the confidence of participants
in market is built. It is being stated that the regulatory initiatives
taken by the CERC have ensured conducive and significant
development of the electricity market and the major bottlenecks that
were hindering growth of the electricity sector prior to these regulatory
initiatives have been removed.

The Committee have been made to understand that CERC's
Regulations have already achieved the desired results and the Sector
has significantly developed because of them. The Committee are of
the view that now there is no point in burdening the sector with-these
Regulations anymore, therefore, the Committee reiterate their
recommendation that the sector should now be eased out of the over
regulations and left to develop on its intrinsic strength,



Recommendation (81, No. 15)

18. The Committee had noted that regulations of grant of connectivity,
long-term excess and mid-term open excess in inter-State transmission
aimed at providing transmission products of different varieties, standardization
of procedures, defining timelines and ensure level playing field among
different categories of market players. CERC had also provided for deemed
concurrence of SLDC for open excess if their decision was not given
within a specified time frame. Grid code and deviation settlement mechanism
regulations were also there for maintaining grid discipline. The Committee
had been apprised that the Commission's initiative in regard to grid discipline,
deviation settlement mechanism and grid security had resulted in improved
reliability of power supply. However, close observance of these factors also
led to the conclusion that denial of permission by the State Load Despatch
Centers, delay in the name of grid discipline and non-transparent settlement
mechanism had led to manipulation of the activities. The Committee,
therefore, had recommended that:

(i) The necessity of prior permission from State Load Despatch
Centre should be reconsidered and done away with.

(ii) It should be ensured that no malpractice is being resorted to in
the garb of grid discipline.

(iii) Deviation Settlement Mechanism should be open and transparent.

19, The Ministry of Power, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:

"@) As per information made available by CERC & CEA, each
transmission system has got a capacity of transferring certain quantum
of power, taking into consideration the line loading capacity, voltage
stability and angular stability, These are reflected in Available Transfer
Capacity determined by the appropriate load despatch centre. Therefore,
before granting permission to the generators/consumers for entering
into transactions in power exchange, the State Load Despatch Centre
(SLDC) would have to determine if there is sufficient transaction
capacity for transfer of power through the State grid.

The State Load Despatch Centre is primarily an entity owned by the
State Government. Operation of the State grid is also handled by the

18


State Load Despatch Centre as per the operational norms specified in
the IEGC and relevant State Grid Code. Prior permission of the State
Load Despatch Centre is necessary to ensure safety and security of
the grid while providing real-time access for executing the open access
transaction. What is needed to ensure proper ring-fencing of SLDCs
to ensure that such permissions are not unreasonably withheld.

(ii) The Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) and the Deviation
Settlement Mechanism (DSM) Regulations framed by the CERC provide
for adequate deterrents against grid indiscipline. There are also
provisions for penal action against instances of gaming. Further, the
Central Commission initiates strong action against violations of grid
discipline based on the instances brought before it.

(ii) As per CERC, the Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations
provide for commercial deterrents against grid indiscipline. The
commercial norms for deviations have been clearly specified in the
Regulations and the energy accounting is done by the respective
Regional Power Committees. The settlement is carried out at the level
of Regional Load Despatch Centres. The mechanism is transparent
and functioning smoothly to the satisfaction of all sellers and buyers
involved in the transactions."

20. The Government, in its reply, has stated that the prior
permission of the State Load Despatch Centre is necessary to ensure
safety and security of the grid while providing real time access for
executing the open access transaction, However, it has been
acknowledged that there is a need to ensure proper ring-fencing of
SLDCs to ensure that such permissions are not unreasonably withheld.
It has also been stated that the deviation settlement mechanism is
transparent and functions smoothly to the satisfaction of all sellers
and buyers involved in the transactions.

The Committee would like to know about the steps taken to
ensure proper ring-fencing of SLDCs and the result thereof so that
the prior permission of the State Load Despatch Centre is not
unreasonably withheld.

Recommendation (SI, No, 16)

21. The Committee had noted that there was an over-bearing presence
of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission in the electricity sector to

19


regulate and promote it. In pursuance of its duties, the Commission had
framed guidelines, issued regulations and formed committees to oversee the
sector. CERC had also initiated some governance control mechanism at
power exchanges. This was done through Risk Management Committee,
Market Surveillance Committee, Annual IT System Audit for Data Security,
Data Integrity and Operational Efficiency, Anaual Report along with Audited
Balance Sheet, Monthly Report on Data on Prices and Volumes, and
Reviewing of the Power Exchanges, etc. The Committee also found that
all functions, varying from framing of regulations, their execution,
amendments and dispute resolutions, revolve around the regulator. It had
appropriated functions which should have been divided and delegated to
other bodies for fairness and transparency in the sector. It had assumed the
role of Judge, Jury and E
that fairness and objectivity can be compromised. Execution of the regulations
and dispute resolutions should have been with different entities to make this
sector competitive and transparent. The Committee, therefore, had
recommended that:

ecutioner and in such a situation it is but obvious

(i) Role and responsibilities of CERC should be reviewed thoroughly
to make the system at the Power Exchanges fair and objective.

(ii) The functions of execution of regulations and dispute resolutions
should be assigned to other bodies as the concentration of these
powers in one entity compromises the principle of division of
responsibilities for efficient and transparent functioning.

(ii) If need be, the CERC itself may be sub-divided and each
individual unit may be made autonomous for due discharge of
its differentiated responsibilities.

22. The Ministry of Power, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as
under:

"“(i) The Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 envisaged an
independent role for the regulator in the electricity sector. The Electricity
Act, 2003, further enlarged, the Commission's role for discharging
various regulatory functions which ier-alia include determination of
tariff, licensing, maintaining grid discipline, development of electricity
markets, promotion of renewable energy, adjudication on petitions
ete.

20


As regards the Power Exchanges, the CERC closely monitors their
functioning and issues monthly monitoring report and annual report
on power markets: The Commission has already initiated special audit
of the functioning of the power exchanges as also IT audit/third party
audit of trading software of the power exchanges. The vigilance and
proactive actions by CERC have helped ensure transparency and
accountability in the power sector and more so in the functioning of
the short term market.

(ii) The functions, responsibilities of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission have been well laid out in the Electricity Act, 2003.As
per Section 79 (1) (f) of the Act, the CERC has been mandated to
adjudicate upon disputes involving generating companies or transmission
licensee in regard to matters connected with tariff and to refer any
dispute for arbitration. Further, the orders issues by the CERC can be
challenged in the APTEL and the Supreme Court. The proper checks
and balances have already been provided in the Act.

(iii) The Electricity Act envisages CERC as a collegiate body. The
Commission consists of one Chairperson and three full time Members
who are experienced professionals in different arcas closely related to
the electricity sector. Chairperson CEA is the ex-officio Member of
CERC.

It has been stated by CERC that the issues for consideration before
it are multi-disciplinary in nature and therefore, the Act provides for
appointment of Chairperson and Members with specialization in various
disciplines like engineering, finance, law, economics, management ete.

Further, it has been informed by CERC that is has different divisions
1.6. Legal, Finance, Engineering, Economics, Regulatory Affairs etc.
to examine the issues from different dimensions and provide inputs/
analysis for further consideration of the Commission."

23. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the

Government has stated that the Electricity Act, 2003 envisaged the
Commission's role for discharging various regulatory functions which
inter alia include determination of tariff, licensing, maintaining grid
discipline, development of electricity markets, promotion of renewable
energy, adjudication on petitions ete. and as per section 79(1)(f) of

2



the Act, the CERC has been mandated to adjudicate upon disputes
involving generating companies or transmission licensee in regard to
matters connected with tariff and to refer any dispute for arbitration.

It has also been stated that the CERC has different divisions ie.
Legal, Finance, Engineering, Economics, Regulatory Affairs etc. to
examine the issues from different dimensions and provide inputs /
analysis for further consideration of the Commission.

But, the Committee feel that the role of framing regulations/by
laws, their execution and dispute resolution should not be concentrated
in a single body and it appears that the regulator has appropriated
functions which otherwise should have been divided and delegated to
other bodies for fairness and transparency in the Sector. [t has
assumed the role of Judge, Jury and Executioner and in such a
situation it is but obvious that fairness and objectivity can be
compromised. Execution of the regulations and dispute resolutions
should have been with different entities to make this sector competitive
and transparent. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation that:

(i) Role and responsibilities of CERC should be reviewed
thoroughly to make the system at the Power Exchanges
fair and objective.

(ii) The functions of execution of regulations and dispute
resolutions should be assigned to other bodies as the
concentration of these powers in one entity compromises
the principle of division of responsibilities for efficient and
transparent functioning.

(iii) If need be, the CERC itself may be sub-divided and each
individual unit may be made autonomous for due discharge
of its differentiated responsibilities.


CHAPTER IL

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Status of implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee contained in the Fourteenth Report, under
Direction 73A of the ‘Directions by the Speaker'

Recommendation (SI. No. 1)
Need for the Power Exchange

The Committee note that the Energy Sector in the country is beset
with multiple problems varying from disparity among electricity surplus-
deficit regions, demand-supply mismatch, varied tariff for diverse nature of
consumers coming from different categories, e¢c. To bring in some sort of
uniformity and also for ensuring availability of electricity on demand at
competitive price, it was felt that there should be some mechanism available
to the stakeholders of the power sector which would adequately cater to
the requirements of persons/agencies concerned. In line with this, the
Electricity Act, 2003 introduced the concept of the Power Market for the
electricity sector, The Appropriate Commission (Regulatory Commission)
Was entrusted with the responsibility of development of the Power Market,
The primary objective of the Act was to promote inter-State and intra-State
power trading within the country and ensuring the development of a
competitive market with efficiency and economy, while attracting new
investments. Consequently, the Power Exchanges came into being and
commenced their operations in the year 2008. However, the experience of
the performance of the Power Exchanges in the country since then calls
for proper scrutiny and appropriate modifications, It has neither revolutionized
or galvanized the sector, nor has there been any indication that the Power
Exchanges will usher in an era of competition, efficiency and growth of
the Power Market. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) The concept of the Power Exchanges having a lead role in the
development of the robust power market needs to be revisited,

23


24

(ii) The experience gained from the functioning of the Power
Exchanges hitherto should be analyzed in an objective manner
to assess as to how the Power Exchanges have helped in the
development of the market.

(ii) The provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 regarding the Power
Market also require to be reviewed in the proper perspective.

Reply of the Government

(@ Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that 'The
Appropriate Commission shall endeavour to promote the development
of a market (including trading) in power in such manner as may be
specified and shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy referred
to in section 3 in this regard’, The relevant provisions of the National
Electricity Policy, Para 5.7 are given below:

National Electricity Policy: Para 5.7 "Competition Aimed At Consumer
Benefits

"5.7,1(d) Development of power market would need to be undertaken
by the Appropriate Commission in consultation with all
concerned."

"5.7.1(f) Enabling regulations for inter and intra State trading and
also regulations on power exchange shall be notified by the
appropriate Commissions within six months."

Accordingly, the Central Commission viz. the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC) has created a conducive regulatory
framework for development of short term market and ६1४०
institutionalized wading avenues through traders and power exchanges.
The buyers and sellers choose a particular platform based on their
requirements for standardized or customized contracts, case of doing
business, various charges payable/receivable ctc.

The volume of transactions in various segments of the short term
market, namely through traders, bilateral transactions and power
exchanges has been increasing consistently over the period. In so far
as the power exchanges are concerned, their share as a percentage
of total electricity generation has increased from 0.94% in 2009-10 to


3% in 2015-16, Similarly, the share of traders as a percentage of total
electricity generation has moved from 3.49% in 2009-10 to 4.1% in
2011-12 and to 3% in 2015-16 and that of direct bilateral transactions
has increased from 0.81% in 2009-10 to 2% in 2015-16 as per data
published by Central Commission.

The Market Monitoring Cell (MMC) of the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC) has been monitoring the market
operations including in the power exchanges at regular intervals, through
its monthly and annual market monitoring reports.

(ii) Power exchanges have helped in developing a market where
power sector participants can buy and sell power that is not tied up
in long term PPAs. The institution of power exchange has facilitated
in re-distributing electricity from surplus regions to deficit regions of
the country. It has also helped in price discovery of electricity in the
Day Ahead market and price dissemination electronically in the country.

(iii) The objective of the Electricity Act, 2003 is to encourage
competition with a view to ensuring quality supply of electricity to
consumers at competitive rates. While this underlining vision is reflected
through various provisions, section 66 of the Act specifically provides
that—

'The Appropriate Commission shall endeavour to promote the
development of a market (including trading) in power in such manner
as may be specified and shall be guided by the National Electricity
Policy referred to in section 3 in this regard,"

The Act, therefore, provides responsibility to the Appropriate
Commission for development of the market in electricity and in this
regard will be guided by the National Electricity Policy. The Government
of India as well as the CERC have taken a number of initiatives to
encourage competition and facilitate power market development. As a
result, the country today has generation capacity to the tune of 309GW,
transmission capacity of 684454MVA (AC) and 16500MW (HVDC),
inter-regional capacity of 62650MW. The number of participants in
various segments of the power sector have increased substantially,
i.e. around 600 generating stations, 30 transmission licensees,

25


70 distribution utilities, 2 power exchanges, 43 trading licensees, 1
NLDC, 5 RLDCs, different State LDCs ere.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated:28/07/2017]

Recommendation (51, No. 3)

The Committee observe that the Power Exchanges are an online platform
that help generators and consumers to come together and discover prices
of electricity, based on the demand-supply mechanism. It also fulfills the
diverse needs of electricity consumers in the country. Large consumers
with a requirement of 1 MW and above are primarily served by the Power
Exchanges for buying electricity. The Power Market is now moving from
a regulated one to a market driven regime and hence more and more buyers
and sellers are opting to trade electricity through these Exchanges, However,
the existence of only two Power Exchanges has been restricting the effective
functioning of the sector. The monopoly of one Exchange has further
eroded the spirit of the Electricity Act, 2003 and is impinging upon hassle-
free trading activities in the electricity market. This has hampered alternative
mechanisms to evolve and hindered further improvement in the performance
of the Exchanges. It has also led to problems of power liquidity, non-
transparent peak management, under-utilization of transmission capacity
and optimal functioning of the market. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that:

(i) Power Exchanges need to be made effective paving the way for
a level playing field among themselves.

(ii) Power liquidity in the market should be in the public domain,
leading to transparency,

(ii) Peak management of power should be overhauled and streamlined
in an objective manner.

(iv) There should be real time declaration of transmission capacity
so as to minimize any manipulation.

Reply of the Government

(i) There is no bar in the CERC Regulations for setting up power
exchanges, provided each power exchange has a minimum of

26


20% market share, subject to a minimum of two power exchanges.
There is a level playing field for all the power exchanges as the
Regulations for all of them are the same.

Further, CERC has taken steps to provide a level playing field to the
power Exchanges. CERC vide order in Petition. No.158/MP/2013,
directed allocation of upto 10% of the constrained corridor to the
smaller Power Exchange with the provision for review of the
methodology after six months. Vide order in Petition No. 279/RC/
2015 SLDCs are required to grant Exchange neutral NoC /Prior Standing
Clearance to State Utility or an intra-State entity intending to participate
in trading through Power Exchange(s). CERC vide Petition No. 246/
MP/2015 stipulated an appropriate and reasonable methodology for
allocation of "Operating Charges" under Regulation 17 of the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (Open Access in inter-State
Transmission) Regulations, 2008 ("Open Access Regulations") to be
paid by the Power Exchange India Limited to NLDC for collective
transaction,

In order to further competition and provide a level playing field,
CERC notified Fourth Amendment of the Open Access in inter-State
Transmission Regulations on 22nd June 2016, wherein NLDC operating
charges have been reduced and are now payable by each of the
successful buyer and seller on the basis of its energy scheduled
(MWh) at regional periphery.

(7). Market oversight is required to maintain the market integrity and
credibility and to ensure that the market is fair and efficient, The
Commission has always accorded importance to transparency in
functioning of the Power Exchanges. In accordance with the CERC
Regulations, the aggregate buy and sell bids, along with the bid price,
but without mentioning the name of the bidders, is being put in the
public domain. It has also been enshrined in the Power Market
Regulations that a Power Exchange shall function with the objective
to ensure fair, neutral, efficient and robust price discovery. The Power
Exchanges are required to comply with the provisions of the
Regulations and their status of compliance is monitored regularly.
Further, the power liquidity position is closely monitored by the
Commission and the status is published through its Monthly Monitoring
Reports/Annual Reports.

27


28

(iii) It may be stated that the mechanism for arriving at the uniform
clearing price is used for every 15-minute time block, whether during
off-peak hours or peak hours, and put on the website of the power
exchange. Therefore, there is a transparent way of arriving at the
peak power prices also. Since there is more demand during peak
hours than during off peak hours, the market principles would dictate
that peak power is valued more and therefore traded at a higher price,
as compared to power during off peak hours.

Further, the peak management forms part of the overall power
procurement portfolio of the distribution licensees and is managed by
such licensees themselves. As per information made available by CERC,
the Power Exchanges operate 24X7 as per the orders of the Central
Commission and distribution utilities mect their short term power
requirement (including for peak hours) through power exchanges as
well.

Further, the Commission, through IEGC has mandated as per the
following:

"5.3(d) Each SLDC shall carry out its own demand estimation
from the historical data and weather forecast data from time to
time. All distribution licensees and other concerned persons shall
provide relevant data and other information as required by SLDC
for demand estimate.

(c) While the demand estimation for operational purposes is to
be done on a daily/weekly/monthly basis initially, mechanisms
and facilities at SLDCs shall be created at the earliest but not
later than 1,1,2011 to facilitate on-line estimation of demand for
daily operational use for each 15 minutes block.

(f) The monthly estimated demand by the SLDC shall be
provided to RLDC and RPC for better operation planning."

(iv) Transmission capability is determined through "Available Transfer
Capability (ATC)", which is initially estimated and publicly displayed
on the website of the system operator for all inter-regional/inter bid
areas, three months in advance. This is revised on a monthly basis,
depending on actual situation on the ground, with respect to outage/


restoration of generating units/lines/other power system elements, and
again revised during the day in case of further outage/restoration.
There is no system of real time declaration on a minute to minute
basis, since system operation is planned on day-ahead basis in
accordance with the CERC's Indian Electricity Grid Code Regulations
and revised during the day, due to change in schedule, with actual
implementation at a minimum gap of one hour/one and a half hours
ahead basis. However, this can be attempted in a shorter interval
through online load flow/stability studies once the same is
operationalized. However, this would not be useful for collective
transactions which are finalized on day ahead basis, but would be
useful for intra-day/contingency contracts on the power exchange,

The responsibility of declaration of availability of transfer capability
on real-time basis lies with the system operator/NLDC/SLDCs. The
NLDC provides information related to availability of transfer capability,
through its website. It is recognized that the prior knowledge of
congestion could influence bidding strategics and cause variation in
prices,

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 4)

Short Term Contracts

The Committee note that the Power Market is largely dominated by
long-term power purchase agreements, However, these long-term contracts
have been found to create problem of peak demand as either the buyer is
stuck with excess capacity or there is a shortfall in supply. Besides, the
Storage capacity of clectricity is very limited, adding to the problem. To
address these shortcomings of the Power Market, there is a need to emphasize
short-term and Day Ahead Markets. Before the Power Exchanges, short-
term contracts were driven by either direct contract between -parties or
through power traders. The Exchanges have restructured the unorganized
short-term market, especially Day Ahead Contracts. The new market structure
that has evolved over the last few years provides distribution utilities with
avenues to optimize their power purchase portfolio and reduce overall
power purchase cost. This has brought in real time competition and helped

29


the Power Market in balancing its sale and purchases. However, a lot more
needs to be done so as to instill confidence in the fair functioning of the
Power Exchanges. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) | A mechanism should be evolved to ensure that electricity trading
at the Power Exchanges is being done in a proper and effective
manner,

(ii) The short-term contracts need to be redefined so as to make
them fit for contracts other than Day Ahead Market.

(iii) The bulk purchasers of power, i.¢., distribution utilities should
have some say in the wheeling of the Powers Exchanges.

Reply of the Government

(0). Electricity trading on power exchanges is based on the fair and
scientific principle of price discovery, Price discovery mechanism is
the process of determining a price which the buyers and sellers at the
power exchange have to pay for purchasing or selling clectricity in a
specific product category.

Different prices in different regions reflect information about demand
and supply, gencration capacity and transmission capacity. Member of
the power exchanges can also bid for 15 minutes contracts. Over the
years, there has been an increase in volumes and decrease in prices
of electricity through transactions on power exchanges.

Adequate provisions for market surveillance have been provided in the
Power Market Regulations, 2010. CERC has taken due cognizance of
any abnormality in the market operations to ensure integrity and
transparency of the market transactions. In a recent development,
vide order dated 30thDecember, 2016 in the Suo-Motu Petition No.
12/SM/2016, the CERC has issued show cause notice under Section
142 of the Act read with Regulation 14 B (1) of the Trading License
Regulations to a trader for contravention of the provisions of the
Power Market Regulations and Trading License Regulations. CERC
has also enquired whether the Power Exchange has put in place
mechanism to detect such abnormalities and undertake corrective
actions with suitable penalties.


Further, to ensure effective functioning of the power exchanges,
review of regulatory compliance and IT audit of the Power Exchanges
have been initiated by Central Commission.

(ii) The Central Commission has created a conducive regulatory
framework for development of short term market and also
institutionalized trading avenues through traders and power exchanges.
The buyers and sellers choose a particular platform based on their
requirements for standardized or customized contracts, ease of doing
business, various charges payable/receivable etc.

The Commission has already allowed contracts other than Day Ahead
Market in order to cater to the needs of buyers and sellers. Contracts
such as Term Ahead Contracts (TAM) and Intraday Contracts/
Contingency Contracts are also being traded on Power Exchanges.
Extended Market Session has been enabled on both Power Exchanges.
Therefore, CERC has made a effort to enable multiple products to be
traded on Power Exchanges.

(ii) Distribution utilities also participate in power exchanges for
purchase and sale of power. In so far as transmission/wheeling of
power contracted through power exchanges is concerned, it is governed
by the relevant regulations of CERC.

It may be mentioned that power exchanges at present facilitate
contracts on account of variations of demand/generation availability
of the States closer to the real time, for e.g. due to certain weather
changes or tripping/restoration of the States owned generators. Planning
for procurement of power over the longer term i.e. for upto a month,
three months in advance, is through bilateral trades, either directly or
through power traders. With effect from Ist April, 2016, the Ministry
of power has launched 'DEEP' power portal, through which state
distribution utilities can also procure power for Short term
(procurement period of one day to one year) and also for procurement
of power for mediuin term (procurement period more than one year
to five years). More than 1, 20,000 MW of electricity has been bided
using DEEP portal for short term by State Utilities from April 2016
to April, 2017.

31


It may also be mentioned here that the transmission corridor gets
filled up first through long term contracts (7 years to 25 years), the
medium term contracts (one year to 7 years) and then for short term
contracts, in the order of longer duration contracts first, gradually
coming down to day ahead contracts. Therefore, the transmission
corridor remaining for day ahead through power exchanges is only
the balance transfer capability, after the longer duration contract have
been considered.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-ID,
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (81, No. 5)

The Committee note that the Power Exchanges were set up to mitigate
the volatility of power supply and to facilitate the flow of power from
surplus to deficit regions. An equilibrium in pricing as well as demand/
supply with low transaction cost and efficiency gains is to be maintained
by the Power Exchanges. The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
had notified the Power Market Regulations 2010, creating a comprehensive
market structure wherein inclusion of all types of products in electricity
market has been ensured. The objectives of the Regulations are to ensure
fair, neutral, efficient and robust price discovery, provide extensive and
quick price dissemination, design standardized contracts and work towards
increasing liquidity in such contracts. The primary role of the Power
Exchange is to fill the gap in the demand/supply of electricity through
trading in the Day Ahead Market. Price discovery is done on the basis of
demand and supply bids submitted by participants. In the Day Ahead
Market, prices are discovered for every 15 minutes for next day delivery
and in case of congestion, Market Splitting Mechanism is adopted. The
Committee find that although short-term electricity demands are being met
through the Power Exchanges in a structured manner, yet there are scope
for human intervention and manipulation. Availability of transmission
corridors, real time declaration of transmission capacity, availability of
liquidity in the Power Exchanges are some of the areas which indicate the
possibility of scope for preferences and choices in the Power Exchanges,
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) Availability of transmission corridor should be notified in advance
to make power trading more meaningful.

32


(ii) Efforts should be made to indicate a timeline to ensure that
electricity traded will be transmitted within the given time.

(iii) The Price Discovery Mechanism should be streamlined in such
a way that there is no scope for any extraneons intervention.

Reply of the Government

(i) National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC) publishes monthly Total
Transfer Capability (ITC), Available Transfer Capability (ATC) on its
website. The ATC details are categorised into Inter country ATC, Intra
regional ATC and Inter regional ATC. In all the three categories Total
Transfer Capability (TTC), reliability margins, ATC for long term and
short term is specified for specific time periods. Any change in the
corridor availability is also notified on the website periodically, Central
Transmission Utility (CTU) also publishes the TTC/ATC details in
advance in its website.

So far as real-time availability of transmission capacity is concerned,
responsibility of declaration of availability of transmission capacity on
real-time basis lies with the system operators (NLDC/RLDCs/SLDCs).
The NLDC provides information related to availability of transmission
capacity, through its website. It is recognized that the prior knowledge
of congestion could influence bidding strategies and cause variation in
prices.

To further streamline the process, the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission is currently working on an "Open Access Registry"
automated framework. This is aimed at facilitative transactions through
open access including dissemination of real-time availability of
transmission capacity.

(ii) Power Exchanges have standardized delivery based contracts
with fixed timelines and these timelines are adhered to by Power
Exchanges and also ensure that the contracts settled are scheduled as
per the timeline of the contract. In case there is congestion in the
network and the contracts cannot be settled as decided in the contract,
NLDC carries out curtailment to maintain stability of the power system.

(ii) The price discovery mechanism has already been streamlined
and takes place through an automated process, which is approved by

es ae ४. क्या


CERC. The samc is also displayed transparently on the website of the
respective Power Exchanges.

The provisions for ensuring fair and transparent price discovery have
already specified by CERC in its Power Market Regulations to ensure
that there are no extraneous interventions. However, to ensure that
these provisions are complied with, CERC initiated and completed the
exercise of carrying out review of Power Exchanges. The auditors,
M/s KPMG and M/s Deloitte were engaged for review of Power
Exchanges PXIL and IEX respectively. CERC has reecived a report
from both the auditors and based on the report CERC is taking actions
to ensure transparency and compliance to Power Market Regulations.
The Commission has also initiated IT audit of Power Exchanges.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 6)

The Committee note that functions of the Power Exchanges, among

others, include:

34

(i) Providing fair, transparent and neutral platform for trading of
electricity;

(ii) Matching algorithm on the principle of social welfare
maximization;

(iii) Scheduling power through merit order dispatch across the
country;

(iv) Splitting of market to alleviate congestion for delivery of power;
(v) Providing access to smaller consumers located in remote corners;
(vi) Having provisions of clearing and settlement mechanism;

(vii) Round the clock access with introduction of contracts which
operate as close as 3 hours to the actual delivery;

(viii) Monthly operation of renewable energy certificate market;

(ix) Information dissemination regarding prices discovered for the
next day;


(x) Providing pan India electronic platform for anonymous bids by
buyers and sellers;

(xi) Portfolio optimisation by distribution utilities;
(xii) Facilitating open access as envisaged in the Electricity Act, 2003;
(xiii) Ensuring a robust payment security mechanism,

The functions are varied and are meant for development of fair and
transparent system. However, it has also led to various problems
which are inherent and related to the working of the Power Exchanges,
The temporal nature of prices, seasonality of supply and demand
dynamics, inadequate transmission network, scope of participant's
ability to influence prices, ete, have also been brought to the fore
which require immediate remedial attention. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:

(i) 116 areas of functioning of the Power Exchanges need to be
safeguarded from external interventions.

(ii) Functioning of the Power Exchanges should be thoroughly
reviewed,

(ii) Clearing and settlement mechanism needs to be more simple and
transparent.

Reply of the Government

(i) 10 is mentioned that power exchanges should be safeguarded
from external interventions, for e.g. a participant's ability to influence
prices. It may be stated that whenever any rules are made, there is
always a scope for gaming by participants, whether in India or in any
other country. Regulations for adequate safeguards have been provided.
through market oversight. In case it is detected that some participant
is trying to influence market prices for its own benefit, there are
provisions for taking action against thg same, including cancelling of
the Membership of the member of the Exchange and in case of
malpractice of the Exchange, cancellation of the Registration of the
Exchange by CERC.

CERC Regulations provide for such safeguards. Part 4 of Power
Market Regulations spells out the principles of Market and Market

35


Design. Under regulation 25(iii) of Power Market Regulations, the
Power Exchanges constitute a Market Surveillance committee headed
by an independent director of the board and having members from the
executive team of the Power Exchange. No member of this committee
is a Member of the Power Exchange. The exchanges submit a
surveillance report quarterly to CERC. The report is analysed by
CERC and exceptions in the functioning of power exchanges, if any,
are taken up with the power exchanges for suitable corrective
measures.

(i) As per information made available by CERC, it has initiated and
compieted the exercise of carrying out review of Power Exchanges.
The auditors, M/s KPMG and M/s Deloitte were engaged for review
of Power Exchanges PXIL and [EX respectively. CERC has received
a comprehensive report from both the auditors and based on the
report CERC is taking actions to ensure transparency and compliance
to Power Market Regulations. The Commission has also initiated IT
audit of Power Exchanges.

(iii) ‘The clearing and settlement mechanism of both Power Exchanges
is as per the bye laws and business rules as approved by the
Commission. Multiple clauses of the Bye Laws of IEX (one of the

exchangi

s) spell out the Clearing and settlement process undertaken
by IEX as approved by CERC. Chapter 5 of the Business rules of
PXIL (one of the exchanges) explains the clearing and settlement of
funds at PXIL as approved by CERC. Vide Order in Petition No. 175/
RC/2015, CERC has approved a modified trading platform for PXIL
called P-NEST,

(Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter - 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 7)

The Committee note that the Power Exchanges offer limited portfolios
in the form of Day Abead Market, Term Ahead Market, Renewable Energy
Certificates, etc. 01 this, the Day Ahcad Market in electricity trading is a

36


vital component and most of the trading revolves around this portfolio, It
consists of round the clock, 15 minutes, block-wise, bidding for the next
day and the trading is done on all days, irrespective of holidays.

The Term Ahead Market includes products for delivery of electricity
for duration upto 11 days, and enables participants to purchase electricity”
for the same day through intra-day contracts. There is also a provision of
Day Ahead Contingency Contract in which trading for a day before delivery
after the Day Ahead Market auction is done. In daily contracts, trading upto
one week in advance is done for any calendar day. The Committee find that
there is some overlapping in the Day Ahead Market and Day Ahead
Contingency Contracts, Similarly, daily contracts and weekly contracts are
also on the same footing, as the first contract allows trading upto one week
in advance, while the weekly contracts goes upto 11 days in advance. The
Committee feel that these contracts should have clear and identifiable
distinctions as it is difficult to ascertain and comprehend as to how trading
in Day Ahead Market is different from Day Ahead Contingency Contract,
more so when the bidding is done every 15 minutes in the Day Ahead
Market. For any contingency, intra-day contracts can be taken recourse to.
Similarly, daily and weekly contracts can also be seen to be overlapping;
there is scope for some improvement as there is hardly any justification for
haying different portfolios for trading upto a week and upto 11 days.
Moreover, no figures have been given regarding the volume of electricity
traded under these products separately. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that:

(i) The portfolios for trading at the Power Exchanges should be
devised in such a way so as to minimize the scope for
manipulation and overlapping.

(ii) Day Ahead Market and Day Ahead Contingency Contract need
to be synchronized for better functioning of the Power Exchanges
or the conditions for the operation of Contingency Contracts
should be spelt out clearly.

(ii) Similarly, daily and weekly contracts should be reviewed, and,
if needed, conjoined for better and efficient functioning of the
Exchanges.

37


38

Reply of the Government

(i) As per the Power Market Regulations, the Power Exchanges
need to obtain approval of the Commission before introducing any
product or contract. The Commission considers the proposal received
from the Power Exchanges in this regard based on the requirements
of, and impact on power market operations. While granting approval,
the Commission ensures that there is no overlap between the products.

The methodology for trading of all these products is also approved by
the Central Commission by considering the needs of the market and
avoiding any scope of manipulation and overlapping. For instance, the
broad procedure followed for Day Ahead Market includes, acceptance
of Closed Double sided Bids by the exchange in the stipulated time
window dedicated for bidding (10 am to 12 noon each day for day
ahead market); matching of the buy bids to the sell bids and discovery
of Marginal Cleared Volume and Marginal Cleared Price; checking
availability of corridor and funds availability in order for the trade to
be executed smoothly; and finally after obtaining confirmation, settling
the trades and scheduling of power.

This procedure of trade execution is carried out independently on
both PXs.

(ii) The Day Ahead Market (DAM) is the electricity trading market
for delivery of power on the next day. The trading is carried out from
10.00 hrs, to 12.00 hrs. on day ahead basis for delivery of power on
the next day.

In order to address further balancing requirements of buyers and
sellers in their power portfolios subsequent to the closure of the Day
Ahead Market, the buyers and sellers are provided with another
opportunity to trade power through "Day Ahead Contingency Market"
for the next day.

The Day Ahead Contingency Market is available on the Power
Exchanges from 15.00 hrs. upto the end of the day for delivery of
power on the next day.

Accordingly, these two products are mutually exclusive, yet
complementary to each other,


(ii) Apart from the Day Ahead Market, Day Ahead Contingency
Market and Intra-Day Contracts, the Power Exchanges offer Daily
Contracts and Weekly Contracts. The product "Daily Contract"
facilitates trading upto one week in advance for any calendar day,
while the "Weekly Contract" allows trading upto eleven days in
advance,

These two products are designed to provide the buyers and sellers
with necessary option to choose from the portfolio to appropriately
meet their power balancing requirements. The Power Exchanges are
offering a wide range of products including the daily and weekly
contracts to facilitate the buyers and sellers to effectively balance
their power portfolios.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 8)

The Committee find that the volume contracted on the Power Exchange
platform through Day Ahcad Market constitutes about 95 per cent of the
electricity traded, while the Term Ahead Market constitutes rest of the
5 per cent of the electricity traded at the Power Exchanges. The Term
Ahead Market consists of contracts which are Intra-Day Contract, Day
Ahead Contingency Contract, Daily Contracts and Weekly Contracts, The
Committee also find that there has been a consistent increase in the trading
of electricity under the Day Ahead Market since 2009-10, except for the
year 2014-15. Also, this is the portfolio which has the most liquid product.
The Torm Ahead Market, though increasing, is not so consistent. While
there has been increase in the trading volume of electricity at the Power
Exchanges, yet it has been only 3.11% of the total generation of electricity,
which speaks about the functioning and performance of the Power
Exchanges. Although there have been long-term PPAs, the DISCOMs have
been buying electricity through the Power Exchanges to meet their
requirements. The Committee note that the functioning of the Power
Exchanges is still not very transparent and lacks promptness in delivery.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) Reasons as to why the portfolio under the Term Ahead Market
is not getting appropriate response should be identified and
measures put in place to improve trading through this portfolio.

39


(ii) Steps should be taken to popularize the concept of the Power
Exchanges so as to make people aware about their role and
usefulness in making electricity rates more competitive and
transmission efficient.

Reply of the Government

(i) Trading for Power in Term ahead is only for upto 11 days
which is a restricting factor. Currently, the PXs can not offer any
" contract having delivery greater than '11' days. This is due to the
matter being sub-judice before the Supreme Court. Further, there are
other avenues for buyers and sellers for purchase and sale of electricity
for a duration exceeding one day; as for example, through traders for
a duration upto 3 months in advance under short term open access
etc, The responsibility of the Commission is to create various avenues
for trade and choice for a particular product depends upon the specific
requirements, ease of doing business of the market players etc,

(ii) The PXs have been in existence since 2008 and the volume of
electricity traded has been increasing over the years. PXs also have
3000 Open Access Consumers as their members and trade on PXs
regularly,

The power exchanges display all relevant information about trades in
the website. The Commission, in order to ensure greater transparency
had mandated the power exchanges to display the aggregate demand
and supply curves in their websites. The information to this extent is
also being displayed by the power exchanges, Further, the market
monitoring cell of CERC compiles the Market Monitoring Report.
CERC makes information regarding power exchanges freely available
on its website. The MMC report gives details about prices and volume
of power transacted, details of congestion etc.

CERC also publishes Annual Report on Short Term Power Market in
India. Monthly trends and daily trends are also a part of this report.
Time of the day variation in volume and price of electricity, effect of
congestion on volume of electricity transacted and tariffs of long term
sources of Power for various distribution companies are some of the
areas which are analyzed and mentioned in the Teport,

(Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-I1),
Dated 28th July, 2017]


Recommendation (SI. No. 9)
Price Discovery Mechanism

The Committee note that the Price Discovery Mechanism for the Day
Ahead Market is governed by Regulation 11 of the Power Market Regulations
2010. The Regulation provides for the economic principle of social welfare
maximization and to create buyer and seller surplus. It is determined by the
Price Discovery Mechanism in which the buyers and sellers at-the Power
Exchanges have to pay for purchasing or for selling electricity in a specific
product category. Price discovery in the context of the Day Ahead Market
is done by auction for all the 24 hours which is sub-divided into 15 minutes
contracts. It allows simultaneous buy and sell bids and demand-supply
curves are formed, The intersection of the two curves is the price for the
market which is referred to as the Market Clearing Price. Afterwards, the
bids matched are included in the day ahead schedules. Buy trades. are
settled at below the quoted price and sell trades are settled at above the
quoted prices ensuring maximum benefits to both buyers and sellers of
electricity. It has also been informed that there is complete anonymity of
the bids between members. The congestion management is done through
market splitting and financial settlement/clearing is done by the Exchanges.
The Committee find that there is no clarity and transparency with regard
to formation of curves; besides it is not known as to what principle is
adopted for this when there are multiple buyers and sellers. In-what manner
will the prior knowledge of quoted price for buying and selling impact the
curve making process? The Committee observe that as per the current
practice, the Power Exchanges receive Buy Bids and Sell Bids and follow
the double sided closed bidding process. As part of the process, the Power
Exchanges process the bids for Day-Ahead transactions at the designated
time, through a specific algorithm to arrive at Market Clearing Volume
(MCV) and Market Clearing Price (MCP), Subsequently, the availability of
transmission corridor is verified and bids are re-run in case of congestion
to determine market splitting as per requirement and then the final Market
Clearing Volume and Market Clearing Price for the surplus and the deficit
zones are arrived at separately. The information about the availability of
transmission corridor being not known, the bidders are unable to take well-
informed decisions before placing their bids, Further, the stakeholders have
complained about lack of transparency in the process. Quoting of different

41


prices for trading becomes irrelevant after the price discovery through

curve formation which, besides being non-transparent also creates some
scope for genuine apprehensions. The Committee are not against the Price
Discovery Mechanism, per se, but are of the considered view that the
process involved requires improvement.

that:

42

Therefore, in order to make the bidding process more transparent and
to avoid human intervention at multiple points, the Committee recommend

(i)

ii)

(iti)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

The Price Discovery Mechanism should be an open ended
process.

The process of curve formation should be brought within the
public domain,

Some alternative mechanism for discovery of prices should be
considered which is holistic in nature.

The Ministry of Power should expeditiously look into the
expansion of transmission nctwork and augmenting transmission
capacity/ transformation capability, so that transmission
congestion and resultant market splitting are avoided.

POSOCO/NLDC may be directed to declare the availability of
transmission corridor in advance, to enable more informed
decision making and robust price discovery in the Power
Exchanges.

The Price Discovery Mechanism needs to be verified to make
sure that matching of bids and the resultant prices discovered
are fair and not manipulated. While stringent regulatory oversight
is the need of the hour, one alternative is to assign the
responsibility of price discovery to a neutral Third Party.

The Third Party, before initiating the bid process, should consider
the availability of transmission corridor and then run the bids
through the matching engine to arrive at MCV and MCP. The
structure, functional responsibilities, over-sight mechanism, ete.
for the Third Party service provider may be decided by the
CERC.


(viii) Such an arrangement would enable greater social welfare
maximization as the number of bids for price matching will
increase (as a result of combining the bids of all the Power
Exchanges). This will also encourage establishment of multiple
the Power Exchanges and bring in more competition in this
segment of the Power Market. The Power exchanges will then
compete, based on the services they provide.

Reply of the Government

(i & ii) For Price discovery, the buy and sell volumes are pooled
and prices are discovered through a double sided closed auction
mechanism. In day ahead market, prices are discovered through a
matching mechanism which is based on a software algorithm, The
aggregate demand/supply curve of both power exchanges are displayed
on their respective websites, The process of the curve formation and
arriving at MCP and MCV is provided on the websites of both power
exchanges.

PRICE a Supply(Sell)

MCP

MCV

It is recognized that the various stakeholders with different bidding
portfolios and strategies have to make their offers at a single point i.e.
the power exchange. Also, a single trader may have multiple clients
competing with each other for transmission corridor as well as price.
Adequate provisions have been made in the Power Market Regulations,
2010 to secure and maintain the confidentiality of the bids by all
stakeholders. Adequate measures are being undertaken through market
surveillance and monitoring activities. Improvements are being
attempted through review of regulatory compliance and IT audit of
the Power Exchanges initiated by CERC.


(ii) Different contracts in the power exchange follow different
methods of price discovery. As far as collective transactions are
concerned, the mechanism is the same as is being followed by Nordic
countries and has been working satisfactorily. This was debated through
a staff paper published by the staff of CERC and finalized after
hearing all stakeholders. In any case, the aggregate demand and supply
curves are displayed transparently on the website of the power
exchange for every 15 minutes-time block. Further, the Central
Commission has undertaken review of the functioning of the power
exchanges, as also initiated action on IT audit/third party testing of
trading software of the power exchanges. Suitable corrective action
would be taken by the Commission after such audit/third party testing
has been completed.

(iv) As per the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) does the planning and coordination relating to inter-state
transmission system with the Central transmission Utility, to ensure
development of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of
inter-State transmission lines for smooth flow of electricity from
generating stations to the load centres.

It is stated that in order to ensure reliability of power supply, about
80-85% the power purchased by States should be through long term
contracts. However, a number of States have not signed long term
contracts for sufficient generating capacity and therefore depend upon
short term contracts for meeting their balance demand, which causes
congestion in the transmission system.

Tt may be submitted here that as part of formation of National Grid
& strengthening the regional grids, various transmission lines/clements
in all the regions are being implemented by Central, State & Private
utilities. As per information made available by POSOCO, the
transmission lines expected to be commissioned in néar future to
relieve Congestion are as follows:

. WR-NR Corridor

- £800 kV Champa Pooling Station - Kurukshetra HVDC
Bipole

- 765 kV Jabalpur-Orai D/C and 765 kV Orai-Aligarh D/C


. WR-SR Corridor

- 765 kV Wardha - Hyderabad D/C
. ER-SR Corridor

- 765 kV Angul - Srikakulam D/C

(v) Responsibility of declaration of availability of transfer capacity
on real-time basis lies with the system operation/NLDC/SLDCs. NLDC
declares the total transfer capability of various corridors and this
information is available transparently for all stakeholders in the public
domain as per the CERC (Measures to Relieve Congestion in Real
Time) Regulations, 2009, The details of Long term access and Medium
term Open access granted by the CTU are displayed at the website
of CTU on regular basis. Further, the information of the bilateral
transactions accepted by the nodal agency is also displayed by the
RLDCs at their website as per the Clause: 27 of CERC (Open access
in inter-state transmission) Regulation, 2008 and further amendments
thereof, As informed, to further streamline the process, the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission is currently working on an "Open
Access Registry" automated framework. This is aimed at facilitative
transactions through open access including dissemination of real-time
availability of transmission capacity.

(vi, vii & viii) A well-functioning electricity market requires an effective
market monitoring process. As a part regulatory oversight, CERC
publishes the Monthly Market Monitoring Cell report on short term
transactions of electricity.

As stated the Commission has initiated the IT audit/3rd party testing
of trading software of the power exchanges. Suitable corrective action
will be initiated based on the report of such audit/third party testing.
As regards the alternative price discovery mechanism, the Commission
while disposing of the petition No. 158/MP/2013, in its order dated
4.4,2016, deliberated upon one of the recommendations of the expert
committee constituted, for introduction of merging of bids (market
coupling method), The Commission felt that various practical issues
need be resolved before considering such a proposal, for instance,
addressing the issues around market design including transmission

45


access methodology besides requirement of infrastructure, logistics
etc.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-I1),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 11)

The Committee note that cross border trading of electricity has now
become a reality in view of cooperation in the sector with neighbouring
countries like Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, About the expected size and
implications, and how these tradings may help India, the Committee have
been apprised that out of 500 MW of inter-connectivity with Bangladesh,
50 MW can flow on the Exchanges, With Nepal, one transmission line is
being strengthened which can have a maximum of 50 MW of transaction
while with Bhutan a maximum of 120 MW can come through the Exchanges.
Tt has also been reported that optimal utilization of resources is the potential
gain of cross border transactions. Hydro resources of the neighbouring
countries could be utilized to balance load/generation variations and also for
handling intermittent renewable energy sources of the country, The Committee
have been informed that trade in electricity can help bring down energy
prices, mitigate power shocks, relieve shortages, facilitate decarbonization
and provide incentives for market extension and integration. Regions with
low cost generation resources could become net exporters of power, while
electricity customers in high cost areas could benefit from cheaper imports,
The Committee note that Cross Border Trade may provide an emergency
back-up for the existing system during shortages or plant outages and may
also facilitate developing countries to opt for more Renewable Energy.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that:

(i) India should play a leading role in facilitation of Cross Border
Electricity Trade among its neighbours, without compromising
on the Energy Needs of its own people, and should ensure that
such a system does not worsen initial distortions in regional
markets,

(ii) The Ministry and the CERC must formulate policies and
regulations related to pricing of Electricity as a commodity for
transmission, in coordination and harmonization with the
neighbouring countries as different countries follow different


regulatory practices which lead to difference in electricity pricing
in the Indian Sub-continent.

(ii) The pricing of c!ectricity coming from across the border should
also be congenial and amenable to our market.

Reply of the Government

(i) As per the information available by CERC/POSOCO, at present
cross border transactions in clectricity between India and neighbouring
countries of Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar is being done
through Long-term, Medium term and Short term contracts under
bilateral agreements. Around 1450 MW is imported from Bhutan,
500-600 MW exported to Bangladesh, about 300 MW exported to
Nepal and around 1-3 MW export to Myanmar.

Government of India has initiated the first step in the direction of
cross border cooperation in electricity the SAARC region. In order to
facilitate and promote cross border trade of electricity with greater
transparency, consistency and predictability in regulatory approaches
across jurisdictions and minimise perception of regulatory risks, the
Guidelines on Cross Border Trade of Electricity have been issued by
Ministry of Power vide OM No.14/1/2016-Trans dated Sth December
2016, The objectives of these guidelines are to:

(a) Facilitate cross border trade of electricity between India and
neighbouring countries;

(b) Promote transparency, consistency and predictability in regulatory
approaches across jurisdictions and minimise perceptions of
regulatory risks;

(c) Meet the demand of the participating countries by utilizing the
available resources in the region;

(d) Reliable grid operation and transmission of electricity across the
borders;

(c) Evolve a dynamic and robust electricity infrastructure for cross
border transactions.

(i) As per the Guidelines issued, there will be an Authority
(Designated Authority) designated by the Ministry of Power,

47



Government of India for facilitating the process of approval and
laying down the procedure for cross border transaction and trade in
electricity. Ministry of Power vide OM No. 14/1/2016-Trans dated
14th December 2016 has notified Member (Power System), CEA as
per the provisions under sub-clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Guidelines
on Cross Border Trade issued by the Ministry of Power, The cross
border trade of electricity shall be regulated by the Rules and Regulations
framed or to be framed for the purpose of its implementation. Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) of India has been mandated
to frame appropriate regulation for facilitating cross border trade of
electricity with neighbouring countries in accordance with these
guidelines,

(iii) The Guidelines have specified the provisions for tariff
determination for Cross border transaction of electricity through
Government to Government negotiations and through arrangements
other than Government to Government negotiations.

In case of hydro projects, the tariff will be determined by the Central
Commission, if approached by the generator through the Government
of the neighbouring country and agreed by the Indian entities, including
Public Utilities/Discom(s),

The tariff for export of electricity to entities of neighbouring countries
by Indian entities through long ternv/nedium terny/short term agreements
may be as mutually agreed or through competitive bidding, subject to
payment of the charges as applicable for transmission/wheeling of
electricity through the Indian grid.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 12)
Renewable Energy Certificates

The Committee note that trading of Renewable Energy Certificate has
been introduced with a view to ensuring the fulfillment of RPO by the
DISCOMs and State utilities, However, the mechanism adopted to achieve
the objective is not transparent, It has been stated that the total quantity of
certificates (solar and non-solar separately) placed for dealing at the Power

48


Exchanges by the eligible entity shall be less than or equal to the total
quantity of valid certificates held by eligible entity as per the records of the
central agency, i.e., the National Load Dispatch Centre, and will be dealt
with by the Power Exchanges within the price band specified by the CERC
from time to time. It is done through bidding, the eligible entities place their
offers and the buyers shall place their bids through the trading platform of
the respective Power Exchange. Thereafter, the Power Exchange shall send
the maximum bid volume for each of the eligible entity which has placed
offer on that Exchange to the central agency for verification of the quantity
of valid REC available with the eligible entity concerned. The central agency
then checks the combined maximum bid volume in the Power Exchange
for cach eligible entity against the quantity of valid RECs for that entity and
thereafter send a report to the Power Exchange confirming the availability
of valid REC with the eligible entity, Market Clearing Price and Market
Clearing Volume are worked out taking into account the advice from the
central agency and then the final clear trades are sent to the central agency
for extinguishing of RECs sold in the records of the central agency. The
Committee find that although the process of trading in REC appear to be
transparent, yet there is scope for vested interventions, as RPO is decided
by Regulatory Commissions and are to be complied with by the DISCOMs.
Ensuring compliance is the responsibility of the regulatory bodies. The
availability of certificates is ascertained only after the receipt of the bids.
This system needs to be reviewed particularly in the context that this
mechanism has not yielded the desired results and to examine whether this
system is at all required to meet our renewable commitments. It is nothing
but a process involving exchange of money to fulfill the commitment, and
to achieve this, having the involvement of multiple agencies like CERC,
NLDC, power exchanges etc. does not appear to be logical. Can there not
be some price adjustment mechanism without the involvement of multiple
agencies? After all, the target of this entire process is achieved only through
the money changing hands for the intended purpose. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that:—

(i) To meet the RPO, some alternative mechanism should be explored
immediately without involving RECs,

(ii) If the current system is continued, then it should be ensured
that it functions with integrity in an open manner, There should

49


be no scope for manipulations in the trading of RECs and the
involvement of agencies should be minimized to the bare
minimum.

Reply of the Government

(i) There already exists various alternatives for Renewable Purchase
Obligation (RPO) compliance by the obligated entities, as for example,
(a) by procuring RE power under feed-in-tariff (FiT route)/regulated
tariff route; (b) by procuring RE power through competitive bidding
route; (c) by procuring renewable energy certificates (RECs). The
objective is to enable an obligated entity to choose a specific alternative
keeping in view the cost implications under various alternatives.

(ii) To ensure proper monitoring and tracking of REC trade, CERC
has informed that at present allowed trade of RECs only through
power exchanges. The processes are well defined to avoid any scope
for manipulation in the trade of RECs, the roles and responsibilities of
various agencies involved in the accreditation, registration, issuance
and exchange of RECs have been clearly articulated in the detailed
procedure approved by the Commission. The CERC Regulations also
provide for appointment of compliance auditor for ensuring compliance
of these provisions of the Regulations by all such entities, The
Commission has also appointed compliance auditors, The reports
submitted by the auditors through POSOCO (i.e, the Central Agency
for RECs) are under examination in the Central Commission.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 13)

The developers generate revenue through sale of Renewable Power to
the utilities at the pooled cost of power purchase of such utility as determined
by the Appropriate Commission or to any other licensee or to an open
access consumer at a mutually agreed price, or through the power exchange
at market determined price, The developers also generate revenue from the
sale of environmental credits in the form of Renewable Energy Certificates
issued to them as per the terms and conditions provided for in the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions for recognition

50


and issuance of Renewable Energy Certificate for Renewable Energy
Generation) Regulations, 2010 (and amendments notified from time to
time). The Committee were informed that Obligated entities such as
DISCOMs; Open Access & captive users; Generators, that generate power
from renewable sources of energy; State Agency, such as State Load
Dispatch Centre; Central Agency, such as POSOCO; and the Power
exchanges, where the transactions take place are involved in the REC
mechanism. However, the Committee note that most of the States are not
enthusiastic about meeting their Renewable Purchase Obligations. As per
data provided by the Ministry, while the North-Eastern States like Arunachal
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, etc. and Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
have achieved their Renewable Energy Targets, other States have not been
able to comply fully with their Renewable Purchase Obligations. The
Committee were also informed that on 16th March, 2015, the Ministry of
Finance had released an incentive grant of around Rs. 5000 crores for
incentivizing RPO compliance to the States. Despite such incentives, it
seems that States are not willing to comply with their Renewable Purchase
Obligations which prima-facie points to a systemic flaw in the working of
the concept of Renewable Energy Obligations. Keeping in view the
importance of Renewable Energy and the utmost need to increase the share
of Renewable Energy in India's Energy mix, the Committee recommend
that:—

(i) The Ministry should devise some awareness programme to
encourage States to fulfil their RPO targets and help them to
comply with reasonable RPO requirements so as to enable the
country to mect International Commitments.

(ii) If need be, for ensuring stricter compliance with the Power
Market Regulations, the Ministry may come up with some Penal
Provisions for non-complying States so that such States may
fall in line and make every effort to fulfill their Renewable
Energy Obligations.

(iii) Reasons should also be analyzed as to why the incentive scheme
of the Government has not been successful in getting proper
response from the States.

Reply of the Government

(0). Electricity Act, 2003 provides for promotion of efficient and
environmentally benign policies and for matters connected therewith

51


52

or incidental thereto. In particular, Section 86(1)(e) of the Electricity
Act, 2003, mandates State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(SERCs)/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions (JERCs) to specify
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) target for the obligated entities
in their State. Extract from the said section is reproduced as under:—

86(1) The State Commission shall discharge the following functions,
namely:—

"(e) promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from
renewable sources of energy by providing suitable measures for
connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any person,
and also specify, for purchase of electricity from such sources,
a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the arca
of a distribution licence."

Monitoring compliance of RPO by the obligated entities is the
responsibility of the concerned SERCs/JERCs and the Appropriate
Government in this regard are the State Governments. Further, the
revised Tariff Policy has been notified by Ministry of Power on
28.1,2016 with the objectives inter-alia to promote renewable energy
which will help the obligated entity to fulfill their RPO obligations.

Forum of Regulators (FOR) Secretariat has also been raising the RPO
compliance in FOR meetings at regular intervals. The model Regulations
evolved by the FOR have in fact, already provided for various measures
for ensuring RPO compliance. For instance, there are provisions
requiring creation of a separate fund and requiring the obligated entity
to deposit in the fund an amount of moncy equivalent to the shortfall
in the RPO compliance (shortfall energy multiplied by the forbearance
price of REC) in any particular year, It further provides that this fund
could be used by an agency designated by the SERC to purchase
RECs, thereby ensuring deemed compliance of RPO in the
State. Some SERCs have adopted this provision in their State
Regulations.

(ii) There are provisions in the Electricity Act, 2003 for imposing
penalty for non-compliance of any of the regulations of the Appropriate
Commission. Further, in the proposed Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2014, stricter provisions have been made to ensure strict compliance
of RPO.


(iii) The basic problem of State distribution companies of not being
able to fulfill their RPO targets is that most of the State distribution
companies are running into financial losses. This is a chronic problem
and has to be solved at the root. Government of India has already
taken steps through the UDAY scheme to make the State governments
accountable for the State distribution companies. However, in order
to make the State Distribution companies sustainable, the governance
of State distribution companies would have to be ensured, under the
overall responsibility of the State government. Further, the SERCs are
not inclined to take action against the state distribution companies for
non-compliance of the RPOs.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Recommendation (SI. No. 15)

The Committee note that regulations of grant of connectivity, long-
term excess and mid-term open excess in inter-State transmission aim at
providing transmission products of different varieties, standardization of
procedures, defining timelines and ensure level playing field among different
categories of market players, CERC has also provided for deemed
concurrence of SLDC for open excess if their decision is not given within
a specified time frame, Grid code and deviation settlement mechanism
regulations are also there for maintaining grid discipline. The Committee
have been apprised that the Commission's initiative in regard to grid discipline,
deviation settloment mechanism and grid security has resulted in improved
reliability of power supply, However, close observance of these factors also
lead to the conclusion that denial of permission by the State Load Despatch
Centers, delay in the name of grid discipline and non-transparent settlement
mechanism have led to manipulation of the activities. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that;—

(i) The necessity of prior permission from State Load Despatch
Centre should be reconsidered and done away with.

(ii) Tt should be ensured that no malpractice is being resorted to in
the garb of grid discipline,

(iii) Deviation Settlement Mechanism should be open and transparent,

53


54

Reply of the Government

(i) As per information made available by CERC & CEA, cach
transmission system has got a capacity of transferring certain quantum
of power, taking into consideration the line loading capacity, voltage
stability and angular stability, These are reflected in Available Transfer
Capacity determined by the appropriate load despatch centre, Therefore,
before granting permission to the generators/consumers for entering
into transactions in power exchange, the State Load Despatch Centre
(SLDC) would have to determing if there is sufficient transaction
capacity for wansfer of power through the State grid.

The State Load Despatch Centre is primarily an entity owned by the
State Government. Operation of the State grid is also handled by the
State Load Despatch Centre as per the operational norms specified in
the IEGC and relevant State Grid Code. Prior permission of the State
Load Despatch Centre is necessary to ensure safely and security of
the grid while providing real-time access for executing the open access
transaction, What is needed to ensure proper ring-fencing of SLDCs
10 ensure that such permissions are not unreasonably withheld,

(ii) The Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) and the Deviation
Settlement Mechanism (DSM) Regulations framed by the CERC provide
for adequate deterrents against grid indiscipline, There are also
provisions for penal action against instances of gaming, Further, the
Central Commission initiates strong action against violations of grid
discipline based on the instanges brought before it,

(iii) As per CERC, the Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations
provide for commercial deterrents against grid indiscipline, The
commercial norms for deviations have been clearly specified in the
Regulations and the energy accounting is done by the respective
Regional Power Committees. The settlement is carried out at the level
of Regional Load Despatch Centres, The mechanism is transparent
and functioning smoothly to the satisfaction of all sellers and buyers
involved in the transactions,

[Ministry of Power OM No, 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter - I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 17)

The Committee observe that the determination of tariff by the regulators
has not helped the market in its proper growth. The Committee were
apprised that the regulator has fixed the tariff at Rs. 7,90 which is not
compatible with the concept of open and competitive economy and the
Committee find no rationale behind fixation of tariff by the regulator, When
asked about it, the Commiltee was informed that Section 62 of the Electricity
Act provides for determination of tariff by the Electricity Regulatory
Commission. Further, as per Section 63 of the Act, the appropriate
Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff is determined through a
transparent process of bidding. The Electricity Act, 2003 docs not provide
for determination of tariff for short-term power as it varies from the tariff
determined under Section 62 and Section 63 of the Act, This is due to the
inherent differences in those products in terms of duration and certainty of
contract, besides need for hedging against market risks, On being queried
about how and from where the regulator arrives at these prices and what
is the methodology used to arrive at the price, the Committee was informed
that CERC determines the tariff in accordance with Section 62 of the
Electricity Act, 2003. The Committee find that this exercise of determining
tariff by the CERC is not helpful in the development of the Sector. Fixation
of the tariff at Rs. 7.90 is beyond comprehension when electricity is being
traded at a much lower tariff, Moreover, the high tariff is also detrimental
to growth as the consumer may desist from buying electricity at a higher
rate. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—

(i) The determination of tariff of electricity by the CERC under
various provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 should be
reviewed,

(ii) Tariff determined by the regulator should reflect the market
sentiments and support the market, involving all the stakcholders,
ie. generator, consumer, etc,

(ii) The ultimate benefit of tariff determination should accrue to the
consumers and should also benefit the generators to strive for
increased generating activities,


56

Reply of the Government

(i) As per the provisions given in section 61 to 64 Electricity Act,
2003, the Electricity Regulatory Commissions has been entrusted with
the functions of determination of Tariff for generation, transmission
and distribution. The tariff of generation and Transmission companies
owned by Central Government is regulated by the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission, whereas the tariff for generation, transmission
and distribution within the state are determined by the State Electricity
Regulatory Commission. Under Section 62 of the Act, the Appropriate
Commission shall determine the tariff if it is supplied from a generating
company to a distribution licensee, while under section 63 the
Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been
determined through transparent process of bidding in accordance with
the guidelines issued by Central Government.

As per information made available by CERC, after the enactment of
the Electricity Act, 2003 (which repealed inter-alia the Electricity
Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998) the Commission notified Terms
& Conditions of Tariff in March, 2004 for five-year period from 2004
to 2009 and then in March, 2009 for a further five year period
2009-14, These notifications provide for determination of generation
tariff (station/unit wise) and transmission tariff (line or system-wise).
11 has been further informed that the Commission vide notification
dated February 21, 2014 issued Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2014 to be
effective from 1.4.2014,

The tariff is determined as per the Regulations on Terms & Conditions
of tariff as applicable from time to time. The terms and conditions
contain the financial norms and technical norms,

(ii) Transparency and objectivity are the hallmark of the regulatory
processes adopted by CERC, including the processes involved in the
tariff fixation, The regulations are finalised after following the due
process of public consultation at various stages involving seeking
public comments on staff paper, draft regulation and oral submissions
made during the public hearing. Market realities are discussed and
analysed since the staff paper stage, and the Commission takes final


decision based on the comments received from wide ranging
stakeholders and with due regard to the nced for balancing the interests
of consumers and investment needs of the sector.

(iii) As stated the role of the regulator as envisaged in the Act is to
balance the interests of the consumer while at the same time ensuring
recovery of reasonable costs to generators and licensees. The
Regulations of CERC are crafted with these cardinal principles in
mind. The various technical and financial norms specified by the
Commission are aimed at inducing efficiency in operation and also
provide sharing of efficiency gains between the generators and the
buyers.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

57


CHAPTER वा

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

-Nil-


CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (SI. No. 2)
Competition in the Power Market

The Committee were informed that one of the objectives behind the
setting up of the Power Exchanges was to promote competition in the
power market. The Electricity Act, 2003 envisages development of a
competitive power market for promoting efficiency, economy and for
mobilization of new investments in the Power Sector. However, the
Committee note that there are only two Power Exchanges in the country
of which one has monopoly in the Power Trading, which according to the
Committee, is not in the interest of the sector. 96 per cent of the Power
Market is owned by one Exchange i.e. IEX and the owner of this very
Exchange has been debarred from the Commodity Exchanges. This is
undoubtedly a very anomalous situation as the Exchange against which
action has to be taken is, in fact, running the whole Power Market.

The Committee find that the objective of ensuring competition in the
Power Market has not been followed scrupulously. Rather, consciously or
otherwise, one Exchange has been allowed to monopolize the Market. This
has led to perception that the Regulations, Contracts and other Guidelines
have been tailor-made to suit the requirements of one Power Exchange.

With a view to addressing the need for climination of this anomaly in
the Power Market which is not conducive to the concept of competitive
economy, the Committee recommend that:

(i) The Ministry and the CERC must come up with clear and
effective Guidelines so as to ensure healthy competition in the
Power Market and also to eliminate the monopoly of one Power

59


Exchange so that the diminishing trust of the stakeholders in the
system can be restored.

(ii) The Ministry should work out an Action Plan on setting up of
the Power Exchanges in every zone (North Zone, South Zone,
East Zone, West Zone, Central Zone and North East Zone) of
India, to facilitate competition in the Market which will benefit
the consumer.

Reply of the Government

(i) The over-arching objective of the Electricity Act, 2003 is to
encourage competition, induce efficiency improvements, with a view
to ensuring quality supply of clectricity to consumers at competitive
rates. The Central Commission evolved an enabling framework for
operation of power exchanges through its Power Market Regulations,
2010. The power exchange is a platform which can be located
anywhere, irrespective of the geographical area where physical power
transactions are being done, there would be no need to have regional
power exchanges physically. If it is seen by the CERC that there are
sufficient regional transactions within a region, the regional power
exchange can also be operated in the existing power exchanges, which
would save in infrastructure cost, or, could be set up on Region-wise
basis. At present, since the day ahead transactions are to an average
extent of about 4,000 MW, out of a total all-India peak demand of
about 1,50,000 MW, it is felt that if regional exchanges are implemented,
the transactions per exchange would go down and this would lead to
non-optimization of the available surplus power being bought by deficit
States.

The framework for operation of power exchanges through its Power
Market Regulations, 2010 addresses the issues around monopoly of
a single power exchange. The relevant extracts of the Power Market
Regulations, 2010, the Explanatory Memorandum and the Statement
of Reasons to the said Regulations are reproduced below:—

"CERC (Power Market) Regulations, 2010

35. A Power Exchange which has less than 20% market share
for continuously two financial years falling after a period of two


years of commencement of its operations shall close operations
or merge with an existing Power Exchange with in a period of
next six months. (For this purpose Market size is defined as the
total Annual Turnover in Million Units of all contracts transacted
in all the Power Exchanges in each financial year) Provided that
this regulation shall not apply if there are only two Power
Exchanges in operation."

"Explanatory Memorandum — Power Market Regulations

9, After two years of operations, any exchange with a market
share Jess than 20% for a continuous period of 2 years shall
need to close or merge with other exchange. This will not be
applicable in case there are only two exchanges operational. The
rationale behind this stipulation is to concentrate liquidity for
improved pricing of contracts while at the same time avoiding
monopoly of a single exchange,"

"Statement of Objects and Reasons — CERC (Power Market)
Regulations, 2010

8.19.2 The rationale behind this provision in the regulations is
to concentrate liquidity in Power Exchanges for improved pricing
of standardised contracts, Numerous spot prices with low
volume will provide confusing signals and not serve the intended
purpose of Power Exchange providing investment signals, It
shall also complicate corridor allocation process adopted by
NLDC and have a negative impact on social welfare maximization.
Sufficient care has been taken to ensure that a situation where
monopoly of a single Power Exchange occur does not happen
by allowing two Exchanges to always co exist.....”,

* — CERC issued the Second Amendment to the Open Access
Regulations on 11.09.2013, wherein, SLDCs were asked
to provide an exchange neutral NOC to the market
participants to help creating a level playing field between
the two power exchanges,

«  CERC notified Third Amendment of the Open Access
Regulations on 12.05.2015 reducing the NLDC operating

61


charges payable by the participants of power exchanges
from Rs. 5000 to Rs, 2000,This was also done to create
a level playing field between the two power exchanges.

* Further, CERC vide order in Petition No.158/MP/2013,
directed allocation of upto 10% of the constrained corridor
to the smaller Power Exchange with the provision for
review of the methodology after six months.

+ In order to further competition between the Power
Exchanges, CERC notified Fourth Amendment of the Open
Access in inter-State Transmission Regulations on 22nd
June 2016. The NLDC operating charges have been reduced
and are now payable by each of the successful buyer and
seller on the basis of its energy scheduled (MWh) at regional
periphery by NLDC for transactions in the respective power
exchange. The rate of NLDC operating charges is Re, 1/
MWh for collective transactions. NLDC operating charges
payable by cach of the successful buyer and seller in case
of collective transaction, for a day, shall be capped to a
maximum ceiling of Rs, 200 per day,

(ii) 116 Electricity Act 2003 provides that development of the market
is vested with the Appropriate Commission. The CERC (Power Market)
Regulations allow the setting up of multiple power exchanges, subject
to the provision that each power exchange must have a market share
of at least 20% and subject to at least two power exchanges being
in operation, for which this provision of 20% market share does not
apply. For the 20% condition, if the market share remains less than
20% for two continuous financial years falling after a period of two
years of commencement of operation, then it is to close its operations
or merge with the existing power exchange. This therefore means
that competition in power exchanges is encouraged by the CERC
Power Market Regulations to ensure that there are at least two power
exchanges in operation. Worldwide, it is seen that there is normally
one power exchange for a country, which is regulated by the
appropriate Regulator.

Further, the Central Commission vide CERC's Power Market
Regulations and related orders do not prohibit setting up of Power


Exchanges in every zone. Regulation 3(ii) of Power Market Regulations
defines Power Exchange Market and part 3 of the Power Market
Regulations provides for Approval/suspension of the contracts by the
Commission, Any eligible entity fully compliant to the regulations
notified by CERC can set up and run a Power Exchange, with prior
approval of the Commission.

In India, CERC has provided for multiple Power Exchanges to exist
simultaneously in one physical market, This allows for competition
amongst the existing Power Exchanges and an automatic system of
checks and balances, The market participants stand to benefit from
the innovative process of Exchanges vying with each other for
providing superior quality of service. A stakeholder located in any
corner of the country can transact locally on the pan-India power
exchange platform, Worldwide, it is sen that there is only one power
exchange in a country such as European Energy Exchange (EEX) in
Germany, Power next in France and Belgium Power Exchange (Belpex)
in Belgium etc, Also, a single exchange named Nord Pool operates
Spot and Balancing Market segments in three countries namely Norway,
Sweden and Finland,

Two power exchanges viz. Indian Energy Exchange (TEX), Delhi and
Power Exchange India Ltd, (PXIL), Mumbai commenced operations
from 27.06.2008 and 22.10.2008 respectively after approval of CERC.

Pursuant to the application filed by NTPC Ltd, secking permission to
set up and operate Power Exchange, the CERC granted in-principle
approval to establish a National Power Exchange, subject to compliance
of certain directions vide Order dated 1.7.2009 in Petition No. 91/
2007. Thereafter, CERC approved the Rules, By-laws and Business
Rules of National Power Exchange Limited (NPEX) for setting up and
operation of Power Exchange on 24,2.2012. Thereafter, NPEX Board
approved the ‘Business Plan' for setting up of Power Exchange and
‘Vision Document’ was prepared encompassing various future market
scenarios,

NPEX was engaged in a process to ascertain the ‘business viability’
under changed market scenario and the promoters were in the process
of revisiting the issue to study feasibility of 3rd Power Exchange in

63


the Indian power market. In the meantime, NTPC, one of the promoters
of NPEX, decided to exit from NPEX deriving no strategic advantage
by investing in the power exchange. Thereafter, the group of promoters
of NPEX has voluntarily recommended for winding up of the Company.
Therefore, the Commission vide Order dated 17.4.2014 in Petition
No. 262/SM/2014 has withdrawn the approval of National Power
Exchange with effect from 1.4.2014.

Also, in November, 2011, Marquis Energy Exchange. Limited filed
application under CERC (Power Market) Regulations, 2010 seeking
permission for setting up and operation of a Power Exchange, Vide
order dated 16.01.2013 in the Petition No. 216/PX/2011, CERC rejected
the application of Marquis Energy Exchange Limited as the company
did not meet the net worth criteria required under the Power Market
Regulations for registration for setting up and operation of a Power
Exchange,

However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted,

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-II),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
Shareholding Pattern

The Committee note that Regulation 22 of the Power Market
Kegulations, 2010 govern the broad structure of the Power Exchanges and

ation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 specifies the
olding pattern of the Power Exchanges. Regulation 19 notes that any
cholder other than a member of the Power Exchanges can have a
maximum of 25 per cent shareholding; for a member, the limit has been
fixed at 5 per cent, In total, a Power Exchange can have a maximum of
49 per cent of its total shareholding owned by entities (whether directly or
indirectly) which are members of the Power Exchanges. The reason given
for sharcholding pattern is that the Power Exchange should be a demutualised
and ring fenced organization and hence a power sector participant may
have the stake in the power sector only upto 5 per cent of the total

64


shareholding. The Committee find that despite precautions, the Regulations
for shareholding pattern of the Power Exchange provide an opportunity for
control of the Exchanges and have led to their mutualisation. The over-
bearing presence of one exchange in the electricity sector and its complete
command and control exemplifies that the rationale behind the Regulations
for shareholding pattern of the Power Exchange did not deliver the desired
results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:

(i) Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 should be
revised to find out as to why it has failed in its objective.

(ii) Shareholding pattern of the Power Exchanges need to be made
wide ranging and demutualised with the involvement of
stakeholders of every segment of the clectricity sector.

Reply of the Government

The provisions of the Power Market Regulations already ensure de-
mutualisation and enables involvement of any stakeholder of electricity
sector subject to the conditions specified therein.

Regulation 19 of the Power Market Regulations, 2010 specifies the
shareholding pattern of the power exchanges. There it is specified that any
shareholder other than the member of the power exchange can have a
maximum of 25% shareholding. For a member the limit has been fixed at
5%. The relevant extract is excerpted below:—

"19. Shareholding Pattern of Power Exchange

(1) 116 shareholding pattern for equity holders in the Power Exchange
shall be as follows:

° Any shareholder other than a Member of the Power Exchange
can have a maximum (whether directly or indirectly) of 25%
shareholding in the Power Exchange.

. A Member of the Power Exchange can have a maximum (whether
directly or indirectly) of 5% shareholding in the Power Exchange.

. In total, a Power Exchange can have a maximum of 49% of its
total shareholding owned by entities (whether directly or
indirectly) which are Members of the Power Exchange...”


The statement and object of reasons for Power Market
Regulations, 2010 provides the rationale 10 these limits. It is reproduced
below for clarification:—

"8.5.2 Decision and rationale

(i) The Commission has considered the views of all
stakeholders. The Commission maintains the view that
Power Exchange is market based institution and hence
should be a widely held organization. The commission is
also of the view that Power Exchange should be fully
demutualised and ring fenced organization and hence a
power sector participant may have equity stake in the Power
Exchange (as is an international practice) but limited to 5
% of total shareholding...

8.5.3 In view of the reasons given in the above paragraphs, the

(i)

@)

shareholding pattern in the final version of the regulations
is as briefly described below:—

Any shareholder (in case of a corporate this is including its
subsidiaries and cross holding in other companies and
associate companies) other than member of the Power
Exchange can have a maximum of 25% shareholding in
the Power Exchange. (Earlier in guidelines it was required
that 51% of the equity share capital of the PX should be
held by the public other than the shareholder having trading
rights in the Exchange).

A member of the Power Exchange can have maximum of
5% shareholding in the Power Exchange. (Earlier there
was no limit on individual member's shareholding in the
Power Exchange).

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-II)
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-! of the Report)


Recommendation (SI. No, 14)
Role of Regulators

The Committee note that the regulators have been entrusted with the
responsibility of development of the Power Market as laid down in the
Electricity Act which specifies that the appropriate Commission shall
endeavour to promote the development of a market (including trading) in
power in such a manner as may be specified, and shall be guided by the
National Electricity Policy. The National Policy enjoins upon the appropriate
Commission to undertake consultation for the development of market and
to provide regulation for the Power Exchanges. Accordingly, the Commission
has taken a series of steps, including issuance of guidelines and notification
of market regulations. These regulations also provide for qualification and
disqualification for the appointment of Director in the Board of a Power
Exchange. It infer alia includes Risk Management Mechanism Requirement
and framework for market oversight and surveillance. The regulations of
the regulator are extended to Day Ahead Markets, Term Ahead Markets,
Renewable Energy Certificates, etc. The Committee has been apprised that
these regulations have ensured that the market functions in a fair and
transparent manner. The market intermediaries like electricity traders and
market infrastructure like the power exchanges are regulated through these
regulations. In addition, the CERC has notified a series of enabling regulations
for the development of the Power Market and for promoting power trading.
The Committee have also been apprised that absence of market access for
buyers and sellers of clectricity, evacuation infrastructure for seamless
flow of electricity, safe and secure operation of the grid are some of the
major bottlenecks that are hindering the growth of the electricity sector.
The Committee find that despite wide ranging regulations in this regard, the
problems afflicting the sector are very evident. Inaccessibility to the market
for buyers and sellers, evacuation inadequacy, etc., are not insurmountable
problems. If this is hampering the growth of the market, then the regulations
of the CERC seems to have failed in achieving the desired objective. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that:—

(i) It should be ascertained as to why the regulations of the CERC
have not yielded the desired results and whether these regulations
are conducive for the development of the market.

67


(ii) In what manner the sector can be eased from over regulations,
and it is left to develop on its intrinsic strength.

Reply of the Government

(i) In pursuance of the provisions contained in Section 66 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 along with the overarching principles laid down
in the National Electricity Policy, the CERC has taken a number of
regulatory interventions to promote the development of power market.
The regulatory interventions/initiatives by the CERC from time to time
have resulted in significant development of the electricity markets.
This is borne out by the facts given below:—

1, The volume of electricity transacted through traders has increased
from 21.92 BUs in 2008-09 to 34.56 BUs in 2014-15. The
weighted average price of electricity transacted through traders
declined from Rs.7.29/kWh in 2008-09 to Rs.4.28/kWh in 2014-
19

2. The volume of electricity transacted through power exchanges
has increased from 2.77 BUs in 2008-09 to 29.40 BUs in 2014-
15. The weighted average price of electricity transacted through
power exchanges declined from Rs. 7.49/kWh in 2008-09 to
Rs. 3.50/kWh in 2014-15,

3. Grid Code provided range of operation of frequency within
specific band which is at present 49.9 Hz to 50,05 Hz. To
supplement the Grid Code towards secure and reliable grid
operation, the Commission has issued Deviation Settlement
Mechanisin (DSM) Regulations which provide inter alia for
deterrents in the form of Unscheduled Interchange (UI) charges
for deviation -from schedule. The tightening of grid frequency
and DSM Regulations issued by the Commission has improved
grid discipline.

4. — Thus, the regulatory initiatives taken by the CERC have resulted

in providing conducive development of electricity markets.

(ii) Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that 'The
Appropriate Commission shall endeavour to promote the development
of a market (including trading) in power in such manner as may be


specified and shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy referred
to in section 3 in this regard’.

Accordingly, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (08९6) . :
has created a conducive regulatory framework for development of
short term market and also institutionalized trading avenues through
traders and power exchanges. Prior to the regulatory initiatives taken
by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, major bottlenecks
that were hindering growth of the electricity sector inter alia included
absence of market access for buyers and sellers of clectricity,
evacuation infrastructure for seamless flow of electricity, safe and
secure operation of the grid etc,

The CERC while drawing powers from the provisions Section 66 of
the Electricity Act, 2003 for promoting and development of market
(including trading) in power and adhering to the overearching principles
laid down in the National Electricity Policy, has taken a number of
initiatives to strengthen the power markets,

The regulations issued by CERC have ensured that the market functions
in a fair and transparent manner, The market intermediaries like
electricity traders, market infrastructure like power exchanges are
regulated through these regulations, The market rules, risk management
are defined through these regulations,

The CERC, through its regulations has ensured that Open Access
becomes a reality.

The initiatives taken by the CERC cannot be termed as over regulation
of the sector, A well-functioning market ensures that the confidence
of participants in market is built. The regulatory interventions of the
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission have at pan-India level
helped in resource optimization by facilitating the transfer of surplus
power to deficit regions in the country.

[Ministry of Power OM No. 27/17/2015-R&R (५४०7),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)


Recommendation (SI, No, 16)

The Committee note that there is an over-bearing presence of the
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission in the electricity sector to regulate
and promote it, In pursuance of its duties, the Commission has framed
guidelines, issued regulations, and formed committees to oversee the sector.
CERC has also initiated some governance control mechanism at power
exchanges. This is done through Risk Management Committee, Market:
Surveillance Committee, Annual IT System Audit for Data Security, Data
Integrity and Operational Efficiency, Annual Report along with Audited
Balance Sheet, Monthly Report on Data on Prices and Volumes, and
Reviewing of the Power Exchanges, etc, The Committee also find that all
functions, varying from framing of regulations, their execution, amendments
and dispute resolutions, revolve around the regulator. It has appropriated
functions which should have been divided and delegated to other bodies for
fairness and transparency in the sector, It has assumed the role of Judge,
Jury and Executioner and in such a situation it is but obvious that fairness
and objectivity can be compromised, Execution of the regulations and
dispute resolutions should have been with different entities to make this
sector competitive and transparent, The Committeo, therefore, recommend.
that:

(i) Role and responsibilitios of CERC should be reviewed thoroughly
to make the system at the Power Exchanges fair and objective.

(ii) 116 functions of execution of regulations and dispute resolutions
should be assigned to other bodies as the concentration of these
powers in one entity compromises the principle of division of
responsibilities for efficient and transparent functioning.

(ii) If need be, the CERC itself may be sub-divided and cach
individual unit may be made autonomous for due discharge of
its differentiated responsibilities,

Reply of the Government

(i) The Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 envisaged an
independent role for the regulator in the electricity sector. The Electricity
Act, 2003, further enlarged the Commission's role for discharging
various regulatory functions which inter-alia include determination of
tariff, licensing, maintaining grid discipline, development of electricity

70


markets, promotion of renewable energy, adjudication on petitions
ete,

As regards the Power Exchanges, the CERC closely monitors their
functioning and issues monthly monitoring report and annual report
on power markets. The Commission has already initiated special audit
of the functioning of the power exchanges as also IT audit/third party
audit of trading software of the power exchanges. The vigilance and
proactive actions by CERC have helped ensure transparency and
accountability in the power sector, and more so in the functioning of
the short term market.

(ii) The functions, responsibilities of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission have been well laid out in the Electricity Act, 2003
As per Section 79(1)(f) of the Act, the CERC has been mandated to
adjudicate upon disputes involving generating companics or transmission
licensee in regard to matters connected with tariff and to refer any
dispute for arbitration, Further, the orders issues by the CERC can be
challenged in the APTEL and the Supreme Court, The proper checks
and balances have already been provided in the Act.

(ii) The Electricity Act envisages CERC as a collegiate body. The
Commission consists of one Chairperson and three full time Members
who are experienced professionals in different areas closely related to
the electricity sector, Chairperson CEA is the ex-officio Member of
CERC.

It has been stated by CERC that the issues for consideration before
it are multi-disciplinary in nature and therefore, the Act provides for
appointment of Chairperson and Members with specialization in various
disciplines like engineering, finance, law, economics, management ९०.

Further, it has been informed by CERC that it has different divisions
1.०, Legal, Finance, Engineering, Economics, Regulatory Affairs cic.
to examine the issues from different dimensions and provide inputs/
analysis for further consideration of the Commission.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No, 27/17/2015-R&R (Vol-Il),
Dated 28th July, 2017]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)

7”


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
New Detwy  * DR, KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
March 05, 2018 Chairperson,
Phalguna 14, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

72


APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 15TH FEBRUARY,

14,
15.
16.
17;

2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT
LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT

Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu — Chairperson
Lok Sabha

Shri Om Birla

Shri Harish Dwivedi

Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

Dr. Arun Kumar

Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shri M.B. Rajesh

Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy

Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma

Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy

Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
Rajya Sabha

Shri T.K.S. Elangovan

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas

Shri $, Muthukaruppan

73


18. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar

19. Smt. Viplove Thakur

L
2.
Bu
2.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and

apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up
the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:

74

(i)

(1)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

(vii)

Draft Report on 'Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Electricity
Sector’.

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Fourteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Evaluation of
Role, Performance and Functioning of the Power Exchanges’.

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the
year 2016-17!,

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Hydro Power—
A Sustainable, Clean and Green Alternative',

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Energy
Access in India—Review of Current Status and Role of
Renewable Energy’.

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2017-18".

Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘National Electricity
Policy — A Review’.


3.

4.
8.
6,

After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any change.
The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the
second part of the Budget Session.

XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX

XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX

XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX

The Committee then adjourned.

XXXKX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX

75


APPENDIX II

(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
1. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE

6)

ai)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

76

FOURTEENTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

Total number of Recommendations 17

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:

Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 17.

Total: 13
Percentage 76.47%

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies:

Nil
Total: ‘ 00
Percentage 00

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 2, 10, 14 and 16

Total: 04
Percentage 23.53%

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:

Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00


“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their
outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www. parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above.”

— ७ ९ ए७०००००००००० ७ एएए ७७७० ककको