STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Power for the year 2018-19]
41
FORTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


FORTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2017-18)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Power for the year 2018-19]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.8.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.8.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


COE. No. 300
Price : Rs. 70.00
© 2018 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset
New Delhi-110 064.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2017-18) ..................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 19
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations     which     the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply .............................................. 43
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which
the reply of the Government has not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 44
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which
the final reply of the Government is still awaited... 45
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 2nd August, 2018.................................... 46
II. Analysis  of  Action Taken by the Government on
the  Observations/Recommendations  contained  in
the 38th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ........................................... 48

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2017-18)
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri M. Chandrakasi
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Kunwar Sarvesh Kumar
10. Shri Malyadri Sriram
11. Shri R.P . Marutharajaa
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
17. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
18. Shri Conrad Kongkal Sangma
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
20. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
21. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
23. Shri Oscar Fernandes
24. Shri Manish Gupta
25. Shri Ram Jethmalani
26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
27. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
28. Shri S. Muthukaruppan
29. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur
31. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K.Pandey — Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Senior Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 41st Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 38th Report of the Standing Committee on
Energy (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power
for the year 2018-19.
2. The 38th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 13th March
and was laid same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 23rd May, 2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 2nd August, 2018.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 38th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPA TI HARIBABU,
2 August , 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2018-19.
2. The Thirty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
13th March, 2018 and was laid same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The
Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total - 16
Chapter II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Sl. No.: Nil Total: 00
Chapter III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of
the Government has not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. No.: Nil Total: 00
Chapter IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply
of the Government is still awaited:
Sl. No.: Nil Total: 00
Chapter V
1

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government
on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit
comments.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee had noted that the some important programmes
under strengthening of power system heads such as Smart Grid and Green
Energy Corridor has been a non-starter. The Smart Grid scheme envisages
setting up of an institutional mechanism by launching the “National Smart
Grid Mission” which would serve the need of an electrical grid with
automation, communication and IT systems that can monitor power flows
from the point of generation to the point of consumption and ensure
control of power flow or curtailment of loads matching generation on real
time basis. The Committee had further noted that the Green Energy Corridor
is the scheme for maximization of renewable energy generation and integration
with the main grid, without compromising on the security and stability of
the power system. Since a massive 1.75 GW capacity of renewable energy
will be added in the coming years, these programmes are extremely
important. For the last three years, only a token amount had been allocated
which has not been utilized fully. For the current year also a meager
Rs. 5.5 crore and Rs. 10 crore have been provided to smart Grid and
Green Energy Corridor respectively. Likewise, the implementation and
allocation under the head Strengthening of Transmission System in the
State of Arunanchal Pradesh and Sikkim has been tardy. This year also it
has been allocated Rs. 300 crore only. The Committee, therefore, had
recommended that the Government should appropriately enhance the
allocation to these important programmes and expedite their execution.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The allocation in smart grid under National Smart Grid Mission
(NSGM) have been addressed through consideration and approval of
EFC for Extension of NSGM upto March, 2020 (co-terminous with
15th Finance Commission) with a proposed outlay of Rs. 990 crore

3
(GBS Rs. 312 crore) with focus on expeditious implementation of
smart grid projects so as to showcase the demonstrated benefits of
these projects on ground in time. New Smart Grid projects have been
appraised and put up to Technical Committee under Chairman, CEA
for appraisal/recommendation to Empowered Committee under
Secretary (Power) for Sanction.
The Ministry would like to apprise the Parliamentary Committee that
given the high technology interventions under Smart Grids; the NSGM
is playing an important role in creating an ecosystem for furthering
the Smart Grids in the Country, apart from undertaking projects. This
is important to ensure that Smart Grids are integrated into the current
distribution system properly. However, as suggested by the
Parliamentary Committee, based on the progress of the works
sanctioned and the new projects to be sanctioned, the Ministry would
seek additional funds during the Revised Estimate Stage.”
8. The Committee in their Report, while recognizing the
importance of some of the programmes including ‘Smart Grid’, had
expressed concern over the meager allocation made to them. The
Committee now note with satisfaction that the Ministry have responded
positively to the suggestion of the Committee by allocating Rs. 990
crore for Smart Grid. They have also stated that New Smart Grid
projects have been appraised and put up to Technical Committee
under Chairman, CEA for appraisal/recommendation to Empowered
Committee under Secretary (Power) for sanction. The Committee
have been further apprised that the Ministry would seek additional
funds during the Revised Estimate Stage. The Committee are happy
with the efforts made by the Ministry in regard to enhancement of
allocation to these important programmes and expect that the fund
allocated will not only be fully utilized but also additional demand for
fund will be made at the time Revised Estimate.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
9. The Committee had noted that apart from rural electrification,
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) has two more
components. One is separation of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders
to facilitate D
ISCOMS in the judicious rostering of supply to agricultural and
uninterrupted quality power supply to non-agricultural consumers. And the

4
other is strengthening and Augmentation of Sub-Transmission & Distribution
infrastructure in rural areas, including metering of Distribution Transformers/
feeders/consumers. Though the achievement under rural electrification
component was right on track, the progress of work under other components
leaves much to be desired. In regard to feeder segregation, against the
sanctioned 1,59,801 ckm, the achievement at that time was only 15,244
ckm which stands a meager 10% of the sanctioned capacity. Similarly,
against the sanctioned 1,825 new sub-stations, only 215 new sub-stations,
which was 12% of the sanctioned, were commissioned at that time. A total
of 3,85,883 distribution transformers had been sanctioned under the scheme,
however, the achievement at that time was only 38,719. In regard to DTR
& Feeder Metering, the area which the Committee have long been putting
emphasis, has very poor performance till that time. Against the sanctioned
4.06 lakh, the achievement was only 0.46 lakh. The Committee believed
that addition of these components has conceptually improved the earlier
rural electrification programme of the Government and helpful in making
it more sustainable and efficient. Therefore, proper and timely execution of
work under these components is just as important as that of rural
electrification. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the pace
of implementation of other two components other than rural electrification
should be increased so that the work of rural electrification be made more
sustainable.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Under DDUGJY , the progress in some of the States is slow due to
delay in award of the contract, delay in getting forest & railway
clearances, land acquisition for sub-stations, Right of Way (RoW)
issues, law & order issues and difficult terrain etc. In order to close
monitoring and speedy resolution of impediments, a robust institutional
mechanism has been put in place at District, State and Central levels.
The States have already been requested during monthly meetings to
expedite the progress of DDUGJY . The Review Meetings on regional
basis are regularly held by the Ministry. Besides, one-to-one meetings
with the State Governments are also held for redressal of issue(s).”
11. The Committee had expressed their concern over the slow
progress made in two other components under Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY). The Ministry while admitting this fact,

5
have assigned various reasons for the same. They have also stated
various efforts made by them to overcome it. The Committee expect
the Ministry to pay equal attention to these two components of the
scheme along with the most visible component of the scheme i.e.
household electrification. They further desire that the Ministry would
make every effort to expedite the implementation these two
components of the programme. The Committee expect that the
Ministry of Power would apprised the Committee of the latest data
regarding achievement made under these components at the time of
furnishing Final Action Taken Notes.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
12. The Committee had noted that Government of India has approved
Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana “Saubhagya” with an outlay of
Rs. 16,320 crore including a Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of
Rs. 12,320.00 crore from Government of India. As per the Ministry of
Power the objective of the scheme is to achieve universal household
electrification by providing last mile connectivity and electricity connections
to all remaining un-electrified households in rural and urban areas. In regard
to timeline for implementation of this scheme, it was stated that all States/
UTs are required to complete the works of households’ electrification by
31st March, 2019. However, spillover works if any, will continue till
2021-22. The progress of rural household electrification is being updated
by the respective State DISCOMs directly on Saubhagya web-portal. As on
07th February, 2018, progress of electrification of 22.39 lakh rural
households across the country; had been reported by the States. The
Ministry had also informed that 3.56 crore households are yet to be
electrified. The Committee find that the earlier concept of universal
electrification was ridden with conditions. Earlier, under Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), and Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), there was a provision to provide free electricity
connection to BPL households. However, the launch of ‘Saubhagya Scheme’
has totally changed the earlier concept of universal electrification as it
envisages providing electricity connection to each and every household.
Saubhagya Scheme aims to cover non-BPL: rural as well as economically
weaker urban households. This initiative of the Government is laudable as
the Committee since long have been pointing out to the lacunae in the
concept of universal electrification. However, the Committee were not sure

6
about the set deadline for completion of this programme i.e. March, 2019.
The Committee had noted that as on 31-01-2018, 2.83 crore BPL households
could be given free electricity connections under the scheme which is
continuing since 2005. Therefore, providing electricity connection to 3.56
crore households and that too in one year timeframe seems to be a herculean
task. The Committee were very apprehensive in regard to achievement of
the target fixed under Saubhagya scheme and were of the belief that unless
extraordinary and concerted efforts by the Central Government as well as
the State Governments are made, the said target is difficult to achieve. The
Committee, therefore, had recommended the Ministry to make every possible
efforts to achieve the said target. The Ministry was expected to guide and
do handholding of States in this regard.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The target of electrifying all the remaining un-electrified households
(as on 10.10.2017) across the county by March, 2019 is indeed a
herculean task. Considering the stipulated timelines, the implementing
agencies have been asked to kick start the works for releasing electricity
connections to eligible households with immediate effect. Further,
following strategic measures have been adopted by Ministry of Power
and the Nodal Agency of DDUGJY & Saubhagya — the REC, for
accelerating the progress.
A. Sanction and Budget Allocation:
• Adhoc advance has been released to States based on the scope
of un-electrified household and progress thereon.
• An additional budgetary support of 15% (5% for special category
States) would be released to States on achievement of 100%
household electrification of all willing households by
31st December, 2018.
• Sufficient funds are being allocated to the States as per their
achievement of pre-defined milestone.
B. Implementation Strategy:
• State DISCOMs update the progress village-wise, district-wise,
State-wise profiling of un-electrified households done on
Saubhagya portal on near real time basis.

7
• 100 districts in 8 States account for most of the remaining
un-electrified households.
• States have been permitted to electrify household by award of
new contracts, extension of existing contracts or execution of
works departmentally.
• States have been requested to make application form for service
connection simple and electronic,
• State DISCOMs have been requested to organize camps to
facilitate on the spot filling up of application forms for releasing
service connections.
• States have been requested to involve Gram Panchayat/public
institutions in rural areas to collect application form, complete
documentation and other activities, if required.
C. Review and Monitoring:
• At State level, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief
Secretary is in place to monitor the progress and resolve issues
relating to implementation. Further, the progress is reviewed by
Chief Secretary of respective State on fortnightly basis.
• At Central level, inter-Ministerial Monitoring Committee on
DDUGJY/Saubhagya headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power,
Government of India is monitoring the implementation of the
scheme. Besides, the progress is reviewed with States/Power
Utilities in Review, Planning and Monitoring (RPM) meetings of
Ministry of Power on monthly basis.
• Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), the nodal agency,
monitors implementation of scheme through its State Offices at
field level.
• At District level, (DISHA) District Development Coordination &
Monitoring Committee meetings (under the aegis of Ministry of
Rural Development) headed by senior-most Hon’ble Member of
Parliament (Lok Sabha) of the district & other MPs of the

8
district as co-chair with District Magistrate as Convener, reviews
the progress of Saubhagya along with other schemes.
• Saubhagya Mobile App and http://saubhagya.gov.in/ portal has
been developed for monitoring of household electrification works
on near real time basis.
Based on the information furnished by the States, 48.72 lakh service
connections have been released under Saubhagya, as on 26.04.2018. This
information is made available in public domain for effective monitoring and
use of all stakeholders. In view of the above, proactive steps taken by
Government of India and with the help of States the target of Saubhagya
is expected to be achievable.“.
14. The Committee taking into account the huge number of
remaining household to be electrified, i.e. 3.56 crore, in their Report,
had recommended the Ministry to make efforts to achieve the goal
within the targeted date i.e. 31st March, 2019. The Ministry in their
reply have stated that implementing agencies have been asked to
kick start the works for releasing electricity connections to eligible
households with immediate effects. They have detailed the strategic
measures which have been adopted by Ministry of Power and the
Nodal Agency of DDUGJY & Saubhagya - the REC, for accelerating
the progress. They have also furnished data regarding household
electrification according to which 48.72 lakh service connections have
been released under Saubhagya as on 26.04.2018. Further, as per
Saubhagya website 91.22 lakh households have been provided
connections as on 25.07.2018. The Committee note that there are still
2.63 crore households which are yet to be given electricity connections.
Considering the timeframe, the target is an uphill task and merit top
priority of the Central and State agencies to achieve it within the
stipulated timeframe. The Committee, therefore, hope that the
Ministry will not only put their sincere efforts but also provide all
possible assistance and do handholding to State Government in this
regard.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
15. The Committee had noted that Integrated Power Development
Scheme (IPDS) was formulated on 20th November, 2014 with an objective
to provide 24x7 Power supplies for consumers, to provide access to all

9
urban household and facilitate State Power Utilities to reduce the level of
AT&C losses to 15%. The component of IPDS inter alia  include
(i) strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution networks in the urban
areas; (ii) metering of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in the
urban areas; and (iii) IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening
of distribution network under R-APDRP for 12th and 13th Plans by carrying
forward the approved outlay of R-APDRP to IPDS. All DISCOMs including
private and State Power Departments will be eligible for financial assistance
under. the scheme. The Committee had been apprised that the scheme is
designed to help in AT&C loss reduction, establishment of IT enabled
energy accounting/auditing improvement in billed energy based on metered
consumption and improvement in collection efficiency. In regard to meeting
the targets under the scheme, the Committee had been apprised that
achievements generally are in line with above targets. State Utilities have
already awarded distribution strengthening projects worth Rs. 24,309 crore
which is more than 90% of sanctioned cost. The awarded projects are in
various stages of execution and it is expected that all projects may be
completed within the scheduled completion period i.e. 24 months of awards.
The Committee had also noted that the overall physical progress under
IPDS was mere 21%. The Secretary, Power accepted before the Committee
that the spendings under IPDS in some part were slow. The Committee,
therefore, had recommended that the Government should pay utmost attention
to implementation of this programme so that work awarded could be
executed within the stipulated timeline. Further, they had desired that every
effort be made to optimally utilize the allocated fund for this scheme.
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Ministry of Power, Government of India is paying utmost attention
to the implementation of IPDS to ensure that works awarded are
completed by 31.03.2019. IPDS implementation is being rigorously
monitored at highest levels of Ministry of Power and M/s Power
Finance Corporation, designated as nodal agency by MoP for
operationalization of the scheme. Following monitoring mechanism is
being followed by PFC strictly to ensure speedy implementation as
follows:
(i) Central level monitoring at MoP
Monthly Review, Planning & Monitoring (RPM) meetings by Ministry
of Power with Secretaries (Power) of States/CMD’s of DISCOMs.

10
Such meetings are often chaired by Hon’ble Minister of State for
Power, GoI. IPDS Monitoring Committee under chairmanship of
Secretary(P) reviews implementation of IPDS (including subsumed
R-APDRP) for operationalization of the Programme. MoP team also
frequently visits States for expediting implementation.
(ii) Concurrent Monitoring by PFC
Regular review by PFC, the nodal agency along with Web based
project monitoring. Also, day-to-day monitoring at the level of Nodal/
Zonal Officers of PFC with States/Utilities to resolve Implementation
issues, expediting milestone linked to progress of project implementation
and release of funds.
(iii) State level monitoring in States
Regular monitoring and review at State level by Distribution Reforms
Committee(DRC), chaired by Energy Secretary. Also, regular follow-
up meetings are taken by MDs/CMDs of respective Power Utilities.
Also, periodic reviews are taken by Disha(District Development
Coordination and Monitoring Committee).
(iv) Quality Monitoring
The Project Management Agency (PMA) appointed by DISCOMs to
assist them in project management for ensuring timely implementation
of project. Concurrent and post implementation evaluation by Third
Party Concurrent Evaluating Agency(TPCEA) for verification of material
and process at site, reporting of progress etc.
With almost all the system strengthening projects been awarded and
surveys having been completed, the progress of IPDS works is likely
to scale up. Further, rigorous monitoring of IPDS implementation has
resulted in overall progress of system strengthening works to a level
of 29% as on 15th April, 2018 vis-a-vis 9% as on 30th November,
2017. At said pace, 100% implementation is likely within timeline. To
ensure that funds provided to State Utilities under IPDS are optimally
utilized, following steps are being taken:
IPDS being a Government of India program, the release from nodal
agency (PFC) to utilities is being done through Public Financial
Management System(PFMS) and utilities are using same for funds

11
flows under the scheme. Utilities receiving funds under IPDS are
registered/mapped in PFMS. PFC ensures that all utilities to whom
funds are to be released are properly registered/mapped in PFMS.
17. Being unsatisfied with the physical progress under Integrated
Power Development Scheme (IPDS) which was mere 21%, the
Committee in their Report had recommended the Ministry to pay
required attention to expedite the execution of the scheme. The
Committee now note that the Ministry in their reply have stated that
they are paying utmost attention to the implementation of IPDS to
ensure that works awarded are completed by 31.03.2019. They have
further assured the Committee that the scheme is being rigorously
monitored at highest levels. The Committee have time and again
emphasized the importance of this scheme as its successful
implementation would strengthen the distribution sector in particular
and power sector at large. The slow pace of execution of the scheme
has been the concern of the Committee for a long time. The
Committee, therefore, expect that the Ministry would make sincere
efforts and adhere to their timeline of 31.03.2019 for implementation
of Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS).
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
18. The Committee had noted that State DISCOMs in the country
had huge. accumulated losses and outstanding debt. As a result of which
financially stressed DISCOMs are not able to supply adequate power at
affordable rates, which hampers quality of life and overall economic growth
and development. Efforts towards 100% village electrification, 24x7 power
supply and clean energy cannot be achieved without performing DISCOMs.
Power outages also adversely affect national priorities like “Make in India”
and “Digital India”. In addition, default on bank loans by financially stressed
DISCOMs has the potential to seriously impact the banking sector and the
economy at large. The Committee had further noted that the Scheme
“UDAY” (Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana) for financial turnaround of
State owned Power Distribution Companies has been formulated by the
Government in consultation with the various stakeholders to ensure a
sustainable permanent solution to the problem. The Scheme has been made
effective with effect from 2011-15. The Scheme is operationalized through
a bipartite/tripartite agreement amongst the Ministry of Power, State

12
Government and the DISCOMs. The Scheme “UDAY” is optional for all
States. In regard to progress and achievement under the scheme, the
Committee had been apprised that DISCOMs debt of around Rs.2,08,641
crore has already been taken over by the States. Hence to that extent -the
benefits to DISCOMs by way of savings in interest and increase in cash
flow has been achieved. Also, improvement in some crucial parameters viz.
ACS-ARR Gap, Collection Efficiency, Billing Efficiency, and AT&C losses,
has also been seen. However, no decrease in Power Purchase Cost is a
matter of concern. The Committee while appreciating the effort of the
Government in launching this scheme which involves no financial grant
from the Central Government, were a bit apprehensive also in regard to it
successful implementation and achieving desired goal. The Committee were
aware that the task of financial turnaround of DISCOMs financial health is
difficult and complicated. All the earlier efforts of the Central Government
have miserably failed in achieving their intended goals. As the present
scheme aims at not only bailing out DISCOMs of financial stress but also
making them economically viable, there is a greater possibility of its becoming
successful. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the
Government should keep making indefatigable efforts for implementation of
UDAY scheme and guide, persuade and do handholding of State
Governments/DISCOMs to achieve their goals as per the trajectory drawn
under the scheme.
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“UDAY was launched in the latter part of FY 2016. As per data
submitted by States so far, the aggregate ACS-ARR gaps of UDAY
DISCOMs has come down to 29 paise/unit by the end of 9 months
of FY 2018 as against 59 paise/Unit at the end of FY 2016, thereby
indicating the progress towards the target of achieving financial break
even.
Power purchase costs are around 80% of the costs of DISCOMs,
and therefore, UDAY has focussed comprehensively on reducing this
cost for achieving sustainability. In the beginning of UDAY program,
the average power purchase cost of UDAY states was Rs. 4.18 in
FY2016, which increased to Rs. 4.23 in FY 2017. Further, the first
nine months data of FY 2018 submitted by States suggests that the
Power purchase costs remained almost same at Rs. 4.24. It may be

13
observed that during almost last two financial years the average power
purchase cost has risen from Rs.4.18 to Rs.4.24 less than 1.50%
increase, which indicates that efficiency improvements across the
Power Sector value chain have absorbed most of the inflationary
impacts arising out of Coal price hikes, increase in environmental
cess, and rail freight hikes in the interim periods.
It may also be brought to the notice of the Committee that the power
purchase costs for DISCOMs had been on an increasing trend in
pre-UDAY period, peaking at almost 7% increase in FY 2016, in the
latter half, when UDAY was launched. On the cost recovery front, the
billed energy to consumers in FY 2017 showed an increase of almost
9% on an aggregate basis, which indicates the efforts made by
DISCOMs in billing consumers.
Ministry of Power is making all possible efforts, through regular
interactions, conducting workshops, sharing best practices among
DISCOMs, and by handholding the States/DISCOMs enabling them to
achieve the goals under UDAY . Following measures are being taken
to make UDAY successful:
i. Close focus on Outcomes of AT&C losses and ACS-ARR gaps;
ii. Reduction of interest burden on utilities through issuance of
bonds;
iii. Bringing financial discipline in working of utilities;
iv. Emphasis on key operational parameters;
v. Web Portal and Mobile App for data-flow and transparency;
vi. Focused analysis of utilities’ quarterly, half-yearly and annual
performances;
vii. Regular state specific reviews by Ministry Officials;
viii. Enhanced involvement of State Governments in turnaround of
utilities;
ix. Capacity building of utilities;
x. Handholding in State owned Power Plants by NTPC for
efficiency improvements of State GENCOs;

14
xi. Identifying issues of consequence to States on a routine basis,
and discussing measures to solve them;
xii. Encouraging DISCOMs to focus on high AT&C loss (>40%)
Divisions, and take remedial measures to reduce the losses.
Further, the progress of the scheme has also been reviewed regularly
by Hon’ble Minister of State (IC) for Power and New & Renewable
Energy apart from the regular monitoring by Central Monitoring
Committee headed by Secretary (Power), Government of India.
20. In regard to success of UDAY scheme, the Ministry have
informed that the aggregate Average Cost of Supply (ACS) - Average
Revenue Realized (ARR) gaps of UDAY DISCOMS has come down to
29 paise/unit by the end of 9 months of financial year 2018 as against
59 paise/unit at the end of financial year 2016. They have further
stated in the beginning of UDAY programme, the average power
purchase cost of UDAY States was Rs. 4.18 in FY 2016, which increased
to Rs. 4.23 in FY 2017. Further, the first nine months data of FY 2018
submitted by States suggest that the Power purchase costs remained
almost same at Rs. 4.24. It may be observed that during almost last
two financial years the average power purchase cost has risen from
Rs. 4.18 to Rs. 4.24 that is less than 1.5% increase. They have also
reported considerable improvement in billing efficiency also. The
Committee find that the achievements made under the scheme so far
are encouraging. The Committee are of the view that for the viability
of the whole power sector, the success of this scheme is vital. The
Committee, therefore, expect that the Government will relentlessly
make efforts in the form of UDA Y for turnaround of DISCOMS’s
financial health.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
21. The Committee had noted that the hydro power installed capacity
in the country as on 31.01.2018 was 44,963.42 MW. As on 31.01.2018,
205 Nos. of hydro stations with total installed capacity of 44,963.42 MW
including 9 Pumped Storage Schemes (PSS) with installed capacity of
4,785.6 MW were under operation. In regard to development of hydro
power in the country, the Committee had noted that the pace has been
rather slow as a total capacity addition of 5,479 MW only had been

15
achieved during the 12th Plan against the targeted capacity addition of
about 10,897 MW during the same period. Further, a Hydro Power capacity
of 4,376.01 MW has been installed since 2014-15 up to end of January
2018. The committee had been expressing their displeasure over the slow
pace of the development of the hydro power. Nevertheless, any concrete
measure in this regard is yet to be taken by the Government. The Committees
were of the view that the sooner we start utilizing the hydro power potential
the better it will be in terms of cost as over the years, the hydro projects
are becoming increasingly costlier mainly due to increased costs associated
with environment and R&R. These environmental and R&R norms are
unlikely to ease out and in fact are likely to become further stringent with
time. The Committee, therefore, were of the view that to develop the hydro
power sector at a desired pace, there is urgent need for overhauling of
hydro power policy instead of ad hoc and isolated efforts. The concern of
the Committee has been acknowledged by the Secretary, Power who accepted
that in wake of upcoming renewable energy, hydro power has become
more important. He has further stated that the Ministry is formulating a
new policy for hydro power sector. The Committee had recommended that
the Government should formulate a new policy for hydro power sector
which will address the existing as well as the anticipated problems being
faced by this sector. The committee had hoped that the matter raised by
the Committee from time to time such as sharing the burden of enabling
infrastructure by the Government, providing long term loan and cheaper
loan to hydro projects, streamlining the process of various clearances and
R&R process in regard to setting up hydro power projects and pro-active
participation of Central and the State Government in it and consideration of
all hydro power projects irrespective of their capacity as renewable source
of energy, etc. will be taken care of while formulating the new policy will
be done in an expeditious and time bound manner.
22. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“A Cabinet Note comprising of various policy initiatives as well as
facilitation measures for revival of under construction hydro electric
projects is under active inter-Ministerial consultation.”
23. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
inter-Ministerial consultation relating to development of hydro power
at the time of Final Action Taken Notes.

16
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
24. The Committee had noted that Central Power Research Institute
(CPRI), Bengaluru serves as a National Laboratory for applied research in
the field of electrical power and also functions as an independent authority
for testing, evaluation and certification of electrical equipment and
components. For the financial year 2017-18, the allocation for CPRI was
Rs. 150 crore only. However, the Committee had found that this budgetary
allocation was revised to Rs. 50.36 crore at the time of RE. The Committee
had inferred that reduction in the allocation may be the result of lesser
utilization of money as the Actual expenditure of CPRI for the year 2016-
17 has been only Rs. 65.79 crore. Again, for the year 2018-19, a provision
of Rs. 150 crore has been made for CPRI. The Committee had observed
that the country is one of the biggest generator and consumers of electricity
in the world. However, in terms of technological innovation and achievements
there is not much to mention about. The Committee are surprised that
despite an existing big market with huge future potential in the country, our
allocation for R&D, is negligible. The Committee had believed that there is
immense scope for technological innovation and upgradation of existing
technologies, be it increasing the efficiency of electrical devices and bringing
down its cost, introduction of super critical technology and reduction of
emission, from thermal power plants, technologies related to transmission
and distribution of electricity for reducing AT&C losses, so on and so
forth. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the
Government should give due attention to Research and Development in the
field of electricity by allocating more fund. The Committee had also desired
that the areas of technological advancement should be prioritized and all
efforts be made to achieve it in a time bound manner by the involvement
of premium technological institutions of the country.
25. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The Ministry of Power (MoP) agrees with the views of the Committee
that the areas of technological advancement should be prioritized and
all efforts be made to achieve it in a time bound manner.
2.1. It is stated that Ministry of Power through CPRI is implementing
three R&D schemes i.e. National Perspective Plan (NPP), Research
Scheme on Power (RSoP) and In-House Research & Development
(IHRD) to create strong research and development base in power

17
sector. SFC proposal for R&D schemes of the Ministry of Power
being implemented through CPRI for Rs. 158.00 crore for three years
w.e.f 2017-18, is under consideration.
2.2 The projects under NPP aim to promote R&D in the power
sector in technological areas of importance to manufacturers, power
utilities and academia in collaborative mode. For Projects directly
taken by CPRI under this scheme, 50% funding is by Ministry of
Power and 50% funding by the concerned manufacturer/power utilities/
academia. RSoP schemes are fully funded by MoP and aims to carry
out need based research in power sector including research in various
operational problems encountered in power system. The RSoP projects
are undertaken by organizations including academia such as IITs,
NITs, etc. Under IHRD, various Divisions and Units of the CPRI take
up Research Projects under the In-house R&D (IHRD) scheme which
is fully funded by Ministry of Power.
2.3 Besides, the Ministry of Power also participates in research
projects under Impacting Research Innovation and Technology
(IMPRINT) and Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) scheme/programme
of Ministry of Human Resource and Development (MHRD). Since the
research projects under UAY and IMPRINT are mainly collaborative
in nature involving participation of industry and the IITs, these are
being considered as R&D proposals/projects under National Perspective
Plan (NPP) scheme.
In addition to the above, research in power sector is also being
undertaken by various PSUs (NTPC, PGCIL, THDC, NEEPCO, SJVN
and NHPC) under this Ministry in their domain fields.
3 In order to have a coordinated approach and proper monitoring
of R&D activities being carried in the power sector by Organisations/
PSUs of the Ministry of Power, a High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) has been constituted by the
Ministry vide Order dated 25th Nov., 2016. Subsequently, in the first
meeting of the Committee held on 19th January 2017, a sub-Committee
was constituted to list out all major R&D activities being undertaken
by organisations/PSUs under MoP, identify areas where there is an
overlap and possibility for collaboration, areas of importance for the
power sector and focus areas for research in the next 3 to 4 years.

18
The final report submitted by the sub-group which includes a number
of areas focusing on measures to achieve higher efficiency levels in
all the domains of the power sector has also been deliberated upon
during the second meeting of the Committee held on 19th September,
2017. It is agreed that some minimum acceptable standards need to
be fixed for performance in research areas and it should be made
mandatory for all to comply inter alia, the following decisions were
taken during the meeting:—
(i) CEA may organise an interaction with the industry wherein the
report of the sub-Committee could be circulated and the industry
be invited to participate in R&D in identified thrust areas. Regional
workshops could also be organised.
(ii) Besides the R&D already being undertaken by them, PSUs/
Organisations under MoP may also be asked to also focus on
some of the thrust areas identified in the report for R&D.
(iii) DG, NPTI may explore collaboration with the industry (IEEMA)
for R&D in identified thrust areas.
4 It is further stated that CPRI along with BEE and CEA has
already initiated a research program on indigenous development of
LED lamps and luminaries, identifying a supply side weakness in LED
lighting products such as heavy dependence on imports for electronic
components, LED chips/wafers, modifications required as per Indian
conditions for the imported products and limited testing capacity for
LED lighting.
CPRI along with BEE has also initiated research projects on 'Electricity
based clean cooking technologies' with the objective to make e-cooking
adaptable for Indian Dishes which is expected to lead to huge savings
in LPG imports.”
26. The Committee, on finding unsatisfactory condition of R&D
in the country, had sought the due attention of the Government. The
Ministry in their reply have enumerated various efforts being made
in this regard. The Committee while appreciating these efforts, would
like to re-emphasize the importance of R&D for power sector and
desire the Government to take this task on a Mission mode.

19
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Annual Plan Outlay
The Committee while scrutinizing the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2018-19 note that against proposed
outlay of Rs.36,843.32 crore of the Ministry of Power, the Ministry of
Finance have allocated Rs. 15,046.92 crore only. Though the approved
allocation of Rs.15,046.92 crore is slightly higher than the previous year’s
allocation of Rs. 13,881 crore, it is less than 50% of the proposed. The
budgetary cut is across the board and all the important and flagship
programmes of the Ministry are affected. Against the demand of Rs. 26,271
crore, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) has been
allocated Rs.6,550 crore only. Under IPDS, a demand of Rs. 5,950 crore
has been reduced to Rs. 4,935 crore. Similarly, under PSDF, an allocation
of Rs. 544 crore has been made against the proposal of Rs. 3,040.66 crore.
At the one hand Government is striving hard to achieve the goal of universal
electrification in the country and strengthen the power system, on the other
hand they are resorting to severe budgetary cuts. As the Government has
preponed the timeline for achieving the targets of electricity access to every
households, the Committee were hoping that the Ministry of Power will get
a substantially enhanced budgetary allocation. However, a budget of less
than half of the proposed allocation is disappointing and, therefore, the
committee express their concern. As financial allocation and its utilization
has direct link with the physical progress and achievement of programmes,
the Committee is now a bit apprehensive about the achievement of proposed
physical targets considering the much lesser allocation. In view of the
above the Committee feel that important programmes of the Ministry should
not suffer any delay due to paucity of fund and therefore, strongly
recommend that the Ministry of Power should endeavour to optimally
utilize whatever fund has allocated and post further demand at the time of

20
Revise Estimate (RE). The Ministry of Finance is expected that they will
allocate extra budgetary allocation at the time of RE if the Ministry of
Power require so.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Power is thankful for the above observations of
Standing Committee on Energy and hope the continued support of the
Committee in future.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date : 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that the some important programmes under
strengthening of power system heads such as Smart Grid and Green
Energy Corridor has been a non-starter. The Smart Grid scheme envisages
setting up of an institutional mechanism by launching the “National Smart
Grid Mission”, which would serve the need of an electrical grid with
automation, communication and IT systems that can monitor power flows
from the point of generation to the point of consumption and ensure
control of power flow or curtailment of loads matching generation on real
time basis. The Committee further note that the Green Energy Corridor is
the scheme for maximization of renewable energy generation and integration
with the main grid, without compromising on the security and stability of
the power system. Since a massive 1.75 GW capacity of renewable energy
will be added in the coming years, these programmes are extremely
important. For the last three years, only a token amount is being allocated
which is also not being utilized fully. This year also a meager Rs. 5.5 crore
and Rs. 10 crore have been provided to Smart Grid and Green Energy
Corridor respectively. Likewise, the implementation and allocation under the
head Strengthening of Transmission System in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh and Sikkim has been tardy. This year also it has been allocated
Rs. 300 crore only. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should appropriately enhance the allocation to these important
programmes and expedite their execution.
Reply of the Government
The allocation in smart grid under National Smart Grid Mission (NSGM)
have been addressed through consideration and approval of EFC for

21
Extension of NSGM upto March, 2020 (co-terminous with 15th Finance
Commission) with a proposed outlay of Rs. 990 crore (GBS Rs. 312 crore)
with focus on expeditious implementation of Smart Grid Projects so as to
showcase the demonstrated benefits of these projects on ground in time.
New Smart Grid Projects have been appraised and put up to technical
Committee under Chairman, CEA for appraisal/recommendation to
Empowered Committee under Secretary (Power) for sanction.
The Ministry would like to apprise the Parliamentary Committee that
given the high technology interventions under Smart Grids, the NSGM is
playing an important role in creating an ecosystem for furthering the Smart
Grids in the Country, apart from undertaking projects. This is important to
ensure that Smart Grids are integrated into the current distribution system
properly. However, as suggested by the Parliamentary Committee, based on
the progress of the works sanctioned and the new projects to be sanctioned,
the Ministry would seek additional funds during the Revised Estimate Stage.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget  Date : 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para No. 2.3)
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)
The Committee note that the Government has approved DDUGJY
with a total, investment of Rs. 43,033 crore including a budgetary support
of Rs. 33,453 crore, in the country for feeder separation and strengthening
of sub-transmission and distribution network. Rural electrification is the
core activity under the scheme. Since, the Government envisages to fully
implement the scheme by March, 2019, there is need to expedite the
execution work. As per the given trajectory of annual budgetary support,
Rs. 7500 crore was to be allocated this financial year i.e. 2018-19. However,
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) has been allocated
only Rs. 6500 crore. The Committee are surprised over the lesser than
proposed allocation for such an important programmes of the Ministry. If
we go by the budgetary allocation, it can be inferred that the targets set
under the scheme will not be achieved as per schedule and the programme
is bound to be delayed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
scheme should be allocated more fund at the time of RE as well as in the
next financial year.

22
Reply of the Government
Government of India is providing sufficient funds for smooth
implementation of DDUGJY . Accordingly, Government of India, under
DDUGJY , has allocated Rs.3,800 crore for the financial year 2018-19.
Further, a provision for Rs.15,000 crore is made for allocation through
Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR) for DDUGJY and Saubhagya during
2018-19.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date : 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that there were 18,452 un-electrified villages as
on 1st March, 2015. However, by the end of January, 2018, this number
is reduced to 1,234. The deadline set by the Government in regard to
electrify all the un-electrified villages is May, 2018 which is not very far.
Though the number of villages that is to be electrified is miniscule, the
Committee are aware that these remaining villages are located in the difficult
terrain. Most of the remaining un-electrified villages are in the State of
Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee
are also aware of the difficulties being faced in electrification of these
remaining villages. Nevertheless, the Committee expect that instead of
showing any complacency, the Ministry will reinvigorate their efforts and
resolve the issue being faced in electrification of these villages. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the timeline for electrification of all
the un-electrified villages should be strictly adhered to.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power and Nodal Agency-Rural Electrification Corporation
(REC) are taking all proactive actions and extending all possible support to
the States to accomplish Village Electrification on time.
The target of electrification of 18,452 un-electrified villages (as reported
on 01.04.2015) has been achieved as on 30.4.2018. A number of 1,271
villages were found uninhabited.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation ( Sl. No. 5 Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that apart from rural electrification, Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) has two more components. One

23
is separation of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders to facilitate DISCOMs
in the judicious rostering of supply to agricultural and uninterrupted quality
power supply to non-agricultural consumers. And the other is strengthening
and Augmentation of Sub Transmission & Distribution infrastructure in
rural areas, including metering of Distribution Transformers/feeders/
consumers. Though the achievement under rural electrification component
is right on track, the progress of work under other components leaves
much to be desired. In regard to feeder segregation, against the sanctioned
1,59,801 ckm, the achievement so far is only 15,244 ckm which stands
a meager 10% of the sanctioned capacity. Similarly, against the sanctioned
1,825 new sub-stations, only 215 new sub-stations, which is 12% of the
sanctioned, has so far been commissioned. A total of 3,85,883 distribution
transformers has been sanctioned under the scheme, however, the
achievement so far is only 38,719. In regard to DTR & Feeder Metering,
the area which the Committee have long been putting emphasis, has very
poor performance so far. Against the sanctioned 4.06 lakh, the achievement
is only 0.46 lakh. The Committee believe that addition of these components
has conceptually improved the earlier rural electrification programme of the
Government and helpful in making it more sustainable and efficient.
Therefore, proper and timely execution of work under these components
is just as important as that of rural electrification. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the pace of implementation of other two components
other than rural electrification should be increased so that the work of rural
electrification be made more sustainable.
Reply of the Government
Under DDUGJY, the progress in some of the States is slow due to
delay in award of the contract, delay in getting forest & railway clearances,
land acquisition for sub-stations, Right of Way (RoW) issues, law & order
issues and difficult terrain etc. In order to close monitoring and speedy
resolution of impediments, a robust institutional mechanism has been put
in place at District, State and Central levels. The States have already been
requested during monthly meetings to expedite the progress of DDUGJY.
The Review Meetings on regional basis are regularly held by the Ministry.
Besides, one-to-one meetings with the State Governments are also held for
redressal of issue(s).
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]

24
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that Government of India has approved Pradhan
Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana “Saubhagya” with an outlay of
Rs. 16,320 crore including a Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of
Rs. 12,320.00 crore from Government of India. As per the Ministry of
Power the objective of the scheme is to achieve universal household
electrification by providing last mile connectivity and electricity connections
to all remaining un-electrified households in rural and urban areas. In regard
to timeline for implementation of this scheme, it has been stated that all
States/UTs are required to complete the works of households’ electrification
by 31st March, 2019. However, spillover works; if any will continue till
2021-22. The progress of rural household electrification is being updated
by the respective State DISCOMs directly on Saubhagya web-portal. As on
07th February, 2018, progress of electrification of 22.39 lakh rural
households across the country; have been reported by the States. The
Ministry have also informed that 3.56 crore households are yet to be
electrified. The Committee find that the earlier concept of universal
electrification was ridden with conditions. Earlier, under Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), and Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), there was a provision to provide free electricity
connection to BPL households. However, the launch of ‘Saubhagya Scheme’
has totally changed the earlier concept of universal electrification as it
envisages providing electricity connection to each and every household.
Saubhagya Scheme aims to cover non-BPL: rural as well as economically
weaker urban households. This initiative of the Government is laudable as
the Committee since long have been pointing out to the lacunae in the
concept of universal electrification. However, the Committee are not sure
about the set deadline for completion of this programme i.e March, 2019.
The Committee note that as on 31-01-2018, 2.83 crore BPL households
could be given free electricity connections under the scheme which is
continuing since 2005. Therefore, providing electricity connection to 3.56
crore households and that too in one year timeframe seems to be a herculean
task. The Committee are very apprehensive in regard to achievement of the
target fixed under Saubhagya scheme and are of the belief that unless
extraordinary and concerted efforts by the Central Government as well as

25
the State Governments are made, the said target is difficult to achieve. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry that every possible efforts
be made to achieve the said target. The Ministry is expected to guide and
do handholding of States in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The target of electrifying all the remaining un-electrified households
(as on 10.10.2017) across the county by March, 2019 is indeed a herculean
task. Considering the stipulated timelines, the implementing agencies have
been asked to kick start the works for releasing electricity connections to
eligible households with immediate effect. Further, following strategic
measures have been adopted by Ministry of Power and the Nodal Agency
of DDUGJY & Saubhagya — the REC, for accelerating the progress:
A. Sanction and Budget Allocation:
• Adhoc advance has been released to States based on the scope
of un-electrified household and progress thereon.
• An additional budgetary support of 15% (5% for special category
States) would be released to States on achievement of 100%
household electrification of all willing households by
31st December, 2018.
• Sufficient funds are being allocated to the States as per their
achievement of pre-defined milestone.
B. Implementation Strategy:
• State DISCOMs update the progress village-wise, district-wise,
State-wise profiling of un-electrified households done on
Saubhagya portal on near real time basis.
• 100 districts in 8 States account for most of the remaining
un-electrified households.
• States have been permitted to electrify household by award of
new contracts, extension of existing contracts or execution of
works departmentally.
• States have been requested to make application form for service
connection simple and electronic.

26
• State DISCOMs have been requested to organize camps to
facilitate on the spot filling up of application forms for releasing
service connections.
• States have been requested to involve Gram Panchayat/public
institutions in rural areas to collect application form, complete
documentation and other activities, if required.
C. Review and Monitoring:
• At State level, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief
Secretary is in place to monitor the progress and resolve issues
relating to implementation. Further, the progress is reviewed by
Chief Secretary of respective State on fortnightly basis.
• At Central level, inter-Ministerial Monitoring Committee on
DDUGJY/Saubhagya headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power,
Government of India is monitoring the implementation of the
scheme. Besides, the progress is reviewed with States/Power
Utilities in Review, Planning and Monitoring (RPM) meetings of
Ministry of Power on monthly basis.
• Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), the nodal agency,
monitors implementation of scheme through its State Offices at
field level. At District level, (DISHA) District Development
Coordination & Monitoring Committee meetings (under the aegis
of Ministry of Rural Development) headed by senior-most Hon’ble
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) of the district & other MPs
of the district as co-chair with District Magistrate as Convener,
reviews the progress of Saubhagya along with other schemes.
• Saubhagya Mobile App and http://saubhagya.gov.in/ portal has
been developed for monitoring of household electrification works
on near real time basis.
Based on the information furnished by the States, 48.72 lakh service
connections have been released under Saubhagya, as on 26.04.2018. This
information is made available in public domain for effective monitoring and
use of all stakeholders. In view of the above, pro-active steps taken by
Government of India and with the help of States the target of Saubhagya
is expected to be achievable.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018 Budget Date: 23.05.2018]

27
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that at State level, a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary is in place to monitor progress resolve
issues relating to implementation viz. allocation of land for sub-stations,
right of way, forest clearance,. railway clearance, safety clearance etc. At
District level, District Development Coordination& Monitoring Committee
namely DISHA (administered by Ministry of Rural Development) headed by
senior most Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) is in place to review and
monitor implementation of Central sector schemes including DDUGJY. At
Central level, inter-ministerial Monitoring Committee on DDUGJY headed
by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, Government of India also monitor
implementation of scheme. In regard to penal actions taken against the
responsible person when irregularities are found during the monitoring
check under the scheme, the Ministry have stated that under DDUGJY, the
defects in works reported by Quality Monitors, are rectified by the respective
Implementing Agencies. The complaints received from public, are addressed
to the concerned State, Utility, Implementing Agencies for remedial measures/
compliance. Despite the said monitoring mechanism in place, the Committee
are aware of the irregularities and quality issues in the implementation of
this scheme. The Committee find that though the scheme is mainly financed
by the Central Government, the execution of work and related decisions are
taken by the State Governments. This has created a scenario where nobody
could be made accountable for any misdeed. The Secretary, Power also
vindicated the view of the Committee and has stated that the present
monitoring mechanism that is not working very well, therefore, there is
need to improve it. He assured the Committee that the States will be told
to develop the monitoring system at the grassroots level and have a system
of reporting. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the monitoring
mechanism for Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) should
be reviewed and made more effective so that accountability may be fixed
and penal action may taken against the erring persons.
Reply of the Government
Under DDUGJY , the State Power Utilities shall be the solely responsible
& accountable for assuring quality works. For effective monitoring of

28
works under DDUGJY , appointment of Projects Management Agencies
(PMAs), who are not the executing agencies have been envisaged under
DDUGJY scheme. PMA assist Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) in
implementation of projects in such activities which involves formulation of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), award of works, monitoring the progress,
quality monitoring etc. Besides, project management activities performed
by PMA, there is an independent and separate quality monitoring mechanism
in the scheme. REC, the nodal agency for the programme has deployed
quality monitoring agencies, viz, REC Quality Monitors (RQMs) who ensure
quality of material as well as the quality of workmanship. The defects
reported by the RQMs is reported to PIAs, who in turn get the same
rectified and submit the compliance report to REC.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that for implementation of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), the Central Government provides financial
support to States upto 75% of the projects cost and upto 90% in case of
Special Category . States, However, for implementation of the programme,
the Central Government is heavily dependent on the State Governments. As
the Electricity falls under the concurrent list of the Constitution, theoretically,
the arrangement so made under the scheme conform the constitutional
provisions. However, in practicality, this arrangement leaves so, many
loopholes and uncertainties that lead to avoidable delays and preventable
quality issues. The Committee find that the lack of effective coordination
between the Centre and the State as far as the implementation of the
Centrally Scheme is concerned, add fuel to the fire. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the coordination mechanism in regard to
implementation of this scheme should be further strengthened and made
more effective. Since, this is a Central Government’s Scheme, the onus of
its desired implementation lies with them. Therefore, the Committee expect
the Central Government to play a more active role in implementation of this
programme.
Reply of the Government
The projects sanctioned under the scheme are being implemented by
the concerned State DISCOMs/Power Deptt., therefore, effective

29
coordination is solicited from these implementing agencies. For effective
monitoring of works under DDUGJY, appointment of Projects Management
Agencies (PMAs), who are not the executing agencies have been envisaged
under DDUGJY scheme. These PMAs help in effective coordination with
DISCOMs and Government of India. To facilitate efficient monitoring of
projects, a web enabled platform has been developed for updating progress
on near real time basis.
In order to expedite the progress and resolution of various impediments,
meetings of various stockholders are conducted at District, State and Centre
level and all possible help is extended by the Ministry of Power to achieve
the objective of the scheme.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018 Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that the Government endeavour to provide
electricity connection to all the households in the country by launching
Saubhagya Scheme. The creation of infrastructure for providing electricity
access to every village of the country is being done under Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY). The Committee have time and
again emphasized that the work of providing universal electricity access is
not limited to erection of required infrastructure and service connection but
it also extend to actual supply of electricity. The work of universal electricity
access is accomplished only when all the households get reliable and quality
power supply as per their requirements. The Committee are aware that the
country has now got the adequate power generation capacity and there is
situation of surplus power due to low demand in the country. The Committee
are aware that DISCOMs are reluctant to divulge the actual demand due
to various reasons. Therefore, DISCOMs are either not getting into long
term power purchase agreements as per their actual requirement or purchase
electricity through short term trading. As the Government is determined to
provide 24x7 power supply in the country, it is the high time that the issue
of latent electricity demand of the country in the form of power outages
by the DISCOMs, should be addressed. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should formulate policy/guideline that
obliges DISCOMs to meet most of their actual electricity demand through
long term PPA.

30
Reply of the Government
The supply of electricity falls under the jurisdiction of respective State
Power Utilities. However, in order to enable continuous electricity supply,
Government of India have taken up a joint initiative with all States/UTs for
preparation of State specific documents for providing 24x7 power supply
to all and adequate supply of power to agricultural consumers as per State
policy. 24x7 “Power for All” document has been signed with all the States/
UTs.
Government of India supplements the efforts of States with schemes
such as Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), Pradhan
Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojna-Saubhagya, Integrated Power Development
Scheme (IPDS) and Ujwal DISCOM AssuranceYojana (UDAY) to help
them to achieve the objective of providing continuous and reliable power
supply to every household.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS)
The Committee note that Integrated Power Development Scheme
(IPDS) was formulated on 20th November, 2014 with an objective to
provide 24x7 Power supplies for consumers, to provide access to all urban
household and facilitate State Power Utilities to reduce the level of AT&C
losses to 15%. The component of IPDS inter alia include (i) strengthening
of sub-transmission and distribution networks in the urban areas; (ii) metering
of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in the urban areas; and
(iii) IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening of distribution
network under R-APDRP for 12th and 13th Plans by carrying forward the
approved outlay of R-APDRP to IPDS. All DISCOMs including private and
State Power Departments will be eligible for financial assistance under the
scheme. The Committee have been apprised that the scheme is designed to
help in A T&C loss reduction, establishment of IT enabled energy accounting/
auditing improvement in billed energy based on metered consumption and
improvement in collection efficiency. In regard to meeting the targets under
the scheme, the Committee have been apprised that achievements generally
are in line with above targets. State Utilities have already awarded distribution

31
strengthening projects worth Rs. 24,309 crore which is more than 90% of
sanctioned cost. The awarded projects are in various stages of execution
and it is expected that all projects may be completed within the scheduled
completion period i.e. 24 months of awards. The Committee also note that
the overall physical progress under IPDS is mere 21%. The Secretary,
Power accepted before the Committee that the spendings under IPDS in
some part are slow. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should pay utmost attention to implementation of this programme
so that work awarded could be executed within the stipulated timeline.
Further, every efforts be made to optimally utilize the allocated fund for this
scheme.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power, Government of India is paying utmost attention to
the implementation of IPDS to ensure that works awarded are completed
by 31.03.2019. IPDS implementation is being rigorously monitored at highest
levels of Ministry of Power and M/s Power Finance Corporation, designated
as nodal agency by MoP for operationalization of the scheme. Following
monitoring mechanism is being followed by PFC strictly to ensure speedy
implementation as follows:
(I) Central level monitoring at MoP
Monthly Review, Planning & Monitoring (RPM) meetings by
Ministry of Power with Secretaries (Power) of States/CMD’s
of Discoms. Such meetings are often chaired by Hon’ble Minister
of State for Power, GoI. IPDS Monitoring Committee under
chairmanship of Secretary (P) reviews implementation of IPDS
(including subsumed R-APDRP) for operationalization of the
Programme. MoP team also frequently visits States for expediting
implementation.
(II) Concurrent Monitoring by PFC
Regular review by PFC, the nodal agency along with Web based
project monitoring. Also, day-to-day monitoring at the level of
Nodal/Zonal Officers of PFC with States/Utilities to resolve
Implementation issues, expediting milestone linked to progress
of project implementation and release of funds.

32
(III) State level monitoring in States
Regular monitoring and review at State level by Distribution
Reforms Committee (DRC), chaired by Energy Secretary. Also,
regular follow-up meetings are taken by MDs/CMDs of respective
Power Utilities. Also, periodic reviews are taken by Disha (District
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee).
(IV) Quality Monitoring
The Project Management Agency (PMA) appointed by Discoms
to assist them in project management for ensuring timely
implementation of project. Concurrent and post implementation
evaluation by Third Party Concurrent Evaluating Agency (TPCEA)
for verification of material and process at site, reporting of
progress etc.
With almost all the system strengthening projects been awarded and
surveys having been completed, the progress of IPDS works is likely to
scale up. Further, rigorous monitoring of IPDS implementation has resulted
in overall progress of system strengthening works to a level of 29% as on
15th April 2018 vis-a-vis 9% as on 30th November 2017. At said pace,
100% implementation is likely within timeline. To ensure that funds provided
to State Utilities under IPDS are optimally utilized, following steps are being
taken:
IPDS being a Government of India program, the release from nodal
agency (PFC) to utilities is being done through Public Financial Management
System (PFMS) and utilities are using same for funds flows under the
scheme. Utilities receiving funds under IPDS are registered/mapped in
PFMS. PFC ensures that all utilities to whom funds are to be released are
properly registered/mapped in PFMS.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date:23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that the prime objective of IPDS is to bring
down AT&C losses. For this electricity supply infrastructure is being
strengthened and augmented. Also, IT enabled system is being put up for
efficiency, transparency and better control. There is no need to expound

33
the importance of bringing down AT&C losses on the sustainable basis for
the financial health of DISCOMs. The quality of work and infrastructure
provided under the scheme will greatly determine the efficiency of system
that will lead to reduction in AT&C losses. However, it has been brought
to the notice of the Committee that there are many instances where the
quality of the work and the materials being used in the execution of the
work under the scheme is not up to the specified standards. The Committee,
therefore, express their concern over the quality of the work being done
under IPDS as this defeats the very purpose of strengthening the system.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should devise a
monitoring mechanism that enable to keep a close vigil on the quality of
work being done under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power, Government of India has already appointed Third
Party Concurrent Evaluation Agencies (TPCEA) for various States for
concurrent evaluation of the project and for carrying out inspections on
sample basis.
Third Party Concurrent Evaluating Agency (TPCEA) shall be carrying
out inspection and quality checks during scheme implementation at various
stages (25%, 60%, 100% and final inspection) on sample basis. They shall
also carry out concurrent & post implementation evaluation of the IPDS
scheme in above areas.
TPCEA shall also verify Compliances including Quality of Material
and Erection and Process and achievements of the execution of projects in
various Circles in Utilities.
The scope includes:—
• Material Checking: To check if material is as per approved Material
Quality Plan & if material prior to sanction is not used.
• Field Quality Plan: To verify execution of work in adherence to
approved FQP. Verifying Quality Check Documents of Utility
Field Inspections on sample basis.
• Evaluation of other processes and achievements: like processes
for bidding, stage wise delays, metering etc.

34
Adherence to Systems and Procedures:
• Submission of Weekly Progress Reports
• Submission of Reports of Concurrent & Post Implementation
Evaluation Verifying Quality Check Documents of Utility
The TPCEAs are being deployed progressively in various States on
achievement of at least 25% progress by State. Further, for assessing the
quality of the erstwhile RAPDRP projects, the Ministry has recently engaged
Quality Council of India (QCI). QCI is to start their assessments shortly.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY)
The Committee note that State DISCOMs in the country had huge
accumulated losses and outstanding debt. As a result of which financially
stressed DISCOMs are not able to supply adequate power at affordable
rates, which hampersquality of life and overall economic growth and
development. Efforts towards 100% village electrification, 24x7 power
supply and clean energy cannot be achieved without performing DISCOMs.
Power outages also adversely affect national priorities like “Make in India”
and “Digital India”. In addition, default on bank loans by financially stressed
DISCOMs has the potential to seriously impact the banking sector and the
economy at large. The Committee further note that the Scheme “UDAY”
(Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana) for financial turnaround of State owned
Power Distribution Companies has been formulated by the Government in
consultation with the various stakeholders to ensure a sustainable permanent
solution to the problem. The Scheme has been made effective with effect
from 2011-2015. The Scheme is operationalized through a bipartite/tripartite
agreement amongst the Ministry of Power, State Government and the
DISCOMs. The Scheme “UDAY” is optional for all States. In regard to
progress and achievement under the scheme, the Committee have been
apprised that DISCOMs debt of around Rs. 2,08,641 crore has already
been taken over by the States. Hence to that extent the benefits to DISCOMs
by way of savings in interest and increase in cash flow has been achieved.
Also, improvement in some crucial parameters viz. ACS-ARR Gap, Collection
Efficiency, Billing Efficiency and AT&C losses, has also been seen. However,
no decrease in Power Purchase Cost is a matter of concern. The Committee

35
while appreciating the effort of the Government in launching this scheme
which involves no financial grant from the Central Government, are a bit
apprehensive also in regard to it successful implementation and achieving
desired goal. The Committee are aware that the task of financial turnaround
of DISCOMs financial health is difficult and complicated. All the earlier
efforts of the Central Government have miserably failed in achieving their
intended goals. As the present scheme aims at not only bailing out DISCOMs
of financial stress but also making them economically viable, there is a
greater possibility of its becoming successful. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should keep making indefatigable efforts
for implementation of UDAY scheme and guide, persuade and do handholding
of State Governments/DISCOMs to achieve their goals as per the trajectory
drawn under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
UDAY was launched in the latter part of FY 2016. As per data submitted
by States so far, the aggregate ACS-ARR gaps of UDAY DISCOMs has
come down to 29 paise/unit by the end of 9 months of FY 2018 as against
59 paise/Unit at the end of FY 2016, thereby indicating the progress towards
the target of achieving financial break even.
Power purchase costs are around 80% of the costs of DISCOMs,
and therefore UDAY has focussed comprehensively on reducing this cost
for achieving sustainability. In the beginning of UDAY program, the average
power purchase cost of UDAY States was Rs. 4.18 in FY16, which
increased to Rs. 4.23 in FY17. Further, the first nine months data of FY18
submitted by States suggests that the Power purchase costs remained
almost same at Rs. 4.24. It may be observed that during almost last two
financial years the average power purchase cost has risen from Rs. 4.18
to Rs. 4.24 less than 1.50% increase, which indicates that efficiency
improvements across the Power Sector value chain have absorbed most of
the inflationary impacts arising out of Coal price hikes, increase in
environmental cess, and rail freight hikes in the interim periods.
It may also be brought to the notice of the Committee that the power
purchase costs for DISCOMs had been on an increasing trend in pre-
UDAY period, peaking at almost 7% increase in FY 2016, in the later half,
when UDAY was launched. On the cost recovery front, the billed energy

36
to consumers in FY 2017 showed an increase of almost 9% on an aggregate
basis, which indicates the efforts made by DISCOMs in billing consumers.
Ministry of Power is making all possible efforts, through regular
interactions, conducting workshops, sharing best practices among DISCOMs
and by handholding the States/DISCOMs enabling them to achieve the
goals under UDAY . Following measures are being taken to make UDAY
successful:
i. Close focus on Outcomes of AT&C losses and ACS-ARR gaps.
ii. Reduction of interest burden on utilities through issuance of
bonds;
iii. Bringing financial discipline in working of utilities;
iv. Emphasis on key operational parameters;
v. Web Portal and Mobile App for data-flow and transparency;
vi. Focused analysis of utilities’ quarterly, half-yearly and annual
performances;
vii. Regular state specific reviews by Ministry Officials;
xviii. Enhanced involvement of State Governments in turnaround of
utilities;
ix. Capacity building of utilities;
x. Handholding in State owned Power Plants by NTPC for
efficiency improvements of State GENCOs;
xi. Identifying issues of consequence to States on a routine basis
and discussing measures to solve them;
xii. Encouraging DISCOMs to focus on high AT&C loss (>40%)
Divisions and take remedial measures to reduce the losses.
Further, the progress of the scheme has also been reviewed regularly
by Hon’ble Minister of State (IC) for Power and New & Renewable
Energy apart from the regular monitoring by Central Monitoring Committee
headed by Secretary (Power), Government of India.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]

37
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para No. 2.13)
Hydro Power
The Committee note that as per reassessment studies of hydro-electric
potential carried out by the Central Electricity Authority during 1978-87, the
hydro power potential in terms of Installed Capacity (IC) is estimated at
1,48,701 MW out of which 1,45,320 MW of the potential consists of
hydro, electric schemes having installed capacity above 25 MW. The Ministry
have stated that the above reassessment is still valid. However, the
Government is conducting Reassessment of the hydro power potential of
the country. The reassessment has been necessitated due to the availability
of additional hydrological, topographical and other data about upstream and
downstream water usages in last 29 years, They have further stated that
the work for Basin wise review of Hydro Electric Potential & Preparation
of Basin reports have been taken up by CEA in association with W APCOS
Ltd. in March, 2017. The reassessment study is being carried out, taking,
into consideration the actual site constraints in terms of site geology,
submergence and other aspects including impacts of these projects on the
Environment and Forest. The study includes the features of the hydro
schemes already developed/under different stages of development. The
study is likely to be completed in a period of 30 months i.e. by September,
2019. The Committee has been insisting for reassessment of hydro potential
as the available data is 30-40 years old; thus welcome this move of the
Government. The Committee, however, would like to recommend that the
said study should be completed within the targeted timeframe. The
Committee also desire the Government to provide all possible assistance to
this study to enable it to assess the potential of hydro power in the country,
accurately.
Reply of the Government
The Recommendations of the Committee regarding timely completion
of the Study has been noted for compliance. It is also assured that the
Government is committed to extend all possible assistance to the Study to
assess the hydro potential in the Country.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.10/2/2018-Budget Date : 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14 Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that the hydro power installed capacity in the

38
country as on 31.01.2018 is 44,963.42 MW. As on 31.01.2018, 205 Nos.
of hydro stations with total installed capacity of 44,963.42 MW including
9 Pumped Storage Schemes (PSS) with installed capacity of 4,785.6 MW
are under operation. In regard to development of hydro power in the
country, the committee note that the pace has been rather slow as a total
capacity addition of 5,479 MW only has been achieved during the 12th Plan
against the targeted capacity addition of about 10,897 MW during the same
period. Further, a Hydro Power capacity of 4,376.01 MW has been installed
since 2014-15 up to end of January 2018. The Committee have been
expressing their displeasure over the slow pace of the development of the
hydro power. Nevertheless, any concrete measure in this regard is yet to
be taken by the Government. The Committee are of the view the sooner
we start utilizing the hydro power potential the better it will be in terms of
cost as over the years, the hydro projects are becoming increasingly costlier
mainly due to increased costs associated with environment and R&R.
These environmental and R&R norms are unlikely to ease out and in fact
are likely to become further stringent with time. The Committee, therefore,
are of the view that to develop the hydro power sector at a desired pace,
there is urgent need for overhauling of hydro power policy instead of
ad hoc and isolated efforts. The concern of the Committee has been
acknowledged by the Secretary, Power who accepted that in wake of
upcoming renewable energy, hydro power has become more important.
He has further stated that the Ministry is formulating a new policy for
hydro power sector. The Committee recommend that the Government
should formulate a new policy for hydro power sector which will address
the existing as well as the anticipated problems being faced by this sector.
The Committee hope that the matter raised by the Committee from time to
time such as sharing the burden of enabling infrastructure by the Government,
providing long term loan and cheaper loan to hydro projects, streamlining
the process of various clearances and R&R process in regard to setting up
hydro power projects and pro-active participation of Central and the State
Government in it, and consideration of all hydro power projects irrespective
of their capacity as renewable source of energy, etc. will be taken care of
while formulating the new policy will be done in an expeditious and time
bound manner.

39
Reply of the Government
A Cabinet Note comprising of various policy initiatives as well as
facilitation measures for revival of under construction hydro electric projects
is under active inter-Ministerial consultation.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee find that the pace of development of hydro power is
not as desired considering the immense hydro power potential is yet to be
utilized. The Private Sector which as performed exceptionally well in the
thermal power, has failed to leave any mark in hydro power sector. The
performance of Central Power Sector Undertaking involved into hydro
power sector viz. NHPC, NEEPCO, THDC, SJVNL etc., in respect of
capacity addition leaves much to be desired. These CPSUs have not many
hydro power projects to develop. The Committee are of the firm belief that
in involvement of private players in a big way is necessary for the
development of hydro power sector. However, they are not sure whether
this would happen soon. The Committee find that the said PSIs are having
the required infrastructure, manpower, expertise, and are also specialized in
the development of hydro projects. The Committee feel that under-utilization
of these PSUs is nothing but sheer waste of available resources and expertise.
The Committee are aware that hydro power projects have the long gestation
period and their development is a cumbersome process with greater
uncertainties. Thus, the return on the investment takes longer time to come
in comparison with the thermal power projects. However, in the long run
it has the benefit of being clean, green and cheaper power. The Committee
sire that the Government should take the burden of developing hydro
power in the country so that the country can reap the arising benefit in the
long run. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more projects and
funds should be given to PSUs engaged in hydro power. The Committee
also desire that the Government should also mulls to provide financial
assistance in the form of grant to such hydro power projects that the
difficult to develop.
Reply of the Government
A Cabinet Note comprising of various policy initiatives as well as
facilitation measures for revival of under construction hydro electric projects
is under active inter-Ministerial consultation.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]

40
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
Research and Development
The Committee note that Central Power Research Institute (CPRI),
Bengaluru serves as a National Laboratory for applied research in the field
of electrical power and also functions as an independent authority for
testing, evaluation and certification of electrical equipment and components.
For the financial year 2017-18, the allocation for CPRI was Rs. 150 crore
only. However, the Committee find that this budgetary allocation was revised
to Rs. 50.36 crore at the time of RE. The Committee infer that reduction
in the allocation may be the result of lesser utilization of money as the
Actual expenditure of CPRI for the year 2016-17 has been only Rs. 65.79
crore. Again, for the year 2018-19, a provision of Rs. 150 crore has been
made for CPRI. The Committee observe that the country is one of the
biggest generator and consumers of electricity in the world. However, in
terms of technological innovation and achievements there is not much to
mention about. The Committee are surprised that despite an existing big
market with huge future potential in the country, our allocation for R&D,
is negligible. The Committee believe there is immense scope for technological
innovation and upgradation of existing technologies, be it increasing the
efficiency of electrical devices and bringing down its cost, introduction of
super critical technology and reduction of emission, from thermal power
plants, technologies related to transmission and distribution of electricity
for reducing AT&C losses, so on and so forth. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Government should give due attention to
Research and Development in the field of electricity by allocating more
fund. The Committee also desire that the areas of technological advancement
should be prioritized and all efforts be made to achieve it in a time bound
manner by the involvement of premium technological institutions of the
country.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Power (MoP) agrees with the views of the Committee
that the areas of technological advancement should be prioritized and
all efforts be made to achieve it in a time bound manner.
2.1 It is stated that Ministry of Power through CPRI is implementing
three R&D schemes i.e National Perspective Plan (NPP), Research

41
Scheme on Power (RSoP) and In-House Research & Development
(IHRD) to create strong research and development base in power
sector. SFC proposal for R & D schemes of the Ministry of Power
being implemented through CPRI for Rs. 158.00 Cr. for three years
w.e.f 2017-18, is under consideration.
2.2 The projects under NPP aim to promote R&D in the power
sector in technological areas of importance to manufacturers, power
utilities and academia in collaborative mode. For Projects directly
taken by CPRI under this scheme, 50% funding is by Ministry of
Power and 50% funding by the concerned manufacturer/power utilities/
academia. RSoP schemes are fully funded by MoP and aims to carry
out need based research in power sector including research in various
operational problems encountered in power system. The RSOP projects
are undertaken by organizations including academia such as IITs,
NITs, etc. Under IHRD, various Divisions and Units of the CPRI take
up Research Projects under the In-house R&D (IHRD) scheme which
is fully funded by Ministry of Power.
2.3 Besides, the Ministry of Power also participates in research
projects under Impacting Research Innovation and Technology
(IMPRINT) and Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) scheme/programme
of Ministry of Human Resource and Development (MHRD). Since the
research projects under UAY and IMPRINT are mainly collaborative
in nature involving participation of industry and the IITs, these are
being considered as R&D proposals/projects under National Perspective
Plan (NPP) scheme.
In addition to the above, research in power sector is also being
undertaken by various PSUs (NTPC, PGCIL, THDC, NEEPCO, SJVN
and NHPC) under this Ministry in their domain fields.
3 In order to have a coordinated approach and proper monitoring
of R&D activities being carried in the power sector by Organisations/
PSUs of the Ministry of Power, a High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) has been constituted by the
Ministry vide Order dated 25th Nov., 2016. Subsequently, in the first
meeting of the Committee held on 19th January 2017, a sub-Committee
was constituted to list out all major R&D activities being undertaken
by organisations/PSUs under MoP, identify areas where there is an

42
overlap and possibility for collaboration, areas of importance for the
power sector and focus areas for research in the next 3 to 4 years.
The final report submitted by the sub-group which includes a number
of areas focusing on measures to achieve higher efficiency levels in
all the domains of the power sector has also been deliberated upon
during the second meeting of the Committee held on 19th September,
2017. It is agreed that some minimum acceptable standards need to
be fixed for performance in research areas and it should be made
mandatory for all to comply inter alia, the following decisions were
taken during the meeting:—
(i) CEA may organise an interaction with the industry wherein the
report of the sub-Committee could be circulated and the industry
be invited to participate in R&D in identified thrust areas. Regional
workshops could also be organised.
(ii) Besides the R&D already being undertaken by them, PSUs/
Organisations under MoP may also be asked to also focus on
some of the thrust areas identified in the report for R&D.
(iii) DG, NPTI may explore collaboration with the industry (IEEMA)
for R&D in identified thrust areas.
4. It is further stated that CPRI along with BEE and CEA has
already initiated a research programme on indigenous development of
LED lamps and luminaries, identifying a supply side weakness in LED
lighting products such as heavy dependence on imports for electronic
components, LED chips/wafers, modifications required as per Indian
conditions for the imported products and limited testing capacity for
LED lighting.
CPRI along with BEE has also initiated research projects on “Electricity
based clean cooking technologies” with the objective to make e-cooking
adaptable for Indian Dishes which is expected to lead to huge savings
in LPG imports.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.10/2/2018-Budget Date: 23.05.2018]

43
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
-Nil-

44
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-Nil-

45
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
FINAL REPL Y OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AW AITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; DR. KAMBHAMPATI HARIBABU,
2 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

46
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2017-18) HELD ON 2ND
AUGUST, 2018 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu —Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi
5. Dr. Arun Kumar
6. Shri Malyadri Sriram
7. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
13. Shri Oscar Fernandes
14. Shri Manish Gupta
15. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

47
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up
the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on “Impact of RBI’s Revised Framework for
Resolution of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity Sector”.
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Power.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize
the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current session.
4. The Committee decided to undertake a study tour in the month
of August, 2018 for detailed examination of the various subjects selected
by the Committee. The Committee also wished to seek necessary permission
regarding this study visit from the Hon’ble Speaker.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

48
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
38TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15 & 16
Total: 16
Percentage 100%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Sl. No.: Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the reply of the Government has not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. No. Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 0%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final reply of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on
sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (T el. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above."