STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
8
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on National Solar Mission – An Appraisal]
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna,1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."

 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty - Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 
National Solar Mission – An Appraisal] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2021 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
COE NO. 323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok 
Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 P AGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……………….. iii 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………. v 
CHAPTER   I Report …………………………………… 1 
CHAPTER  II Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the  
Government .......................................... 16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies…... 52 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration…….. 55 
CHAPTER  V Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited………….... 57 
 A PPENDICES 
              I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
held on 18th March, 2021……………….. 58 
             II. Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 
28th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Energy………… 61 
ii 
 
 
  

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON ENERGY (2020-21) 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed 
3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
12. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
13. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
14. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. ^Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
18. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
iv 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  R.C. Tiwari  – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  R.K. Suryanarayanan  – Director  
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
^ Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020. 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan, retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020. 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee w.e.f. 13.09.2020. 
  
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
21. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. *Vacant 
31. #Vacant 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Eighth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in Twenty-Eighth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on 'National Solar 
Mission – An Appraisal'. 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to the  
Lok Sabha on 31st July, 2017 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the 
same day. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 18th September, 2020  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 18th March, 2021 
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
observations and recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
     NEW DELHI; 
18 March, 2021 
27 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
  RAJIV RANJAN SINGH  
ALIAS LALAN SINGH, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
  
vi 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER  I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eight 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on National Solar Mission – An 
Appraisal, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 31st July, 2017 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The 
Report contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. 
2..Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
been received from the Government on 18th September, 2020. 
These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19 and 20  
Total -18 
 Chapter-II 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: 
Serial No. 12 
Total - 01 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which 
the reply of the Government has not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 10 
Total–01 
                                        Chapter-IV 
2 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which 
the final reply of the Government is still awaited: 
Nil    
Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
3. The Committee observe that the 28th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An Appraisal’ was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 31st July, 2017 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day and the Ministry was 
required to submit the action taken reply on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report within 
a period of three months i.e. by 30th October, 2017. The 
Committee, however, observe that the Ministry has submitted 
the requisite action taken reply on 18th September, 2020, after 
a  long delay of 3 years. While deploring the long delay on the 
part of the Ministry in submission of action taken replies, the 
Committee  desire the Ministry (i) to enquire into the reasons 
for such inordinate delay in this case  with  a view  to fixation 
of responsibility on the concerned and furnish the details of 
the action taken to the Committee (ii) to inform the Committee 
as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry to avoid the 
recurrence of such delays in future ; and (iii)  to issue  
instructions/directives  to all  concerned to be extra cautious 
in adherence to  the time-line prescribed  for submission of 
replies to the Committee in future.  
The Committee further desire that the Action Taken 
Statement on the Observations/Comments contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of the Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations that require 
reiteration or merit comments. 

3 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
5. The Committee had recommended : 
“The Committee note that out of the 100 GW Solar Power, 
40 GW is to be achieved from grid connected Solar 
Rooftops in residential, social, institutional and Government 
sectors in the country. The Ministry has submitted that the 
capital subsidy of 30% is available for residential, 
institutional (hospitals, educational institutions, etc.) and 
social sectors. For the Government Institutions/ Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs), achievement-linked 
incentives/ awards are being provided. There is no subsidy 
for commercial and industrial establishments in the private 
sector as they are eligible for other benefits such as 
accelerated depreciation, custom duty concessions, excise 
duty exemptions and tax  holiday etc. The Committee 
also note that the Ministry has a budget of Rs. 5000 crore 
for Grid connected Solar Rooftop systems to be installed 
upto 2019-20. This will provide financial support/central 
financial assistance for installation of about 4200 MW Solar 
Rooftops in the country (2100 MW with Subsidy and 2100 
MW without subsidy). Till now, the Ministry has sanctioned 
projects of cumulative capacity of 2032 MWp under the 
programme to various State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) and 
Public Sector Undertakings/Authorities (SECI, CEL, REIL, 
Railways, AAI, etc.). About 661 MW of RTS capacities have 
been installed including subsidized and non-subsidized 
projects as on 30.04.2017. The Committee are highly 
disappointed with the performance of the Ministry in this 
sector. The Committee find that Rooftop Systems are not 
remunerative for consumers due to high maintenance cost. 
The Committee feel that the Rooftop Solar target of 40 GW 
by 2022 is unrealistic and it is highly unlikely that this target 
will be achieved. The Committee are of the view that the 
4 
 
Ministry should give this scheme a serious relook, 
otherwise, it will derail the target achievement of the 
National Solar Mission. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that : 
(i) The target of 40 GW through Rooftop Solar Projects 
should be reconsidered. 
(ii) Public Awareness Programme should be conducted 
regularly to popularize the Grid connected Solar 
Rooftop Projects. 
(iii) The Ministry should undertake regular review 
meetings with the implementing agencies. 
(iv) The process of subsidy disbursement should be 
made simpler. 
(v) Single Window Clearance System should be adopted 
for approvals like connectivity, net-metering, 
electricity inspection, limitation in sanctioned load, 
etc. 
(vi) The Ministry should pursue all the States/UTs to 
make Rooftop Solar compulsory on new buildings by 
making changes in building byelaws. 
(vii) Steps should be taken to encourage research and 
innovation in Solar Rooftop Systems so as to make 
them attractive and remunerative.” 
6. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, in its reply 
has stated: 
“i. Phase-II of Grid Connected Rooftop Solar Programme 
has started after issuance of Scheme guidelines on 
20th August 2019.  Programme envisages a cumulative 
capacity of 40 GW by the year 2022 and will be 
implemented through Power Distributing Companies 
(DISCOMs). Out of this 4 GW will be in residential 
sector with Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of  
20-40% and the balance will be without CFA. 

5 
 
Implementing Agencies i.e.  DISCOMs will get the 
incentive for achieving in the financial year above the 
baseline capacity as on 31st March of the previous 
year. No incentives for capacity addition up to 10% 
capacity. 5% incentives for addition beyond 10% and 
up to 15%; and 10% incentives for addition beyond 
15%. Addition of capacity in commercial and Industrial 
sector will also be counted for the incentive purpose 
and incentive will be provided for the addition of first  
18 GW only. As on 13th August 2020 total installation of 
2144 MW has been reported on the SPIN portal of 
MNRE. However, market reports suggests that at 
present more than 5 GW of Rooftop solar has been 
installed in the country.  As there was no incentive for 
the implementing agencies for reporting the non-
subsidised installation on the SPIN Portal, however, 
with the provision of incentive for the DISCOMs, it is 
now expected that actual installation will be reported by 
the implementing agencies and we will be able to 
achieve the target of 40 GW by the year 2022. 
ii. MNRE has requested all the State/UT Governments to 
give wide publicity to the Rooftop Solar Programme 
including the incentive available for installation of 
Rooftop Solar. MNRE has also provided the content for 
the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
material to the States/UTs, which can be used for 
publicity of the Rooftop solar. MNRE has also planned 
public awareness campaign through print and 
electronic media at central level. 
iii. As recommended by the Standing Committee, the 
review meetings with the implementing agencies are 
held regularly at Secretary and Joint Secretary level.   
During the Power Ministers Conference also the issue 
6 
 
of Rooftop Solar Programme is deliberated by the 
Hon’ble Minister with his counterparts. 
iv. In Phase-I of Rooftop Solar (RTS) Programme, there 
was a provision of 30% advance of the project cost 
calculated at benchmark cost or the tendered cost 
whichever is lower. Balance 70% of the payment was to 
be released after completion of the project and 
submission of all the documents. As, implementing 
agencies were taking longer time in submission of 
documents, therefore, release of balance 70% of the 
subsidy amount was taking time. In Phase-II of RTS 
Programme, a provision of additional 30% advance 
after the implementing agency exhausted the initial 
30% advance has been made. Further, it has been 
made mandatory for the implementing agencies to 
submit the documents within 30 days after the project 
completion timelines. Further, the residential 
consumers will have to pay only the balance of subsidy 
amount to the empanelled vendor. For example, if the 
total cost of the system is Rs.100/- with subsidy amount 
of Rs. 40/-. Now consumer will have to pay only Rs.60/- 
to the empanelled vendor and subsidy amount of 
Rs.40/- will be claimed by the vendor from the DISCOM 
(which has been made the implementing agency). 
Therefore, the consumer will not have to wait for the 
subsidy amount. With these provisions it is expected 
that process of subsidy disbursement will be faster. 
v. Technical Assistance is being provided to the 
DISCOMs, the implementing agencies for creation of 
Single Window Clearance Portal. As one 13th August 
2020, single Window clearance portals of 10 States are 
live and integrated with SPIN Portal of MNRE.  It is 
expected that by 31st December 2020 all the 

7 
 
implementing agencies will have this facility for their 
consumers.   
vi. Ministry has written to all the State/UT Government to 
make the installation of Rooftop Solar mandatory in all 
the new buildings above a particular size. States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and UTs of Chandigarh and 
Delhi have notified regulations for mandatory 
installation of rooftop solar in new buildings above a 
particular size. 
vii. Innovative ideas in installation, maintenance and 
business models by implementing agencies are shared 
with the other agencies from time to time.” 
7. With regard to the target vis-a-vis achievement of 40 
GW solar power through rooftop solar projects, the 
Committee observe that as on 13th August 2020, total 
installation of 2144 MW (2.14 GW) has been reported on the 
SPIN portal of MNRE and according to market report, more 
than 5 GW of rooftop solar has been reportedly installed in 
the country. The Ministry submitted that they would be able to 
achieve the target of 40 GW solar power through rooftop solar 
projects by the year 2022. The Ministry has stated that all the 
State/UT Governments have been requested to give wide 
publicity of rooftop solar programme, regular review meetings 
are  held with implementing agencies, provision for faster 
disbursement of subsidy  has been introduced, Technical 
Assistance is  being provided to the DISCOMs and the 
implementing agencies for creation of Single Window 
Clearance Portal, all the State/UT Government  have been 
asked to make the installation of rooftop solar mandatory in 
all the new buildings above a particular size. The Committee 
though appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry on their 
recommendations, yet  the very slow performance made so 
8 
 
far in this sector reinforces the Committee’s  apprehensive 
about the achievement of the target by the year 2022. The 
Committee feel that non achievement of target in this 
particular sector will have a cascading effect on the overall 
target of 100 GW solar power by 2022.  The Committee would 
therefore like to re-emphasize that for achievement of the 
target of 40 GW solar power through rooftop solar projects in 
the specified time,  a specific thrust needs to be given by the 
Ministry on this particular sector. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10) 
8. The Committee had recommended : 
“The Committee note that the Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions of all the 36 States/UTs have notified 
regulations/tariff orders for net metering/feed-in-tariff 
mechanism. But DISCOMs are reluctant to operationalize 
the Net-Metering Regulations as it may reduce their income 
from high-paying customers. The Committee also note that 
from the consumers point of view, availability of NetMeters, 
time taken for giving Net-Metering connections by 
DISCOMs, inspection by Chief Electrical Inspector (CEI), 
etc. are few of the concerns. The Committee are of the 
view that to give boost to Rooftop Solar Systems, 
operationalization of Net-Metering is of utmost importance. 
It reduces AT&C losses and need for large tracts of land. It 
even helps DISCOMs to avoid buying expensive peak 
power. The Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
(i)  The concept of Cross-Subsidy should be reconsidered 
so that Net-Metering for all users will make more 
financial sense. 
(ii) Clear installation guidelines should be formulated by  
the Central and State Regulatory Authorities. 

9 
 
(iii) There should be proper training of DISCOM’s staff  
on implementation of Net-Metering.” 
9. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in its reply 
has stated : 
“(i) All the Regulators have notified the metering 
regulations. Although Net metering is available for the 
residential sectors in all the States, however, in addition 
to Net Metering, gross metering and Net  billing have 
also been prescribed by some State Regulators for 
commercial and Industrial Sectors. Ministry has 
regularly pursued with the State Government to 
approve the Net Metering/Gross Metering for the 
Rooftop Solar installer in a time bound manner. Ministry 
has also written to the State Governments and State 
Electricity Regulators to fix the tariff under Gross 
Metering by considering the capital cost involved in 
installation of Rooftop Solar and a reasonable return on 
the capital  cost so that the same is recovered in a 
reasonable time of 5-6 years. The issue of cross 
subsidy is a sensitive issue under the domain of State 
Governments; therefore, each State Government takes 
a view as per the recommendations of State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission as per local requirement. 
(ii) Ministry has written to all the State Governments to 
notify standard procedure for installation of rooftop 
solar and also shared a indicative operating procedure 
with timelines for each activities for installation of 
rooftop solar by the consumers. 
(iii) Technical Assistance is being provided to the 
DISCOMs, the implementing agencies by the 
multilateral agencies like World Bank, ADB, European 
Union and GIZ (German Agency) under bilateral 
10 
 
agreement. These agencies under the guidance of 
MNRE provide technical assistance programme 
provide training to the DISCOMs Staff for Net metering 
is also covered in addition to other issues.” 
10. The Committee had recommended in their original 
report that the concept of cross-subsidy should be 
reconsidered so that Net-Metering for all users will make more 
financial sense. The Ministry in its reply has stated that the 
issue of cross subsidy is a sensitive issue under the domain 
of State Governments and that each State Government takes a 
view as per the recommendations of State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission as per local requirement. The 
Committee are well aware of the fact that the issue is in the 
domain of the State Governments. Nevertheless, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy being a nodal Ministry to look after all aspects relating 
to new and renewable energy could play significant role for 
the betterment and development of new and renewable energy 
sector with structured consultations with the State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore, would like to 
reiterate that the concept of Cross-Subsidy need to be 
reconsidered so that Net-Metering for all users will make more 
financial sense. Regarding recommendation for formulation of 
clear installation guidelines by the Central and State 
Regulatory Authorities, the Committee are informed that the 
Ministry has written to all the State Governments to notify 
standard procedure for installation of rooftop solar and also 
shared a indicative operating procedure with timelines for 
each activities for installation of rooftop solar by the 
consumers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the State Governments in this regard. With 
regard to the training required to be given to DISCOM staff on 
the subject of implementation of net-metering, the Committee 

11 
 
observe from the reply that the Ministry has restricted their 
role only to the extent of giving guidance which, according to 
the Committee, indicate an indifferent and passive approach 
of the Ministry towards such an important issue. The 
Committee would therefore while reiterating their 
recommendation that there should be proper training of 
DISCOM’s staff on the subject of implementation of Net-
Metering, desire the Ministry to play and active and result 
oriented role on this issue. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
11. The Committee had recommended: 
“The Committee have been informed that one of the 
challenges to meet the target of 100 GW by 2022 is delay 
in signing of PPA after finalization of tenders which is a 
consequence of lack of directions from parent Ministry, 
lengthy internal approval process, involvement of multiple 
Ministries, lack of prior experience of the Government 
Departments etc., and the possible fall outs of this situation 
are delay in project implementation, changes in scheme 
norms, change in cost/incentives, backing out of 
developers, revenue loss for entity etc. The Committee 
have taken a serious view of this situation as with this delay 
in signing of PPAs, the sanctity of the whole Mission will be 
affected and the Ministry will not be able to achieve its 
target within the stipulated time. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that : 
(i) The Ministry should devise a single window system 
wherein lengthy internal approval process and 
involvement of multiple Ministries can be avoided. 
(ii) The Ministry should come up with model PPAs with the 
help of specialized agencies.” 
12 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action-taken reply has stated : 
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. 
Further, Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) has 
prepared Standard Bidding Guidelines for Tariff Based 
Competitive Bidding Process for Procurement of Power 
from Grid Connected solar PV and Wind Power Projects, 
which provide for a detailed standardized framework for 
procuring solar/wind power in a fair and transparent 
manner.” 
13. Keeping in view the delay in signing of Power 
purchase Agreements (PPAs) which was one of the main 
challenges in renewable energy project implementation, the 
Committee had recommended to devise a single window 
system wherein, lengthy internal approval process and 
involvement of multiple Ministries can be avoided and also to 
come up with model PPAs. The Ministry has informed that 
Standard Bidding Guidelines for Tariff Based Competitive 
Bidding Process for Procurement of Power from Grid 
Connected solar PV and Wind Power Projects has been 
prepared.  The Committee note the action taken in this regard 
and would like them to be apprised of the progress of the 
proposed Guidelines in this connection. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.18) 
14. The Committee had recommended: 
“The Committee note that India has installed solar PV 
manufacturing capacity of round 3 GW for solar PV Cells 
and around 7 GW for solar PV modules, however, the 
actual production is 1 GW and 3 GW respectively. Also, 
solar PV power installed in the year 2016-17 was about  
5.5 GW and the target for 2017-18 is around 10 GW. The 
Ministry has submitted that the installed manufacturing 
capacity of solar PV cells and modules is not capable of 

13 
 
catering the annual demand of the country and China and 
China controlled Taiwan + SEA hold 85% of total global 
capacity for solar cell and module manufacturing. The 
Committee find that despite its low labour cost, Indian 
Manufacturers are not able to compete with Chinese Firms.  
The Committee also note that the Government of India 
provides incentives for solar manufacturing under Modified 
Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS) of the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY).M-SIPS provide a capital subsidy to promote large 
scale manufacturing in the Electronic System Design and 
Manufacturing (ESDM) sector which also includes Solar 
Photovoltaic units. The Committee are concerned about the 
lack of domestic Solar Manufacturing Capacity. The 
Committee are of the view that it is a necessity for India to 
support Domestic Solar Manufacturing as over-reliance on 
a single country puts Indian Solar Sector at a risk of 
disruption in supply chain. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that: 
 (i)  The Ministry should urgently formulate a dedicated 
programme to establish India as a Solar 
Manufacturing Hub so as to provide policy support to 
the complete value chain. 
 (ii) There should be excise duty exemption and Zero 
import duty on raw materials. 
(iii) The Ministry should work to provide Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) and low interest rate loans to 
domestic manufacturers. 
(iv) There should be provision for establishment of 
manufacturing units inside the Solar Parks so that 
Manufacturers may benefit from the Infrastructure & 
ecosystem of the Solar Parks. 
14 
 
(v)  The Ministry should focus on quality and reliability of 
the Solar Cells/Modules.” 
15. The Ministry in its Action-taken reply has stated: 
“To provide financial support as well as to reduce the 
financing cost for domestic solar PV manufacturing, 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) is in the 
process of formulating "National Programme on Solar  PV 
Manufacturing". This would help in setting up of new          
Giga-scale solar PV manufacturing facilities in India. 
As per notification No. 24/2005-Customs dated 1st March, 
2005, of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, all 
goods required for the manufacture of solar PV cells and 
modules, when imported into India, are exempt from the 
whole of the duty of customs leviable thereon,  provided that 
the importer follows the procedure set out in the Customs 
(Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for 
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. 
As per Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30th June, 
2017, of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, 
capital equipment required for the manufacture of solar PV 
cells and modules, when imported into India, are exempt 
from the whole of the duty of  customs leviable thereon 
under First Schedule of Customs Tariff Act, 1975, provided 
they are included in the goods specified in List 19 of the 
said Notification, as mentioned in Sl. No. 426 of the Table 
included in the said notification, provided that the importer 
follows the procedure set out in the Customs (Import of 
Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy is facilitating 
setting up of renewable energy manufacturing hubs in the 
country, preferably at location near ports. Such renewable 
energy manufacturing hubs are expected to create a 

15 
 
holistic environment for fully integrated manufacturing of 
renewable energy equipment in the country. 
For quality and reliability assurance, MNRE is 
implementing the Quality Control Order on SPV Systems, 
Components and Devices (Compulsory Registration 
Scheme), which covers SPV modules, inverters and battery 
storage. These products are required to conform to 
specified Indian Standards. Products qualifying the 
standards tested in BIS recognized test labs are required to 
be registered by the respective manufacturers with BIS.” 
16. The Committee note that the Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy is in the process of formulating 'National 
Programme on Solar PV Manufacturing' which according to 
the Ministry would help in setting up of new Giga-scale solar 
PV manufacturing facilities in India. The Committee are also 
informed that the Ministry is facilitating setting up of 
renewable energy manufacturing hubs in the country, 
preferably at location near ports, which are expected to create 
a holistic environment for fully integrated manufacturing of 
renewable energy equipment in the country. The Committee 
hope that the proposed programme would be implemented in 
letter and spirit so that the Indian manufacturers are able to 
compete with the international firms in the solar sector. The 
Committee would like to be apprised them of the progress 
regarding formulation of National Programme on Solar PV 
Manufacturing and setting up of renewable energy 
manufacturing hubs in the country. 
  
16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that the Government has embarked 
upon an ambitious mission of renewable energy laying great 
emphasis on the natural resources like solar, wind, hydro etc.            
A target of 175 GW has been set to be achieved by 2022. Solar is 
the thrust area of the mission. As far as wind is concerned, it is 
already performing satisfactorily and steps have been taken to 
provide the desire fillip to this sector. Among the various renewable 
energies, wind has taken a lead and it is presumed that the target 
set for this sector will be achieved. However, the performance in 
other sectors of the renewable energy such as solar, Small Hydro, 
Biomass, Biogas, Bagasse, etc. is not so encouraging. The 
success of the mission solely and squarely hinges on the success 
of solar energy programmes. Any unfulfilling result of our efforts on 
this count will have a cascading effect. If we are determined for the 
success of the renewable energy mission, then there can be no 
letup in our consistent efforts, close monitoring and keen interest in 
attainment of the Solar Energy targets. Sectors like Small Hydro, 
Biomass, Bagasse, etc. are local in nature and can be achieved 
with somewhat lesser efforts as there is not so significant target 
under these heads of renewable energy. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that keeping in view the importance of the 
mission and its potential to transform the lives of the rural India, 
wholehearted and concerted efforts should be made taking into 
account fiscal and financial targets, their time-bound achievements 
with appropriate mechanism to review the shortfall, if any, in the 
successful implementation of the programme. 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. 
Concerted efforts are being made in this regard in consultation with 
various stakeholders. As on 31st July, 2020, a total of 88.04 GW of 
renewable energy capacity has been installed which includes  
37.94 GW from wind, 35.30 GW from solar, 10.09 GW from bio-
power and 4.71 GW from small hydro power. Further, projects of 
capacity worth 43.39 GW are under various stages of 
implementation and capacity of 29.96 GW is under various stages 
of bidding. 
Further, the solar energy growth has been rapid in the 
country. The solar power installation has multiplied almost 10 times 
in last five years (it was 3744 MW on 01.04.2015). Today the solar 
power installed capacity is 35.74 GW.  
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Grid Connected Solar Power 
The Committee note that the total investment for 
commissioning of 100 GW Solar Power has been estimated to Rs. 
5 Lakh Crore and most of the investment is done by private 
entities. The Government has been playing a facilitative role in land 
acquisition, loan at affordable rates, 100% FDI in RE sector 
through automatic route, etc. The Committee also note that the 
Ministry has not set any financial targets in this regard and all has 
been left to the private sector. The Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry should not act like a bystander as arrangement for 
such a huge investment cannot be left to the private sector alone. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
play a more proactive role with respect to financial investment like 
providing access to loans at more favourable rate of interests, 
introducing Green Bonds through SECI, approaching international 
18 
 
donors, arranging finances from Green Climate fund etc., so as to 
achieve the ambitious target of 100 GW of Solar Energy by 2022. 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA), a 
public sector unit under the aegis of MNRE involved in the 
financing of RE projects has carried out following activities: 
 IREDA has successfully financed more than 
2600  renewable energy projects in the country with 
cumulative loan sanctions of Rs 85,600 Crores (loans 
disbursed more than Rs. 54,322 Crs) as on 
31.3.2020, supporting green power capacity addition 
of more than 16,295 MW and acting as a trendsetter 
for other FIs and Banks. 
 During the last 5-6 years, IREDA has implemented 
several initiatives / Business strategies, which have 
helped increase lending to the sector and also the 
overall Business growth of IREDA. Various innovative 
schemes introduced (Apart from regular project 
finance) in last 5 -6 years are as follows: 
i. Loan assistance to manufacturers & suppliers. 
ii. Regular “Top up Loan” Scheme 
iii. Dedicated Policy for Financing of Transmission 
Projects: 
iv. Short Term Loan Facility to Govt. Bodies/ 
Discoms/Transco/State Owned Trading 
Companies 
v. Securitization of Future GBI receivables in case 
of Grid Connected Wind & Solar Projects 

19 
 
vi. Introduction of Factoring Scheme for 
Purchasing Receivables of Solar Power 
Developers Payable by Eligible Entities (Central 
Govt. Entities/Govt. Owned Companies/State 
Entities) 
 Further, IREDA is among the largest ‘Green Energy 
Financier’ in India & this has greatly supported the 
shaping of renewable energy sector in India. Thus, 
IREDA has been a focal point of attracting 
international finance in the Indian RE sector; many 
multilateral/bilateral  lending agencies such as the 
World Bank, JICA, ADB, KFW, AFD & EIB prefer to 
route their funds through IREDA for supporting the 
Indian RE sector. 
 India has been issuing green bonds for development 
of renewable energy project. 
 As per Emerging Markets Green Bond Report, in 
2019, India issued $3.2 billion worth of green bonds 
to provide access to scalable, long term, low cost 
debt capital from institutional investors. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that the potential of Solar Energy in 
cantonment and Military Stations and in Ordnance Factory Boards 
(OFBs) are approximately 5000 MW and 950 MW respectively. 
There is a target to install a capacity of 300 MW in various 
Establishments of Ministry of Defence i.e. Establishments of Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Ordnance Factory Board, Defence Laboratories 
and Defence PSUs etc. The Cabinet has approved the Scheme in 
its meeting held on 10th December, 2014. The Ministry has issued 
20 
 
Administrative Approval for the same on 7th January, 2015. The 
Committee are informed that to keep the provisions of scheme 
WTO compliant, the capacity under EPC mode of the scheme will 
use made in India solar cells and modules in the solar PV power 
plants and the projects under developer mode will be free to 
procure solar cells/modules under open category (indigenous or  
imported). The Committee also note that, as on date, 357.5 MW 
has been allocated under this scheme but only 7 MW has been 
commissioned so far. The Committee are not satisfied with this 
performance. Keeping in view that more than two years have 
passed since issuance of Administrative approval, such dismal 
performance is not justified. The Committee, therefore, strongly  
recommend that:— 
i. Time-bound achievement of targets should be  
ensured. 
ii. In view of the estimated potential of about 6000 
MW and large tracts of land and vacant roof-tops 
available with various establishments of the 
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry should set a target 
for setting up 5000 MW of Grid connected Solar PV 
Power Projects by the Defence Establishments. 
iii. The full capacity of 5000 MW should be tendered 
through EPC Mode so that only Made In India Solar 
Cells and Modules may be used. 
Reply of the Government 
i. The suggestion has been noted and all efforts are 
being made to achieve the targets. A scheme for defence 
establishment was launched on 07.01.2015 and was operational 
up to 31.03.2019. Further, the Ministry had requested Ministry of 
Defence for information regarding power requirement of advance 
Army bases towards de-dieselisation of these.  

21 
 
ii. As mentioned in point no. (i) above, under 
the Defence scheme, 241.5 MW were allocated to 
different Defence Organisations.  Out of this allocation, 125.5 MW 
has been allocated to the Department of Defence (DoD) and 75.5 
MW allocated to BEL & balance capacities of 40.5 MW allocated to 
different Defence organisations like MIDHANI, HAL, BDL 
etc. Further, out of 241.5 MW, 138.5 MW has already been 
commissioned and balance capacities are expected to be 
commissioned by March 2021.  DoD capacities being implemented 
by Military Engineering Services (MES), are spread across various 
locations in the country and smaller capacity at a single location 
ranging from 1 MW to 2 MW.  MES is facing difficulties in the 
implementation of these projects from State Govts. This Ministry 
has taken up with the State Govts to resolve the issues faced by 
MES.  
iii. The provision of Domestic Content Requirement (DCR) 
has been made to promote Made in India concept through Rooftop, 
CPSU and PM-KUMSUM schemes. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee are informed that the scheme for 
development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects 
envisages supporting the States in setting up solar parks at various 
locations in the country with a view to create required infrastructure 
for setting up of Solar Power Projects. It is also submitted that the 
solar parks will provide suitable developed land with all clearances, 
transmission system, water access, road connectivity, 
communication network, etc. This scheme will facilitate and speed 
up installation of grid connected solar power projects for electricity 
generation on a large scale. The Committee note that, so far,  
34 Solar Parks of aggregate capacity of 20,000 MW have been 
22 
 
approved in 21 States. However, the Committee find that, till date, 
the Ministry has identified land at various places for 33 Solar Parks 
and land for one is yet to be finalized. So, it means that much of 
the infrastructure in these Solar Parks will be developed parallel to 
the construction of Solar Project inside these Parks which is not 
going to help project developers. The Committee also note that, as 
of now, Solar Projects of only 1516 MW capacity, out of  
20,000 MW capacity, have been commissioned inside Solar Parks. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all necessary actions 
should be taken to expedite the development of Solar Parks. The 
Ministry should conduct regular review meetings with the State 
Governments and Solar Park Developers to ensure the time-bound 
development of Solar Parks, so that the Solar Project Developers 
may get the benefit of the established infrastructure. 
Reply of the Government 
MNRE is making concerted efforts in this regard by holding 
review meetings with various stakeholders from time to time. As on 
31st July,2020,  40 solar parks of aggregate capacity 22,614 MW 
have been approved to 17 States. These solar parks are at 
different stages of development. 
Out of these solar parks, the park infrastructure of Kurnool 
solar park (1000 MW) & Ananthapuramu-II solar park (500 MW) in 
Andhra Pradesh, Rewa solar park (750 MW) in Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhadla-II solar park (680 MW), Bhadla-III solar park (1000 MW) 
and Bhadla-IV solar park (500 MW) in Rajasthan are fully 
developed. In addition, the park infrastructure for Pavagada Solar 
Park (2000 MW) in Karnataka, Mandsaur solar park (250 MW) in 
Madhya Pradesh, Ananthapurumu-I solar park (900 MW out of 
1500 MW) and Kadapa solar park (250 MW out of 1000 MW) in 
Andhra Pradesh, Kasaragod solar park (50 MW out of 105 MW) in 
Kerala, and UP solar park (165 MW out of 440 MW) are partially 
developed. Thereby, so far, aggregate capacity of 7945 MW of 
solar projects has been commissioned in 12 solar parks. 

23 
 
Further, now under the Solar Park Scheme, setting up of 
Ultra Mega Renewable Energy Parks (UMREPPs) has been 
planned in various states of the country including Border areas with 
an objective to provide land and transmission infrastructure upfront 
to the project developer on plug and play model. Various CPSUs 
and State Governments have expressed interest to set up 
UMREPPs. CPSUs and State agencies may form a Joint Venture 
or independently develop Solar Parks and can act as Solar Power 
Park Developer (SPPD). To incentivize States, a provision has 
been made to give 5 paisa per unit, as a facilitation charge. The 
implementing agencies for UMREPPs of around 25 GW capacities, 
either exists or the MoUs for formation of JVCs have been signed. 
Therefore, all the possible efforts are being made by the 
Ministry to complete the targets under the Solar Park Scheme in 
the stipulated timelines. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No. 372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that the Ministry provides Central 
Financial Assistance (CFA) up to Rs. 25 lakh per solar park for 
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) and upto Rs. 20.00 
lakh per MW or 30% of the project cost, including Grid-connectivity 
cost, whichever is lower on achieving the milestones prescribed in 
the scheme. The approved grant is released by Solar Energy 
Corporation of India Ltd. (SECI) as per milestones. The Committee 
also note that the total fund required to provide CFA is estimated at 
Rs. 4050 crore. The Committee find that, during the last three 
years (2014-15 to 2016-17), the SECI should have disbursed  
Rs. 1650 crore as CFA. But, CFA actually released during the said 
period is only Rs. 906.12 crore i.e. about 45% short of the target. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the reasons for low 
24 
 
disbursement of funds should be identified and remedial measures 
should be taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The release of Central Financial Assistance (CFA) is linked 
with the achievement of different milestones e.g. acquisition of 
land, financial closure, award of work of pooling station etc. under 
the Solar Park Scheme. The CFA cannot be released until the 
milestones are achieved by the SPPDs. The acquisition of land is 
very critical in the process of development of solar parks which 
generally delays the development process. Further, delay in 
signing of PPA/ adoption of tariff for projects inside the solar park 
also delays the overall development of the solar park. These in turn 
slows down the disbursement of CFA to the SPPDs. Despite 
constraints being faced, Ministry is making concerted efforts 
through various review meetings, video conferences and written 
communications to the State Government and other stakeholders 
to expedite acquisition of land for development of solar parks and 
to sort out other constraints in implementation of the scheme. 
With regard to disbursement of the funds under the 
Scheme, based on the milestones achieved by the various SPPDs, 
the CFA of around Rs. 1566.67 crore has been disbursed to 
different SPPDs and Transmission Utilities for infrastructure 
development of the solar parks. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No. 372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee have been informed that SECI has 
implemented Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Schemes of 750 MW, 
2000 MW and 5000 MW each for setting up large scale           
ground-mounted solar PV projects. Under this scheme, developers 
would be paid tariff of Rs. 4.43 per kWh or the discounted tariff 

25 
 
discovered through e-reverse auctioning, for 25 years by entering 
into a PPA with SECI. Power from these projects would be sold to 
various DISCOMs/Bulk consumers/State utilities by SECI at  
Rs. 4.50 per kWh or discounted tariff discovered (including trading 
margin of 7 paisa per unit). The Committee find that the results of 
this scheme are not so encouraging. Under first batch of VGF 
Scheme of 750 MW, only 680 MW could be commissioned. Under 
the second batch of 2000 MW, only PPAs have been signed for 
2295 MW and commissioning status is not known. Under the third 
batch of 5000 MW, 2500 MW should have been commissioned till 
2016-17, but SECI has only signed PPAs for 970 MW till date. The 
Committee are of the view that VGF Scheme has outlived its utility. 
The Scheme had relevance when the quoted Solar tariff was above 
Rs. 4.43 per Kwh. Now, in view of the dwindling Solar tariff, the 
Committee do not find any rationale behind continuation of this 
Scheme. Moreover, the Committee are not able to understand the 
sanctioning of VGF to CPSUs like ONGC, Coal India Ltd., GAIL 
(India) Ltd., NTPC, BHEL, NHPC Ltd., etc. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should reconsider the 
Viability Gap Funding Scheme in this sector. 
Reply of the Government 
i. The current status of the projects under the VGF 
schemes are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme 
Name 
Commissioned 
Capacity (MW) 
Capacity (MW) not commis-
sioned with reasons 
1. 750 MW 680 MW 70 MW - Noncompliance by  
SPDs therefore PPA terminated 
2. 2000 MW 2155 MW - 
3. 5000 MW 2670 MW 
As mentioned above, after the 
tariff came down, projects under 
VGF scheme were not required. 
26 
 
As the tariffs have come down, the VGF is not required and 
the Scheme has been discontinued.  
Under MNRE’s CPSU Scheme Phase-I, VGF has been 
given to CPSUs like NTPC, BHEL, NHPC, ONGC, GAIL, etc. for 
compensating the extra cost incurred by them in deploying 
domestically manufactured solar PV modules (and in some cases 
domestically manufactured solar PV cells also) as per domestic 
content requirements under CPSU Scheme Phase-I. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee are informed that there is a scheme for 
setting up of 1000 MW Grid connected Solar PV Power Projects by 
15 CPSUs/Government Organizations by 2018. The Committee 
note that the Ministry has allocated 1037.26 MW capacity out of 
which 669 MW has been commissioned till date. Performance of 
the CPSUs like Coal India Ltd., NHPC Ltd., ONGC, GAIL (India) 
Ltd., THDC India Ltd., NVVN Ltd. etc. is disappointing. The 
Committee are concerned to note that even the Government 
Organizations are not able to achieve their targets. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take corrective 
steps so that 1037.26 MW capacity under this scheme gets 
commissioned in time. 
Reply of the Government 
Under the CPSU Scheme Phase-I there was a requirement 
of Domestic Content Requirement (DCR). While MNRE had 
sanctioned the entire Scheme capacity, a view emerged in 
consultation with Department of Commerce that the structure of the 
Scheme may not be fully WTO compliant and that the projects 
which were yet to be started may be removed from the Scheme. 
Accordingly, the capacity sanctioned under the Scheme (CPSU 

27 
 
Scheme Phase-I) was revised to 882 MW. The entire capacity of 
882 MW sanctioned under the Scheme, has been commissioned. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee note that there is a scheme for installation 
of 15000 MW Grid connected Solar PV Power Plants through 
NTPC Ltd. Under tranche-I (2014-15 to 2016-17) of this scheme, 
3000 MW of Solar Power is to be bundled with unallocated thermal 
power in the ratio of 2:1 for which the required 1500 MW 
unallocated thermal power has been made available by the 
Ministry of Power and NTPC Ltd./NVVN will sell the Bundled Power 
to willing State Utilities under 25 years Power Sale Agreements 
(PSAs), at Weighted Average Tariff of the Solar and Thermal 
components plus Trading Margin of seven paisa per kWh. The 
Committee find that only 1090 MW has been commissioned under 
this scheme till 31.03.2017 i.e. 64% short of the target. The 
Committee also find that the bundling of Solar Power with Thermal 
Power is to incentivize the Solar Power. However, in view of the 
dwindling Solar Tariff, the Committee feel that the Thermal Power 
is getting incentivized which is not the objective of the Bundling 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should revisit the Bundling Scheme as this scheme has stopped 
yielding the desired results now. 
Reply of the Government 
Govt. of India had launched the State Specific Bundling 
scheme for implementing 15000 MW of Grid-connected Solar PV 
Power Plants under National Solar Mission (NSM) from 2014-15 to 
2018-19 in three tranches, with NTPC as the implementing agency: 
• Tranche-I: 3000 MW: 2014-15 to 2016-17; 
• Tranche-II: 5000 MW: 2015-16 to 2017-18; 
28 
 
• Tranche-III: 7000 MW: 2016-17 to 2018-19. 
MNRE issued the Guidelines for selection of 3000 MW of 
Solar PV Capacity (i.e. identified quantum of Tranche-I) in March 
2015. Under the scheme, it was envisaged that the then costlier 
solar power will be bundled with cheaper thermal power in the ratio 
of 2:1, so as to supply combined power at an affordable price. 
The entire capacity of 3,000 MW Tranche-I is 
commissioned now. Now, as the Solar power tariff has fallen 
significantly, i.e., even less than the tariff of thermal power, it is not 
proposed to take up Tranche II and III. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that out of the 100 GW Solar Power, 
40 GW is to be achieved from grid connected Solar Rooftops in 
residential, social, institutional and Government sectors in the 
country. The Ministry has submitted that the capital subsidy of 30% 
is available for residential, institutional (hospitals, educational 
institutions, etc.) and social sectors. For the Government 
Institutions/ Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), achievement-
linked incentives/ awards are being provided. There is no subsidy 
for commercial and industrial establishments in the private sector 
as they are eligible for other benefits such as accelerated 
depreciation, custom duty concessions, excise duty exemptions 
and tax holiday etc. The Committee also note that the Ministry has 
a budget of Rs. 5000 crore for Grid connected Solar Rooftop 
systems to be installed upto 2019-20. This will provide financial 
support/central financial assistance for installation of about 4200 
MW Solar Rooftops in the country (2100 MW with Subsidy and 
2100 MW without subsidy). Till now, the Ministry has sanctioned 
projects of cumulative capacity of 2032 MWp under the programme 
to various State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) and Public Sector 

29 
 
Undertakings/Authorities (SECI, CEL, REIL, Railways, AAI, etc.). 
About 661 MW of RTS capacities have been installed including 
subsidized and non-subsidized projects as on 30.04.2017. The 
Committee are highly disappointed with the performance of the 
Ministry in this sector. The Committee find that Rooftop Systems 
are not remunerative for consumers due to high maintenance cost. 
The Committee feel that the Rooftop Solar target of 40 GW by 
2022 is unrealistic and it is highly unlikely that this target will be 
achieved. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should 
give this scheme a serious relook, otherwise, it will derail the target 
achievement of the National Solar Mission. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that : 
i. The target of 40 GW through Rooftop Solar 
Projects should be reconsidered. 
ii. Public Awareness Programme should be 
conducted regularly to popularize the Grid 
connected Solar Rooftop Projects. 
iii. The Ministry should undertake regular review 
meetings with the implementing agencies. 
iv. The process of subsidy disbursement should be 
made simpler. 
v. Single Window Clearance System should be 
adopted for approvals like connectivity, net-
metering, electricity inspection, limitation in 
sanctioned load, etc. 
vi. The Ministry should pursue all the States/UTs to 
make Rooftop Solar compulsory on new buildings 
by making changes in building byelaws. 
vii. Steps should be taken to encourage research and 
innovation in Solar Rooftop Systems so as to make 
them attractive and remunerative. 
30 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Phase-II of Grid Connected Rooftop Solar Programme 
has started after issuance of Scheme guidelines on 20th August 
2019. Programme envisages a cumulative capacity of 40 GW by 
the year 2022 and will be implemented through Power Distributing 
Companies (DISCOMs). Out of this 4 GW will be in residential 
sector with Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of 20-40% and the 
balance will be without CFA. Implementing Agencies i.e. DISCOMs 
will get the incentive for achieving in the financial year above the 
baseline capacity as on 31st March of the previous year. No 
incentives for capacity addition up to 10% capacity. 5% incentives 
for addition beyond 10% and up to 15%; and 10% incentives for 
addition beyond 15%. Addition of capacity in commercial and 
Industrial sector will also be counted for the incentive purpose and 
incentive will be provided for the addition of first 18 GW only. As on 
13th August 2020 total installation of 2144 MW has been reported 
on the SPIN portal of MNRE. However, market reports suggests 
that at present more than 5 GW of Rooftop solar has been installed 
in the country. As there was no incentive for the implementing 
agencies for reporting the non-subsidised installation on the SPIN 
Portal, however, with the provision of incentive for the DISCOMs, it 
is now expected that actual installation will be reported by the 
implementing agencies and we will be able to achieve the target of 
40 GW by the year 2022.  
(ii) MNRE has requested all the State/UT Governments to 
give wide publicity to the Rooftop Solar Programme including the 
incentive available for installation of Rooftop Solar. MNRE has also 
provided the content for the Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) material to the States/UTs, which can be 
used for publicity of the Rooftop solar. MNRE has also planned 
public awareness campaign through print and electronic media at 
central level. 
(iii) As recommended by the Standing Committee, the 
review meetings with the implementing agencies are held regularly 
at Secretary and Joint Secretary level. During the Power Ministers 

31 
 
Conference also the issue of Rooftop Solar Programme is 
deliberated by the Hon’ble Minister with his counterparts. 
(iv) In Phase-I of Rooftop Solar (RTS) Programme, there 
was a provision of 30% advance of the project cost calculated at 
benchmark cost or the tendered cost whichever is lower. Balance 
70% of the payment was to be released after completion of the 
project and submission of all the documents. As, implementing 
agencies were taking longer time in submission of documents, 
therefore, release of balance 70% of the subsidy amount was 
taking time. In Phase-II of RTS Programme, a provision of 
additional 30% advance after the implementing agency exhausted 
the initial 30% advance has been made. Further, it has been made 
mandatory for the implementing agencies to submit the documents 
within 30 days after the project completion timelines. Further, the 
residential consumers will have to pay only the balance of subsidy 
amount to the empanelled vendor. For example, if the total cost of 
the system is Rs.100/- with subsidy amount of Rs. 40/-. Now 
consumer will have to pay only Rs.60/- to the empanelled vendor 
and subsidy amount of Rs.40/- will be claimed by the vendor from 
the DISCOM (which has been made the implementing agency). 
Therefore, the consumer will not have to wait for the subsidy 
amount. With these provisions it is expected that process of 
subsidy disbursement will be faster. 
(v) Technical Assistance is being provided to the 
DISCOMs, the implementing agencies for creation of Single 
Window Clearance Portal. As one 13th August 2020, single Window 
clearance portals of 10 States are live and integrated with SPIN 
Portal of MNRE. It is expected that by 31st December 2020 all the 
implementing agencies will have this facility for their consumers.  
(vi) Ministry has written to all the State/UT Government to 
make the installation of Rooftop Solar mandatory in all the new 
buildings above a particular size. States of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana 
and UTs of Chandigarh and Delhi have notified regulations for 
mandatory installation of rooftop solar in new buildings above a 
particular size. 
32 
 
(vii) Innovative ideas in installation, maintenance and 
business models by implementing agencies are shared with the 
other agencies from time to time. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that the issues cited by the DISCOMs 
against Net-Metering like revenue erosion, tariff increase for non-
RTS consumers and backing down of conventional power etc. are 
of sustainable nature and these problems will certainly erode 
economic capacity of the DISCOMs and precisely for this reason, 
one or the other ruse will be cited to delay the process of net-
metering. Any delay in the process will impair the pace of the solar 
mission. We cannot be ignorant of the fact that Solar Rooftop 
systems will eliminate the techno-commercial losses and thus will 
provide a model for imitation on a larger scale. If we are to usher in 
new concepts, some inherent problems may arise, but the wisdom 
lies in finding their solutions. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that some alternative concepts like micro cooperative 
grid in a standalone manner be explored wherein a group of 
consumers/households can be pooled in for availing the solar 
rooftop benefits among themselves. It should also be examined 
whether there can be a mini/micro open excess window for this 
cooperative grid arrangement in rural/semi-urban areas. 
Reply of the Government 
The Distribution Licensees (DISCOMs) have been made 
the implementing agency for the Rooftop Solar Phase-II program of 
MNRE, as the consumers have easy access and regularly interface 
with DISCOMs. Beyond playing a facilitative role, it provides an 

33 
 
opportunity for DISCOMs to play an active role by leveraging 
access to the consumer base. DISCOMs can act as aggregators of 
RTS demand and leverage the transaction cost saved by the 
developers in accessing the interested consumers. Similarly, the 
DISCOMs could invest in the RTS system and benefit from the 
lower power purchase cost as compared to newly build thermal 
power. 
In this context, last year, the Forum of Regulators released 
a ‘Report on metering regulation and accounting framework for 
grid-connected rooftop solar PV in India’. The report details the 
utility-centric models, which could be adopted for accessing the 
benefits of rooftop solar promotion. In all these models, the utility 
acts as an aggregator of consumer interest for installing rooftop 
solar. The concept of mini/micro grid has been implemented under 
off-grid programme of MNRE to provide electricity to remote and 
far flung areas where grid is not available. Delhi is trying a model 
under which plant can be installed by group of persons at a 
available place and its energy can be shared by all the consumers. 
a. Consumer-owned model (utility only aggregates) 
 The EPC contract for installing the rooftop solar 
plants is signed between the consumer and the 
utility. 
 The utility further signs a back-to-back agreement 
with the successful EPC player identified through 
reverse bidding. 
 The utility earns revenue in the form of a one-time 
facilitation fee and a margin on the back-to-back 
EPC agreements. 
 Kerala and MP have adopted this model. Most of 
the States also follow this model without actively 
participation in demand aggregation 
34 
 
b. Third party-owned (Utility aggregates and acts as a 
trader between the RESCO and Consumer) 
 A RESCO selected based on reverse bidding 
invests in the RTS system. 
 The RESCO will sign a PPA with the utility to 
purchase all the energy generated by the solar 
plant. 
 The utility will sign a PSA with the consumer for the 
energy generated by RESCO. 
 The utility will charge a trading margin or a fixed fee 
for facilitating the trading operations. 
 Chandigarh and Delhi are in the process of filing a 
petition for adopting the same. 
c. Utility owned (Utility aggregates and acts as RESCO) 
 The utility in this model sets up, owns, and 
operates the RTS system. 
 The PPAs are signed between the utility and the 
consumers. 
 The utility collects the charges for the electricity 
consumed from the grid and the rooftop solar plants 
through monthly billing. 
 The average cost of supply for the utility is reduced. 
 Kerala has attempted an adaption of the model 
As may be seen from the above three models that 
DISCOMs are coming forward to actively participate in the rooftop 
solar installation and driving the rooftop solar installation. Good 
work done in the State of Madhya Pradesh and models developed 
by Kerala, Delhi and Chandigarh have been circulated among all 
States so that other States can also come forward with innovative 

35 
 
business models which take cares of the finance of the DISCOMs 
as well as attractive for the consumers also. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that the Ministry has been able to 
install 1.27 lakh Solar Pumps till 31.05.2017. The Committee find 
that the objective of the Solar Pump Scheme is to replace existing 
diesel pumps and the scheme is mainly focused on small and 
marginal farmers. The Ministry provides upto 30% capital subsidy 
through State Nodal Agencies for irrigation and drinking water and 
40% capital subsidy through NABARD with mandatory loan. 
However, it has been submitted that the Ministry has advised 
stoppage of subsidy scheme routed through NABARD and the 
same will now be handled by IREDA. The Committee hope that 
with this switchover, more farmers will be benefitted. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
i. As the scheme is mainly focused on small and marginal 
farmers who may not be able to bring upfront capital, 
the procedure for availing loans should be made easier 
and simpler. 
ii. The procedure for disbursement of capital subsidy 
should also be made faster and inclusive. 
iii. The Ministry should ensure quality, sustainability and 
maintenance of installed Solar Pumps. 
iv.  The Ministry should analyze reasons for the scheme 
being unsuccessful with NABARD and it should be 
ensured that the same are not repeated in the new 
arrangement. 
36 
 
Reply of the Government 
I. Solar Pumping Programme  
Solar Pumping Programme was first started by MNRE in 
the year 1992. From 1992 to 2014, about 11,600 solar pumps were 
installed in the country. During 2014-15, the Government allocated 
Rs. 400 crore for installation of one lakh solar pumps for irrigation 
and drinking water in the country under Off-grid and Decentralized 
Solar PV Applications Programme Phase-II. Under the Scheme, 
30% of the benchmark cost of the solar pumps was available as 
CFA for projects sanctioned to SNAs and 40% of the benchmark 
cost of the solar pumps was available as CFA for pumps installed 
through NABARD with loan component. Subsequently, during 
2017-18 to support small capacity pumps to marginal farmers, CFA 
pattern was revised as given below: 
 Capacity less than 1 hp          -           30% subsidy 
 Between 1 hp and 3 hp          -           25% subsidy 
 Between 3 hp and 5 hp          -           20% subsidy 
During Phase-II, 1.94 lakh solar pumps were sanctioned, 
out of which 1.78 lakh pumps have been installed, including 4012 
nos. of solar pumps through NABARD. Standalone solar pumps 
were part of the Off-grid and Decentralised Solar PV Applications 
Scheme up till 31.03.2017. 
II. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan 
Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM)  
i. Ministry has launched Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja 
Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) 
which includes installation of off-grid solar pumps and 
solarization of existing grid connected agricultural 
pumps. Under the scheme, 30% of the cost of system 
is provided by each of the Central Government and 
State Government (total 60%). Balance 40% of the cost 

37 
 
is to be invested by the farmer, out of which 30% may 
be provided by bank and 10% will be upfront 
investment by the farmer. 
ii. MNRE subsidy will be provided in two tranches, 40% of 
the subsidy will be provided in advance on placement 
of work order by the State Implementation agency and 
balance 60% on completion of the project. Farmer only 
needs to deposit their share of 40% (10% in case of 
loan from bank) and balance 60% will be directly paid 
to the supplier on installation of the system. 
iii. To ensure quality, sustainability and maintenance, 
following provisions have been included: 
a. Systems will be installed as per MNRE 
specifications and relevant standards. 
b. Selected vendors shall be responsible for design, 
supply, installation and commissioning of solar 
agriculture pumps. Vendors will mandatorily provide 
AMC for a period of 5 years from the date of 
commissioning of the systems including insurance 
coverage for the installed systems against natural 
calamities and theft. 
c. AMC will include inspection by Vendor at least once 
in a quarter and submission of quarterly inspection 
report of the installed pumps as per prescribed 
format. 
d. To ensure timely maintenance of the systems the 
vendor shall have one authorized service centre in 
each operational district and a helpline in local 
language in each operational State. Helpline 
number shall be indicated on the pump/ controller 
at suitable location easily visible to the user. 
e. All solar Agriculture pumps sanctioned under the 
programme shall be provided with remote 
monitoring system by the vendor. It will be 
38 
 
mandatory to submit performance data of solar 
power plant online to MNRE in the manner and 
format prescribed by MNRE. 
f. Funds will be released by implementing agency to 
the vendor on submission of bank guarantee 
equivalent to 10% of the cost of systems installed 
by that vendor for a period of five years. 
Alternatively, BG may be provided initially for a 
period of one year which may be extended on year 
to year basis thereafter. 
g. In case the installed systems are not as per 
standards, non-functional on account of poor 
quality of installation, or non-compliance of AMC, 
the Ministry reserves the right to blacklist the 
vendor. 
iv. After careful assessment of drawbacks of the scheme 
which was implemented by NABARD provisions as 
mentioned above have been included in the Guidelines 
for PM-KUSUM to ensure proper installation and 
monitoring. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
Progress of National Solar Mission 
The Committee note that the Ministry has a target of 
installation of 600 MW of Off-Grid Solar Applications during Phase 
II of NSM (2013-17), out of which 345.50 MW has been installed. 
The Committee are disappointed with the performance of the 
Ministry in this sector. The Committee feel that Off-Grid Solar 
Applications can play a significant role in giving electricity access to 
remote locations where extension of centralized grid is 
uneconomical. However, Off-Grid Applications too face some 
obstacles including high capital cost, complicated procedure of 

39 
 
subsidy disbursal, difficulty in local operation and maintenance. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
i. Innovative schemes should be devised to drive down 
cost and increase return on investment. 
ii. Procedure of disbursement of subsidies should be 
made simpler and faster. 
iii. Public-Private Partnership with rural entrepreneurs 
should be encouraged. 
iv. Large multi-national companies should be persuaded to 
dedicate part of their Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) fund to Off-Grid Solar Projects. 
Reply of the Government 
i. Following measures have been taken by the Ministry 
under Off-grid and Decentralized Solar PV Applications 
Scheme Phase-III to ensure lower cost of adoption and 
increased returns: 
a. Centralized tender has been conducted for solar 
street lights and solar study lamps after 
aggregating demand from various States. 
b. Improved specifications have been adopted for 
installation of solar street lights which includes 
higher illumination through 12 W LED and better 
storage capacity through Lithium batteries. 
c. RESCO based models have been brought in for 
solar power plants to avoid high upfront investment. 
Institutional consumer will only have to pay for 
usage charges on per unit basis. 
ii. Procedure for disbursement of subsidies has been 
made faster and particularly in NER and Hill States/UTs 
advance CFA is provided by MNRE. Further the 
40 
 
centralized tender also makes the process faster as 
only one tender is conducted in place of multiple 
tenders by States. Ministry has also developed web-
based monitoring platform for faster inspection and 
better monitoring of the installed systems. 
iii. RESCO based model has been developed for 
installation of solar off-grid systems in North-eastern 
States wherein service provider companies including 
local/ small developer will install the system with MNRE 
subsidy and their own investment and supply power to 
institutional consumer on per unit basis. 
iv. Although there is no scheme for use of CSR funds for 
installation of solar off-grid applications, such 
investment through CSR is already being done wherein 
a part of cost for common use applications is funded 
through CSR. Further, based on requests received 
from Hon’ble MPs and MLAs from various States, 
PSUs under the administrative control of MNRE and 
MoP have provided funds through CSR for installation 
of applications such as solar street lights, solar lanterns 
and solar pumps for community usage. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that the per unit price of Solar Power 
in India has dropped from Rs. 10.95 in December, 2010 to Rs. 2.44 
in May, 2017. Solar Power has become cheaper than coal-based 
thermal Power Plant. The Ministry submitted that the project cost 
per MW, to make the unit cost of Rs. 2.44 viable, works out to be 
Rs. 3.75 crore per MW. However, the parameter considered by the 
successful bidder for arriving at Rs. 2.44 per unit is not available 
with the Ministry. The Committee are informed that as per Central 

41 
 
Electricity Regulation Commission (CERC) norms, the life of a 
Solar project is 25 years and Return on Equity (RoE) is 14%. 
However, for arriving at lower tariff, the bidder may have 
considered a lower RoE. The Committee note that in a rush to build 
market share in this sector, some players have become very 
aggressive in competitive auction and are bidding very low tariff. 
The Committee are apprehensive about the quality of material 
used. The Committee are of the view that some of these projects 
would become unviable because the developers may find it difficult 
to raise funds and contain high project costs and such a low Solar 
Tariff would also affect the viability of those Solar Projects which 
have been awarded earlier at a higher rate. The Committee are 
concerned about the viability of such solar power projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
i. High Anti-Dumping Duty or Duty based on efficiency of 
the material imported should be imposed so as to 
discourage import of poor quality material. 
ii. The Ministry should ensure that some outlying bids do 
not disturb the market dynamics. 
Reply of the Government 
i. At different times, petitions were filed for imposition of 
Anti-Dumping Duty and Safeguard Duty on import of 
solar PV cells and modules. Safeguard Duty has been 
imposed by Department of Revenue on import of solar 
PV cells and modules. 
ii. The bidding are held in transparent manner and it is left 
to the market forces to decide the tariff for solar power 
projects. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
42 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee note that DISCOMs are not able to comply 
with their RPO target because of the high cost and infirm nature of 
the Renewable Energy. But, it has been submitted that the tariff for 
renewables has come down, Solar and Wind have reached grid 
parity and steps have been taken to address the infirm nature of 
Renewable Energy. The Committee also note that the Ministry of 
Power has issued guidelines for year-wise growth trajectory for 
RPO compliance upto 2018-19 and a web portal is being created 
for online monitoring of RPO compliance. However, the Committee 
find that the States are not willing to comply with their Renewable 
Purchase Obligations and they continue to default on their RPO 
targets which prima facie points to a systemic flaw in the working of 
the concept of Renewable Energy Obligations. Keeping in view the 
importance of Renewable Energy and the utmost need to increase 
the share of Renewable Energy in India’s Energy mix, the 
Committee recommend that : 
i. The Ministry should work towards aligning State-wise 
Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPOs) with the RPO 
trajectory as notified by the Ministry of Power. 
ii. For ensuring stricter compliance, the Ministry should 
come up with some Penal Provisions for non-complying 
States so that such States may fall in line and make 
every effort to fulfill their Renewable Energy 
Obligations. 
iii. Reasons should also be analyzed as to why this 
scheme has not been successful in getting proper 
response from the States. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has been consistently following with 
States/UTs for ensuring RPO compliance, and also aligning RPO 

43 
 
trajectory with that notified by the Ministry of Power. In order to 
create robust RPO compliance regime, under Section 142 of the 
Draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill 2020, penalty for non-compliance 
with the directions of the Appropriate Commission is proposed to 
be increased upto Rs. 1 crore (from Rs. 1 lakh), with an additional 
per day penalty in case of continuing non-compliance of Rs. 1 lakh 
(from Rs. 6000). Special penalty for failure to comply with purchase 
of renewable and hydro power as specified by the central 
Government has been proposed. The Amendment Bill proposed a 
penalty of Rs. 0.50/kWh for the shortfall in purchase in the first year 
of default, and if such default continues for the second successive 
year, then the penalty is proposed to be increased to Rs. 1/kWh 
and thereafter Rs. 2/kWh.  In addition, under Section 146, penalty 
for non-compliance of orders or directions under the Electricity Act 
has been increased to upto Rs. 1 crore (from Rs. 1 lakh), with an 
additional per day penalty in case of continuing non-compliance of 
Rs. 1 lakh ( from Rs. 5000). 
Reasons attributed for RPO non-compliance include 
perception of some of the DISCOMs that renewable energy costs 
more than other energy sources, resulting in cost-driven decisions 
and policies that avoid renewable energy. Some DISCOMs have 
perception that additional cost associated with integration may be 
very high. However, these are largely associated with system 
inertia and progressively DISCOMs have started realizing positive 
attributes of renewable energy. In addition, Ministry has been 
progressively advancing products capable of providing steady and 
dispatchable power from renewable energy sources to meet the 
DISCOM’s requirements. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
44 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee have been informed that one of the 
challenges to meet the target of 100 GW by 2022 is delay in 
signing of PPA after finalization of tenders which is a consequence 
of lack of directions from parent Ministry, lengthy internal approval 
process, involvement of multiple Ministries, lack of prior experience 
of the Government Departments etc., and the possible fallouts of 
this situation are delay in project implementation, changes in 
scheme norms, change in cost/incentives, backing out of 
developers, revenue loss for entity etc. The Committee have taken 
a serious view of this situation as with this delay in signing of 
PPAs, the sanctity of the whole Mission will be affected and the 
Ministry will not be able to achieve its target within the stipulated 
time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
i. The Ministry should devise a single window system 
wherein lengthy internal approval process and 
involvement of multiple Ministries can be avoided. 
ii. The Ministry should come up with model PPAs with the 
help of specialized agencies.  
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. 
Further, Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) has 
prepared Standard Bidding Guidelines for Tariff Based Competitive 
Bidding Process for Procurement of Power from Grid Connected 
solar PV and Wind Power Projects, which provide for a detailed 
standardized framework for procuring solar/ wind power in a fair 
and transparent manner. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 

45 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
Solar Manufacturing in India 
The Committee note that India has installed solar PV 
manufacturing capacity of round 3 GW for solar PV Cells and 
around 7 GW for solar PV modules, however, the actual production 
is 1 GW and 3 GW respectively. Also, solar PV power installed in 
the year 2016-17 was about 5.5 GW and the target for 2017-18 is 
around 10 GW. The Ministry has submitted that the installed 
manufacturing capacity of solar PV cells and modules is not 
capable of catering the annual demand of the country and China 
and China controlled Taiwan + SEA hold 85% of total global 
capacity for solar cell and module manufacturing. The Committee 
find that despite its low labour cost, Indian Manufacturers are not 
able to compete with Chinese Firms. The Committee also note that 
the Government of India provides incentives for solar 
manufacturing under Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme 
(M-SIPS) of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY). M-SIPS provide a capital subsidy to promote large scale 
manufacturing in the Electronic System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) sector which also includes Solar Photovoltaic units. The 
Committee are concerned about the lack of domestic Solar 
Manufacturing Capacity. The Committee are of the view that it is a 
necessity for India to support Domestic Solar Manufacturing as 
over-reliance on a single country puts Indian Solar Sector at a risk 
of disruption in supply chain. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that : 
i. The Ministry should urgently formulate a dedicated 
programme to establish India as a Solar Manufacturing 
46 
 
Hub so as to provide policy support to the complete 
value chain. 
ii. There should be excise duty exemption and Zero 
import duty on raw materials. 
iii. The Ministry should work to provide Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) and low interest rate loans to domestic 
manufacturers. 
iv. There should be provision for establishment of 
manufacturing units inside the Solar Parks so that 
Manufacturers may benefit from the Infrastructure & 
ecosystem of the Solar Parks. 
v. The Ministry should focus on quality and reliability of 
the Solar Cells/Modules. 
Reply of the Government 
To provide financial support as well as to reduce the 
financing cost for domestic solar PV manufacturing, Ministry of 
New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) is in the process of formulating 
"National Programme on Solar PV Manufacturing". This would help 
in setting up of new Giga-scale solar PV manufacturing facilities in 
India.  
As per notification No. 24/2005-Customs dated 1st March, 
2005, of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, all goods 
required for the manufacture of solar PV cells and modules, when 
imported into India, are exempt from the whole of the duty of 
customs leviable thereon, provided that the importer follows the 
procedure set out in the Customs (Import of Goods at 
Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) 
Rules, 1996.  
As per Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30th June, 
2017, of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, capital 

47 
 
equipment required for the manufacture of solar PV cells and 
modules, when imported into India, are exempt from the whole of 
the duty of customs leviable thereon under First Schedule of 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975, provided they are included in the goods 
specified in List 19 of the said Notification, as mentioned in  
Sl. No. 426 of the Table included in the said notification, provided 
that the importer follows the procedure set out in the Customs 
(Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy is facilitating 
setting up of renewable energy manufacturing hubs in the country, 
preferably at location near ports. Such renewable energy 
manufacturing hubs are expected to create a holistic environment 
for fully integrated manufacturing of renewable energy equipment 
in the country. 
For quality and reliability assurance, MNRE is implementing 
the Quality Control Order on SPV Systems, Components and 
Devices (Compulsory Registration Scheme), which covers SPV 
modules, inverters and battery storage. These products are 
required to conform to specified Indian Standards. Products 
qualifying the standards tested in BIS recognized test labs are 
required to be registered by the respective manufacturers with BIS.  
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
R & D and Human Resource Development 
The Committee note that the Ministry has spent  
Rs. 534.30 crore on Research and Development out of the total 
48 
 
expenditure of Rs. 11250 crore on Renewable Energy during the 
12th Five Year Plan Period. During the year 2016-17 expenditure 
on R&D in renewable energy was Rs. 100 crore. The Ministry 
submitted that in the field of Solar PV, R&D efforts are directed to 
improving the efficiency of solar cells, developing invertors and 
power electronic systems, storage systems. According to the 
MNRE, its Research & Development activities aims at resource 
assessment, technology development, demonstration and 
commercialization for promoting the large scale use of new and 
renewable energy across the country. The Committee are of the 
view that the large scale utilization of solar energy can only be 
sustained if it is backed by indigenous R&D, innovation and 
manufacturing capability. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that : 
i. The Ministry should adopt a coordinated approach for 
successful collaboration among the technological and 
R&D institutions and the industries to achieve the goal 
of indigenous renewable energy technology 
development and innovation. 
ii.  The Ministry should also ensure constant monitoring of 
all the R&D projects with a view to evaluating their 
functioning in a cost effective and result-oriented 
manner. 
iii. The Ministry should provide financial support to start-
ups, entrepreneurs and innovators for R&D of new 
solar related technologies and for creating new and 
unique business models which have a potential of 
increasing the deployment of solar related 
technologies. 

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. The R&D scheme and policy was launched in Feb, 
2019 with a provision to support for technology 
development and demonstration in various areas of 
new and renewable energy such as solar thermal, solar 
photovoltaic, biogas, waste to energy, wind energy, 
hybrid systems, storage, geothermal, hydrogen and 
fuels cells etc. with the ultimate aim of increasing share 
of renewables in the energy mix in the country. In the 
scheme, there is a provision for encouraging innovation 
and start-ups for major intervention for promoting 
setting up small scale industries for indigenous 
development and manufacture of new and renewable 
energy systems/components/devices. To achieve the 
goal of indigenous renewable energy technology 
development, innovation & manufacturing capability, 
the proposals are invited from the R&D institutes/ 
Universities/IITs/NITs/ Industry/start-ups in line with the 
R&D thrust area of the Ministry. The proposals are 
screened and sanctioned after the expert 
evaluation/RDPAC Committees.  
Ministry has sanctioned the R&D projects with a target 
efficiency of 22% mono crystalline solar cell to IIT Bombay and 
22% on PERC mono crystalline solar cell to BHEL. National Centre 
for Photovoltaic and Research and Educations (NCPRE) by IIT 
Bombay developed 19.4 % efficiency crystalline silicon solar cell 
against targeted efficiency of 22%, developed various inverters and 
electronics, research on latest solar cell development in thin 
film/pervoskite, done various studies on all India module 
degradations and development of storage systems with aim to 
indigenous R&D, innovation, technology development and 
commercialization.  
50 
 
ii. Monitoring and evaluation of the research and 
technology development activities are being 
undertaken through Project Monitoring Committees 
(PMCs) of the respective renewable energy technology 
area. PMCs continuously monitors project 
implementation and recommend mid-course 
corrections, budget revisions, realigning of objectives to 
enable delivery of the envisaged project outcomes with 
a view to evaluating their functioning in a cost effective 
and result-oriented manner  
iii. The standing committee recommendations will be 
followed and would also ensure a coordinated 
approach for successful collaboration among the 
scientific & technical Institutes like IITs, NISE, NIWE, 
NIBE, other R&D institutions and industry to achieve 
the goal of indigenous renewable energy technology 
developent and innovation. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
The Committee note that the Ministry has launched the 
Suryamitra Training Programme with a target of training 50,000 
persons as Solar PV Technicians in the various States by 2019, to 
be skilled for acting as installation, commissioning and after sales 
services (Operation & Maintenance) providers with 
entrepreneurship skills in the field of renewable energy with special 
reference to solar energy. The Committee also note that so far, 
11,013 Suryamitras have been trained under this programme in the 
country. The Ministry has submitted that it has sanctioned/released 
an amount of Rs. 41.91 crore to National Institute of Solar Energy 
(NISE) for implementation of Suryamitra programme and NISE has 
spent Rs. 35.4 crore as on 31.03.2017. The Committee are of the 

51 
 
view that the large-scale installation of Solar Energy will require a 
technically qualified manpower of high standard. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that : 
i. Specialized courses in Solar Energy should be 
introduced in Research Institutes and other Institutes of 
higher studies, like IITs, IISc, etc. with financial 
assistance from the Government. 
ii. The Ministry should provide scholarship for research in 
the field of Solar Energy. 
Reply of the Government 
(i)  Most of the IITs and NITs and other universities 
introduced renewable/solar energy courses in 
B.Tech/M.Tech degree courses as main/ancillary 
subjects. Ministry also provides financial 
assistance/grant for upgradation of laboratory facilities 
in renewable energy research in reputed academic and 
research institutions engaged in RE education and 
research. 
(ii)  Ministry is providing scholarships/ fellowships to the 
students pursuing M.Tech / M.E , M.Sc (Renewable 
Energy), Junior and Senior Research Fellowships for 
students pursuing Ph.D degree in renewable energy 
including Solar energy Research Associates and Post 
Doctoral fellowships for research scholars, under 
National Renewable Energy Fellowship scheme as per 
AICTE, DST/MHRD/CSIR guidelines. Ministry, under 
National Renewable Energy Science Fellowship 
Scheme also provides fellowship for eminent scientists 
with a doctorate degree and with experience of at least 
ten years RE research, working in institutes with an 
innovative idea in renewable energy/solar energy. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
  
52 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN  
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
Off-Grid Solar Applications 
The Committee note that under Atal Jyoti Yojana, there is a 
target of installation of 2,97,440 Street Lights in 169 constituencies 
in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha and Assam by 2018. 
However, only 9401 street lights have been installed so far. Out of 
which, 9179 Street Lights have been installed in Uttar Pradesh 
only. The main constraining factor is availability of batteries which 
are needed to be imported. The Committee are apprehensive 
about the installation of remaining 2,88,039 Street Lights by March, 
2018. The Committee, therefore, recommend that: 
i. The Ministry should speed up the installation process in 
consultation with the Energy Efficiency Services limited 
(EESL) and all the five State Governments concerned. 
ii. The Ministry should also ensure proper functioning and 
maintenance of the installed Street Lights with the help 
of Panchayats/Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
Reply of the Government 
i. Ministry had expedited installation under Phase-I of the 
AJAY Scheme and a total quantity of 1,35,393 nos. of 
solar street lights have been installed in the States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha and Assam. 
State-wise break-up is given below: 

53 
 
Sl. 
No. State 
No. of solar street 
lights installed under 
phase-I 
1. Uttar Pradesh 79543 
2. Bihar 29923 
3. Jharkhand 10535 
4. Odisha 8733 
5. Assam 6659 
 Total 135393 
Under the Scheme, 25% of the cost of solar street lights 
was to be provided through MPLADS. Therefore, being a demand 
driven scheme, street lights could be installed in constituencies 
wherein required funds were sanctioned by the District 
Administration on recommendation of Hon’ble Member of 
Parliament. 
Subsequently, AJAY Phase-II Scheme was launched on 
18.12.2018, wherein besides the States covered in Phase-I, NER 
States, Hill States & UTs, Island UTs and aspirational districts were 
also covered. Before closure of the scheme due to discontinuation 
of MPLADS by Government on account of COVID-19, a total 
quantity of 1.44 lakh solar street lights were sanctioned by District 
Administrations. Out of this, 62,736 nos. of solar street lights have 
already been installed. 
ii. To ensure proper functioning and maintenance of the 
installed Street Lights following provisions have been 
included in the AJAY Guidelines: 
a. 5 years of Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) is 
provided by the supplier to ensure the overall 
maintenance of the Solar Street Lighting Systems 
by the suppliers for 5 years. 
54 
 
b. Complaint management portal and toll-free number 
are available for resolving complaints. 
c. Bank Guarantee (BG) of 10% of the award amount 
with a validity of 1 year, to be rolled over every year 
for the first five years, will be given by the suppliers 
of the system. 
d. In case service is not provided by the supplier or 
the system is not working properly or supplier fails 
to repair or replace the faulty systems within the 
time specified in the tender, the BG may be 
encashed to repair or replace the systems as may 
be required. In case the supplier fails to repair or 
replace the faulty systems within the time specified 
in the tender, MNRE will have the right to black list 
the supplier for future projects/works. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
  

55 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT  
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee note that the Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions of all the 36 States/UTs have notified 
regulations/tariff orders for net metering/feed-in-tariff mechanism. 
But DISCOMs are reluctant to operationalize the Net-Metering 
Regulations as it may reduce their income from high-paying 
customers. The Committee also note that from the consumers 
point of view, availability of NetMeters, time taken for giving Net-
Metering connections by DISCOMs, inspection by Chief Electrical 
Inspector (CEI), etc. are few of the concerns. The Committee are of 
the view that to give boost to Rooftop Solar Systems, 
operationalization of Net-Metering is of utmost importance. It 
reduces AT&C losses and need for large tracts of land. It even 
helps DISCOMs to avoid buying expensive peak power. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that: 
i. The concept of Cross-Subsidy should be reconsidered 
so that Net-Metering for all users will make more 
financial sense. 
ii. Clear installation guidelines should be formulated by 
the Central and State Regulatory Authorities. 
iii.  There should be proper training of DISCOM’s staff on 
implementation of Net-Metering. 
Reply of the Government 
i. All the Regulators have notified the metering 
regulations. Although Net metering is available for the 
residential sectors in all the States, however, in addition 
to Net Metering, gross metering and Net billing have 
56 
 
also been prescribed by some State Regulators for 
commercial and Industrial Sectors. Ministry has 
regularly pursued with the State Government to 
approve the Net Metering/Gross Metering for the 
Rooftop Solar installer in a time bound manner. Ministry 
has also written to the State Governments and State 
Electricity Regulators to fix the tariff under Gross 
Metering by considering the capital cost involved in 
installation of Rooftop Solar and a reasonable return on 
the capital cost so that the same is recovered in a 
reasonable time of 5-6 years. The issue of cross 
subsidy is a sensitive issue under the domain of State 
Governments; therefore, each State Government takes 
a view as per the recommendations of State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission as per local requirement. 
ii. Ministry has written to all the State Governments to 
notify standard procedure for installation of rooftop 
solar and also shared a indicative operating procedure 
with timelines for each activities for installation of 
rooftop solar by the consumers. 
iii. Technical Assistance is being provided to the 
DISCOMs, the implementing agencies by the 
multilateral agencies like World Bank, ADB, European 
Union and GIZ (German Agency) under bilateral 
agreement. These agencies under the guidance of 
MNRE provide technical assistance programme 
provide training to the DISCOMs Staff for Net metering 
is also covered in addition to other issues. 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, OM.No.372-12/8/2017-PU 
Dated: 18/09/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

57 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
18 March, 2021 
27 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS 
LALAN SINGH, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
  
58 
 
APPENDIX I  
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON  
18th MARCH, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘2’,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE  
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1535 hrs. 
PRESENT 
        Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  —  Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Kumari Shobha Karandlaje 
3.  Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
4.  Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
5.  Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
6.  Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
7.  Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
8.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
10.  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
11.  Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 

59 
 
12.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
13.  Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                           –      Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan          –      Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        –      Additional Director 
4.  Smt. L.N. Haokip                         –     Deputy Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up the following ten draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:– 
(a) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An 
Appraisal’; 
(b) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Stressed/Non-performing 
Assets in Power Sector’; 
(c) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised 
Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets on 
NPAs in the Electricity Sector’; 
(d) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report  
60 
 
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing 
Assets in Gas based Power Plants'; 
(e) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’; and 
(f) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2019-20) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy; 
(g) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2019-20) of the Ministry of Power; 
(h) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2020-21) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy’. 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2020-21) of the Ministry of Power. 
(j) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement 
of 175 Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the 
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget 
Session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

61 
 
MIAPPENDIX  II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
28th REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 (i)    Total number of Recommendations:       20 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
    Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 and 20 
Total : 18 
Percentage : 90% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Sl. No. : 12 
Total :  01 
percentage : 05% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
reply of the Government has not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. No. : 10 
Total : 01 
Percentage : 05% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil 
Total : 00 
Percentage 00% 