 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
  
  
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
the Ministry of Power]    
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-23) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 31 
 

ii 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of 
Power] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
  


iii 
 
C.O.E.  NO. 360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022  By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by ______________________ 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2022-23) v 
 Introduction vi 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
11 
Chapter III Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
29 
Chapter IV Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which reply 
of Government has not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration 
30 
Chapter V Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited 
31 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on                            
15th December, 2022 
32 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Fifth Report (1 7th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Energy 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2022-23) 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal -  Chairperson 
  
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary* 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri P. Velusamy 
                                                                          RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
25. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
26. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
27. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
28. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
31. Vacant 
                                                                       SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th November, 2022. 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-First Report 
on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy 
on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Power. 
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 22 nd March, 2022 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
30th August, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 15th December, 2022. 
4. An Analysis on the action -taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fifth Report of the Committee is given at  
Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  
16th December, 2022  
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka) 
Jagdambika Pal,                                            
Chairperson,  
             Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the                
Twenty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the 
Ministry of Power.  
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 22nd March, 202 2 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report 
contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action-taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report were received on 30th August, 2022. These have 
been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 and14             
Total - 14 
                         Chapter-II 
                                                          
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
- Nil   -          Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of w hich the reply  of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
     -     Nil   -     Total–00                                                                                             
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the 
Government is still awaited:  
- Nil    -  
                                 Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that action t aken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3) 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram JyotiYojana (DDUGJY) 
6. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee are aware that fiscal 2021 -22 is the sunset year for DDUGJY 
scheme thus no funds under the scheme has been allocated for the year 2022 -
23. The Committee note that against the budgetary allocation of Rs.3,600 crore 
for the year 2021-22 only Rs 2,321.71 crore have been utilized till 31.01.2022. 
The Committee also note that under the 'Rural Electrification' component of 
DDUGJY scheme all the inhabited census villages across the c ountry stand 
electrified on 28.04.2018. The Committee further note that apart from 'Rural 
Electrification' there are two other components of DDUGJY i.e. Separation of 
agriculture and non-agriculture feeders, and Strengthening and Augmentation 
of Sub Transm ission & Distribution infrastructure in rural areas, including 
metering of Distribution Transformers/feeders/consumers. The Committee 
find that overall progress under the scheme in the country is 99%. The 
Committee is appreciative of the massive work under taken under the DDUGJY 
scheme and that too in a time -bound manner. They believe that the work done 
under the scheme will not only provide an impetus for the economic and social 
up lift men of a large population but also increase the electricity demand and 
its per capita consumption in the country. Though the States have submitted 
that all the villages have been electrified and electricity connections to all 
households have been provided, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
through the nodal agency of this scheme carry out an audit to ascertain that no 
willing household of any village/hamlet is left un -electrified. The Committee 
also recommend that all -out efforts be made to complete the remaining work 
under the DDUGJY scheme in the current fiscal itself.” 
 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“The Government of India is committed to achieve universal household 
electrification in the country. To this end, the Saubhagya Scheme was 
implemented to achieve saturation in household electrification. Funds were 
released to State Governments/DISCOMs/PIAs through the nodal agency, 
based on proposals submitted by State Governments concerned. Under 
Saubhagya scheme, all the States had confirmed completion of households 
electrification by 31.03.2019 after electrifying 2.62 crore households (HHs). 
Thereafter, b ased on the request of States, GoI allowed funding for 

3 
 
electrification of another ~19 lakh HHs that were unwilling earlier but 
expressed willingness to be electrified later. As reported by the States, 2.81 
crore households were electrified since the launch  of Saubhagya,  as on  
31.03.2021. Based on requests of States yet again, funding for electrification 
of another set of 11.84 lakh HHs were sanctioned under DDUGJY during 
2021-22 with the condition of completion of these works by 15.3.2022. In 
total, 2.86 crore households have been electrified under Saubhagya and 
DDUGJY.  
The above clearly indicates that Government of India is committed to 
electrify all HHs in the country. The State Governments have also submitted 
reports indicating universal household elec trification coverage under the 
scheme. It is understood that presently no willing household has been left un-
electrified under the aforesaid schemes. The Government of India has worked 
closely with various State Governments to achieve this objective 
comprehensively in a time bound manner. Arising of new households is a 
continuous process, and their electrification is the responsibility of the 
respective States and their Utilities. Therefore, at any point in time, some 
households or the other would be in the  stage of process of obtaining 
connections, which shall get reflected in any survey. The Ministry of Power 
has dwelt upon the issue in detail and has in light of closure of DDUGJY and 
Saubhagya Schemes w.e.f 31.03.2022, informed all the States that the 
Government stands committed to electrifying all willing households 
identified before Saubhagya, for which they can pose DPRs to this Ministry 
for electrification under RDSS. This measure has not only remediated the 
issue of willing households that were unwill ing earlier but now willing to 
obtain electricity connections, but also ensure that the States and their 
utilities take up ownership for the continuing connections.”  
 
8. The Committee , with a view to ensure that no willing household  of any 
village/hamlet in the country  was left un-electrified, had recommended the 
Ministry to carry  out an audit in this regard. The Committee are pleased to note 
that the Ministry of Power have dwelt upon the issue in detail and stated that they 
are committed to electrify  all willing households identified before Saubhagya  
Scheme. They have further stated that they have also informed the States to pose 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) to the Ministry for their electrification under the 
Revamped Reforms-based and Results-linked Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) . 
The Committee , therefore,  believe that the Ministry of Power will take all 
proactive measures to ensure that the aforementioned work relating to universal 
household electrification/ coverage identified before Saubhagya Scheme is 
completed at the earliest. 
 
 

4 
 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
9.  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) was 
launched in 2014 to extend financial assistance against capital expenditure for 
addressing the gaps in sub-transmission & distribution networks and metering in 
urban areas to supplement the resources of DISCOMS/Power Departme nts. The 
Committee also observe that one of the main objectives of the scheme is to 
reduce the AT&C losses in the country to the level of 15%. The Committee are 
also aware that the Government had initiated Accelerated Power Development 
and Reforms Programm e (APDRP) with a similar objective as early as the year 
2000-01. The Scheme was revised in 2008 as Restructure -Accelerated Power 
Development and Reforms Programme (R -APDRP). The Committee further note 
that the level of AT&C losses which was 23.7% in the ye ar 2015-16 reduced to 
20.93 % in 2019 -20. However, it is still way below the target level of 15% 
considering the low levels of AT&C losses in the developed countries, the 
committee have been of the view that even the target of 15%, is too moderate. 
The very fact that the monetary value of the AT&C losses across the country is to 
the tune of Rs. 1,22,000 Crore which speaks volumes about this problem. The 
scrutiny of the committee has revealed that the five states of the country, AT&C 
losses range as high as 40% to 60% though the overall losses have decreased 
since 2015 -16. In regard to the Physical progress of IPDS, the committee note 
that out of the 547 circle sanctioned, system strengthening works in 544 circles 
have been completed. The Committees do unders tand that reducing the level of 
AT&C losses is a challenging work considering the fact that the power 
distribution is a State matter. Since 2021 -22 is the sunset year for IPDS, the 
Committee feel that there is a need for a fair and transparent study to ass ess the 
overall impact of this scheme on the distribution system and to find out   the 
reasons as to why the efforts of the Central Government have not yielded the 
desired results in the reduction of AT&C losses for that reinvestigated efforts be 
made in fu ture, moreover, in most of the circles, the Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition (SCADA) system is now in place, it would now be easier to 
pinpoint the problematic areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should do the data/ system analysis and put the report of such exercise 
in the public domain also.” 
 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“The sunset year for IPDS was FY 2021 -22. Accordingly, the projects under IPDS 
scheme have been declared complete d by the State DISCOMs as on March 2022. 
As per IPDS Guidelines, Ministry of Power and Power Finance Corporation (PFC) 
(Nodal Agency) are in the process of appointing Independent Third -party 
Agencies for studying the impact of IPDS projects implementation from the 
perspective of Utility, Customer and Society. The evaluation parameters shall 


5 
 
broadly cover analysis of system and data related to AT&C loss, quality & 
reliability of power supply, consumer convenience, socio -economic impact etc. 
Two Impact Assess ment Studies have been conducted in 2016 -17 and 2018 -19 
for R-APDRP component subsumed under IPDS. 
Further, keeping in mind the objective of improving the quality and reliability of 
power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and operationally 
efficient distribution Sector, Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) has 
been launched by Ministry of Power, Government of India in July’2021. The 
Scheme aims to reduce the AT&C losses to pan -India levels of 12 -15% and ACS -
ARR gap to zer o by 2024 -25.To avail funding under loss reduction and 
modernization works under RDSS, an eligible DISCOM is required to prepare an 
Action plan for strengthening its distribution system and improving its 
performance by way of various reform measures, which  would result in 
improvement in operational efficiency and financial viability as well as 
improvement in the quality and reliability of power supply to the consumers. 
RDSS envisage the unique approach of conditional financial assistance to 
DISCOMs contingent to undertake reforms as per agreed action plan.   The fund 
flow from the scheme will be subject to their adhering to the loss reduction and 
other trajectories." 
 
11. In response to the recommendation of the Committee for the need of a fair 
and transparen t study to assess the overall impact of Integrated Power 
Development Scheme (IPDS) on the distribution system, the Ministry have stated 
that the Ministry of Power and the Power Finance Corporation (Nodal Agency) are 
in the process of appointing Independent  Third-party Agencies for studying the 
impact of IPDS projects implementation  from the perspective of Utilities , 
Customers and Society.  The Committee desire that the said assessment should 
critically examine all the aspects of the Scheme to find out the pitfalls that prevent 
an optimum outcome. It is n eedless to emphasize that the Committee will be 
apprised of the outcome of the said exercise.  
 
Revamped Reforms-based and Results-linked  
Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
12. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Ministry have launched a new scheme viz. 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) which aims for improving 
operational efficiencies and ensuring financial sustainability of the distribution 
sector. They further noted that the objectives of the scheme are to improve the 
quality, reliability and affordability of power supply to consumers through a 

6 
 
financially sustainable and operationally efficient distribution Sector, 
reduction in AT&C losses at pan -India levels of 12 -15% by 202 4-25, and 
reduction in ACS -ARR gap to zero by 2024 -25. They also note that these 
objectives are proposed to be met through financial assistance to DISCOMs for 
strengthening of supply infrastructure.  The Committee further note that the 
total outlay for the scheme is Rs. 3,03,758 crore including Gross Budgetary 
Support of Rs. 97,631 crore. The scheme duration is 5 years from 2021 -22 to 
2025-26. The Smart metering component alone has a share of Rs. 1,50,000 
crore. For the year 2022 -23, a provision of Rs. 7,565 .59 crore has been made 
for the scheme. The Committee find that the amount allocated for the new 
scheme is less than the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 8,900 crore for 2021 -
22 of the two scheme i.e. DDUGJY and IPDS which will be subsumed in it. The 
Committee also note that the as per the planning of the Expenditure Finance 
Committee, there had to be a budgetary allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore for this 
scheme for fiscal 2022 -23. The Committee appreciate this much needed 
initiative and believe that it is a step in the right direction in making the 
distribution sector financially sustainable. However, they also express their 
concern over the less allocation of funds for this important scheme and 
recommend that the Ministry should earnestly pursue for enhancem ent of the 
budgetary allocation for this scheme at RE stage and also for the next financial 
year.” 
 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) was launched by Ministry of 
Power, Governme nt of India in July’2021 with the objective of improving the 
quality and reliability of power supply to consumers through a financially 
sustainable and operationally efficient distribution Sector. The Scheme aims to 
reduce the AT&C losses to pan -India levels of 12 -15% and ACS -ARR gap to zero 
by 2024-25.  The duration of the scheme is 5 years from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025-
26. In FY 2021 -22, Ministry of Power has  released Rs. 277.03 crore to the REC 
and Rs. 536.975 crore to PFC for onward release to beneficiary Utilities under 
RDSS. REC and PFC both are the  Implementing Agencies of the RDSS scheme.In 
FY 2022-23, on the basis of discussion held , Ministry of Finance has allocated  Rs. 
7,565.59 crore for RDSS scheme.  In the first Quarter of FY 2022 -23, Ministry o f 
Power has released Rs. 948.74 crore under RDSS for onward release to 
beneficiary Utilities.  Ministry of Power is closely monitoring the progress of the 
scheme and utilization of allocated funds. The additional requirement of  funds, if 
felt necessary on  the basis of actual utilization up to 2nd Quarter of current FY 
2022-23 will be placed before the Ministry of Finance in the pre -budget 
meetings/ discussion  which is generally held in the month of October/ 
November every year.” 
 
 
14. Taking into account the significance of the  newly launched Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS ), the Committee had recommended an 
augmentation of the budgetary provisions  for it. The Committee understand that 
the additional requirement of funds, if felt necessary will b e placed, but they are 

7 
 
actually concerned to note that out of Rs. 7,565.59 crore allocated for the fiscal 
year, only Rs. 948.74 crore could be released in the first quarter. The Committee 
feel that at the current pace, even full utilization of the allocated funds is doubtful. 
The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to increase the pace of the 
implementation of the Scheme so that not only the allocated funds are fully 
utilized but the demand for additional funds can also be posted with proper 
justification well within time. 
 
 
State Designated Agencies (SDAs) 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Energy Conservation Act empowers the state 
government to facilitate and enforce the efficient use of energy through their 
respective State Designated Agencies (SDAs) in consultation with the Bureau 
of Energy Efficiency. The Committee further note that 36 states/UTs have 
nominated an SDA in their respecting State /UTs. These agencies differ from 
State to State with Renewable Energy Development Agency comprising 44%, 
Power Department comprising 22%, Electrical Inspectorate comprising 17%, 
Distribution Companies comprising 17% and stand -alone SDA comprising 
6%. Only two States – Kerala and Andhra Pradesh have established stand -
alone SDAs. 
The Committee are of the belief that the role of States in implementing 
energy efficiency measures and hence, meeting the Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) targets is crucial.  The Committee also observe that SDAs 
with the additional responsibilities are generally deprived of dedicated 
physical and fiscal resources for the implementation of Energy Conservation 
activities in the States. This dampens the pace and direction of Ener gy 
Conservation initiatives within the States. The Committee find that the States 
where stand -alone SDAs exist, are working more aggressively for the 
implementation of Energy Conservation programmes and are in a better 
position to perform the mandated func tions in comparison to States, where 
such designated agencies are not available. Moreover, the Committee also 
believe that an effective enforcement mechanism is imperative for the 
implementation of all regulatory schemes. The creation of stand -alone SDAs 
will also facilitate in smooth and effective institutionalization of 
structure/machinery responsible for effective enforcement of provisions of 
the Energy Conservation Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to persuade the remaining States to  have stand -alone SDAs. The 
Committee also expects the Ministry to provide all possible 
support/assistance to them in this regard.” 
 
 

8 
 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Earlier, BEE has taken up the matter at various platforms including written 
request to State Governments for establishing standalone SDA. In a review 
meeting held on 9th February 2022 under chairmanship of Hon'ble Union 
Minister of Power with Senior Officers of States/ UTs, the matter was again 
reiterated, and the Hon'ble Minister in his address again urged the senior officers 
of the State Governments / UT Administrations to establish BEE like 
organization within their State/UT. Further as per directions, the matter will be 
taken with all states/UTs (exc ept Andhra Pradesh and Kerala) requesting them 
to establish Standalone SDA in their State/UTs." 
 
17. From the reply by the Ministry, the Committee infer that they have not 
taken any fresh initiative to persuade States/UTs to establish stand alone St ate 
Designated Agencies (SDAs) in response to the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee while re-emphasizing the importance and benefits of 
having stand alone SDAs desire that in view of failure of persuasive efforts made 
by Bureau of Energy Effi ciency (BEE) and request made during re gular meetings, 
the Ministry should make reinvigorated efforts to persuade the concerned State 
Governments in this regard. They also expect the Ministry to provide details of 
those efforts and outcome thereof at the time of furnishing the Final Action Taken 
replies within three months. 
 
 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee find that NPTI – a National Apex Body for fulfilling the training 
and Human Resource Development requirements of the Power Sector in the 
country, has a poor track record of fund utilization. The actual utilization of 
funds by NPTI for the ye ars 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22(up to15.02.2022) have 
been 41.8%, 22.4% and 12% of the budgetary estimate respectively. Regarding 
the reasons for the under -utilization of funds, the Ministry have stated that the 
CAPEX requirements of NPTI are not huge. They have made a number of new 
centres but their revenue earning has come down partly because of COVID and 
partly because of the long -term aspect of their dropping the degree -course 
which they were doing without AICTE recognition. The demand from the CPSEs 
has come down because they have opened their own training institutions. 
Similarly, POSOCO will also conduct the training of the Load Dispatch Centres. 

9 
 
The Committee also note that for the year 2022 -23, there is an allocation of Rs. 
50 crore only which is 29% l ess than the previous year’s BE of Rs. 70 crore for 
NPTI. 
The Committee observe that there is a shortage of trained manpower, especially 
in the field of Cyber Security and the Smart Distribution Sector. The Committee 
also note that as per National Electric ity Plan (2017-22) – fora capacity addition 
of 1,76,140 MW in 2017 -22, the additional man power requirement would be 
more than 2,53,760 out of which 1,94,910 would be technical and 58,580 non -
technical. The Committee believe that the number would be much l arger in the 
latest assessment made under the upcoming National Electricity Plan (2022 -
27). The Committee observe that the training institutes in the country have 
multiplied in recent years. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view that 
there is still g reat scope for the expansion of NPTI as it has vast experience and 
expertise in its field. The Committee, however, feel that to remain relevant in the 
present scenario, NPTI needs to reinvent itself and augment their training 
infrastructure to cater to the  training needs of the Power Sector of the country 
which is dynamically changing with technology integration and energy 
transition path. The Committee, therefore, recommend that NPTI should get 
regular feedback from the power industry to know their rapidly  changing 
requirements. Since NPTI is a premier institute of the field, the Committee feel 
that NPTI should also coordinate with Power Sector Public Undertakings and 
organizations for formulation of courses and conduct oftraining programmes as 
per their re quirements. The Committee also expect that sincere efforts will be 
made to fully utilize the funds allocated to NPTI for the year 2022 -23 and if 
needed raise the demand of more funds at RE stage.” 
 
 
19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“NPTI has been mainly involved in catering the training needs of Thermal and 
Hydro Sector besides distribution and transmission sector. Now the focus of the 
Power Sector is in the area of New & Renewable Energy/Alternative Sources of 
Energy. The number of Training Institutes has also multiplied in recent years. 
NPTI has to compete with a number of Training Institutes in Public and Private 
sector resulted in tough competition in getting new trainees. Due to outbreak of 
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 -21, the physical/offline training at the institutes 
has also become difficult. Consequently, the demand of training in the 
conventional Sector has decreased. 
However, an Advisory Body has been constituted at each Institute of NPTI which 
comprises of stake holders from the catchment area and each Institute is 
preparing their Training calendar in consultation with the Advisory Body.  
A lot of skill building of the DISCOMS staff in the area of smart grid and cyber 
security is needed. NPTI is now focusing on ca pacity building of the distribution 
utilities. Ministry of Power is funding the NPTI training courses from Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme. There are two other areas in which Training is 
provided by NPTI. For Energy Conservation schemes, Bureau of Ener gy 
Efficiency (BEE) sponsors candidates for training through NPTI. Similarly, 
POSOCO  sponsor candidates for training in the area of load dispatch centers 
through NPTI. 

10 
 
NPTI has also been given a mandate for Training & Certification in the area of 
Cyber Security and Training & Certification of Load Despatch Personnel. It has 
also been decided that a mandatory induction training programme will be 
conducted at NPTI for the fresh recruits of all CPSEs under Ministry of Power. 
NPTI is also planning to start its  flagship MBA (Power Management) 
programme. 
The CAPEX requirements of NPTI are not huge. NPTI has made a number of new 
centres, but their revenue earning has come down. Ministry of Power is 
considering the proposal of NPTI for grant of additional amount in  order to 
bring the Pension Fund at par within next 2 years, i.e. by FY 2023 -24. This 
would ensure that the future pension liabilities are manageable and 
Government would not be required to provide significant amounts every year as 
being done currently. Ra tionalization of capital expenditure may also be 
considered for managing the expenditure within the overall budget. NPTI will 
utilize its Budget allocation of Rs.50 crores in the FY 2022 -23 and more funds 
will also be provided at the RE stage, if required.”  
 
 
20. The Committee are elated to note that a mandatory induction training 
programme will be conducted at NPTI for the fresh recruits of all C entral Public 
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under  the Ministry of Power. Also, NPTI is planning to 
start its flagship MBA (Power Management) programme. The Ministry have also 
stated that the CAPEX re quirements of NPTI are not huge but t hey have assured 
that NPTI will utilize its Budget allocation of Rs. 50 crores in FY 2022 -23 through 
rationalization of capital expenditure and more funds will also be provided at the 
RE stage, if required. Notwithstanding, the Committee  desire that paucity or 
underutilization of funds should not be a reason for the lack of  training 
infrastructure in NPTI and trained manpower required for the Power Sector of 
the country. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
Budgetary Allocation 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power sought outlay of Rs. 23,949.99 crore, 
Budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Power for the Financial Year 2022 -23 has been 
made as Rs. 16,074.74 crore which is 4.9% more than the previous year’s allocation. For 
the year 2021 -22, the Ministry had posted a demand of Rs. 30,155.40 crore which they 
got only Rs. 15,322 crore. Also, for the year 2020 -21, against their demand of Rs. 
33,366.75 crore, only Rs. 15,874.82 crore has been allocated. Thus during all these years 
the Ministry of Power have been allocated half or even less of their demand projections. 
The Committee, however, are happy to note that the performance of the Ministry in 
regard to utilization of the allocated funds have been exemplary as they could utilize 
100.7%, 103.5% and 96.5% of their Budgetary Estimates for the year 2017-18, 2018-19, 
2019-20 respectively. In the year 2020 -21, the Ministry could utilize only 66.7% of the 
allocated fund due to COVID -19 pandemic. For fiscal 2021 -22, the Ministry have 
reported that up to 15th February, 2022, they have utilized 72.8% of the Budgetary 
allocation and are hopeful to exceed the target by the end of this financial year. 
Considering the performance of the Ministry, the Committee are a bit surprised over the 
less demand posted by the Ministry themselves for 2022 -23 than the previous year’s. 
The Committee was expecting a significant rise in the demand for the year 2022 -23 on 
the basis of a good track record of their financial performance. Apart from that the 
Ministry have also in tiated a major scheme namely  Revamped Reforms -based and 
Results-linked, Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) for that a significant budgetary 
provision is required. 
The Committee are aware that a major task of village electrification and electricity 
connections to households has been accomplished by the Ministry. Nonetheless, there 
are several challenges for the power sector, particularly in the Distribution Sector that 
merits the attention of the Government. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry 
should not become complacent and keep on striving for the betterment of the power 
sector by accelerating further the pace of implementation of various important 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, desire that instead of curtailing/ rationalizing 
the requir ement of funds based on their actual financial performance as well as 
functional requirements. The Committee specifically recommend that the Ministry 
should try to fully utilize the funds allocated at the BE stage of 2022 -23 in a time bound 
manner so that additional demands can be posted at the time of supplementary 
Demands for Grants.    
 
 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power express its sincere thanks to the Hon’ble  committee for considering  
the submission regarding  utilization of funds against the BE/RE allocation in the last 
three years i.e FY 2017 -18, FY 2018-19 and FY 2019-20.  Again, the MOP would   like to 
express its gratitude to the Hon’ble Committee for the recommendation made for 
enhancement of budget allocation for Power sector . The r ecommendation made by the 
Hon’ble Committee will be placed before the Ministry of Finance at the time of Pre -
Budget Discussion for finalization of Revised Estimates (2022-23) and Budget Estimates 
(2023-24). 
 
It is submitted for kind  information of the Hon ’ble Committee that two schemes 
namely, Deen Dayal Upadhayay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and Integrated Power 
Development Scheme(IPDS)  stands closed on 31.03.2022 and a new scheme namely  
Revamped – Results linked Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) has been  launched by 
the Ministry of Power in July’2021 with the objective of improving the quality and 
reliability of power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and 
operationally efficient distribution Sector. 
For  IPDS scheme , budget provision of Rs of Rs.3574.12 was made in RE ( 2021 -22) . 
However, keeping in view the sunset date of the scheme i.e. 31.03.2022 and actual 
financial and physical performance, Ministry of Power made a request to the Ministry of 
Finance for  additional funds to the t une of Rs.1267.54 crore in 3rd and final batch of 
supplementary. The request of the Ministry of Power for additional allocation was 
agreed by the Ministry of Finance. Against the total budget allocation of Rs. 4899.70 
crore for IPDS scheme, expenditure inc urred was Rs. 4721.48 crore.  Similarly, for Deen 
Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), funds allocated in Revised Estimate (RE) 
– 2021-22  was  at  Rs. 4720 crore, out of which expenditure incurred was Rs. 4655.23 
crore.   
Ministry of Power monitored/ reviewed the implementation of Schemes on regular 
basis and has been able to utilize Rs. 17950.95 crore , out of total budget allocation of  
Rs.18416.26 crore in RE (2021-22), which is  117.16% of BE ( Rs. 15322 crore) and 
97.47% of RE ( 18416.26 crore).  In FY 2022-23, total budget allocation is Rs. 16074.74 
crore  and Ministry of Power  is taking all efforts to utilize the entire allocation, and if 
need felt, additional demand will be placed before the Ministry of Finance in RE (2022-
23). 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
  

13 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  2) 
 
The Committee note that the expenditure for Qtr.1, Qtr.2, Qtr.3 and Qtr.4 (up to 
15.02.2021)for the year 2021-22 have been 11.28%, 18.21%,24.10% and 19.17 %of the 
budgetary allocation respectively. Thus, the cumulative spending so far stands at 72.8% 
of the BE. The Ministry have also raised an additional demands of around Rs. 400 crore 
for this supplementary. The Committee find that to fully utilize the budgetary al location 
for the year, the Ministry need to further spend 27.2% of the BE plus Rs. 400 crore 
during  the remaining time period of the current fiscal i.e. one and half month. In that 
scenario, the total spending in the Qtr.4 would stand at around 50% of the  total 
allocation. Thus, in view of the Committee, such erratic quarterly expenditure 
performance is undesirable. The Ministry have assigned COVID -19 as the reason for 
such lopsided spending. The Committee do understand that the pandemic had slowed 
down th e implementation of various schemes of the Ministry. The Committee, 
nonetheless, would like to recommend that sincere efforts be made by the Ministry to 
fully utilize the allocated funds during the current fiscal. The Committee also desire that 
utmost effort be made in future to ensure that the funds are evenly utilized during each 
quarter as per the norms prescribed by the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Ministry of Power would like to submit  that two  flagships schemes namely DDUGJY & 
IPDS which bear a major part of the budget estimates for the FY 2021 -22 were around 
completion and bills were awaited from a number of DISCOMs and Implementing 
Agencies . This was the reason for low expenditure of 72.8% against BE as the bills were 
pending which were received in last Quarter of FY 2021 -22. The Ministry would further 
like to inform that after allocation  of  funds in the third supplementary projected to 
clear the pending claims under DDUGJY and IPDS, the total budget allocation for the 
Ministry was Rs. 18416.26 crore and accordingly Ministry of Power was able to utilize  
Rs. 17950.95 crore which is 97.47% of total allocation in RE 2021 -22, ie  after third 
supplementary grant for the FY 2021 -22 and 117.16% of BE ie. Rs 15322.00 crore for 
FY 2021-22.  
 
Lastly, the Ministry takes note of the recommendation that sincere efforts will be made 
in future to ensure evenly funds utilization in future. 
Ministry of Power h as been monitoring the utilization of funds on regular basis in the 
Scheme Monitoring Committee Meeting/Senior Officers Meeting. 
 
It is submitted for kind information of  Hon’ble Committee that two major schemes 
namely, DDUGJY and IPDS had provisions of  R s. 8900  crore which is  58% of total 
funds allocated (Rs. 15322) in BE (2021 -22). These two Schemes were set to close on 
31.03.2022. Due to COVID -19 effect and delay in submission of financial closure report 
by the Distribution Companies (DISCOMS), the ex penditure in first two Quarters of FY 
2021-22 was not up to level desired as per Quarterly Targets. In the Third Quarter of FY 
2021-22, budget utilization was 25% of total BE. Since the closure proposals in respect 
of DDUGJY and IPDS Schemes were received in last Quarter of FY 2021 -22, the Ministry 
of Power examined all proposals in fast track mode and released funds against all the 
proposals  which were in order. Finally, Ministry of Power was able to utilize Rs. 

14 
 
17950.50 crore against total Budget Allocat ion of Rs. 18416.16 crore in RE 2021 -22, 
including budget provided in Third and Final Batch of Supplementary, which is 
117.16% of BE 2021-22 (Rs.15322 Crore). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram JyotiYojana (DDUGJY) 
 
The Committee are aware that fiscal 2021-22 is the sunset year for DDUGJY scheme thus 
no funds under the scheme has been allocated for the year 2022 -23. The Committee 
note that against the budgetary allocation of Rs.3,600 crore for the year 2021-22 only Rs 
2,321.71 crore have been utilized till 31.01.2022. The Committee also note that under 
the 'Rural Electrification' component of DDUGJY scheme all the inhabited census villages 
across the country stand electrified on 28.04.2018. The Committee further note t hat 
apart from 'Rural Electrification' there are two other components of DDUGJY i.e. 
Separation of agriculture and non -agriculture feeders, and Strengthening and 
Augmentation of Sub Transmission & Distribution infrastructure in rural areas, 
including meter ing of Distribution Transformers/feeders/consumers. The Committee 
find that overall progress under the scheme in the country is 99%. The Committee is 
appreciative of the massive work undertaken under the DDUGJY scheme and that too in 
a time-bound manner. T hey believe that the work done under the scheme will not only 
provide an impetus for the economic and social up lift men of a large population but also 
increase the electricity demand and its per capita consumption in the country. Though 
the States have su bmitted that all the villages have been electrified and electricity 
connections to all households have been provided, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry through the nodal agency of this scheme carry out an audit to ascertain that no 
willing household of any village/hamlet is left un-electrified.  
The Committee also recommend that all -out efforts be made to complete the remaining 
work under the DDUGJY scheme in the current fiscal itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India is committed to achieve universal household electrification in 
the country. To this end, the Saubhagya Scheme was implemented to achieve saturation 
in household electrification. Funds were released to State Governments/DISCOMs/PIAs 
through the nodal agency, based on proposals submitted by State Governments 
concerned. Under Saubhagya scheme, all the States had confirmed completion of 
households electrification by 31.03.2019 after electrifying 2.62 crore households (HHs). 
Thereafter, b ased on the request of States, GoI allowed funding for electrification of 
another ~19 lakh HHs that were unwilling earlier but expressed willingness to be 
electrified later. As reported by the States, 2.81 crore households were electrified since 
the launch  of Saubhagya,  as on  31.03.2021. Based on requests of States yet again, 
funding for electrification of another set of 11.84 lakh HHs were sanctioned under 
DDUGJY during 2021-22 with the condition of completion of these works by 15.3.2022. 
In total, 2.86 crore households have been electrified under Saubhagya and DDUGJY.  

15 
 
The above clearly indicates that Government of India is committed to electrify all HHs in 
the country. The State Governments have also submitted reports indicating universal 
household electrification coverage under the scheme. It is understood that presently no 
willing household has been left un -electrified under the aforesaid schemes. The 
Government of India has worked closely with various State Governments to achieve this 
objective compre hensively in a time bound manner. Arising of new households is a 
continuous process, and their electrification is the responsibility of the respective States 
and their Utilities. Therefore, at any point in time, some households or the other would 
be in the  stage of process of obtaining connections, which shall get reflected in any 
survey. The Ministry of Power has dwelt upon the issue in detail and has in light of 
closure of DDUGJY and Saubhagya Schemes w.e.f 31.03.2022, informed all the States 
that the Gov ernment stands committed to electrifying all willing households identified 
before Saubhagya, for which they can pose DPRs to this Ministry for electrification 
under RDSS. This measure has not only remediated the issue of willing households that 
were unwilling earlier but now willing to obtain electricity connections, but also ensure 
that the States and their utilities take up ownership for the continuing connections. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) 
The Committee note that the Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) was 
launched in 2014 to extend financial assistance against capital expenditure for 
addressing the gaps in sub-transmission & distribution networks and metering in urban 
areas to supplement the resources of DISCOMS/Power Departments. The Committee 
also observe that one of the main objec tives of the scheme is to reduce the AT&C losses 
in the country to the level of 15%. The Committee are also aware that the Government 
had initiated Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) with a 
similar objective as early as the year 20 00-01. The Scheme was revised in 2008 as 
Restructure-Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (R -APDRP). The 
Committee further note that the level of AT&C losses which was 23.7% in the year 2015-
16 reduced to 20.93 % in 2019-20. However, it is still way below the target level of 15% 
considering the low levels of AT&C losses in the developed countries, the committee 
have been of the view that even the target of 15%, is too moderate. The very fact that 
the monetary value of the AT&C losses across t he country is to the tune of Rs. 1,22,000 
Crore which speaks volumes about this problem. The scrutiny of the committee has 
revealed that the five states of the country, AT&C losses range as high as 40% to 60% 
though the overall losses have decreased since 2015-16. 
In regard to the Physical progress of IPDS, the committee note that out of the 547 circle 
sanctioned, system strengthening works in 544 circles have been completed. The 
committee do understand that reducing the level of AT&C losses is a challengin g work 

16 
 
considering the fact that the power distribution is a State matter. Since 2021 -22 is the 
sunset year for IPDS, the Committee feel that there is a need for a fair and transparent 
study to assess the overall impact of this scheme on the distribution s ystem and to find 
out  the reasons as to why the efforts of the Central Government have not yielded the 
desired results in the reduction of AT&C losses for that reinvestigated efforts be made in 
future, moreover, in most of the circles, the Supervisory Con trol and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) system is now in place, it would now be easier to pinpoint the problematic 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should do the data/ 
system analysis and put the report of such exercise in the public domain also.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The sunset year for IPDS was FY 2021 -22. Accordingly, the projects under IPDS scheme 
have been declared completed by the State DISCOMs as on  March 2022. As per IPDS 
Guidelines, Ministry of Power and  Power Finance Corporation(PFC) ( Nodal Agency) 
are in the process of appointing Independent Third -party Agencies for studying the 
impact of IPDS projects implementation from the perspective of Utility, Customer and 
Society. The evaluation parameters shall broadly cover analysis of system and data 
related to AT&C loss, quality & reliability of power supply, consumer convenience, 
socio-economic impact etc. Two Impact Assessment Studies have been conducted in 
2016-17 and 2018-19 for R-APDRP component subsumed under IPDS. 
Further, keeping in mind the objective of improving the quality and reliability of power 
supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and operationally efficient 
distribution Sector, Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) has been launched by 
Ministry of Power, Government of India in July’2021. The Scheme aims to reduce the 
AT&C losses to pan -India levels of 12 -15% and ACS -ARR gap to zero by 2024 -25.To 
avail funding under loss reduction and modernization works under RDSS, an eligible 
DISCOM is required to prepare an Action plan for strengthening its distribution system 
and improving its performance by way of various reform measures, which would result 
in improvement in operational efficiency and financial viability as well as improvement 
in the qu ality and reliability of power supply to the consumers. RDSS envisage the 
unique approach of conditional financial assistance to DISCOMs contingent to undertake 
reforms as per agreed action plan.   The fund flow from the scheme will be subject to 
their adhering to the loss reduction and other trajectories. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
Revamped Reforms-based and Results-linked Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) 
The Committee note that the Ministry have launched a new scheme viz. Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) which aims for improving operational efficiencies 
and ensuring financial sustainability of the distribution sector. They further noted that 
the objectives of the scheme are to improve the quality, reliability and affordability of 
power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and operationally efficient 

17 
 
distribution Sector, reduction in AT&C losses at pan -India levels of 12-15% by 2024-25, 
and reduction in ACS -ARR gap to zero by 2024 -25. They also note that these objectives 
are proposed to be met through financial assistance to DISCOMs for strengthening of 
supply infrastructure. 
The Committee further note that the total outlay for the scheme is Rs. 3,03,758 crore 
including Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 97,631 crore. The scheme duration is 5 years 
from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26. The Smart metering component alone has a share of Rs. 
1,50,000 crore. For the year 2022 -23, a provision of Rs. 7,565.59 crore has been made 
for the scheme. The Committee find that the amount allocated for the new scheme is 
less than the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 8,900 crore for 2021-22 of the two scheme 
i.e. DDUGJY and IPDS which will be subsumed in it. The Committee also note that the as 
per the planning of the Expenditure Finance Committee, there had to be a budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore for this scheme for fiscal 2022 -23. The Committee 
appreciate this much needed initiative and believe that it is a step in the right direction 
in making the distribution sector financially sustainable. However, they also express 
their concern over the less allocation of funds for this important scheme and 
recommend t hat the Ministry should earnestly pursue for enhancement of the 
budgetary allocation for this scheme at RE stage and also for the next financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) was launched by Ministry of Power, 
Government of India in July’2021 with the objective of improving the quality and 
reliability of power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and 
operationally efficient distribution Sector. The Scheme aims to reduce the AT&C losses 
to pan-India levels of 12-15% and ACS-ARR gap to zero by 2024-25.  The duration of the 
scheme is 5 years from FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26.  
In FY 2021 -22, Ministry of Power has  released Rs. 277.03 crore to the REC   and Rs. 
536.975 crore to PFC for onward release to beneficiary Utilities under RDSS. REC and 
PFC both  are the  Implementing Agencies of the RDSS scheme. 
 In  FY 2022 -23, on the basis of discussion held , Ministry of Finance has allocated  Rs. 
7,565.59 crore for RDSS scheme.  In the first Quarter of FY 2022 -23, Ministry of Power 
has released Rs. 948.74 crore under RDSS for onward release to beneficiary Utilities.  
Ministry of Power is closely monitoring the progress of the scheme and utilization of 
allocated funds. The additional requirement of  funds, if felt necessary on the basis of 
actual utilization up to 2 nd Quarter of current FY 2022 -23 will be placed before the 
Ministry of Finance in the pre -budget meetings/ discussion  which is generally held in 
the month of October/ November every year.  
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (No. 6   Para) 
 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
The Committee note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) is the nodal central 
statutory body to assist the Government in implementing the provisions all the 
Electricity Conservation Act. The Committee also note that the past performance of BEE 
in terms of fund utilization has been extremely poor. In 2020 -21, BEE could utilise only 
Rs. 61 crores against the budgetary estimate of Rs. 213 crores. In 2021 -22, they have 
utilized only rupees 61 crores which is a meagre 31% of the bu dgetary estimate of Rs. 
197 crores. The Committee further note that due to energy efficiency 
scheme/programmes there have been electrical energy saving of 159.24 Billion Units, 
worth Rs. 95,554 crore and resulted in reduction of 130 Million Tonne of CO2 emissions. 
Also, therewere thermal energy savings 15.59 Million Tonnes of oil Equivalent, worth 
Rs. 28,683 crore and resulted in the reduction of 58.675 Million tonne of CO2 emission. 
There was a total energy savings of 29.28 Million Tonnes of oil Equivalent  i.e. 3.15% of 
the total primary energy supply of the country. Considering the quantum of benefits 
derived from the energy efficiency scheme, the Committee may not accept the under -
utilization of funds by BEE. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since re efforts 
be made to ensure that the funds allocated to BEE are fully utilized to achieve the targets 
of energy efficiency scheme/programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Projects pertaining to Energy conservation / Energy efficiency activities are being 
monitored by the Ministry of Power   on regular basis. All efforts are being made by BEE 
to utilize full budget allocation. Against the revised allocation of Rs. 157.82 cr ore for the 
financial year 2021 -22, BEE has utilized Rs. 155.82 crore. Additionally, BEE also 
undertake activities which are not dependent on funds but are contributing for energy 
conservation in the country.  
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Road Map of sustainable and Holistic Approach to National Energy Efficiency 
(ROSHANEE) 
The Committee note that then National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
(NMEEE) has been revised to the Road Map of Sustainable and Holistic Approach to 
National Energy Efficiency (ROSHANEE). ROSHANEE has a broader vision and takes into 
account all the  potential areas of energy efficiency in each sector, covering the macro 
level in policy and further delineating the respective schemes. The committee have been 
apprised that ROSHANEE will help in the consolidation of all activities and their 
consequent co ntribution towards meeting the Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) goals. The activities proposed to be undertaken under ROSHANEE are estimated 
to lead to a savings of 887 million tonnes of CO2 by 2030. The estimated expenditure for 

19 
 
the implementation of activities under ROSHANEE is Rs. 10,370.37 Crores. Considering 
the compelling need for reduction of greenhouse gases and the mammoth potentials of 
monetary savings from energy efficiency, the Committee recommended that the scheme 
shall be expeditiously  implemented on priority basis so as to achieve Nationally 
Determined Contribution goals in time bound manner. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The mission forwarded to MoEFCC and has been approved in principle by Prime 
Minister’s executive committee on climate change in its 8th meeting held on 1st 
September 2021. 
The objective of Mission ROSHANEE (Roadmap of Sustainable and Holistic Approach to 
National Energy Efficiency) is to include all the current and potential areas of energy 
efficiency in each sector there by contributing towards India’s climate actions under the 
Paris agreement. The new mission includes all the existing activities of BEE as well as 
new activities which have been identified and some yet to be explored in a much more 
focussed way. For instance, expanding the scope of demand side management programs 
to cover the entire range of industry i.e. from large to small, agriculture to 
municipalities, commercial buildings to households towards a nationally aspired goal of 
energy efficiency support by dedicated eco-system such as technology and finance. 
The activities under the ROSHANEE mission are linked to various Ministries / 
Departments for implementation. Thus, in order to ensure timely implementation of 
various initiatives on energy efficiency with due focus on sectors with high emissions 
intensity, an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) has been constituted. The first meeting 
of the Inter Ministerial Committee for Implementation of roadmap on energy efficiency 
with due focus on sectors with high emissions intensity was held on 14th September 
2021 and second meeting held on 31st January 2022.  
Furthermore, in order to achieve the ambitious targets of India’s NDCs, implementation 
of activities under ROSHANEE is critical. In order to implement activities for reduction 
in emission intensity, identification of sectors and their respective targets to  be 
achieved by 2030 has been done by BEE. The main sectors which will contribute in this 
regard are Industry, Transport and Buildings. Of the estimated emission reduction of 
890 MtCo2 to achieve 45% from 2005 level, these three sectors share over 90%.  
The various initiatives on energy efficiency with due focus in sectors with high emission 
intensity are to be implemented by various Ministries/Departments. Therefore, there is 
need for coordination among the various actors so that the stated objective under  the 
climate commitments are realized. 
To initiate the various sectoral activities under the ROSHANEE, continuation of NMEEE 
upto the year 2025 -26 at an outlay of Rs. 167.00 Crore has been approved by the 
competent authority. Further, EFC has recommended t he proposal for Rs. 600.00 Crore 
to continue scheme of “Promoting Energy Efficiency Activities in Different Sectors of 
Indian Economy”, the approval of the competent authority on this proposal based on 
EFC recommendations is being obtained. 

20 
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
State Designated Agencies (SDAs) 
The Committee note that the Energy Conservation Act empowers the state government 
to facilitate and enforce the efficient use of energy through their respective State 
Designated Agencies (SDAs) in consultation with the Bureau of Energy Efficiency. The 
Committee further note that 36 states/UTs have nominated an SDA in their respecting 
State/UTs. These agencies differ from State to State wit h Renewable Energy 
Development Agency comprising 44%, Power Department comprising 22%, Electrical 
Inspectorate comprising 17%, Distribution Companies comprising 17% and stand -alone 
SDA comprising 6%. Only two States – Kerala and Andhra Pradesh have establi shed 
stand-alone SDAs. 
The Committee are of the belief that the role of States in implementing energy 
efficiency measures and hence, meeting the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 
targets is crucial. The Committee also observe that SDAs with the addi tional 
responsibilities are generally deprived of dedicated physical and fiscal resources for the 
implementation of Energy Conservation activities in the States. This dampens the pace 
and direction of Energy Conservation initiatives within the States. The Committee find 
that the States where stand -alone SDAs exist, are working more aggressively for the 
implementation of Energy Conservation programmes and are in a better position to 
perform the mandated functions in comparison to States, where such designate d 
agencies are not available. Moreover, the Committee also believe that an effective 
enforcement mechanism is imperative for the implementation of all regulatory schemes. 
The creation of stand -alone SDAs will also facilitate in smooth and effective 
institutionalization of structure/machinery responsible for effective enforcement of 
provisions of the Energy Conservation Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to persuade the remaining States to have stand -alone SDAs. The Committee 
also expects the Ministry to provide all possible support/assistance to them in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, BEE has taken up the matter at various platforms including written request to 
State Governments for establishing standalone SDA. In a review meeting held on 9th 
February 2022 under chairmanship of Hon'ble Union Minister of Power with Senior 
Officers of States/ UTs, the matter was again reiterated, and the Hon'ble Minister in his 
address again urged the senior officers of the State Governments /  UT Administrations 
to establish BEE like organization within their State/UT.  
 
Further as per directions, the matter will be taken with all states/UTs (except Andhra 
Pradesh and Kerala) requesting them to establish Standalone SDA in their State/UTs. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

21 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9) 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) 
 
The Committee observe that the past p erformance of the Central Power Research 
Institute (CPRI) in regard to utilization of the allocated fund has not been satisfactory. In 
2020-21, CPRI could utilize only 40% of the BE of Rs. 2000.00 Crore. In 2021 -22, CPRI 
have utilized only Rs.110 crore aga inst the BE of Rs.180.00 crore. The Committee in 
their previous reports have been emphasizing the need and importance to augment the 
base of Research and Development in the country by enhancing the budgetary 
provisions for this purpose and the Ministry hav e increased the budgetary estimation 
for CPRI by 68% for 2022 -23 from their previous year's BE making it Rs. 302.70 crore. 
The Committee are of the opinion that R&D is of prime importance for a sector to thrive. 
As innovations are coming up across the glob e at a faster pace, research activities 
especially in the Power Sector is required not only to ensure that the nation is not 
lagging in the know-how but also to provide an opportunity for our Nation to take a lead 
role in Technology Innovations across the world. However, the Committee find it 
astonishing that despite the compelling need for technological innovation and up -
gradation, the premier research institute of the Power Sector is not able to fully utilize 
the allocated funds. In view of this, the Comm ittee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Power in consultation with CPRI and other agencies concerned should 
prepare a Road -Map to augment the R&D activities at a large scale so that we can 
develop indigenous solutions for our peculiar problems and fu lfill our changing needs. 
The Committee also desire that the development of the latest technologies such as 
Advanced Battery Storage System, Green Hydrogen, Efficient Solar Panel, Internet of 
Things (Ion Smart Meter, Data Analytics, Cyber Security, Nano -Materials etc. should be 
on the top priority list. If needed, there should also be collaborations with advanced 
countries in these fields. The committee expect that with the augmentation of their base 
and activities, CPRI would be able to fully utilize the allocated funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The budge requirement for a financial year   is calculated by taking into consideration 
the annual action plan including procurement that can be completed during the year like  
tenders floated, tenders to be floated, L C to be established, balance payment for 
equipment which are successfully installed & commissioned  and delivery of equipment. 
Sincere efforts are made to utilize the funds in the respective financial year. However, 
due to reasons stated below the allocated funds for the FY 2020 -21, could not be utilized 
in full. 
 
a. The equipment identified for the projec ts had been Scientific in nature. These 
equipment are custom built and specialized in nature and hence only few 
manufacturers are available across the globe. The Global Tender can be floated 
only after completing the domestic tendering process and after ta king necessary 
approvals from Ministry of Power in accordance with the Guidelines of Dept of 
Expenditure. 

22 
 
b. The quantity of work involved in post tendering activities are huge as there are 
many critical technical parameters, which are to be evaluated for compliance.   
 
c. The Civil work for this project requires specialized foundation and structures to 
house the eq uipment identified. Tendering process of the equipment has to be 
planned to synchronize with the completion of civil work for supply, Installation 
& Commissioning of equipment.  
However, taking all the above in consideration, corrective measures have been taken and 
during the FY 2021-22 the entire allocated amount of Rs.120.00 Cr spent. 
For the current FY 2022 -23, the BE is Rs.302.77 crore to meet the expenditure on the 
newly project  titled “Augmentation of existing test facilities and Establishment of new  
test facilities at various centers of CPRI”, with an outlay of Rs.213.40 crore and other 
ongoing Capital Projects and activities under R&D Scheme. 
Milestones have been prepared to closely monitor and to ensure timely completion of 
project activities, enabling CPRI to utilize 100% of the funds allotted. 
The Road Map was prepared covering the Augmentation of existing test facilities, 
Establishment of new test facilities, R&D projects covering latest technologies like Cyber 
Security and IoT (Internet of Things) etc. 
Under “Research and development (R&D) scheme of MoP being implemented through 
CPRI”, research projects in the areas of Cyber Security, energy storage, efficient solar 
panel, data analytics, green hydrogen, nano -materials have been supported to come  up 
with proof-of-concepts for various applications in Power Sector such as: 
 Real time detection and mitigation of cyber attacks 
 Use of Artificial intelligence for detection of cyber threats 
 Super-capacitor based energy storage for micro-grids 
 High Energy Density Composite Materials for Fast Charging Lithium Ion Battery 
 New generation Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA) nano -composites with high UV 
shielding properties for Photovoltaic Modules 
 Nano-composites for the Enhancement of efficiency of Solar Cells, devel opment 
of flame retardant cable, capacitor 
 Detection of Power System Ambient, Transient and Forced Oscillations Based on 
Synchrophasor Data Analytics in Indian Context 
 Development of novel electro catalysts for hydrogen production through 
electrolysis 
CPRI has also instituted chair at IISc, Bangalore to communicate and network with the 
eminent researchers across the globe in the area of Power Systems and draw research 
synergies on new technologies.  
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
 
The Committee find that NPTI – a National Apex Body for fulfilling the training and 
Human Resource Development requirements of the Power Sector in the country, has a 
poor track record of fund utilization. The actual utilization of funds by NPTI for the 
years 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22(up to15.02.2022) have been 41.8%, 22.4% and 12% 

23 
 
of the budgetary estimate respectively. Regarding the reasons for the under -utilization 
of funds, the Ministry have stated that the CAPEX requirements of NPTI are not huge. 
They h ave made a number of new centres but their revenue earning has come down 
partly because of COVID and partly because of the long -term aspect of their dropping 
the degree-course which they were doing without AICTE recognition. The demand from 
the CPSEs has c ome down because they have opened their own training institutions. 
Similarly, POSOCO will also conduct the training of the Load Dispatch Centres. The 
Committee also note that for the year 2022-23, there is an allocation of Rs. 50 crore only 
which is 29% less than the previous year’s BE of Rs. 70 crore for NPTI. 
 
The Committee observe that there is a shortage of trained manpower, especially in the 
field of Cyber Security and the Smart Distribution Sector. The Committee also note that 
as per National Electric ity Plan (2017 -22) – fora capacity addition of 1,76,140 MW in 
2017-22, the additional man power requirement would be more than 2,53,760 out of 
which 1,94,910 would be technical and 58,580 non -technical. The Committee believe 
that the number would be much l arger in the latest assessment made under the 
upcoming National Electricity Plan (2022 -27). The Committee observe that the training 
institutes in the country have multiplied in recent years. Nevertheless, the Committee 
are of the view that there is still g reat scope for the expansion of NPTI as it has vast 
experience and expertise in its field. The Committee, however, feel that to remain 
relevant in the present scenario, NPTI needs to reinvent itself and augment their 
training infrastructure to cater to the  training needs of the Power Sector of the country 
which is dynamically changing with technology integration and energy transition path. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that NPTI should get regular feedback from the 
power industry to know their rapidly  changing requirements. Since NPTI is a premier 
institute of the field, the Committee feel that NPTI should also coordinate with Power 
Sector Public Undertakings and organizations for formulation of courses and conduct 
oftraining programmes as per their re quirements. The Committee also expect that 
sincere efforts will be made to fully utilize the funds allocated to NPTI for the year 2022-
23 and if needed raise the demand of more funds at RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
NPTI has been mainly involved in ca tering the training needs of Thermal and Hydro 
Sector besides distribution and transmission sector. Now the focus of the Power Sector 
is in the area of New & Renewable Energy/Alternative Sources of Energy. The number 
of Training Institutes has also multipl ied in recent years. NPTI has to compete with a 
number of Training Institutes in Public and Private sector resulted in tough competition 
in getting new trainees. Due to outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic in 2020 -21, the 
physical/offline training at the institut es has also become difficult. Consequently, the 
demand of training in the conventional Sector has decreased. 
 
However, an Advisory Body has been constituted at each Institute of NPTI which 
comprises of stakeholders from the catchment area and each Institut e is preparing their 
Training calendar in consultation with the Advisory Body.  
 
A lot of skill building of the DISCOMS staff in the area of smart grid and cyber security is 
needed. NPTI is now focusing on capacity building of the distribution utilities. M inistry 

24 
 
of Power is funding the NPTI training courses from Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme. There are two other areas in which Training is provided by NPTI. For Energy 
Conservation schemes, Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) sponsors candidates for 
training through NPTI. Similarly, POSOCO  sponsor candidates for training in the area of 
load dispatch centers through NPTI. 
 
NPTI has also been given a mandate for Training & Certification in the area of Cyber 
Security and Training & Certification of Load Des patch Personnel. It has also been 
decided that a mandatory induction training programme will be conducted at NPTI for 
the fresh recruits of all CPSEs under Ministry of Power. NPTI is also planning to start its 
flagship MBA (Power Management) programme. 
 
The CAPEX requirements of NPTI are not huge. NPTI has made a number of new 
centres, but their revenue earning has come down. Ministry of Power is considering the 
proposal of NPTI for grant of additional amount in order to bring the Pension Fund at 
par within next 2 years, i.e. by FY 2023 -24. This would ensure that the future pension 
liabilities are manageable and Government would not be required to provide significant 
amounts every year as being done currently. Rationalization of capital expenditure may 
also be considered for managing the expenditure within the overall budget. NPTI will 
utilize its Budget allocation of Rs.50 crores in the FY 2022 -23 and more funds will also 
be provided at the RE stage, if required.  
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
Strengthening of Power Systems 
The Committee are happy to note that for the ‘Comprehensive Scheme for Stregthening 
of Transmission and Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim’ a budgetary 
estimation of Rs. 1,700 crore has been made which is 2873% more than the previous 
year’s estimation. The Committee also note that the fund of Rs. 600 crore estimated for 
the scheme for fiscal 2021 -22 has been fully utilized. The Committee observe that the 
scheme aims at Strengthening the Intra -state Transmission & Distribution 
Infrastructure in Arunachal and Sikkim and creating reliable State Power grids to 
improve North-Eastern States’ connectivity to the upcoming load centres and extend the 
benefitys of the grid -connected power to all categories of consumers. The Committee, 
therefore, appre ciate the Government for the significant increase in fund allocation to 
expedite such an important project. They also desire that every effort should be made to 
fully utilize the enhanced budgetary provision during the current Financial Year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power is closely monitoring the implementation of  both the schemes 
namely  Comprehensive Scheme for Stregthening of Transmission and Distribution 

25 
 
System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim  and the North Eastern Region Power System 
Improvement Programme ( NERPSIP) ( excluding Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim).  In 
the first Quarter of FY 2022 -23, funds of Rs. 300 crore has been released . All out efforts 
shall be made to fully utilize the  funds of Rs. 2344 crore allocated for the strength ening 
of Power distribution system in the North Eastern States in these two schemes (Rs. 644 
crore for NERPSIP and  Rs. 1700 crore for Comprehensive Scheme) 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
National Smart Grid Mission 
 
The Committee note that the Government had established the National Smart Grid 
Mission (NSGM) in 2015 to plan and monitor the implementation of policies and 
programs related toto Smart Grid activities in India. As per NSGM g uidelines, 
deployment of Smart Meters and Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), Development 
of medium -sized micro grids upto 1MW, Real -time monitoring and control of 
Distribution transformers, etc. are the scope of works pertaining to Smart grid 
deployments, the committee believe that introduction of Smart Meters marks a 
paradigm shift in the distribution sector that has the potential not only to ensure 
financial sustainability of the DISCOMS but also to empower the end consumers to 
control their electric ity consumption in a hassle -free manner. The committee, however, 
note with concern that there was an allocation of Rs. 40 crore for Smart Grid for the year 
2020-21, however, the actual utilization was Rs. 16.1 crore only and the poor utilization 
continues in last year 2021 -22, as only Rs. 2.2 crore could be spent (up to 15.02.2022) 
against the budgetary estimation of Rs. 40 crore. There is a provision of Rs.35.73 crore 
under this head for fiscal 2022 -23. The committee, therefore, do not approve such poor 
utilization of budget allocation and desire that funds are fully utilized under this 
important head for expeditious augmentation of the manufacturing capacity of Smart 
Meters in the country to match their increasing demand, installation of Smart Meters in 
the country at a large scale. Moreover, the quality and reliability of the Smart Meters 
should be ensured through their mandatory quality check by independent institutions 
like CPRI and the Government should consider running awareness programmes so that 
any doubt relating to the working of Smart Meters in the minds of end consumers can be 
dispelled. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Revised Estimate (RE) for Smart Grid for the FY 2020 -21 was Rs.20 crore, 
out of which Rs. 16.1 crore (80.4%) was utilized. Budget allocated at Revised Estimate 
for the year 2021 -22 was Rs.28.4 crore, out of which Rs.2.24 crore was released. Funds 
could not be utilized fully due to non receipt of  eligible claims from the Implementing 
Agencies and COVID 19 restrictions. The Proposal for continuation of  NSGM beyond 
March,2021 has been considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and 
recommended for continuation of  NSGM up to up to March, 2024 at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 136.95 crore  including GBS of Rs. 45.42 crore. In FY 2022 -23, Budget provision  of 
Rs.35.73 crore has been made in view of the committed liabilities for ongoing 

26 
 
sanctioned Smart  Grid projects as well as establishment and training & capacity 
building activities. Fund utilization under NSGM is linked with the milestones 
achievement by the project implementing utilities.  
It is submitted  that NSGM was established to plan and monito r the policies and 
programmes related to Smart Grids in India and is not involved in manufacturing of 
smart meters. However, NSGM has greatly contributed to the development of Smart 
Meter standard viz. IS 16444 and its companion standards through BIS. Curr ently, the 
testing of Smart Meters are being done at BIS certified labs viz.CPRI, Bengaluru, CPRI, 
Bhopal, ERDA, Vadodara, YMPL, Udaipur. Further, NPMU has taken up discussions with 
BIS and testing laboratories to reduce the overall time for testing and ce rtification by 
adoption of standard testing protocols and interpretation of testing results. 
Further, NPMU has developed requirements for common pluggable communication 
module to bring in the interoperability between smart meters w.r.t. communication. The 
same has been submitted to BIS LITD 10 for further deliberation amongst the experts 
for necessary inclusion. NSGM has been actively monitoring the deployment of smart 
meters across various schemes and states and as on  March 2022, more than 41 lakh 
smart m eters have been deployed and about 70 lakh smart meters are under 
deployment. Utilities have been progressing towards deployment of smart meters along 
with consumer education and engagement. 
NSGM  has also developed standard bidding documents for appointme nt of AMI Service 
Provider which shall harmonize the tendering processes for Smart Metering projects. 
The SBD has integrated views of relevant stakeholders and now has been available  for 
use in Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS). NSGM has also wor ked with 
relevant stakeholders and created documents on consumer engagement (factsheets, 
procedures, outreach plan, brochures, FAQs etc.) which has been shared with REC. 
As part of training and capacity building activities, NSGM had trained about 300 utili ty 
professionals through dedicated training programs. Further, NSGM has nominated an 
expert member to the committee constituted for RDSS training and capacity building 
programs. 
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
Support for flood moderation storage hydroelectric projects 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power had submitted a requirement of Rs. 80 
Crore under under the head of ‘Support for flood moderation storage hydroelectric 
projects’. The committee, however, are disappointed with the ‘Nil’ allocation as per 
ceiling at Final BE 2022 -23 for such a vital tool for the promotion of hydroelectric 
power. The Committee have long been advocating for such financial incentives and 
support for the Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry of Power to 
take up this matte at the appropriate level and make efforts to get the allocation for this 
vital programme at the time of Supplementary Demands.   
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India circulated the measures for promoting hydropower in the country, 
including ‘Budgetary Support for Flood Moderation/ Storage Hydro Electric Projects’ 
vide O.M. dated 08.03.2019. 
Further, guidelines for operationalization of Budgetary Support for Flood Moderation/ 
Storage Hydro Electric Projects have also been issued by Ministry  of Power on 
28.09.2021. 
As per the guidelines, all Central, State and Private Sector storage hydro project (above 
25 MW capacity) having explicit Flood Moderation component which have been 
concurred either by CEA or the State Government and wherein Letter  of Award (LoA) 
for any major works has been issued or is being issued on competitive bidding basis 
after the date of notification of the measure (i.e. 08.03.2019) are eligible for financial 
support . This Budgetary Support is applicable to all eligible pr ojects which shall be 
taken up for construction by 31st March, 2030.  
However, MoP has not received any eligible proposal  proposal  for Budgetary Support 
for Flood Moderation/ Storage Hydro Electric projects, till date. 
Accordingly, Token provision of Rs.  0.01 crore in BE (2022 -23) for Budgetary Support 
under this scheme made. In case, Ministry of Power received any eligible proposal, 
request will be made to Ministry of Finance to provide sufficient funds at RE stage. 
Further, Hydro projects are of long ge station period and only those with flood 
moderation component like Dibang Multi  Purpose Hydro Electric Project  would qualify 
for the grant in a graded manner.  
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
Manufacturing Zones under Atmanirbhar Bharat Package 
 
The Committee are happy to note that there is an allocation of Rs. 100  
crore for the year 2022 -23 for setting up Manufacturing Zones under Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Package. This is a scheme that is be ing implemented jointly with the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) with budgetary provision in the Ministry of 
Power’s budget. The committee further note that the Government intend to use this 
zone for the manufacturing of renewable energy and transmission & distribution related 
equipment. The committee laud this initiative by the Government and believe that it 
would immensely help in decreasing  dependency of the  Power Sector on import for 
critical equipment. The committee  recommend the Ministry t o make utmost efforts to 
fully utilize the allocated funds so that timely completion of the proposed Manufacturing 
Zones can be ensured.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has started action to implement the scheme. Expression of Interest 
(EOI) for setting up a manufacturing zone for Power & Renewable Energy Sector has 
been issued on 13th April 2022 which has been made available on the websites of 
Ministry of Power and MNRE.   The pre -bid conference has also been  held on 
27.04.2022. Timelines are as under:- 

28 
 
 
 
 
  
Sl. Event  Date and Time 
1.      Notification to Proposers Wednesday, April 13, 2022 
2.      Pre-EOI Meeting Wednesday, April 27, 2022 at 11:00 AM 
3.      Last date of submission of queries 
or information required by 
Proposers 
Wednesday, May 4, 2022 at 04:00 PM 
4.      Issue of clarifications, addendum 
or revised EOI 
Monday, May 30, 2022 at 04:00 PM 
5.      Proposal Due Date Monday, July  11, 2022 at 04:00 PM 
 
 Proposals from 8 States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Telangana) were received by 11.7.2022 i.e. 
the Proposal due date. 
 The evaluation of the received responses is being done by PMA. Meetings of PMA 
have been convened on 04.08.2022 and 10.08.2022. 
2.  As per the recommendat ion given by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) and 
approval of the competent authority, the year wise bifurcation of budgetary outlay of 
Rs.400 crore, for the scheme over a period of five years is as under: 
  
Components 1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 5th Year 
CIF +CTF 
(in Rs. Crore)  40  100  100  100  60 
 CIF- Common Infrastructure Facilities 
CTF- Common Testing Facilities. 
  
3. In BE (2022-23), total budget allocation is Rs 100 crore. All out efforts are being taken 
by Ministry of Power to implement the scheme as per schedule and MoP will be able to 
utilize total allocation of Rs 100 crore in FY 2022-23. 
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 10/1/2022-Budget dated 30.08.2022] 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY: 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION: 
 
-NIL- 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  
16th December, 2022  
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka) 
Jagdambika Pal,                                            
Chairperson,  
             Standing Committee on Energy 
 
  

32 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-23) HELD ON 15th DECEMBER, 2022 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
  
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs. 
PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
6. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
8. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
9. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy  
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh  
11. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
12. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
14. Shri. P. Velusamy  
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
16. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
17. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
                                                              SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayana  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 

33 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the agenda of the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fifth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the 
Ministry of Power’, and 
(ii) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the 
aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The 
Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above -mentioned 
Reports and present the same to both Houses of the Parliament. 
4. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
5. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
The verbatim proceedings of the Sitting have been kept for record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X – not related to this Report 

34 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations     14 
           
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
 accepted by the Government: 
 
 Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 and14 
 
 Total:          14 
 Percentage         100% 
 
(iii) Observation/ Recommendation which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
- Nil   -   
 Total:          00 
 Percentage         00% 
 
(iv) Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which the 
 reply of the Government has not been accepted by the 
 Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
- Nil   -  
 Total:          00 
 Percentage         00% 
 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which  
 final reply of the Government is still awaited: 
- Nil   -  
  
Total:          00 
 Percentage         00% 
 
 
 