30
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2021-2022)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in Execution/
Completion of Power Projects by Power Sector Companies’]
THIRTIETH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
July,  2022/Sravana, 1944 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale at the Sales
Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and
their outlets. The said information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter, Reception,
Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website mentioned above."

 
THIRTIETH
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in 
Execution/Completion of Power Projects by Power Sector Companies’
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
Laid in Rajya Sabha on
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in 
Execution/Completion of Power Projects by Power Sector Companies’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.08.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.08.2022 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in  
the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in  
Execution/Completion of Power Projects by Power Sector Companies’] 
  

(ii) 
 
 
C.O.E  NO. 356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022  BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha secretariat. 
 

(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS  
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) …………………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………………... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report …………………………………………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………………………………………………… 11 
CHAPTER III Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply ………………………………......... 20 
CHAPTER IV Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee and requires reiteration 
…………. 21 
CHAPTER V Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited …………………………………………………….. 22 
ANNEXURES 
I. Details of ongoing projects being implemented by Power Grid ………......... 23 
II. Letter issued to all under construction Thermal power plants ……………… 31 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 26th July, 2022 …………………….. 32 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Energy ………………....................................... 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

(iii) 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  (2021-22) 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh   –   Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
6. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
7. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal ^ 
9. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
10. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
12. Shri Velusamy P. 
13. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
14. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil@ 
15. Shri Jai Prakash 
16. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
17. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
18. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar  
19. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
20. Vacant** 
21. Vacant  #   
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot *  
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy * 
27. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

(iv) 
 
28. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
29. Vacant  $ 
30. Vacant & 
31. Vacant^^ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan – Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Kumar  – Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.12.2021 vice Smt. Sajda Ahmed.  
@ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.02.2022 vice Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik.  
** Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from membership of 
the Lok Sabha on 22.03.2022. 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11.11.2021. 
$ Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala resigned from the membership of the Committee on 02.12.2021. 
& Shri T.K.S. Elangovan ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from the Rajya 
Sabha on 29.06.2022. 
^^ Shri Sanjay Seth ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from the Rajya Sabha on 
04.07.2022. 
  

(v) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report on action-taken by 
the Government on observations/ recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in Execution/Completion of Power Projects by 
Power Sector Companies’. 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2021 and was 
laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 4th January, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
26th July, 2022. 
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) Report of the Committee is given 
at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
26 July, 2022  
4Sravana, 1944(Saka) 
Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh,  
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER  I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in Execution/Completion of Power Projects by 
Power Sector Companies’. 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2021 and was laid 
same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The Report contained 6 observations/recommendations. 
3. Action-taken notes in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report have been received from the Government. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 and 6                                                               Total - 6 
                         Chapter-II                                                         
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
-  Nil   -                           Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
-  Nil   -                        Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the 
Government is still awaited:  
- Nil   -                           Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
4. The Committee desire that Action-taken Statement on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of its presentation.  
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Dispute Avoidance Mechanism 
6. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee's analysis of the information submitted to them indicates that a large 
number of power projects have not been completed as per the schedule which resulted in 

2 
 
huge time and cost overrun. Sector-wise analysis reveals that 12 out of 13 hydro projects, 
30 out of 34 thermal projects, 18 out of 42 Transmission projects and 01 out of 26 
Renewable projects were delayed in their execution. Astonishingly, 12 delayed hydro 
projects with cumulative time overrun of almost 1205 month have resulted in huge cost 
overrun of Rs. 31,530.03 crore so far. The Committee note that out of total 34 thermal 
power projects in the country (both Central and State sector projects), 30 projects are 
delayed having total cost overrun of Rs. 41,100.20 crore and time overrun of 1776 
months. As regards issues affecting the execution/completion of thermal power projects, 
besides law and order/ local issues, natural calamities, inadequate infrastructure facilities, 
shortage of skilled man-power, forest & environment clearance etc., the Committee note 
that contractual and land acquisition are the main impediments faced by the implementing 
agencies. The Committee find that contractual issues/disputes arise due to poor cost 
estimation of projects, poor cost management, Contractor's poor site supervision and 
inadequate funds or budget allocation. The Committee thus feel that a lot of contract 
related disputes could be easily prevented with proper planning and diligence during the 
preliminary stage itself. The Committee therefore, recommend that: 
(i) Due diligence and careful negotiation on contract terms and conditions between 
project developer and contractor be ensured during the contract formation stage; 
(ii) Full presentation of all facts and information during tendering process; 
(iii) Incorporate suitable measures and defining strict norms and penalties for completing 
each level of activities in the contract document;  
(iv) Creation of sub-sectoral limit for lending to thermal power projects on priority basis by 
banks to overcome funds constraint.” 
7.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
A. “MoP has taken various measures with regards to improvement in contract/ bidding 
terms and conditions (clauses) for hydro projects and has also taken other measures to 
avoid contractual disputes for faster execution of works. The details are as under: 
(a) In conformity with the aforesaid recommendations of the Committee, Ministry of 
Power has formulated a Dispute Avoidance Mechanism through 'Independent 
Engineer' for avoidance of dispute between CPSUs and contractors in respect of 
hydro-sector contracts at inception stage itself. Ministry of Power after inviting 
Expression of Interest from interested eligible candidates has empanelled 
Independent Engineer for dispute avoidance in hydro CPSUs under this Ministry. 
(b) The recommendation of the Standing Committee regarding proper planning and 
diligence during preliminary stage, full presentation of facts during tendering process, 
handing over of encumbrance free land to contractor, etc. are part of the 
recommendations of the above Committee.  
(c) Further, for all the complex packages, NTPC is holding pre-NIT/ pre-bid conference 
with all the prospective bidders on Technical and commercial aspects of contract 
terms and conditions, based on which, the contract terms and conditions are finalized.  
(d) Clauses dealing with change of Wholesale Price Index, in case of change of WPI 
Series, would be suitably incorporated in the contract documents for Hydro Electric 
Plants for Price Variation Calculation to avoid any kind of dispute at later stage. 

3 
 
(e) Ministry of Power has notified guidelines dated 08.11.2019 to reduce the incidence of 
time and cost over-run in Hydro Power Projects by adopting various measures like 
preparation of realistic project schedule based on past experience of projects in 
vicinity, use of latest Software tools like Primavera, MS-Project etc for monitoring of 
projects on regular basis, seeking prior approval of competent authority if the project 
is not likely to be commissioned within the prescribed time limit. Following measures 
have also been issued in these guidelines to be followed to reduce incidences of time 
and cost overrun for hydro projects:– 
i. Time bound resolution of disputes and timely payment mechanism to be ensured. 
ii. Review of delegation of power at project level. 
iii. Adoption of international best practice for implementation of projects. 
iv. Ensure availability of resources namely equipment and manpower. 
v. Maintenance and AMC of the equipment to OEM. 
vi. Purchase of new equipment as per the needs of the projects. 
vii. Keeping record/reports in electronic form. 
viii. Timelines to raise claims by the contractors and their settlement by the Engineer 
in Charge. 
ix. Timely decision by Dispute Resolution Board (DRB). 
x. Maintenance of e-diary system to keep record of all events in respect of under 
construction projects. 
xi. Timely decision by the Management to resolve the stalled work for any reason 
other than natural calamity. 
xii. Defining risk sharing mechanism in contract document 
xiii. Device mechanism of incentivizing labour on achieving project milestones in 
time. 
B. In order to address contractor’s queries regarding the works/supply under tender 
document, there is a provision of pre-bid meeting in all major contracts in hydro and 
thermal projects of CPSUs to address queries of the contractors. The prospective bidders 
can ask any question in case some facts and information is missing in the tender 
documents. Further, contractors are also advised to have a site visit to have an idea of 
the site and conditions prevalent at site and to submit a site visit report along with the bid. 
Further, during tendering stage, any information asked by any bidders is duly examined 
and replied, based on merit. 
C. There is a provision for Liquidated Damages for delay in completion of the hydro 
projects, which are part of contracts of CPSUs and is normally about 10% of the contract 
value.  
In case of Thermal projects of NTPC as of now, there is no provision of penalties in the 
contracts. However, NTPC levies the liquidated damages for delay in completion of 

4 
 
facility and for delay in supply of spares. Further, NTPC also levies the liquidated 
damages for shortfall in performance of the equipment (if any).  
Nevertheless, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for consideration in 
future contracts. 
D. Current sectoral limits for lending by the banks are for Power Generation including RE 
generation irrespective of technology (Technology agnostic). However, Priority Loans are 
given to stressed projects by acceptance of all the lenders or consortium of lenders to 
such projects to manage liquidity and reduce stress.  
For Thermal projects, NTPC generally finances its projects through internal resources 
and external commercial borrowings / domestic commercial borrowings. Generally, there 
is no delay on the part of NTPC for meeting the fund requirement.” 
8. The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has taken various measures including 
notification of guidelines in November, 2019 to avoid time and cost overruns of power projects. 
However, there is no mention about any impact of all these measures in reducing the time and 
cost overruns. The Committee believe that the delays in the execution of power projects not only 
jeopardize the efforts of securing energy security for the country but also increase the cost of the 
projects that is eventually passed on to the end consumer in the form of enhanced tariff. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should keep making indefatigable efforts to 
prevent delays in the execution of power projects and should regularly monitor and review the 
impact thereof. The Committee also desire that the Ministry, at the time of furnishing Action-taken 
Statement, should furnish the latest information/data related to delays in the execution of power 
projects corroborating the effectiveness / impact of the steps taken by them in this regard.       
Recommendation (Sl. No.2) 
SHAKTI Policy 
 9. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that the issues related to Coal Supply is one of the major reason for 
stress in thermal power projects and that after the cancellation of 204 coal mines by the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in 2014, many of the power projects became stranded without 
arrangements of adequate fuel supply. In addition, many projects were setup without firm 
coal linkages leading to high cost of generation. The Committee note that a High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) was constituted by Government of India in July 2018 to 
address the issues of stressed thermal power projects. Based on the recommendations of 
Group of Ministers (GoM), the Government has inter-alia decided amendment in Scheme 
to Harness and Allocate Koyla (Coal) Transparently in India (SHAKTI) Policy for allowing 
coal linkage to power plants which either do not have PPAs or where PPAs had been 
terminated due to default in payment by the DISCOMs. The Committee are optimistic that 
the proposed amendment would be a bridge linkage to specified end-use plants both in 
Power as well as Non-Power sector which have been allotted coal mines/ blocks. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the recommendations of the Group of Ministers 

5 
 
(GoM) to address the issues of stressed thermal power plants may be implemented 
forthwith in letter and spirit and the proposed changes in SHAKTI policy may be executed 
at the earliest for the benefit of the end-users.” 
 10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“After the CCEA approval of GoM/HLEC recommendations, certain provisions were 
added to existing provisions of Para B(ii) and B(iii) and a new provision under the para 
B(viii) has been added to the SHAKTI Policy. Under this, para B(viii)(a) allows power 
plants which do not have PPAs, to get coal linkage for short term for trading power in Day 
Ahead Market (DAM) through power exchanges and in short term PPAs through DEEP 
Portal. As per para B(viii)(a): 
“a) All such power plants including private generators which do not have PPAs, shall be 
allowed Coal linkage under B (iii) and B (iv) of Shakti Policy for a period of minimum 3 
months upto a maximum of 1 year, provided further that the power generated through that 
linkage is sold in Day Ahead Market (DAM) through power exchanges or in short term 
through a transparent bidding process through Discovery of Efficient Energr Price (DEEP) 
portal.” 
 At present, auctions under above provision are being held on quarterly basis covering 
para B(iii) of the SHAKTI Policy and till date, 06 tranches of coal linkage auction under para 
B(viii)(a) have been conducted in which various power plants having non-PPA capacity have 
availed the coal linkages. Summary of the auctions under para B(viii)(a) is as follows: 
Quarterly Auction under Para 
B(viii)(a) of SHAKTI Policy 
Non-PPA Capacity 
against which Coal 
Linkage Allotted 
(MW) 
Coal Quantity 
booked in Multiple 
grades for a 
quarter (MT) 
Remarks 
Tranche-1 (Apr-June’20) 5990 1.34 9 plants, Premium NIL  
Tranche-2 (July-Sep’20) 3901 0.63 8 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-3 (Oct-Dec’20) 4223 0.35 6 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-4 (Jan-Mar’21) 3476 0.64 7 plants, Max Premium  
Rs. 50/ton 
Tranche-5 (Apr-June’21) 3620 1.07 8 plants, Max Premium 
Rs. 25/ton 
Tranche-6 (July-Sep’21) 3799 0.82 8 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-7 (Oct-Dec’21) Process of Tranche-7 (Oct-Dec’21) has been started in which 15 
applications have been received. 
(source: CEA) 
11. The Committee while noting that the issues related to coal supply are one of the major 
reasons for stress of various thermal power projects, had recommended that the 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GoM) to address the issues of stressed thermal 
power plants may be implemented forthwith in letter and spirit and the proposed changes in 
SHAKTI policy may be executed at the earliest for the benefit of the end-users. The Ministry in its 
reply has stated that the Government have added a new para in SHAKTI Policy which allows 

6 
 
power plants which do not have PPAs, to get coal linkage for the short term for trading power in 
Day-Ahead Market (DAM) through power exchanges and in short term PPAs through DEEP 
Portal. They have further stated that till date, 06 tranches of coal linkage auction have been 
conducted in which various power plants having non-PPA capacity have availed the coal 
linkages. The Committee believe that these efforts would ameliorate the coal supply position of 
many power plants. The Committee, therefore, expect the Government to keep hand-holding and 
extending relief in the form of adequate supply of coal to the power plants especially which are 
under stress under the new provisions and apprise the Committee about the further progress in 
execution.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Hydropower 
12. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that there are 24 under construction hydroelectric projects (above 
25 MW) having aggregate capacity of 11,342 MW having either time or cost over-run in 
11 States/UT. The time overrun in these delayed hydro projects ranges from 12 months 
to 189 months and cost overrun up to 472.92%. The Committee further observe that there 
are 13 hydroelectric projects being developed in the Central Sector by CPSUs and most 
of these projects have been badly delayed. Although, the works have started in 11 
projects, construction of 02 projects is still held up. The Committee note that the main 
issues involved in execution/completion of hydro-electric projects are bottlenecks in land 
acquisition, environment and forest issues, rehabilitation & resettlement issues, 
inadequate infrastructural facilities, law & order/local issues, geological surprises, natural 
calamities, funds constraints, contractual issues, inter-state issues, etc. Among these 
issues, fund constraints followed by geological uncertainties and law & order/local issues 
are more dominant. The Committee are of the view that the aforesaid issues are common 
and generally occur in large construction projects, which can be addressed and managed 
by having firm contractual guidelines in place prior to the start of the projects and with 
adequate policy and regulatory support. As all the hydro power projects, regardless of the 
capacity, have as per recommendation of this Committee, now been included in the 
"Renewable Energy" segment, the Committee are hopeful that this will give further 
impetus to the Hydro Sector and facilitate commissioning of Hydro Power Projects as per 
stipulated timeline. The Committee therefore, recommend that: 
(i) Due to long construction period of hydro power projects, interest on loan plays a very 
critical role in the operation period and higher interest on outstanding loan leads to 
higher yearly tariff. A review of the financing policies for hydro power projects is thus 
required with a view to provide longer tenure debt with softer interest rates. 
(ii) Inadequate infrastructure like roads, bridges, etc. particularly in Arunachal Pradesh 
and North-Eastern States result in longer construction period thereby increasing the 
project cost. Agencies, like BRO, State PWD, etc., implementing the road sector 
projects need to be provided adequate support to complete the projects expeditiously. 
National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) could be used for development of roads, bridges 
and infrastructure common for hydro power projects.  


7 
 
(iii) Considering the long gestation period and large investment involved, a single window 
clearance mechanism becomes necessary to reduce the cost and time overrun by a 
considerable margin. This will encourage Developers to undertake projects and make 
large investment in hydro power sector.” 
 13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
"A number of measures have been taken by the Government for lowering the tariff of 
hydro projects. In this regard, consultations were held with financial institutions/ banks 
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power & NRE for increasing the tenure of 
the loan as well as lowering the rate of interest. In addition, Guidelines for reducing the 
incidence of Time and Cost Overruns have also been issued by Ministry of Power in 
2019. Further, on the advice of Central Government, the State Governments of hydro-rich 
states like H.P. have also made efforts to push the sector by deferment/ staggering the 
free power during the initial years apart from other measures like allotting projects for 
longer period of 70 years, 50% reimbursement of State GST and booking of Local Area 
Development Fund (LADF) to any head other than project cost to bring down Tariff, etc. 
All these measures are expected to help in reducing the tariff of hydro projects especially 
during initial years. 
PFC and REC have reported that they generally offer longer loan tenure for Hydro 
Electric Projects (HEP). The loan tenure offered by PFC/REC ranges up to 85% of 
economic life of the project i.e. up to 40 years. Considering the risk involved in HEPs, 
PFC/REC contend that interest rates offered by them are reasonably competitive. 
(ii) The construction of roads and bridges in North-Eastern States has always been 
challenging due to various reasons including remote areas, mountainous terrain, limited 
working window due to heavy rains for almost six months etc. In spite of these 
constraints, there have been significant efforts by both central and state agencies to 
construct the roads and bridges.BRO and NHIDCL have completed many roads and 
bridges connecting remote areas and work on other projects is going on. 
Use of National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) will be certainly helpful in speedy completion 
of such infrastructure. As regards the support for implementing the road sector projects in 
order to complete the projects expeditiously, it is to mention that Government has 
approved a number of measures for promoting and expediting the hydro power sector in 
March 2019 which includes, inter-alia, Budgetary Support towards the Cost of Enabling 
Infrastructure, i.e. roads/bridges @ Rs. 1.5 crore per MW for projects up to 200 MW and 
@ Rs. 1.0 crore per MW for projects above 200 MW. As a result of the measures, the 
works are expected to be completed expeditiously. 
(iii) However in case of hydro projects, various stakeholders including State Governments 
are involved to deal with issues relating to Land acquisition, R&R issues, inadequate 
infrastructure facilities, Law & order / Local issues involved.  
However, for concurrence of DPR of Hydro projects, single window system is in place in 
CEA. Project developer is required to upload their DPR at CEA web portal after obtaining 
pre-DPR Clearances from CEA/CWC/GSI/CSMRS. The DPR is easily accessed by 
appraising Groups of CEA and CWC on this portal. After examining the DPR, appraising 
groups of CEA and CWC upload their comments on portal, which developer can access 

8 
 
and submit their replies. Further, clarification, if any, is also raised on the portal. In this 
way, this portal provides two-way communication platform and avoids procedural delay to 
expedite the process of clearance of the DPR of Hydroelectric projects. This system 
saves significant time in transmission of documents among Developers and Appraising 
Groups. This system has eased the DPR examination process drastically.  
National Single Window System (NSWS) has been launched by the Government of India 
for approval of clearances by the Ministries Departments. The web portal of CEA is 
getting integrated with the NSWS.” 
14. The Committee are happy that the Government have started giving due attention to the 
hydropower sector. It is expected that the measures taken by the Ministry in the form of 
increasing the tenure of loans as well as lowering the rate of interest leading to reduction in tariff 
of hydro projects, speedy development of infrastructure and launching of National single window 
system for approval of clearances would ensure speedy development of hydropower projects. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress and impact of all these measures at the 
stage of furnishing of Action-taken Statement by the Ministry.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Hydropower  
15. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee are informed that Central Electricity Authority (CEA) monitors the 
progress of under-construction hydro power projects (above 25 MW) through frequent 
site visits and interaction with the developers and other stake holders and also holds 
review meetings periodically with them to identify and resolve issues critical for 
commissioning of Projects. They are also informed that Ministry of Power undertakes 
regular reviews to identify the constraint areas and facilitate faster resolution of inter-
ministerial and other outstanding issues. The Committee are also informed that in case 
of Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSU's) projects, the project Implementation 
parameters / milestones are incorporated in the annual MoU signed between respective 
CPSU's and the Ministry of Power and the same are monitored during the Quarterly 
Performance Review meetings of CPSU's. The Committee further note that to 
coordinate and synchronize all the support functions of project management, the NTPC 
relies on a three-tiered project management system known as the Integrated Project 
Management Control System (IPMCS), which integrates its engineering management, 
contract management and construction management control centres. Notwithstanding 
the monitoring mechanism in place, the Committee are confronted with the fact that a 
large number of projects are delayed, causing huge time and cost over-run. As timely 
completion of power projects is very crucial to the growth of other sectors of the 
economy, the Committee recommend that apart from regular review meetings, an IT 
based project management, monitoring and follow-up system may be introduced at all 
the project sites with online connectivity with all stake holders, i.e., suppliers, project 
developers, contractors, CEA, etc. with clear cut fixation/ demarcation of responsibilities 
at every level. The need of the hour is to pin down the onus of action on the concerned 
agency/group/individual so that project management becomes more focused, vigorous 
and meaningful.” 

9 
 
 16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“The Ministry of Power has issued Guidelines to reduce the incidence of time and cost 
overruns in Hydro Power Projects in November, 2019 for strict compliance in Hydro 
CPSUs. As per the guidelines, web based e-diary system is to be maintained to keep 
record of all events in respect of under construction projects for purpose of capturing 
data, events, progress of activities, etc. The guidelines also stipulate use of latest 
software tools for project monitoring on regular basis at CPSU level. This will help in 
better project management and also help in providing archive data, if required, for 
resolution of disputes between the Employer and the Contractor.  
Regarding IT based project management, monitoring and follow-up system in respect of 
Thermal project sites, a letter has been issued to all under construction Thermal power 
plants (पğसं. क े.ǒव.Ĥा./ टȣ.पी.एम./ एस.सी./जन-3/2021/Ǒद न ा ं क:27.08.2021) for compliance to 
the recommendations of The Standing Committee on Energy (2020-21) and the same is 
attached as Annexure - II. 
For thermal projects, NTPC has established a state-of-the-art IT-enabled Project 
Monitoring Centre (PMC) for the facilitation of fast-track project implementation and the 
monitoring of key project milestones of various NTPC projects. It also acts as a decision 
support system for the NTPC’s management. PMC is integrated across the NTPC’s 
network as a web based collaborative system, used to facilitate the consolidation of 
project-related issues and their resolution. IP Cameras are also installed at the project 
sites which give real time live streaming to monitor the critical activities. 
NTPC has provided following interfaces to various stake holders for Project management: 
 NTPC has given access of its Project management tool (Web-miles) to Ministry and 
other Govt. agencies, where the project progress can be seen.  
 An online platform for Engineering Management- “DREAMS” has been provided by 
NTPC to agencies. It is an interface between NTPC & agencies for carrying out 
engineering of the various packages. Agencies submit Engineering documents on this 
portal for approval. The Engineering progress of the packages can be reviewed from 
this platform.  
 Further, the processing of payments to all the vendors is being done through NTPCs 
PRADIP portal (A Paperless initiative by NTPC). All the activities from invoice 
submission to payments are done through this portal. 
In addition to above, in order to make monitoring of projects more effective, NTPC is now 
adopting Integrated Software monitoring tool for integrating progress of Engineering, 
Supplies and Erection at one place, and capturing progress online. Features like mobile 
app based updation of progress and role-based access make the tool more user-friendly 
which will result into regular updation of progress. It will help in taking timely remedial 
actions. This tool has been included in the bid documents of EPC packages of upcoming 
thermal projects of NTPC. 

10 
 
In addition, the status of the implementation of power projects is being monitored through 
a number of IT-enabled Web-based platforms viz.: 
a. PRAGATI Portal 
b. UrjaDarpan 
c. E-Samiksha Portal 
d. PMG Portal 
e. NIP Portal 
f. OCMS Portal” 
17. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that apart from regular review 
meetings, an IT-based project management, monitoring and follow-up system may be introduced 
at all the project sites with online connectivity with all stakeholders, i.e., suppliers, project 
developers, contractors, CEA, etc. with clear cut fixation/ demarcation of responsibilities at every 
level, the Ministry have stated that a letter has been issued to all under construction thermal 
power plants for compliance to the recommendations of the Committee. They have further stated 
that in order to make monitoring of projects more effective, NTPC is now adopting Integrated 
Software monitoring tool for integrating progress of Engineering, Supplies and Erection at one 
place, and capturing progress online. Features like mobile app-based updation of progress and 
role-based access have made the tool more user-friendly which will result in regular updation of 
progress and in taking timely remedial action. This tool has been included in the bid documents 
of EPC packages of upcoming thermal projects of NTPC. The Committee believe these tools 
would help in effective monitoring of the progress of power projects and enable prompt remedial 
action in case of any deviation. The Committee may be apprised about the status of compliance 
to the recommendations of the Committee. 
  

11 
 
 
CHAPTER  II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
The Committee's analysis of the information submitted to them indicates that a large 
number of power projects have not been completed as per the schedule which resulted in huge 
time and cost overrun. Sector-wise analysis reveals that 12 out of 13 hydro projects, 30 out of 34 
thermal projects, 18 out of 42 Transmission projects and 01 out of 26 Renewable projects were 
delayed in their execution. Astonishingly, 12 delayed hydro projects with cumulative time overrun 
of almost 1205 month have resulted in huge cost overrun of Rs. 31,530.03 crore so far. The 
Committee note that out of total 34 thermal power projects in the country (both Central and State 
sector projects), 30 projects are delayed having total cost overrun of Rs. 41,100.20 crore and 
time overrun of 1776 months. As regards issues affecting the execution/completion of thermal 
power projects, besides law and order/ local issues, natural calamities, inadequate infrastructure 
facilities, shortage of skilled man-power, forest & environment clearance etc., the Committee 
note that contractual and land acquisition are the main impediments faced by the implementing 
agencies. The Committee find that contractual issues/disputes arise due to poor cost estimation 
of projects, poor cost management, Contractor's poor site supervision and inadequate funds or 
budget allocation. The Committee thus feel that a lot of contract related disputes could be easily 
prevented with proper planning and diligence during the preliminary stage itself. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that: 
(i)  Due diligence and careful negotiation on contract terms and conditions between project 
developer and contractor be ensured during the contract formation stage; 
(ii)  Full presentation of all facts and information during tendering process; 
(iii) Incorporate suitable measures and defining strict norms and penalties for completing   
each level of activities in the contract document;  
(iv) Creation of sub-sectoral limit for lending to thermal power projects on priority basis by  
banks to overcome funds constraint. 
Reply of the Government 
A. MoP has taken various measures with regards to improvement in contract/ bidding 
terms and conditions (clauses) for hydro projects and has also taken other measures to avoid 
contractual disputes for faster execution of works. The details are as under: 
(a) In conformity with the aforesaid recommendations of the Committee, Ministry of Power 
has formulated a Dispute Avoidance Mechanism through 'Independent Engineer' for 
avoidance of dispute between CPSUs and contractors in respect of hydro-sector 
contracts at inception stage itself. Ministry of Power after inviting Expression of Interest 
from interested eligible candidates has empaneled Independent Engineer for dispute 
avoidance in hydro CPSUs under this Ministry. 
(b) The recommendation of the Standing Committee regarding proper planning and 
diligence during preliminary stage, full presentation of facts during tendering process, 
handing over of encumbrance free land to contractor, etc. are part of the 
recommendations of the above Committee.  

12 
 
(c) Further, for all the complex packages, NTPC is holding pre-NIT/ pre-bid conference with 
all the prospective bidders on Technical and commercial aspects of contract terms and 
conditions, based on which, the contract terms and conditions are finalized.  
(d) Clauses dealing with change of Wholesale Price Index, in case of change of WPI 
Series, would be suitably incorporated in the contract documents for Hydro Electric 
Plants for Price Variation Calculation to avoid any kind of dispute at later stage. 
(e) Ministry of Power has notified guidelines dated 08.11.2019 to reduce the incidence of 
time and cost over-run in Hydro Power Projects by adopting various measures like 
preparation of realistic project schedule based on past experience of projects in vicinity, 
use of latest Software tools like Primavera, MS-Project etc for monitoring of projects on 
regular basis, seeking prior approval of competent authority if the project is not likely to 
be commissioned within the prescribed time limit. Following measures have also been 
issued in these guidelines to be followed to reduce incidences of time and cost overrun 
for hydro projects - 
(i) Time bound resolution of disputes and timely payment mechanism to be ensured. 
(ii) Review of delegation of power at project level. 
(iii) Adoption of international best practice for implementation of projects. 
(iv) Ensure availability of resources namely equipment and manpower. 
(v) Maintenance and AMC of the equipment to OEM. 
(vi) Purchase of new equipment as per the needs of the projects. 
(vii) Keeping record/reports in electronic form. 
(viii) Timelines to raise claims by the contractors and their settlement by the Engineer 
in Charge. 
(ix) Timely decision by Dispute Resolution Board (DRB). 
(x) Maintenance of e-diary system to keep record of all events in respect of under 
construction projects. 
(xi) Timely decision by the Management to resolve the stalled work for any reason 
other than natural calamity. 
(xii) Defining risk sharing mechanism in contract document 
(xiii) Device mechanism of incentivizing labour on achieving project milestones in time. 
B. In order to address contractor’s queries regarding the works/supply under tender 
document, there is a provision of pre-bid meeting in all major contracts in hydro and thermal 
projects of CPSUs to address queries of the contractors. The prospective bidders can ask any 
question in case some facts and information is missing in the tender documents. Further, 
contractors are also advised to have a site visit to have an idea of the site and conditions 
prevalent at site and to submit a site visit report along with the bid. Further, during tendering 
stage, any information asked by any bidders is duly examined and replied, based on merit. 
C. There is a provision for Liquidated Damages for delay in completion of the hydro 
projects, which are part of contracts of CPSUs and is normally about 10% of the contract value.  

13 
 
In case of Thermal projects of NTPC as of now, there is no provision of penalties in the 
contracts. However, NTPC levies the liquidated damages for delay in completion of facility and 
for delay in supply of spares. Further, NTPC also levies the liquidated damages for shortfall in 
performance of the equipment (if any).  
Nevertheless, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for consideration in 
future contracts. 
D. Current sectoral limits for lending by the banks are for Power Generation including RE 
generation irrespective of technology (Technology agnostic). However, Priority Loans are given 
to stressed projects by acceptance of all the lenders or consortium of lenders to such projects to 
manage liquidity and reduce stress.  
For Thermal projects, NTPC generally finances its projects through internal resources and 
external commercial borrowings / domestic commercial borrowings. Generally, there is no delay 
on the part of NTPC for meeting the fund requirement.  
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that the issues related to Coal Supply is one of the major reason for 
stress in thermal power projects and that after the cancellation of 204 coal mines by the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in 2014, many of the power projects became stranded without arrangements of 
adequate fuel supply. In addition, many projects were setup without firm coal linkages leading to 
high cost of generation. The Committee note that a High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) 
was constituted by Government of India in July 2018 to address the issues of stressed thermal 
power projects. Based on the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM), the Government 
has inter-alia decided amendment in Scheme to Harness and Allocate Koyla (Coal) 
Transparently in India (SHAKTI) Policy for allowing coal linkage to power plants which either do 
not have PPAs or where PPAs had been terminated due to default in payment by the DISCOMs. 
The Committee are optimistic that the proposed amendment would be a bridge linkage to 
specified end-use plants both in Power as well as Non-Power sector which have been allotted 
coal mines/ blocks. The Committee, therefore recommend that the recommendations of the 
Group of Ministers (GoM) to address the issues of stressed thermal power plants may be 
implemented forthwith in letter and spirit and the proposed changes in SHAKTI policy may be 
executed at the earliest for the benefit of the end-users. 
Reply of the Government 
After the CCEA approval of GoM/HLEC recommendations, certain provisions were added 
to existing provisions of Para B(ii) and B(iii) and a new provision under the para B(viii) has been 
added to the SHAKTI Policy. Under this, para B(viii)(a) allows power plants which do not have 
PPAs, to get coal linkage for short term for trading power in Day Ahead Market (DAM) through 
power exchanges and in short term PPAs through DEEP Portal. As per para B(viii)(a): 
“a) All such power plants including private generators which do not have PPAs, shall be 
allowed Coal linkage under B (iii) and B (iv) of Shakti Policy for a period of minimum 3 

14 
 
months upto a maximum of 1 year, provided further that the power generated through that 
linkage is sold in Day Ahead Market (DAM) through power exchanges or in short term 
through a transparent bidding process through Discovery of Efficient Energr Price (DEEP) 
portal.” 
At present, auctions under above provision are being held on quarterly basis covering para 
B(iii) of the SHAKTI Policy and till date, 06 tranches of coal linkage auction under para B(viii)(a) 
have been conducted in which various power plants having non-PPA capacity have availed the 
coal linkages. Summary of the auctions under para B(viii)(a) is as follows: 
Quarterly Auction 
under Para 
B(viii)(a) of  
SHAKTI Policy 
Non-PPA Capacity 
against which Coal 
Linkage Allotted 
(MW) 
Coal Quantity 
booked in Multiple 
grades for a 
quarter (MT) 
Remarks 
Tranche-1  
(Apr-June’20) 
5990 1.34  9 plants, Premium NIL  
Tranche-2  
(July-Sep’20) 
3901 0.63  8 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-3  
(Oct-Dec’20) 
4223 0.35  6 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-4  
(Jan-Mar’21) 
3476 0.64  7 plants, Max Premium  
Rs. 50/ton 
Tranche-5  
(Apr-June’21) 
3620 1.07  8 plants, Max Premium  
Rs. 25/ton 
Tranche-6  
(July-Sep’21) 
3799 0.82  8 plants, Premium NIL 
Tranche-7  
(Oct-Dec’21) 
Process of Tranche-7 (Oct-Dec’21) has been started in which 15 
applications have been received. 
(Source CEA) 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that there are 24 under construction hydroelectric projects (above 25 
MW) having aggregate capacity of 11342 MW having either time or cost over-run in 11 
States/UT. The time overrun in these delayed hydro projects ranges from 12 months to 189 
months and cost overrun up to 472.92%. The Committee further observe that there are 13 
hydroelectric projects being developed in the Central Sector by CPSUs and most of these 
projects have been badly delayed. Although, the works have started in 11 projects, construction 
of 02 projects are still held up. The Committee note that the main issues involved in 
execution/completion of hydro-electric projects are bottlenecks in land acquisition, environment 
and forest issues, rehabilitation & resettlement issues, inadequate infrastructural facilities, law & 
order/local issues, geological surprises, natural calamities, funds constraints, contractual issues, 
inter-state issues, etc. Among these issues, fund constraints followed by geological uncertainties 
and law & order/local issues are more dominant. The Committee are of the view that the 

15 
 
aforesaid issues are common and generally occur in large construction projects, which can be 
addressed and managed by having firm contractual guidelines in place prior to the start of the 
projects and with adequate policy and regulatory support. As all the hydro power projects, 
regardless of the capacity, have as per recommendation of this Committee, now been included in 
the "Renewable Energy" segment, the Committee are hopeful that this will give further impetus to 
the Hydro Sector and facilitate commissioning of Hydro Power Projects as per stipulated timeline. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that: 
(i) Due to long construction period of hydro power projects, interest on loan plays a very 
critical role in the operation period and higher interest on outstanding loan leads to 
higher yearly tariff. A review of the financing policies for hydro power projects are thus 
required with a view to provide longer tenure debt with softer interest rates. 
(ii) Inadequate infrastructure like roads, bridges, etc. particularly in Arunachal Pradesh and 
North-Eastern States result in longer construction period thereby increasing the project 
cost. Agencies, like BRO, State PWD, etc., implementing the road sector projects need 
to be provided adequate support to complete the projects expeditiously. National Clean 
Energy Fund (NCEF) could be used for development of roads, bridges and 
infrastructure common for hydro power projects.  
(iii) Considering the long gestation period and large investment involved, a single window 
clearance mechanism becomes necessary to reduce the cost and time overrun by a 
considerable margin. This will encourage Developers to undertake projects and make 
large investment in hydro power sector. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) A number of measures have been taken by the Government for lowering the tariff of 
hydro projects. In this regard, consultations were held with financial institutions/ banks under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power & NRE for increasing the tenure of the loan as well as 
lowering the rate of interest. In addition, Guidelines for reducing the incidence of Time and Cost 
Overruns have also been issued by Ministry of Power in 2019. Further, on the advice of Central 
Government, the State Governments of hydro-rich states like H.P. have also made efforts to 
push the sector by deferment/ staggering the free power during the initial years apart from other 
measures like allotting projects for longer period of 70 years, 50% reimbursement of State GST 
and booking of Local Area Development Fund (LADF) to any head other than project cost to 
bring down Tariff, etc. 
All these measures are expected to help in reducing the tariff of hydro projects especially 
during initial years. 
PFC and REC have reported that they generally offer longer loan tenure for Hydro Electric 
Projects (HEP). The loan tenure offered by PFC/REC ranges up to 85% of economic life of the 
project i.e. up to 40 years. Considering the risk involved in HEPs, PFC/REC contend that interest 
rates offered by them are reasonably competitive. 
(ii) The construction of roads and bridges in North-Eastern States has always been 
challenging due to various reasons including remote areas, mountainous terrain, limited working 
window due to heavy rains for almost six months etc. In spite of these constraints, there have 
been significant efforts by both central and state agencies to construct the roads and 

16 
 
bridges.BRO and NHIDCL have completed many roads and bridges connecting remote areas 
and work on other projects is going on. 
Use of National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) will be certainly helpful in speedy completion of 
such infrastructure. As regards the support for implementing the road sector projects in order to 
complete the projects expeditiously, it is to mention that Government has approved a number of 
measures for promoting and expediting the hydro power sector in March 2019 which includes, 
inter-alia, Budgetary Support towards the Cost of Enabling Infrastructure, i.e. roads/bridges @ 
Rs. 1.5 crore per MW for projects up to 200 MW and @ Rs. 1.0 crore per MW for projects above 
200 MW. As a result of the measures, the works are expected to be completed expeditiously. 
(iii) However in case of hydro projects, various stakeholders including State Governments 
are involved to deal with issues relating to Land acquisition, R&R issues, inadequate 
infrastructure facilities, Law & order / Local issues involved.  
However, for concurrence of DPR of Hydro projects, single window system is in place in 
CEA. Project developer is required to upload their DPR at CEA web portal after obtaining pre-
DPR Clearances from CEA/CWC/GSI/CSMRS. The DPR is easily accessed by appraising 
Groups of CEA and CWC on this portal. After examining the DPR, appraising groups of CEA and 
CWC upload their comments on portal, which developer can access and submit their replies. 
Further, clarification, if any, is also raised on the portal. In this way, this portal provides two-way 
communication platform and avoids procedural delay to expedite the process of clearance of the 
DPR of Hydroelectric projects. This system saves significant time in transmission of documents 
among Developers and Appraising Groups. This system has eased the DPR examination 
process drastically.  
National Single Window System (NSWS) has been launched by the Government of India 
for approval of clearances by the Ministries Departments. The web portal of CEA is getting 
integrated with the NSWS.  
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee note that the Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. is implementing 42 
power transmission projects, out of which 18 projects are delayed. The reasons attributed to 
delays are issues in land acquisition, Right of Way (RoW), difficult terrain, natural obstacles, 
geological surprises, contractual disputes, environmental and forest issues, financially stressed 
contractors, limited availability of skilled manpower and material, etc. The Committee however, 
are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that delay in transmission project is having only 
minimal effect on power sector due to robust power transmission network in the country and 
electricity demand being lower than the projected demand. The Committee observe that although 
India is a power surplus country but electricity does not equitably reach all regions due to 
network constraints in some States. Transmission within the States remains a major issue 
leading to intermittent power cuts and shortages of power in localized area. Further, the 
Committee believe that cost and time overrun in transmission projects will inevitably have its 
implications on the cost of power. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should not 

17 
 
remain complacent and must expedite the completion of delayed transmission projects by 
utilizing the existing institutional mechanism, while ensuring that alternative arrangements are 
made to evacuate the power by transmission implementing agency so that no bottling-up of 
power generated occurs due to lack of transmission network. 
Reply of the Government 
18 transmission projects were delayed as on Oct’20 due to various issues. The issues had 
been addressed with support of MoP& the State Govt. and meetings at various levels with State 
Govt. officials. 9 Projects have since been completed and 6 projects are on the verge of 
completion. Balance 3 projects are delayed by more than 3 months. Detailed status enclosed at 
Annexure-I. Transmission projects cover large distances across different geographies/terrain, 
facing various social-environmental challenges such as:  
   Right of Way (RoW);  
   Forest Clearance & Land Acquisitions; 
   Requirement of Shutdown for commissioning activities; 
   Contractual Issues and Supply issues;  
   Restrictions due to COVID-19 Pandemic.  
Close coordination is maintained among MoP, MNRE and CEA to closely monitor progress 
of all elements to implement the inter-state transmission matching with system requirement. If 
required, issues are escalated with MOP for taking up with senior officers of concerned state/ 
Ministry. Many issues have been resolved with active support from MOP and state officials. 
Presently, there are adequate transmission lines and as such no power is bottled up for want of 
commissioning of remaining transmission lines out of 18 nos. of transmission lines, above 
mentioned. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Recommendation (Sl. No: 5) 
The Committee would also recommend that issues arising out of the transmission line 
corridor passing through natural obstacles, adverse terrain, Government land, forest land, private 
land etc. should be foreseen and taken care of by methodical route planning, proactive 
measures, coordination with State administration and perpetual follow-up by the project 
management team. 
Reply of the Government 
For implementation of transmission lines, detailed route survey is carried out by the 
implementing agency. Several alternative routes are surveyed and the most feasible route is 
chosen for implementation of transmission line. The implementing agency tries to avoid the 
natural obstacles, adverse terrain, forest land etc. along the route. However, sometimes all of 
these may not be avoidable as it may result in increase in the length of transmission line thereby 
increasing the cost.  
As per the Tariff Policy, generally, the transmission schemes are to be implemented  
through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) route. These schemes have well defined 
implementation timeline and the transmission tariff is fixed beforehand. Non implementation of 

18 
 
the scheme in the scheduled timeline results in levy of penalties/ recovery of compensation from 
the Implementing agency. This puts the entire onus on the project developer to choose the route 
of the transmission line with minimum natural obstacles. 
Close coordination is maintained among MoP, MNRE and CEA to closely monitor progress 
of all elements to implement the inter-state transmission matching with system requirement. 
Whenever required, issues are taken up with senior officers of concerned state Government.  
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee are informed that Central Electricity Authority (CEA) monitors the progress 
of under-construction hydro power projects (above 25 MW) through frequent site visits and 
interaction with the developers and other stake holders and also holds review meetings 
periodically with them to identify and resolve issues critical for commissioning of Projects. They 
are also informed that Ministry of Power undertakes regular reviews to identify the constraint 
areas and facilitate faster resolution of inter-ministerial and other outstanding issues. The 
Committee are also informed that in case of Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSU's) 
projects, the project Implementation parameters / milestones are incorporated in the annual MoU 
signed between respective CPSU's and the Ministry of Power and the same are monitored 
during the Quarterly Performance Review meetings of CPSU's. The Committee further note that 
to coordinate and synchronize all the support functions of project management, the NTPC relies 
on a three-tiered project management system known as the Integrated Project Management 
Control System (IPMCS), which integrates its engineering management, contract management 
and construction management control centres. Notwithstanding the monitoring mechanism in 
place, the Committee are confronted with the fact that a large number of projects are delayed, 
causing huge time and cost over-run. As timely completion of power projects is very crucial to the 
growth of other sectors of the economy, the Committee recommend that apart from regular 
review meetings, an IT based project management, monitoring and follow-up system may be 
introduced at all the project sites with online connectivity with all stake holders, i.e., suppliers, 
project developers, contractors, CEA, etc. with clear cut fixation/ demarcation of responsibilities 
at every level. The need of the hour is to pin down the onus of action on the concerned 
agency/group/individual so that project management becomes more focused, vigorous and 
meaningful. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Power has issued Guidelines to reduce the incidence of time and cost 
overruns in Hydro Power Projects in November, 2019 for strict compliance in Hydro CPSUs. As 
per the guidelines, web based e-diary system is to be maintained to keep record of all events in 
respect of under construction projects for purpose of capturing data, events, progress of 
activities, etc. The guidelines also stipulate use of latest software tools for project monitoring on 
regular basis at CPSU level. This will help in better project management and also help in 
providing archive data, if required, for resolution of disputes between the Employer and the 
Contractor.  
Regarding IT based project management, monitoring and follow-up system in respect  
of Thermal project sites, a letter has been issued to all under construction Thermal power  

19 
 
plants (पğ सं.क े .ǒव.Ĥा./टȣ.पी.एम./एस.सी./जन-3/2021/Ǒदनांक: 27.08.2021) for compliance to the 
recommendations of The Standing Committee on Energy (2020-21) and the same is attached as 
Annexure - II. 
For thermal projects, NTPC has established a state-of-the-art IT-enabled Project Monitoring 
Centre (PMC) for the facilitation of fast-track project implementation and the monitoring of key 
project milestones of various NTPC projects. It also acts as a decision support system for the 
NTPC’s management. PMC is integrated across the NTPC’s network as a web based 
collaborative system, used to facilitate the consolidation of project-related issues and their 
resolution. IP Cameras are also installed at the project sites which give real time live streaming to 
monitor the critical activities. 
NTPC has provided following interfaces to various stake holders for Project management: 
 NTPC has given access of its Project management tool (Web-miles) to Ministry and 
other Govt. agencies, where the project progress can be seen.  
 An online platform for Engineering Management- “DREAMS” has been provided by 
NTPC to agencies. It is an interface between NTPC & agencies for carrying out 
engineering of the various packages. Agencies submit Engineering documents on this 
portal for approval. The Engineering progress of the packages can be reviewed from 
this platform.  
 Further, the processing of payments to all the vendors is being done through NTPCs 
PRADIP portal (A Paperless initiative by NTPC). All the activities from invoice 
submission to payments are done through this portal. 
In addition to above, in order to make monitoring of projects more effective, NTPC is now 
adopting Integrated Software monitoring tool for integrating progress of Engineering, Supplies 
and Erection at one place, and capturing progress online. Features like mobile app based 
updation of progress and role-based access make the tool more user-friendly which will result 
into regular updation of progress. It will help in taking timely remedial actions. This tool has been 
included in the bid documents of EPC packages of upcoming thermal projects of NTPC. 
In addition, the status of the implementation of power projects is being monitored through a 
number of IT-enabled Web-based platforms viz.: 
a. PRAGATI Portal 
b. Urja Darpan 
c. E-Samiksha Portal 
d. PMG Portal 
e. NIP Portal 
f. OCMS Portal 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.2/8/2016-P&P, dated: 04.01.2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report)  

20 
 
 
CHAPTER  III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

21 
 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

22 
 
 
CHAPTER  V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI  
26 July, 2022  
4 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh,                 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 23 
 
ANNEXURE I 
Details of Ongoing Projects Being Implemented by POWERGRID (>₹150 crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Project 
Approval 
Date 
Completion 
Schedule as 
per Revised 
Time 
Extension 
Approval 
Actual / 
Anticipated 
Completion 
Original 
Schedule 
Approved 
Cost  
(₹ in crore) 
Cumulative  
expenditure 
incurred till 
date (Dec'21) 
(₹ in crore) 
Cost 
Over-run 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Time 
overrun  
with 
respect to 
revised 
Time 
Extension 
approval 
Issues Steps taken to 
mitigate the issues 
1. HVDC Bipole 
link between 
Western Region 
(Raigarh, 
Chhattisgarh) 
and Southern 
Region 
(Pugalur, Tamil 
Nadu)'North 
Trichur (Kerala)' 
Scheme1: 
Raigarh ' 
Pugalur 6000 
MW HVDC 
System 
May'16 Jul'21 Oct-21 Nov-19 14,733 13,696 -- 3 Months   Project completed. 
After intervention of 
MoP, support of 
Govt. of TN and 
local administration 
Main HVDC Line 
along with Pole1  
(1500 MW) was 
commissioned in 
Sep'20, Pole 2,  
Pole 3 and Pole 4  
(1500 MW each) 
commissioned in 
Mar'21, Jul'21 and 
Oct'21 respectively. 
2 HVDC Bipole 
link between 
Western Region 
(Raigarh, 
Chhattisgarh) 
and Southern 
Region 
Feb'17 Sep'21 Jun'21 Apr-20 5,070 5,222 152 --   Project completed. 
After intervention of 
MoP, support of 
Govt. of TN & Kerala 
and assistance by 
local administration, 
1 Monopole 

24 
 
(Pugalur, Tamil 
Nadu) ' North 
Trichur (Kerala)' 
Scheme#3: 
Pugalur' Trichur 
2000 MW VSC 
based HVDC 
System 
alongwith 320kV 
HVDC line 
commissioned in 
Mar'21 & balance 1 
Monopole 
commissioned in 
Jun'21. 
3. HVDC Bipole 
link between 
Western Region 
(Raigarh' 
Chhattisgarh) 
and Southern 
Region 
(Pugalur, Tamil 
Nadu) ' North 
Trichur (Kerala) ' 
Scheme#2: AC 
System 
Strengthening at 
Pugalur end 
Aug'17 Oct'21 Oct'21 Feb-20 1,931 2,065 133.61 --  Project completed. 
After intervention of 
MoP, support of 
Govt. of TN and 
assistance by local 
administration, 2 no. 
400kV AC lines 
commissioned in 
Sep'20 & 2 no. 
400kV AC lines 
commissioned in 
Jul'21 and last line 
commissioned in 
Oct'21.  
4. POWERGRID 
Medinipur 
Jeerat 
Transmission 
Limited  
Mar'17 Dec'20 Aug’21-
Feb’22 
Jul-20 3,500 3,463 -- 14 months --Severe RoW 
issue & rainfall. 
 Phase -I comprising 
of  : 765kV Ranchi-
Medinipur line, 
765kV Medinipur 
SS, 400kV LILO at 
Medinipur,  
Commissioned on 
09.02.2021 
765kV D/C 
Medinipur - Jeerat 
T/L+ 400kV D/C 
Jeerat (New) - 

25 
 
Jeerat (WBSETCL)  
line along with 
Jeerat S/s 
commissioned in 
Sep'21. 
400kV Jeerat-
Subhashgram line 
facing severe RoW 
issues expected to 
be completed by 
Feb'22. RoW 
problem Being 
resolved with the 
help of local 
administration. 
5. System 
Strengthening 
Scheme at 
Tuticorin'II 
(ertstwhile 
Tirunelvelli GIS) 
and Bhuj PS 
Nov'18 Jul'21 Dec'21 Jun-20 496 383 -- 5 months -- Progress 
affected due to 
delay in supply 
of Gas 
Insulated 
Bushings  from 
China during 
COVID-19 
pandemic. Now 
all supplies 
completed. 
Bhuj (PS) Substation 
commissioned. 
Transformer No 3 at 
Tirunelvelli 
completed. All major 
works completed. 
Common facility at 
Bays is likely to be 
completed by  
Dec, 21.  
6. Transmission 
System for Ultra 
Mega Solar 
Power Park at 
Tumkur 
(Pavagada), 
Karnataka' 
Phase'II(Part'B) 
May'17 Feb'21 Feb'21 Feb-19 675 548 -- --   Project completed. 
With support of MoP 
& Govt of KN, line 
charged in Feb'21. 

26 
 
7. System 
Strengthening 
Scheme in 
Northern 
Region-XXXVII 
(NRSS-XXXVII) 
Mar'17 Sep'21 Jan'22 Dec-19 380 338 -- 4 months --Progress 
affected due to 
transportation & 
weather issue; 
--Progress also 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
On completion of  
damaged road/road 
widening by NHAI, 
.all transformers & 
reactors (kept at 
temporary stores at 
Chalthi) have been 
transported at 
Jauljivi site. Civil 
aviation clearance 
and as per clearance 
route has been 
converted from 
overhead to 
underground cable. 
Laying work under 
progress. System 
expected to be 
commissioned by 
Jan,22 
8. Transmission 
System 
Strengthening in 
Indian System 
for Transfer of 
power from 
Mangdechhu 
Hydroelectric 
Project in 
Bhutan 
Mar'16 Jul'21 Jun'21 Jan-18 809 848 39.37 --   Project completed. 
Commissioned on 
24.06.2021 
9. POWERGRID 
works 
associated with 
North Eastern 
Region 
Strengthening 
Scheme-VI 
May'18 Jul'21 May'21 May-20 216 173 -- --   Project completed. 
Completed in May'21 

27 
 
10. Eastern Region 
Strengthening 
Scheme-XX 
(ERSS-XX) 
Nov'17 Aug'21 Jan'22 May-20 359 318 -- 5 months  --Progress also 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Progress 
affected due to 
Non- availability 
of Shutdown 
All major works 
completed, testing is 
under progress. 
Expected completion 
Jan'22.  
11. Eastern Region 
Strengthening  
Scheme - XV 
(ERSS-XV) 
Apr'16 Mar'21 Jun'21 Apr-18 454 398 -- 3 months --Corridor 
constraint at 
Jeerat S/s for 
bays. 
-- Progress also 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Project completed. 
Commissioned. 
12. Creation of 
400/220kV 
Substations in 
NCT of Delhi 
during 12th Plan 
Period (Part-A) 
Mar'15 Dec'21 Mar'22 May-17 1,395 793 -- 3 months --Delay in 
Forest 
clearance; 
--Progress also 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic and 
construction 
ban. 
Working permission 
received in Aug'21 
after lot of 
persuation at 
Ministry level and 
raised in PMG 
portal. Construction 
ban lifted on 
21.12.21.    
13. Eastern Region 
Strengthening 
Scheme-XVII - 
Part-B [ERSS-
XVII (Part-B)] 
Feb'17 Nov'21 Feb'22 Jun-19 236 184 -- 3 months --Non -
availability of 
Shutdown ; 
-- Progress also 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Shutdown provided 
w.e.f. 10.12.21, 
Work under 
progress.  

28 
 
14. Establishment of 
220/66kV, 
2X160MVA GIS 
at UT 
Chandigarh 
along with 
220kV D/c line 
from 220kV 
Chandigarh GIS 
Sub-station to 
400/220kV 
Panchkula (PG) 
Sub-station 
Feb'17 Sep'21 Mar'22 Feb-19 322 278 -- 6 months --RoW issues. Matter taken up with 
district 
administration and 
raised in PMG 
portal. Meeting held 
with Chief Secretary 
and additional Chief 
secretary for 
resolution of RoW 
issues.Case in High 
court , Next hearing 
on 17.01.2022 after 
number of 
adjournments 
15. Transmission 
system for 
evacuation of 
power from 
2x500 MW 
Neyveli Lignite 
Corp. Ltd. TS-I 
(Replacement) 
(NNTPS) in 
Neyveli,  
Tamil Nadu 
May'17 Jul'21 Jul'20 Jul-19 220 205 --    Project completed. 
With support of 
admin., line charged 
in Jul'20 by 
connecting to one 
ckt of LILO section 
of Pugalur - 
Kalivandapattu 400 
kV D/C line near 
Ariyalur S/s (as bays 
by TANTRANCO on 
Deposit work Basis 
are expected by 
Mar'22). 
16. Transmission 
System 
Associated with 
Mundra Ultra 
Mega Power 
Project 
Oct'08 Mar'21 Mar'21 Sep-12 5,072 4,793 --    Project completed. 

29 
 
17. Eastern Region 
Strengthening 
Scheme - XII 
(ERSS-XII) 
May'14 Dec'21 Feb'22 Nov-16 546 532 -- 2 months --Transportation 
issue resolved--
Progress 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
ICT under water 
transportation 
through Farakka 
feeder Canal,  
reached near to 
NTPC switch yard. 
Commissioning 
expected in Feb'22   
18. Phase-I Unified 
Real Time 
Dynamic State 
Measurement 
(URTDSM) 
Project 
Jan'14 Dec'17 Dec'21 Apr-16 375 312 -- 48 months 1) Non-
availability of 
test laboratories 
worldwide for 
type testing of 
PMU in 
accordance 
with the Latest 
IEEE C37.118 
Standard as per 
the 
Specifications. 
2) Space 
constraint at 
ERLDC 
(POSOCO) for 
commissioning 
of backup 
NLDC. Backup 
NLDC 
commissioned 
on 05.03.2021 
3) Development 
of Six analytical 
applications in 
consultation 
with IIT Bombay 
The Type Testing 
was done in 
guidance of 
International 
Consultants 
appointed by 
Powergrid at Virginia 
tech University and 
Consumer Energy 
Laboratory,USA. 
2) Rigorous follow 
ups done with 
ERLDC,POSOCO 
for providing space. 
3) Follow ups with 
IIT Bombay done. 
All major physical 
works have been 
completed, project 
closure / 
documentation 
activities are under 
progress. 

30 
 
is also part of 
URTDSM 
project. All six 
analytical 
applications 
have been 
developed  and 
as it involves lot 
of R&D work so 
development of 
the same has 
taken 
substantial 
amount of time. 
4) Progress 
also got 
affected due to 
COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Note: As per Ministry of Power, Govt. of India circular no. 3/1/2020-Trans dated 12th June, 2021, all inter-state transmission projects which are under construction with SCOD coming 
after 01 April, 2021 have been given of 3 months in respect of their SCOD. 

 
 
  
31 
ANNEXURE  II 
 


32 
 
 
Appendix I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2021-22) HELD ON 26TH JULY, 2022 IN HON’BLE CHAIRPERSON’S CHAMBER,  
ROOM NO. 111, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION,  
NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1615 hours 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh   –   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
4. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
6. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7. Shri Velusamy P. 
8. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
9. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
10. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
12. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
13. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
14. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
15. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
16. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan – Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Additional Director 
 2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about the 
agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports: 

33 
 
(i) Report on the subject ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – Need for uniformity in tariff 
structure across the Country’. 
(ii) Report on the subject ‘Evaluation of Wind Energy in India’. 
(iii) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ recommendations 
contained in Seventeenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Action Plan for 
Achievement of 175 GW Renewable Energy Target’. 
(iv) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ recommendations 
contained in Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Development of Coal 
Blocks allocated to Power Sector Companies’. 
(v) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ recommendations 
contained in Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delay in 
Execution/Completion of Power Projects by Power Sector Companies’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the aforementioned 
draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both Houses of 
the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

34 
 
 
Appendix  II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations                            6 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 and 6 
                     Total: 06 
                          Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observation/ Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply: 
Sl. No. Nil       
                     Total: 00 
                  Percentage: 00% 
(iv) Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. No. Nil       
                     Total: 00 
                  Percentage: 00% 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited: 
Sl. No. Nil      
          Total : 00 
                  Percentage: 00%  