STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
14
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power
for the year 2019-20]
                       FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna,1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."

FOURTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2019-20] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
COE NO. 329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2019 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 

i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)…….………… iii 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………….. v 
CHAPTER I Report ………………………………………….… 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government…………… 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies………………………. 
 
 
58 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration………………………………………… 
 
 
 
59 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………… 
 
 
64 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held 
on 18th March, 2021……………………………. 
 
65 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 2nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Energy……….. 
 
 
 
68 
ii 
 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
ENERGY (2020-21) 
 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed  
3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana  
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
12. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
13. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
14. Smt. Anupriya Patel  
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. ^Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod  
18. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri P. Velusamy  
21. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
iv 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. *Vacant 
31. #Vacant  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari  — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  — Director  
3. Smt. L.Nemjalhing Haokip — Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan, retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020. 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee w.e.f. 13.09.2020 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grant (2019-20) 
of the Ministry of Power. 
2. The Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 6th 
December, 2019 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 22nd June, 2020.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 18th March, 2021 
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee 
is given at Appendix-II. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
18th March, 2021 
Phalguna 27, 1942 (Saka) 
RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS 
 LALAN SINGH, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
  
 
  

CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 
2019-20. 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 6th 
December, 2019 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the 
same day. The Report contained 16 Recommendations/ 
Observations. Action-taken notes in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have been 
received from the Government. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Serial Nos.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 
             Total - 14 
                         Chapter - II 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil      
 Total - 00 
Chapter - III 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. 3 and  4 
                  Total - 02 
Chapter - IV 
2 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Nil                                           
Total - 00 
Chapter - V 
3. The Committee observe that the 2nd Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grant of the Ministry of Power for the 
year 2019-20 was presented to Parliament on 6th December, 2019 
and the Ministry of Power was required to submit the action 
taken replies thereon within a period of 03 months i.e. by               
5th March, 2020.  The Committee however observe that the 
action taken replies on the Report have been submitted by the 
Ministry on 22nd June, 2020.  The Committee therefore advise 
the Ministry to strictly follow the time schedule prescribed for 
the submission of the replies on the Reports of the Committee in 
future.  The Committee further desire that the Action-taken 
statement on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee 
within a period of three months from the presentation of this 
Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Recommendations that require 
reiteration or merit comments. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
5.  The Committee had recommended/observed as under:  
“The Committee note that there is an elaborated monitoring 
mechanism under  DDUGJY to ensure its proper implementation. 
At State level, a Committee under  the Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary is in place to monitor progress and resolve issues 

3 
 
relating to implementation viz. allocation of land for sub-stations, 
right of way, forest clearance, railway clearance, safety clearance 
etc. At District level, District Development Coordination & 
Monitoring Committee namely DISHA (administered by Ministry of 
Rural Development) headed by senior most Member of 
Parliament (Lok Sabha) is in place to review and monitor 
implementation of  central sector schemes including DDUGJY . At 
Central level, Inter-Ministerial Monitoring Committee on DDUGJY 
headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, Government of India 
also monitors implementation of scheme. Besides, progress is 
also reviewed with States/Power Utilities in Review, Planning and 
Monitoring (RPM) meeting of Ministry of Power. REC Limited, the 
nodal agency, monitors implementation of scheme through its 
Project Offices at field level. The Project Management Agency 
(PMA) appointed by Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) assists 
them in implementation of projects in such activities which 
involves  formulation of Detailed Project Report (DPRs), award 
of works, monitoring the progress, quality monitoring etc.   
Despite all these mechanism in place, the Committee have 
been receiving feedback through Members of Parliament about 
the poor quality of work being done at the ground level. The main 
complaint in this regard is that despite pointing out to the poor 
quality of work, hardly any remedial measure is taken. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should keep 
track of the meetings of the DISHA and get report/feedback on 
matters discussed therein pertaining to electricity sector 
especially schemes such as DDUGJY and IPDS. The Committee 
also expect the Ministry to take prompt and sincere action on 
4 
 
such issues under intimation to the respective Member of 
Parliament.” 
6. The Ministry of Power, in its Action -taken reply, has 
recommended/observed as under: 
“As per the Quality Assurance Mechanism established under 
the scheme, at first level; State Power Utilities carryout necessary 
quality checks including pre-despatch inspection of materials as 
well as quality of erection works in the field.  At second level,  
the Nodal agency, REC Limited has also been entrusted with the 
responsibility to carryout pre-despatch quality inspection of 
materials and erection works in villages on random sample basis 
through third party agencies designated as REC Quality 
Monitoring Agencies (RQMs).  The  defects notified by quality 
monitoring agencies are forwarded to Project Implementing 
Agencies for rectification & corrective measures. 
The status of quality assurance is regularly reviewed by the 
nodal agency and the Ministry with the States/Power Utilities and 
necessary directions are issued from time to time in order to 
further improve the quality of materials as well as quality in 
erection works. 
Apart from aforesaid Quality Assurance Mechanism, Ministry of 
Power, through  REC, has imparted trainings to the frontline 
supervisors of State Power Utilities, Turnkey Contractors & 
Project Implementing Agencies (PIA) to improve quality of the 
works being executed under DDUGJY .  In order to enforce quality 
in the DDUGJY works, payment to the PIAs is linked with defect 
rectification and other quality compliances. 
In case of complaints from Public Representatives, a 
Committee/Team consisting of officials from REC, State Power 
Utilities, Project Implementing Agencies, Quality Monitors etc., is 

5 
 
constituted to enquire into the matter and ensure redressal of the 
concerns raised.” 
7. The Committee observe from the reply submitted by the 
Ministry that under Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) Scheme, Quality Assurance Mechanism is established 
at various levels, carrying out necessary quality checks 
including  pre-despatch inspection of materials as well as quality 
of erection works in the field and that the Nodal agency, REC 
Limited has been entrusted with the responsibility to carry out 
pre-despatch quality inspection of materials and erection works. 
The Committee are also informed that the status of quality 
assurance is regularly reviewed and that necessary directions 
from the Ministry are issued from time to time in order to further 
improve the quality of materials as well as quality in erection 
works. The Committee also note that in order to address the 
complaints from public representatives regarding poor quality of 
work under DDUGJY, the Ministry has reportedly constituted a 
Committee/Team consisting of officials from the REC, State 
Power Utilities, Project Implementing Agencies, Quality Monitors 
etc., to enquire into the matter and ensure redressal of the 
concerns raised. The Committee in their original report had 
specifically recommended that the Ministry should keep track of 
the meetings of DISHA and get report/feedback on matters 
discussed therein pertaining to the electricity sector especially 
schemes such as DDUGJY and IPDS.  The Committee had also 
expected the Ministry to take prompt and sincere action on such 
issues under intimation to the respective Member of Parliament.  
The Committee however observe that the action taken reply of 
the Ministry is silent on both these issues though various other 
measures taken by them have been elaborated.   
6 
 
While the Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry 
in ensuring proper implementation of DDUGJY, they would like  
to reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry should  
keep track of the meetings of DISHA along with other 
Committees/Teams and get report/feedback quickly on matters 
discussed pertaining to electricity sector especially DDUGJY and 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS). The Committee 
would like to impress upon the Ministry to take prompt and 
sincere action on the issues and complaints made by the 
Members of Parliament and also to keep apprised the respective 
Member of Parliament of the action taken. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
8. The Committee had recommended/observed as under : 
“The Committee note with satisfaction that Pradhan Mantri 
Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana- Saubhagya, a scheme to achieve 
universal household electrification by providing last mile 
connectivity and electricity connection to all remaining un-
electrified households in rural and urban areas, has been a great 
success. All States declared electrification of all households as on 
31st March, 2019 except 18,734 households in Left Wing 
Extremist (LWE) affected areas of Chhattisgarh. Since launch of 
Saubhagya, 2.63 crore households were electrified across the 
country up to 31st March, 2019. The Committee, considering the 
scale of work and the limited time period, feel that it was indeed a 
herculean task. The Committee appreciate the Ministry for taking 
this much needed initiative and also accomplishing it in a time 
bound manner. This scheme has special significance for this 
Committee as they have  since long been persuading the 
Government to focus on electrification of all households instead of 

7 
 
declaring a village electrified by providing electricity connection to 
households as few as 10% of that village.         
The Ministry have stated that subsequently seven States 
namely Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh reported that there are 19.09 lakh 
un-electrified households which were earlier un-willing, and now 
willing to get electricity connection, identified before 31st March, 
2019. The Ministry have further informed that States have been 
asked to electrify these household under Saubhagya by 31st 
December, 2019. It is also stated that out of these, 3.44 lakh 
households, have been electrified up to 27th September, 2019.  
The Committee do understand that electrification of household 
is an ongoing process, however, the number of ‘unwilling’ 
households is too large to be a regular affair. This figure also 
vindicates the apprehension of this Committee that a sizeable 
number of households were left out of the scheme for whatever 
reasons. The Committee expect that the Ministry would carry on 
the good work without slowing down its pace. The Committee, 
recommend that all the left out/now willing households be 
electrified within the targeted date of 31stDecember, 2019. The 
Committee also expect that the Ministry of Power with the help  
of State Government would run awareness programme and 
encourage people to get electricity connection under the scheme.” 
9. The Ministry of Power, in its Action-taken reply, has stated as 
under: 
“The progress on household electrification is reviewed 
regularly by the nodal agency and the Ministry and the States / 
Power Utilities are advised to expedite the progress by promptly 
8 
 
resolving the issues hampering the progress. Out of 19.09 lakh 
un-electrified households which were earlier un-willing and now 
willing to get electricity connection, 9.85 lakh households have 
been electrified up to 31.12.2019. 
The matter has also been reviewed in the Review, Planning 
and Monitoring meeting with all States / Power Utilities held on  
9th -10th January, 2020 and all concerned States / Power Utilities 
have been advised to accelerate the pace of releasing electricity 
connections to the remaining households to ensure electrification 
of all willing households at the earliest.” 
10. The Committee note from the reply submitted by the 
Ministry of Power that out of 19.09 lakh un-electrified households 
which were earlier un-willing and now willing to get electricity 
connection, 9.85 lakh households have only been electrified  
up to 31.12.2019.  It is thus observed that as on 31.12.2019, 9.24 
lakh households were yet to be electrified.  The aim of the 
Government under Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana – 
Saubhagya, was to electrify all un-electrified household in the 
country by 31st December, 2019 but unfortunately a sizeable 
number of households were left to be electrified by the target 
date.  The Committee therefore, would like to reiterate that all the 
willing households not covered earlier, need to be electrified in a 
time bound manner so that the target of universal household 
electrification is realized in a fruitful manner. The Committee 
observe that with regard to their recommendation that the 
Ministry of Power should run awareness programme with the 
help of State Governments and encourage people to get 
electricity connection under the scheme, the Ministry has not 
mentioned anything about the action taken thereon by them. The 

9 
 
Committee would therefore reiterate their recommendation that 
the government need to run awareness programme by involving 
the State Governments with a view to encourage all households 
not so far electrified, to get electricity connection under the 
scheme at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress in the matter. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
11.  The Committee had recommended/observed as under : 
“The Committee note that India has been participating as one 
of the leading party in the Conference of Parties (COP) under the 
United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). The twenty-first session of the COP that took place in 
2015 at Paris reached a landmark agreement called “Paris 
Agreement” to combat climate change. The aim of the Paris 
Agreement is to strengthen the global response to the threat of 
climate change by keeping the global temperature rise well below 
2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue 
efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degree 
Celsius. The Government of India has submitted its Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) to UNFCCC in 2015, endorsing 
country’s ambitious commitment towards the issues to climate 
change and ratified it in the year 2016. 
In this scenario, the Committee feels that the role of BEE has 
become very crucial in implementation of various energy 
efficiency and conservation programmes. To fulfill this 
commitment, more energy efficiency measures have to be taken. 
However, the Committee also believe that irrespective of that 
commitment, expansion and intensification of energy efficiency is 
in the interest of the Country. Energy Efficiency Programmes are 
not only beneficial from environment perspective but also a 
10 
 
profitable business as it leads to reduction in energy cost. The 
Committee find that the energy efficiency programs being run by 
BEE are relevant and quite effective and the saving caused by 
them in terms of energy and cost, is astonishing. Though 
remarkable achievements have been made under these 
programmes, the Committee are of the belief that there is still 
great potential in the field of energy efficiency. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Energy Efficiency Programmes 
should further be expanded and intensified.” 
12.  In its Action-taken replies, the Ministry of Power has stated as 
under : 
“India ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 
2016 under which its member countries have given commitments 
to make efforts in order to keep  global average temperatures 
rise below 2 degree Celsius. India in its Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) has committed that it will reduce the 
emission intensity of its GDP by 33% to 35% by 2030 from 2005 
level. To achieve the above, it would be necessary to continue 
with its ongoing interventions and enhance the existing policies. 
2. As per the study commissioned by BEE, while emphasizing 
on the energy savings in each of the demand sectors, emission 
reduction is possible through adoption of energy-saving practices, 
use of novel technologies and better enforcement of existing 
policy and programmes. It is envisaged that due to 
implementation of various energy efficiency measures, savings of 
438 to 623 Million Tonnes of CO2 can be achieved by 2030 in the 
moderate and ambitious scenario respectively, which will be 
approximately 50% to 60% of the total energy related emission 
reductions.   
3. In order to achieve above, BEE is planning to undertake 
following new initiatives with an overall objective to reduce the 
energy intensity of the country: 

11 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Initiative Action to be taken 
1 2 3 
I Optimize cooling 
related energy 
consumption 
 
India is one of the fastest major growing 
economies of the world. The present AC 
penetration is only 7% in the households and is 
poised to increase to over 20% by 2030. 
Moreover, with rapid industrialization, 
urbanization, increase in per capita income of 
the people, the cooling demand is bound to 
increase in a significant way. India is ready to 
take this challenge, by optimizing the cooling 
demand, using efficient and climate friendly 
technologies to tackle this growth. 
II Adoption of 
energy 
conservation 
building code by 
ULBs 
 
The updated version of the Energy 
Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was 
launched in 2017 and till date 15 States / UTs 
have notified the same. For effective 
implementation of ECBC, it is necessary to 
incorporate in the municipal bye laws. Post 
Notification of ECBC in States, the bye laws will 
be amended to incorporate ECBC provisions 
and then gradually adoption and enforcement 
of ECBC compliance will be taken up by ULBs. 
III Widen and 
deepen PAT 
scheme 
Coverage of PAT scheme for sectors such as 
Glass, Ceramic, Chemicals, Mining & Non-
Ferrous Metals (Copper/Zinc) are being 
considered. Industrial sector coverage under 
the programme is over 60% with a target to 
reach 75% by 2024-25. Energy Intensive 
sectors like Iron & Steel, Thermal Power Plants, 
Refineries, Petrochemical to save 21 million 
TOE. 
 
12 
 
1 2 3 
IV Adoption of 
energy efficiency 
in MSMEs 
MSME sector to be new focus area with 
schemes to deploy energy efficient 
technologies in process – Cold Chain sector to 
be one of the key area. 
V Transport sector 
fuel consumption 
to be minimized 
through fuel 
efficiency norms 
for Passenger 
Cars, HDVs and 
LCVs. 
Transport sector consumption to be minimized 
by prescribing fuel efficiency norms for 
Passenger Cars, Heavy Duty Vehicles (HDVs), 
Light Commercial Vehicles (LCVs) and 
Tractors. 
 
4. Additionally, BEE has proposed to merge its existing 
programmes/schemes along with the new initiatives under a 
revised mission on enhanced energy efficiency i.e. “Roadmap of 
Sustainable and Holistic Approach to National Energy Efficiency 
(ROSHANEE)”. The revised mission has a broader vision and 
takes into account all the potential areas of energy efficiency in 
various sectors, covering the macro level in policy and further 
delineating the respective schemes. The revised mission includes 
the ongoing activities of BEE that have contributed significantly 
towards enhancing energy efficiency in all the sectors of the 
economy along with CO2 mitigation. The revised programme also 
has a dedicated component for facilitating financing of energy 
efficiency activities in India. It also targets the industrial sector in 
entirety ranging from large to small and medium enterprises.  
It also deals with the subject of Demand Side Management.  
It clearly outlines the strategies that need to be adopted  
for achieving India’s Nationally Determined Contribution 
commitments.     

13 
 
5. Through the ROSHANEE document, NMEEE (existing 
National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency) is being 
strengthened with a new portfolio of strategies to strengthen 
energy efficiency across all sectors in the country till 2030. 
ROSHANEE also aims to bring together seemingly disparate 
national initiatives however, having common climate benefits such 
as Zero Effect, Zero Defect, Smart Cities and India Cooling Action 
Plan. 
6. ROSHANEE aims to align the country’s energy efficiency 
measures with the commitments under Nationally Determined 
Contributions in particular and to strive for United Nations 
Sustainable Development goals.”   
13. The Committee in their original Report had observed that 
the role of Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) had become very 
crucial in implementation of various energy efficiency and 
conservation programmes and to fulfill this commitment, more 
energy efficiency measures were needed to be taken. The 
Committee had recommended for further expansion and 
intensification of energy efficiency programmes.  From the reply 
submitted by the Ministry, the Committee observe that India 
ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 2016 under 
which its member countries have given commitments to make 
efforts in order to keep global average temperatures rise below 2 
degree Celsius.  India in its Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) has committed that it will reduce the emission intensity 
of its GDP from 33% to 35% by 2030 from the 2005 level. The 
Committee have been further informed that due to 
implementation of various energy efficiency measures, savings 
of 438 to 623 million tones of CO2 can be achieved by 2030 in the 
moderate and ambitious scenario respectively which will be 
approximately 50% to 60% of the total energy related emission 
14 
 
reductions.  As per the submission of the Ministry, the BEE with 
a view to reduce the energy intensity of the country, is planning 
to undertake new initiatives like optimize cooling related energy 
consumption, adoption of energy conservation building code by 
ULBs, widen and deepen PAT scheme, adoption of energy 
efficiency in MSMEs and minimization of fuel consumption in 
transport sector. The Committee also find that BEE has 
proposed to merge its existing programmes/ schemes alongwith 
the new initiatives under a revised mission on enhanced energy 
efficiency i.e. Roadmap of Sustainable and Holistic Approach to 
National Energy Efficiency (ROSHANEE). While appreciating the 
initiative reportedly taken up by the Ministry/BEE to combat 
climate change by emphasizing on the energy savings practices, 
the Committee desire that they may be apprised of the concrete 
action taken and result achieved through the new initiatives.   
  

15 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN                       
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee note that Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of  
the Ministry of Power for the year 2019-20 is Rs. 15,874.82  
crore. However, the Ministry of Power had made a proposal for  
Rs. 32,001.11 crore. The Committee further note that previous year 
also the Ministry of Power was allocated only Rs. 15,046.92 crore 
against the demand of Rs. 36,843.32 crore. However, the actual 
utilization of fund during the said period was Rs. 15,576.30 crore 
which is 103.5% of the Budgetary Estimate. The Committee also note 
that though previous year's allocation was the highest ever for the 
Ministry, even then they were able to fully utilized that. 
The Committee appreciate the Ministry for full utilization of fund. 
The Committee expect this kind of committed and sincere efforts for 
achievement of set goals and targets. Considering the previous year's 
financial performance of the Ministry, the Committee are surprised at 
the substantial cut made by the Ministry of Finance in the proposal of 
the Ministry of Power for the year 2019. Though the Ministry of 
Finance has allowed for raising Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) to 
the tune of Rs. 9,000 crore specifically for DDUGJY and Saubhagya 
scheme over and above the budgetary allocation of Rs. 15,874.82 
crore, nevertheless the allocation is well short of the demand of Rs. 
32,001.11 crore. 
The Ministry of Power have stated that the projected requirement 
for Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana during the Interim 
Budget was Rs. 14,000 crore wherein only Rs. 4,066 crore is given in 
16 
 
regular budget of 2019-20. In addition, Rs. 7,000 crore is given by the 
Ministry of Finance by way of raising EBR. It is further stated that total 
budget requirement under IPDS for the year is Rs. 6,150 crore. Out of 
the total requirement, only Rs. 5,280.45 crore is provided in the 
regular budget. The Ministry of Power have stated that the sought 
amount is needed to ensure closure of R-APDRP Part-A IT, SCADA 
and Part-B projects including Grant in aid of Rs. 100 crore. They have 
further stated that as on date claims worth Rs. 2,880 crore has 
already been processed/ are under process. Also, considering the 
progress of IPDS project utilities may need these funds for timely 
completion of IPDS projects. 
Considering the submission of the Ministry of Power and their 
previous year’s financial performance, the committee are of the view 
that the budgetary cut may adversely affect the progress of their 
flagship programmes. The Committee have persistently been 
emphasizing the speedy and timely completion of the projects of 
important programmes of the Ministry viz. DDUGJY, Saubhagya and 
IPDS. They feel that it would be unfortunate if these programmes are 
delayed due to paucity of fund. The committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that adequate fund should be provided to the Ministry of 
Power so that timely implementation of important programmes can be 
ensured. The Committee also expect that the Ministry of Power will 
sincerely pursue this matter at appropriate level and ensure that no 
delay in execution of work is caused for the want of fund.  
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that during current FY 2019-20, Rs.15,874.82 crore 
is allocated in RE 2019-20 along with Rs. 9,000 crore under EBR 
given the full utilization of funds in 2018-19 i.e.103.5% of Budget 
Estimate 2018-19. In pre-budget discussion meeting, Ministry of 

17 
 
Power had demanded an allocation of Rs.19,605.09 crore. However, 
Rs.15,874.82 cr.  was sanctioned by Ministry of Finance.  
Ministry of Power regularly pursues the matter for allocation of 
fund at the time of pre-budget discussion meeting, Supplementary 
demand for grants and at various other forums from time to time. The 
Ministry also ensures that all flagship programmes of MoP do not 
suffer due to inadequacy of fund. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 
The Committee are happy to note that the work of electrification of 
all the inhabited census villages across the country were completed 
as on 28th April, 2018 ahead of the timeline i.e. May, 2018. The 
Committee appreciate the Ministry for ensuring timely electrification of 
all the villages. The Committee believe that the achievement of target 
of electrification of all villages is not only an important milestone for 
the Power Sector but it would also help immensely in overall socio-
economic development of the country.  
The Committee further note that apart from Rural Electrification, 
there are two other components under  Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram 
Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) viz. separation of agriculture and non-
agriculture feeders to facilitate DISCOMs in the judicious rostering of 
supply to agricultural and uninterrupted quality power supply to non-
agricultural consumers and strengthening and augmentation of Sub-
Transmission & Distribution Infrastructure in rural areas, including 
metering of distribution transformers/ feeders/consumers. In regard to 
status of implementation of these components, the Ministry have 
stated that though DDUGJY scheme is available till 2021-22, the 
18 
 
Government of India is impressing upon States for completion of all 
the components of DDUGJY before the schedule time. They have 
also stated that 2910 new Sub-Stations have been established/ 
augmented; the work on 94,380 km feeder separation completed; 
2,88,852 new DT installed and 1,97,267 km LT and 1,16,792 km HT 
new line erected. The Committee note that overall progress under the 
scheme in the country is 62%. The Ministry have stated that slow 
progress of work in some of the States is due to delay in award of the 
contract, delay in getting forest  & railway clearances, land acquisition 
for sub-stations, Right of Way (RoW) issues, law and order issues 
and difficult terrain etc.  
 The Committee are of the view that the other two components of 
DDUGJY are equally important and supplementary to rural 
electrification, therefore, every effort should be made to ensure their 
timely completion. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
coordinate with the States and provide required assistance to them to 
expedite the implementation of the programme if the pace of work is 
not satisfactory.   
Reply of the Government 
The progress of the scheme and its components including system 
strengthening and metering is reviewed regularly by the Ministry. 
Issues are regularly taken up with concerned Additional Chief 
Secretaries/ Principle Secretaries Energy/Power of the States/UTs 
highlighting specific details advising them to promptly resolve the 
issues hampering the progress to ensure timely completion of works. 
Keeping in view the important aspects of each of the components of 
the scheme; especially feeder separation and metering of feeders & 
distribution, the Ministry has requested all the concerned States to 
ensure early completion of sanctioned works. Nodal Agency through 

19 
 
its regional offices and officers also reviews the progress and 
facilitates expediting the projects.  
Progress is also regularly reviewed in the Review, Planning and 
Monitoring (RPM) meetings with all States / Power Utilities and all 
concerned States / Power Utilities have been advised to accelerate 
the pace of execution of works to ensure completion of all sanctioned 
works at the earliest. Progress of rural electrification works is also 
shared in Power Ministers’ Conferences. 
During last three months ending 31.12.2019, 190 new sub-
stations have been established/augmented, work on 6521 Ckm feeder 
segregation have been completed, 18809 new distribution 
transformers have been installed and 11285 Ckm LT & 1230 Ckm HT 
new lines have been erected under DDUGJY. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget 
 Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) 
The Committee note that the Integrated Power Development 
Scheme (IPDS) was formulated on 20th November, 2014 with an 
objective to provide 24x7 power supplies for consumers and to 
provide access to all urban households and facilitate State Power 
Utilities to reduce the level of AT&C losses to 15%. The programme 
(excluding R-APDRP component) have estimated outlay of  
Rs. 32,000 crore including a budgetary support of Rs. 25,354 crore 
from Government of India during the entire implementation period. 
Besides this R-APDRP scheme cost of Rs. 44,011 crore including a 
budgetary support of Rs. 22,727 crore as already approved by CCEA 
will be carried forward to the new scheme of IPDS in addition to the 
outlay for other components.  
20 
 
In regard to progress of implementation of the scheme, the 
Ministry have stated that a total of Rs. 32,059 crore for 546 circles in 
32 States/UTs has been sanctioned. Also, an amount of Rs. 11,737 
crore (of GOI component of Rs. 20,103 crore) has been released by 
Ministry of Power to States in addition to Rs. 181 crore for enabling 
activities for implementation of urban distribution system 
strengthening projects under IPDS. Utilities have reported that Sub-
transmission and Distribution (ST&D) works have been completed in 
336 circles out of 546 Circles. The Committee are well aware of the 
importance of IPDS scheme in strengthening of Distribution Sector 
which is the weakest link in the power system. The Committee are 
also aware of the enormity of work proposed to be carried out under 
the scheme and the complexities owing to involvement of multiple 
agencies. However, the Committee also note that the scheme of  
R-APDRP was initiated way back in the year 2008 and even after 
more than a decade we are not able to reduce AT&C losses to 15%. 
However, it is another issue that even 15% AT&C losses are not 
justified if IPDS is fully implemented. The Committee are of the belief 
that unless the distribution sector is strengthened, economic viability 
of the whole power sector cannot be ensured. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all out efforts be made to expedite the 
execution of work under the scheme and provide assistance to 
Discoms to resolve issues if they themselves are unable to overcome 
it. The Committee, further desire that the Ministry should provide 
guidance and share information relating to best practices/success 
stories/experience learnt which are lagging behind in implementation 
of this scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power, Government of India along with M/s Power 
Finance Corporation, designated as nodal agency for 
operationalization of Integrated Power Development Scheme, have 

21 
 
made concerted efforts for expediting implementation under the 
scheme through rigorous monitoring at highest levels.It is submitted 
that as on 31st March, 2020, an amount of Rs.12,451 crore (of GOI 
component of Rs. 20,103 crore) has been released by Ministry of 
Power to States in addition to Rs.193 crore for enabling activities 
under IPDS. 
A four tier monitoring mechanism for IPDS is adopted to ensure 
speedy implementation is as follows:— 
Tier I : Central level monitoring at MoP 
 Monthly Review, Panning & Monitoring (RPM) meetings by 
Ministry of Power with Secretaries (Power) of States/CMDs of 
Discoms. Such meetings are often chaired by Hon’ble Minister 
of State (IC) for Power, GoI.  
 IPDS Monitoring Committee under chairmanship of Secretary 
(Power) reviews implementation of IPDS (including subsumed 
R-APDRP) for operationalization of the Programme. MoP team 
also frequently visits States for expediting implementation. 
Tier II : Concurrent Monitoring by PFC 
 Regular reviewis being made by PFC, the nodal agency, along 
with Web based project monitoring. Also, day–to-day 
monitoring at the level of Nodal/Zonal Officers of PFC with 
States/Utilities to resolve Implementation issues, expediting 
milestone linked to progress of project implementation and 
release of funds. In addition to this, daily monitoring is being 
done, by UVAs (Urban Vidyut Abhyantas) stationed at Discom 
HQs. 
Tier III : State level monitoring in States 
 Regular monitoring and review at State level by Distribution 
Reforms Committee (DRC), chaired by Energy Secretary. 
22 
 
Also, regular follow-up meetings are taken by MDs/CMDs of 
respective Power Utilities. Also, periodic reviews are taken by 
Disha (District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee). 
Tier IV : Quality Monitoring 
 The Project Management Agency (PMA) appointed by 
Discoms to assist them in project management for ensuring 
timely implementation of project. Concurrent and post 
implementation evaluation by Third Party Concurrent 
Evaluating Agency (TPCEA) for verification of material and 
process at site, reporting of progress etc. 
Rigorous monitoring of IPDS implementation by MoP and PFC 
has resulted in continuous improvement in overall progress of the 
Scheme. As on31st March, 2020, the overall progress of 85% has 
been achieved and work in 428 circles has already been completed.  
Ministry of Power (MoP) /Power Finance Corporation (PFC) is 
facilitating sharing of information, best practices and success stories 
amongst the Discoms under IPDS in following ways:  
 Technical Guidance is also provided to State Utilities to 
facilitate scheme implementation. Standard Bidding Document 
has been prepared and it incorporates specifications for all 
vital equipment. States may modify the same only after State 
DRC approval. 
 PFC, as the Nodal agency, has assisted in formulation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) by issuing Model DPRs, 
Guidelines, hand-holding Utilities for project implementation. 
 A system has been developed in-house for web-based project 
monitoring of IPDS/ R-APDRP on IPDS web portal. 

23 
 
 Capacity building / training of Utility personnel is also carried 
out under IPDS – R-APDRP to enhance their skill. PFC / MoP 
also organizes workshops on technical areas, guidelines, best 
practices etc. for dissemination of information. PFC / MoP also 
issues guidelines for simplification of implementation 
procedures. 
 The Monitoring Committee also reviews the implementation of 
IPDS and issues guidelines / direction for taking corrective 
measures in this regard. 
 Dedicated workshops for sharing of Best Practices in IPDS 
Implementation - One workshop on Experience sharing/peer 
learning was held on 19-Dec-2018 at IHC, New Delhi where 
Best practices were presented by DISCOMs personnel. 
 Fund release under IPDS is being done through Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS). State Utilities have 
been trained on use of said system. 
 Best practices and success stories of Discoms are regularly 
shared on social media platforms as well as during the various 
review meetings organized by PFC and MoP. 
 To handhold the States where progress of implementation is 
slow special review meetings/visits are organized. Special 
conference for review of NER states was organized by 
MoP/PFC in April’19 and August’19. 
As such, MoP/PFC are already undertaking various measures for 
speedy implementation of the scheme, providing assistance to the 
States to overcome critical issues hampering implementation, sharing 
of best practices at various forums etc. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
24 
 
(Recommendations No. 6) 
The Committee note that reduction of AT&C is the main objective 
of IPDS. The works envisaged under IPDS are aimed at 
strengthening the distribution system and plugging the gaps so that 
AT&C losses can be brought down to the level of 15%. The Ministry 
have informed that as per latest available report (2015-16) of 
‘Performance of State Power Utilities’ as released by Power Finance 
Corporation, AT&C losses at All India level stand at 23.98%. 
However, as per Ministry, the losses were at the level of 20.81 in the 
year 2018. The Committee find that despite decade long efforts and 
spending of thousands of crores is yet to be achieved the targeted 
level of 15% of AT&C losses. The Committee also finds it surprising 
that though IPDS scheme is being implemented circle-wise, the circle-
wise AT&C losses are not available with IPDS Unit, PFC. The 
Committee therefore, infer that there is no data to suggest that 
implementation of IPDS will necessarily lead to reduction of AT&C 
losses. They are of the view that the whole exercise of the Central 
Government becomes in-fructuous if the goal of reducing AT&C 
losses is left again on the discretion/will power of Discoms and their 
administrative capabilities to do so. The Committee in the past also 
have been raising the need for segregation of commercial losses and 
technical losses as far as possible so that the losses due to pilferages 
and inefficiency of Discoms in metering, billing and collection dues 
can be brought out and addressed. The Committee are aware that the 
Ministry offers incentive to Discoms on timely reduction of AT&C 
losses but still AT&C losses are not decreasing at the desired rate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that apart from creation of 
enabling infrastructure and providing financial incentives, the Ministry 
should form a study group to examine the case of each and every 
Discom whose performance is not up to the mark in terms of 
reduction of AT&C losses. The Committee expect that besides 

25 
 
prescribing remedial action to them, the Ministry would put relevant 
data/information relating to AT&C losses of Discoms in public domain 
for awareness of consumers of the respective Discoms.  
Reply of the Government 
Hon'ble committee is informed that IPDS Scheme was launched 
by GoI to extend financial assistance against capital expenditure to 
address the gaps in Sub transmission & Distribution network and 
metering in urban areas to supplement the resources of 
Discoms/Power Departments. 
The AT&C losses have two components (i) Technical line losses, 
which occur due to heat losses when electricity flows in the wires; and 
(ii) Commercial losses, which occur due to wrong billing, non-billing, 
non-collection of billed amounts, pilferage of electricity etc. IPDS 
targets both the above components of AT&C loss through different 
measures. 
Technical Line losses increase due to unsuitability of the 
distribution network to cater to loads posed by consumers. This could 
be due to inadequacy of network capability to cater to loads, poor 
efficiency equipment installed in the network, or capacity of network 
being over-utilised beyond the standard continuous load permissible 
for network components. IPDS addresses these issues by providing 
funds for creating and augmenting Distribution infrastructure, which 
includes providing substations, high efficiency transformers, providing 
alternate paths for electricity flow through new conductors, and 
providing higher capacity of the conductors to cater to new loads. 
Therefore, with IPDS interventions, the network technical losses 
would automatically be reduced. 
Commercial losses occur predominantly due to managerial and 
administrative inefficiencies, which can be handled through better 
governance and administration. IPDS provides extension of IT and OT 
26 
 
(Operational Technology) based tools and techniques to the DISCOM 
administration to enable them to take informed evidence based 
decisions to reduce losses. However, the nature of the IPDS 
intervention in form of provision of these tools itself is not an 
automatic solution to the problem of reducing commercial losses. 
Efforts would have to be made by the Utilities to utilise the intelligence 
generated by these tools created under IPDS for proper management 
of commercial losses.  
In so far as the Hon'ble Committee's observations on the non 
availability of circle wise data of AT&C losses is concerned, it is stated 
that the DISCOM circles consist of both Urban and rural areas. IPDS 
caters to requirements of only urban areas. Due to inherent construct 
of the Circles, which subsume both urban and rural areas, the 
exclusive effects of IPDS on the circle AT&C losses cannot be 
ascertained. However, it is also stated that town/feeder wise AT&C 
losses can be ascertained after all the IT/OT related works under 
IPDS would be completed.  
In view of the above, it is submitted that the interventions under 
IPDS have been designed for reduction in AT&C losses, and the 
overall trends indicate a reduction in the loss levels, even though they 
have not come down to the targeted levels of 15% yet. This may also 
be viewed in light of the fact that the full complement of IPDS, 
especially the IT/OT intervention projects are yet to be completed in 
the DISCOMs, and it is expected that the same would be of help to 
the Utilities in reducing the AT&C losses.  
In so far as the transparency of information of AT&C losses of 
urban towns/cities in public domain is concerned, it is stated that the 
information has already been made available in the public domain 
through the national power portal https://npp.gov.in. As and when new 
urban feeders will get IT/OT enabled under IPDS, the information of 
the same will be ported on this portal.  

27 
 
In so far as the DISCOM/State level AT&C losses are concerned, 
it is stated that the same is regularly discussed with the State 
Government Energy Department officials and DISCOM officials during 
the Review Planning and Monitoring meetings held at New Delhi as 
well as in the Power Minister's conference. Apart from the above, 
reports on the performance of DISCOMs, including AT&C losses and 
other operational and financial parameters, are also sent to the 
States. 
(Recommendations No. 7) 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
The Committee note that Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) is the 
nodal central statutory body to assist the Government in implementing 
the provisions of the Energy Conservation Act. As a quasi-regulatory 
and policy advisory body, the Bureau helps in developing policies and 
strategies that emphasize self-regulation and market principles to 
achieve the primary objective of reducing the energy intensity of the 
Indian Economy. 
The Committee feel that budgetary allocation to BEE during the 
last 4-5 years is not commensurate with the importance of an 
organization which is responsible for implementing a significant 
programme – ‘Energy Efficiency’. Moreover, the actual utilization of 
allocated fund during the period leaves much to be desired. In the 
year 2015-16, the actual utilization was Rs. 35 crore against the 
allocation of Rs. 48 crore. Similarly, in 2016-17, 2017-18, and 2018-19 
the actual utilization was Rs. 54.15 crore, Rs. 27 crore and Rs. 10.49 
crore against the allocation of Rs. 63.29 crore, Rs. 49 crore and  
Rs. 100.16 crore respectively. During the current year Rs. 100.16 
crore has been allocated. Considering their necessity and enormous 
benefits derived from the Energy Efficiency programmes, the 
Committee are of the opinion that there is a need to suitably enhance 
the fund allocation for BEE. However, at the same time they also 
desire that whatever fund is allocated to them should be fully utilized.  
28 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that during the 12th Five Year Plan, funds for 
various energy conservation/efficiency activities were provided 
through different schemes, namely, (i) Providing Financial Assistance 
to State Designated Agencies (SDAs); (ii) Demand Side Management 
(DSM); (iii) Standard and Labeling (S&L) and (iv) Energy 
Conservation Awards and Awareness. After the end of 12th Five Year 
Plan, these four schemes have been merged into one scheme i.e. 
“Promoting Energy Efficiency Activities in Different Sectors of Indian 
Economy”. Further, impediments in utilization of budgetary allocations 
under the activities related to energy efficiency/conservation have 
been removed. 
In the current year (2019-20) against the budget estimate of  
Rs. 213.37 crore for both heads, an amount of Rs. 145.37 crore has 
already been released. BEE is expected to utilize the full allocation 
during this year. 
Further, adequate budgetary allocations are being made to 
support the activities/programmes relating to energy conservation.  
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
The Committee note that India has been participating as one of 
the leading party in the Conference of Parties (COP) under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The 
twenty-first session of the COP that took place in 2015 at Paris 
reached a landmark agreement called “Paris Agreement” to combat 
climate change. The aim of the Paris Agreement is to strengthen the 
global response to the threat of climate change by keeping the global 
temperature rise well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial 

29 
 
levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even 
further to 1.5 degree Celsius. The Government of India has submitted 
its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to UNFCCC in 2015, 
endorsing country’s ambitious commitment towards the issues to 
climate change and ratified it in the year 2016. 
In this scenario, the Committee feels that the role of BEE has 
become very crucial in implementation of various energy efficiency 
and conservation programmes. To fulfill this commitment, more 
energy efficiency measures have to be taken. However, the 
Committee also believe that irrespective of that commitment, 
expansion and intensification of energy efficiency is in the interest of 
the Country. Energy Efficiency Programmes are not only beneficial 
from environment perspective but also a profitable business as it 
leads to reduction in energy cost. The Committee find that the energy 
efficiency programs being run by BEE are relevant and quite effective 
and the saving caused by them in terms of energy and cost, is 
astonishing. Though remarkable achievements have been made 
under these programmes, the Committee are of the belief that there is 
still great potential in the field of energy efficiency. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Energy Efficiency Programmes should 
further be expanded and intensified.  
Reply of the Government 
India ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 2016 
under which its member countries have given commitments to make 
efforts in order to keep global average temperatures rise below  
2 degree Celsius. India in its Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) has committed that it will reduce the emission intensity of its 
GDP by 33% to 35% by 2030 from 2005 level. To achieve the above, 
it would be necessary to continue with its ongoing interventions and 
enhance the existing policies.  
30 
 
2. As per the study commissioned by BEE, while emphasizing on 
the energy savings in each of the demand sectors, emission reduction 
is possible through adoption of energy-saving practices, use of novel 
technologies and better enforcement of existing policy and 
programmes. It is envisaged that due to implementation of various 
energy efficiency measures, savings of 438 to 623 Million Tonnes of 
CO2 can be achieved by 2030 in the moderate and ambitious scenario 
respectively, which will be approximately 50% to 60% of the total 
energy related emission reductions.  
3. In order to achieve above, BEE is planning to undertake 
following new initiatives with an overall objective to reduce the energy 
intensity of the country: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Initiative Action to be taken 
1 2 3 
I Optimize cooling 
related energy 
consumption 
 
India is one of the fastest major growing 
economies of the world. The present AC 
penetration is only 7% in the households 
and is poised to increase to over 20% by 
2030. Moreover, with rapid industrialization, 
urbanization, increase in per capita income 
of the people, the cooling demand is bound 
to increase in a significant way. India is 
ready to take this challenge, by optimizing 
the cooling demand, using efficient and 
climate friendly technologies to tackle this 
growth.  

31 
 
1 2 3 
II Adoption of 
energy 
conservation 
building code by 
ULBs 
 
The updated version of the Energy 
Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was 
launched in 2017 and till date 15 States / 
UTs have notified the same. For effective 
implementation of ECBC, it is necessary to 
incorporate in the municipal bye laws. Post 
Notification of ECBC in States, the bye laws 
will be amended to incorporate ECBC 
provisions and then gradually adoption and 
enforcement of ECBC compliance will be 
taken up by ULBs.  
III Widen and 
deepen PAT 
scheme 
Coverage of PAT scheme for sectors such 
as Glass, Ceramic, Chemicals, Mining & 
Non-Ferrous Metals (Copper/Zinc) are being 
considered. Industrial sector coverage under 
the programme is over 60% with a target to 
reach 75% by 2024-25. Energy Intensive 
sectors like Iron & Steel, Thermal Power 
Plants, Refineries, Petrochemical to save 21 
million TOE. 
IV Adoption of 
energy efficiency 
in MSMEs 
MSME sector to be new focus area with 
schemes to deploy energy efficient 
technologies in process – Cold Chain sector 
to be one of the key area. 
V Transport sector 
fuel consumption 
to be minimized 
through fuel 
efficiency norms 
for Passenger 
Cars, HDVs and 
LCVs. 
Transport sector consumption to be 
minimized by prescribing fuel efficiency 
norms for Passenger Cars, Heavy Duty 
Vehicles (HDVs), Light Commercial Vehicles 
(LCVs) and Tractors.  
32 
 
4. Additionally, BEE has proposed to merge its existing 
programmes/ schemes alongwith the new initiatives under a revised 
mission on enhanced energy efficiency i.e. “Roadmap of Sustainable 
and Holistic Approach to National Energy Efficiency (ROSHANEE)”. 
The revised mission has a broader vision and takes into account all 
the potential areas of energy efficiency in various sectors, covering 
the macro level in policy and further delineating the respective 
schemes. The revised mission includes the ongoing activities of BEE 
that have contributed significantly towards enhancing energy 
efficiency in all the sectors of the economy along with CO2 mitigation. 
The revised programme also has a dedicated component for 
facilitating financing of energy efficiency activities in India. It also 
targets the industrial sector in entirety ranging from large to small and 
medium enterprises. It also deals with the subject of Demand Side 
Management. It clearly outlines the strategies that need to be  
adopted for achieving India’s Nationally Determined Contribution 
commitments.  
5. Through the ROSHANEE document, NMEEE (existing National 
Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency) is being strengthened with a 
new portfolio of strategies to strengthen energy efficiency across all 
sectors in the country till 2030. ROSHANEE also aims to bring 
together seemingly disparate national initiatives however, having 
common climate benefits such as Zero Effect, Zero Defect, Smart 
Cities and India Cooling Action Plan. 
6. ROSHANEE aims to align the country’s energy efficiency 
measures with the commitments under Nationally Determined 
Contributions in particular and to strive for United Nations Sustainable 
Development goals.  
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 

33 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note that BEE have enumerated many constraints 
which are being faced in implementation of various Energy Efficiency 
programmes. They have prominently raised the issue of financing of 
Energy Efficiency projects and stated that it still continues to be the 
grey area in this sector. Energy Efficiency financing is considered to 
be loaded with high risks in most of the cases. Industries are hesitant 
to invest with the perception of longer period for getting return on 
investment. Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) are facing shortage 
of adequate funds thereby stalling the projects on ESCO mode and 
restricting their adequate institutionalization. Energy Efficiency 
financing through commercial banks and NBFCs is facing the lack of 
awareness and capacity to understand the Energy Efficiency 
Financing concepts like factors to be considered during appraisal 
process, technical risk appraisal considerations, etc. The Committee 
desire that lack of finances should not become a roadblock in 
implementation of Energy Efficiency Programmes, therefore, they 
recommend the Ministry to take up this issue at appropriate level for 
its resolution. The Committee also expect the Ministry to encourage 
Public Sector Undertakings of Power Sector to finance these projects.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power as well as the Bureau of Energy Efficiency have 
been making efforts to overcome the difficulty of financing of energy 
efficiency projects. Solutions for the same are being explored with the 
help of Financial Institutions/Central Public Sector Undertakings.  
 
34 
 
Action Taken in this regard are as follows:— 
(i)   Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEFP) was launched 
as one of the initiatives under National Mission for Enhanced 
Energy Efficiency to provide a platform to interact with 
Financial Institutions (FIs) and project developers for 
implementation of energy efficiency projects. Under this 
programme, MoUs have been signed by BEE with M/s. PTC 
India Ltd, M/s. SIDBI, HSBC Bank, Tata Capital and IFCI Ltd 
to promote financing for energy efficiency projects. 
(ii)  For capacity building of FIs, BEE signed MoU with Indian 
Banks’ Association for the Training Programme on Energy 
Efficiency Financing. The MoU was signed in 2015 and this 
training programme was launched in June 2015. These 
workshops have been held in two phases. Phase 1 included 
four ToT workshops and two direct training workshops. In 
phase 2, twenty two direct training workshops for FIs on  
EE Financing were held at different locations (seventeen 
States covered) across India. In these workshops total 
of 682 participants from 72 banks/NBFCs received training 
on EE financing. 
(iii)  Currently, BEE is working on conducting “Investment Bazaar 
for Energy Efficiency” in four regions of India to accelerate 
and facilitate financing of EE projects/technologies through 
SDAs. Further, all SDAs have also been directed to 
constitute FIs committees for accelerating EE financing in 
respective states to enable institutions to address financing 
issues at state level itself. 
(iv)  A round-table meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Power) was held recently with heads of Financial Institutions 
(Banks/NBFCs) for scaling up Energy Efficiency financing. 

35 
 
(v)  Heads of Financial Institutions (Banks/NBFCs) have asked for 
more such meetings in order to explore ideas for expanding 
energy efficiency financing. 
(vi)  Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL), a joint venture of 
four Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) of Ministry 
of Power, namely, NTPC Limited, PFC Limited, REC Limited 
and PGCIL has been established under Ministry of Power. 
EESL has been implementing most of the Demand Side 
Management (DSM) energy efficiency programmes/ 
schemes / projects across the country. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) 
   The Committee note that the core activities of the Central Power 
Research Institute (CPRI) are Applied Research in electrical power 
engineering, Testing & Certification of Power equipment, Consultancy 
and Field testing services to Power Utilities and Industries, Third Party 
Inspection and Vendor Analysis, Organizing Customized Training 
programs for Utilities arid Industries. The Committee also note that a 
provision of Rs. 200 crore has been made for CPRI for the year  
2019-20. The allocation of Rs. 200 crore may appear sufficient 
considering track record of the organization in utilization of fund, the 
Committee, however, are of the view that it does not reflect the future 
aspirations of the country. The Committee believe that there is 
immense potential for Research and Development in the Country as 
we are one of the biggest consumers of power in the world with a vast 
network and mammoth infrastructure. However, when it comes to 
major achievements in the field of technology and innovation, still 
much is needed to be done. The Committee are of the view that 
36 
 
instead of being dependent on developed countries for research and 
technological upgradation, it would be prudent if we take initiatives 
and provide support to our research institutes to work on the projects 
which would cater our specific requirements. The Committee feel that 
development of storage capacity, electric vehicle and its charging 
system, efficiency of solar panels etc. are some of the areas where 
we need to focus. They also feel that there is a need to expand the 
base of R&D in the Country so that we can not only fulfil our domestic 
requirements but also become a leading country in the field of 
technology and innovation. 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to identify and prioritize the research areas in Power 
Sector, MoP has constituted the Standing Committee on R&D 
(SCRD) chaired by Chairperson, CEA and having representations 
from Academia (Eminent professors from IITs), Industry (Senior 
Management of BHEL), Utilities (Senior Management from 
POWERGRID, NTPC, NHPC) and Govt. of India (MNRE, MoP, CEA, 
DST).The SCRD periodically reviews the research requirements in 
the country and steers the research schemes for introduction of 
innovations in Power Sector. CPRI is responsible for implementing 
Research Schemes of Ministry of Power. During the last five years, 
125 projects with an outlay of Rs 74.40 crores have been awarded 
under the research schemes which include projects to eminent 
institutions like IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur, IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, 
NIT Meghalaya, NIT Silchar, CMET Thrissur etc. It is proposed to 
further advance the research activities in Power Sector and build a 
strong research foundation for India by supporting the research 
Institutes on projects catering to indigenous requirements. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 

37 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
The Committee note that National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
is a National Apex body for fulfilling the training requirements of the 
power sector in the Country. Also, NPTI has been appointed as the 
Certifying Authority for SystemOperator of NLDC, RLDCs, SLDCs. 
NPTI also functions as an Apex Cadre Training Institute for 
Engineer/Officer of Central Power Engineering Service (Ministry of 
Power, Govt. of India). NPTI operates through nine Institutes in the 
different power zones of the county on an all India basis with 
Manpower Strength of 219 including 87 Officers and they have trained 
over 3,37,900 power professionals in its regular programs over the 
past five decades. The Committee note that the budgetary allocation 
for NPTI for the year 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 was Rs. 40.40 
crore, 57.20 crore and 100.55 crore respectively. However, for the 
year 2019-20, an allocation of only Rs. 69 crore is made. The 
decrease in allocation of fund for NPTI is a bit surprising for the 
Committee. The Committee are well aware of the requirement of 
trained personnel for development of power sector and are of the 
opinion that shortages of trained manpower should not come in the 
way of faster development of the sector. The Committee have 
observed that in implementation of every scheme of the power sector, 
the availability of adequate trained manpower has been an issue. 
Also, for undertaking any reform in the power sector, proper training 
of personnel is a pre-requisite. The Committee, believe that there is 
dire need to augment our training capacities considering technological 
up-gradations and future reforms which will require more and more 
trained manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to review the budgetary provisions for NPTI with a view to 
enhance it. 
38 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per recommendation of the Standing Committee on Energy, 
NPTI was allocated an amount of Rs. 69.00 crore for the Financial 
Year 2019-20 which included Grants in Aid towards Pension Corpus 
Fund of Rs. 15 crore and Rs. 54 crore towards creation of Capital 
Assets.   During the R.E. 2019-20, this amount has been proposed to 
be enhanced to Rs. 75.69 crore.  Against the B.E. 2019-20 
allocations, an amount of Rs. 23.50 crore has been spent by NPTI 
which includes Rs.15 crore towards Pension Corpus and Rs. 8.5 
crore towards creation of Capital Assets.    Currently, three Capital 
Asset creation projects are under implementation as under:— 
 
Name of 
Project 
Physical 
progress as 
on 
31.12.2019 
Financial progress as on 
31.12.2019 
Remarks 
New Institute at 
Alappuzha, 
Kerala 
99% Against the revised cost of 
Rs.75.42 crore, Rs.74.97 
crore has been released 
(99.40%) 
The project is 
expected to be 
completed in 
the F/Y 2019-
20 
New Institute at 
Shivpuri, M.P 
99% Against the approved cost 
of Rs.64.23 crore, Rs.62.60 
crore has been released 
(97.46%) 
-do- 
Renovation, 
Modernization 
and 
Augmentation 
of 9 Training 
Institutes 
99% Against the approved cost 
of Rs.73.97 crore, Rs.70.19 
crore has been released 
(94.88%) 
-do- 

39 
 
 For the BE 2020-21, NPTI has proposed Rs. 121.49 crore, which 
includes Rs. 30 crore for strengthening of Pension Funds and  
Rs. 91.49 crore for new projects and capacity building.  The existing 
projects are expected to be completed during the current Financial 
Year 2019-20. NPTI has to ensure self-sustainability through its 
operations.  The Government of India’s grants are restricted to 
Contribution towards Pension Fund and Creation of Capital 
Assets.  Future allocation of NPTI would be made based on its 
revenue generation, physical/financial progress of its existing projects 
and impact of the capital grants already sanctioned for Asset creation. 
 [Ministry of Power OM.No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Ujwal Discom Assurance Yojana (UDAY) 
The Committee note that UDAY (Ujwal DISCOM Assurance 
Yojana), a scheme for financial and operational turnaround of Power 
Distribution(DISCOMs) was formulated and launched by the 
Government on 20th November, 2015 in consultation with the various 
stakeholders to ensure a sustainable permanent solution to the 
problem of legacy of debts and address potential future losses. The 
scheme envisages reform measures in all sectors — generation, 
transmission, distribution, coal, and energy efficiency. The Scheme 
also envisages reducing interest burden, cost of power and AT&C 
losses. Under the scheme, States are to take over 75% of debt of 
DISCOMs as on 30th September, 2015 which would be outside the 
FRBM limits. The Scheme is operationalized through a bipartite/ 
tripartite agreement amongst the Ministry of Power, State 
Government and the DISCOMs. The Scheme is optional for all States 
to join and there is no financial implication on the part of the Central 
Government. 
40 
 
The Committee also note that so far 27 States and 5 UTs have 
signed Memorandum of Understanding under UDAY. While 16 States 
have signed comprehensive MoU which includes financial 
restructuring of debt, other 16 States/UT have signed the MoU only 
for operational improvements. States of West Bengal and Odisha and 
Union Territories (UTs) of Delhi and Chandigarh have not joined the 
scheme. 16 states which have opted for financial restructuring, a debt 
of Rs.2.69 lakh crores were sought to be addressed (3 states i.e. 
Maharashtra, A.P. & Tamil Nadu have opted for restructuring of only a 
part of their debt). Out of the above, total of Rs.2.32 Iakh crores of 
Bonds have so far been issued (87% of UDAY states debt to be 
addressed) consisting of States Bonds of Rs.2.09 lakh crores and 
DISCOMs Bonds of Rs.0.23 lakh crores. DISCOM Bonds worth 
Rs.0.37 lakh crores are yet to be issued. 
In regard to achievement under UDAY, the Committee note that 
AT&C losses which were at 20.81% in the year 2016, have dropped 
to 18.19% in the year 2019. During the same period billing efficiency 
has also slightly improved from 81.57% to 84.31%, whereas, no 
improvement in collection efficiency is reported. The only encouraging 
result has been seen in the gap between Cost of Supply (ASC) and 
Average Revenue Received (ARR) which was drastically reduced to 
0.17 (Rs./kWh) in 2018 from 0.60 (Rs./kWh) in 2016. However, during 
the year 2019 it has rebounded and increased upto 0.27 (Rs./kWh). 
Likewise, the losses of Discoms which were reduced to Rs.15,132 
crore in the year 2018 have again increased to Rs.28,036 crore in the 
year 2019. 
The Committee had high expectations hopes that UDAY would be 
successful in turning around the financial condition of the Discoms by 
making them economically viable on sustainable basis. However, it is 
a matter of concern for the Committee that the losses of Discoms are 
rebounding after 3 years of introduction of UDAY. The Committee 

41 
 
have always been emphasizing the importance of Distribution Sector 
for power sector and the need for reforms to make it robust and self 
sustainable. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
examine the reasons responsible for rebounding of losses and take 
remedial measures on urgent basis. The Committee also expect that 
necessary changes shall also be made in UDAY to make it more 
effective. 
Reply of the Government 
The committee has observed that there has been a slight 
improvement in the billing efficiency whereas the collection efficiency 
hasn’t much improved. Further, the committee has also mentioned 
that the ACS-ARR Gap has rebounded and increased up to 0.27 
(Rs/kWh) in the year 2018-19, from 0.17 (Rs/kWh) in the year 2017-
18.The Committee has also expressed its concern that the losses of 
Discoms are rebounding after 3 years of introduction of UDAY and 
has recommended this Ministry to examine the reasons responsible 
for rebounding of losses and take remedial measures. The reason 
behind the observations of the Committee is given below: 
(i) AT&C losses : As part of the UDAY scheme, the Discoms were 
mandated to improve their operational performance, by reducing their 
technical and operational losses and improve the reliability of the 
service provided. Discoms have been mandated to reduce the AT&C 
losses against the set targets. The results of the initiatives taken 
under the scheme have shown decrease in the AT&C losses as 
mentioned in the figure below: 
 

42 
 
Figure 1 : AT&C Losses trajectory (Source: 2003-04 to 2014-15: 
National level AT&C losses, PFC report 2015-16 onwards: UDAY 
States’ average AT&C losses , UDAY portal) 
It can be noted that post the UDAY scheme in the year 2015-16, 
states have shown improvement in the billing efficiency. The average 
billing efficiency of the UDAY states improved by around 3%, bringing 
the efficiency to around 83.9% in the year 2018-19 from 81.6% in the 
year 2015-16.  
Similarly, the collection efficiencies of the states have also 
improved. While the Discoms are focusing at improving their collection 
efficiencies, the dues from the State Government departments are on 
the rise and the details are shown in the figure below: 
Parameter 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Govt. Dues 
in (in Rs. 
Crores) 
18,369 29,891 36,900 41,745 
Figure 2 : Dues from the State Government Departments in 
UDAY States (Source: UDAY Portal) 
43 
 
The rise in the dues from State Government departments are 
leading to the delay in the collections, causing the overall annual 
collection efficiency of the UDAY States to be almost at the same 
levels and impacting the reduction of the AT&C losses. To ensure that 
the dues are cleared, the State Governments have been intimated to 
look into the clearance of these dues, thereby aiding the Discoms to 
clear their payments and manage funds for working capital and 
contingency requirements. 
In addition to this, the Discoms are also being asked to take 
measures such as installation of smart meters and ABC cabling for 
theft-prone areas, setting up and operationalization of dedicated IT 
cells, real-time feeder monitoring, constant analysis of online 
consumer data, introduction of online billing in rural areas, strict action 
against power theft, and establishment of special police stations that 
deal with theft issues. These measures shall facilitate the states in 
improving the collections and reducing the AT&C losses with respect 
to their targets. 
(ii) ACS-ARR Gap : Under the UDAY scheme, the gap between 
the Average Cost of Supply (ACS) and the Average Revenue 
Received (ARR) per unit from 0.59 (Rs. /kWh) in the year 2015-16 to 
0.27 (Rs/kWh) in 2018-19, a reduction of 0.32 (Rs/kWh) over three 
years. 
Although the ACS-ARR gap has reduced in the year 2018-19, it 
has rebounded and increased when compared to the same of 0.17 
(Rs/kWh) in the year 2017-18. This can majorly be attributed to the 
increase in the cost of power purchase and the establishment costs. 
Power purchase costs have increased majorly due to the increase in 
the costs of railway freight and coal. These factors led to the increase 
in the average cost of supply, thereby increasing the ACS-ARR gap.  


44 
 
To further elaborate, the railway transportation charges of coal 
have increased by 21% in January 2018 and by 9% in November 
2018 
Figure 3 : Details on the Railway Freight rates of transportation of 
Coal (Source: Indian Railways) 
Corresponding to the increase in the freight charges, the prices of 
coal have also increased. The price per tonne for most grades of coal 
have increased since January 2018.The price of G12 grade coal 
increased by 17% in January 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 : Trend of Coal Price (Source: Coal India Limited) 
45 
 
As a result of these price hikes, the average cost of power 
purchase for the UDAY States in the year 2018-19 was 4.42 (Rs/kWh) 
against 4.20 (Rs/kWh) in 2017-18. 
Also, the establishment costs, due to the increase in the 
administrative expenses owing to the hike in the employment costs as 
per the recommendations of the 7th pay commission, have also 
increased to 0.72 (Rs/kWh) in the year 2017-18 to 0.77 (Rs/kWh) in 
the year 2018-19, further increasing the average cost of supply. 
Continuous creation of Regulatory assets (Annexure), are causing 
the states and regulators not to increase tariffs to the extent required, 
thereby ostensibly avoiding tariff shocks to the consumers. This can 
be observed in the increase in the average revenue received. While 
the ACS increased by 5% in the year 2018-19 (when compared with 
2017-18), the increase in the ARR was around 3% in the same time 
period. 
All stakeholders are being advised that no further Regulatory 
assets should be created in future and already created Regulatory 
assets should be liquidated at the earliest. A new tariff policy is under 
consideration to address this issue. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Development of Power Sector 
The Committee note that there is 3,63,370 MW of total installed 
generation capacity in the country. The Committee further note that 
against the Peak Demand of 177,022 MW, only Demand of 175,528 
MW was met leaving a gap of 0.8%. Similarly, against the total energy 
requirement of 1,274.6 BU, only 1,267.5 BU could be supplied with a 
deficiency of 0.6%. During the year 2019 also there is Peak and 


46 
 
Energy deficit of 0.7% and 0.5% respectively. The inability to fully 
meet the demand despite having more than adequate installed 
generation capacity indicates that there are some issues which need 
to be addressed. The Ministry have stated that this demand-supply 
gap is due to constraints in the sub-transmission and distribution 
network, commercial reasons, financial constraints of State utilities, 
etc. The Committee feel that a concrete plan need to framed to bridge 
the gap between demand and supply as the country at present have 
the installed generation capacity in excess of the peak hour demand. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that sincere efforts be made to 
remove the constraints in meeting the demand of electricity in the 
country. 
Reply of the Government 
It is to note that commercial reasons and financial constraints are 
inter alia factors for contributing to the demand-supply gap. High 
AT&C loss and costs outstripping the revenue are amongst the main 
reasons contributing to poor financial health of the Discoms. Electricity 
is a concurrent subject and distribution of electricity falls under the 
purview of the respective State Governments / State Power Utility. It is 
the responsibility of distribution licensees to take necessary steps in 
their system and be financially stable. Government of India 
supplements the efforts of States by launching various schemes such 
as Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS), Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), Saubhagya, Ujwal Discom 
Assurance Yojana (UDAY) etc. 
A new comprehensive scheme is being evolved by the Ministry of 
Power which would address the issues being faced in the power 
sector. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
The Committee note that there are 34 stressed assets in thermal 
power sector. Out of 40,130 MW of the total capacity of theses 34 
47 
 
projects, 26,265 MW is commissioned, 19,005 MW capacity has PPA 
and 25,702 MW has fuel linkage. The Ministry have stated that they 
have classified these projects in three categories. Category-I projects 
which are mostly commissioned and have been resolved/likely to be 
resolved and /or serving their debt and/or are not in NCLT. A total of 
17 projects come under this category. 11 out of 17 of these projects 
have already been resolved. Category-II projects are only partly 
commissioned and have been referred to or admitted under NCLT 
waiting for resolution. A total o 11 projects come under this category. 
Category-III: Projects which are at very initial stage of construction 
and are totally stalled. Such projects have either been ordered to be 
liquidated or are heading towards liquidation. A total of 6 projects 
come under this category. 
The Ministry have enumerated various efforts that have been 
made to take out these projects from stress. The Committee have 
considered stress/NPA in the power sector as an important issue, 
therefore, they have examined this subject in detail and presented 
Reports thereon. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to pursue this matter diligently and should leave no stone 
unturned to find a solution to this problem. Needless to emphasize 
that while resolving the matter sincere efforts be made by the 
Government to make these assets standard by providing all possible 
assistance to them before they are ultimately considered for 
liquidation. 
Reply of the Government  
The Status of 34 stressed thermal power projects: Out of 34 
projects of capacity 40,130 MW under stress as reported by DFS, 14 
projects with a total capacity of 16,450 MW have been resolved. 
 Government of India constituted an HLEC under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to address the issues of stressed 
thermal power projects. HLEC recommendations were considered by 

48 
 
GoM. The recommendations of the GoM were approved by CCEA on 
07.03.2019, which were circulated vide Govt. approval dated 
08.03.2019. 
 The following steps have been taken by the Government to 
resolve the stress in the Power Sector:  
1. After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Coal formulated a transparent policy for 
reallocation of cancelled coal mines in a fair and transparent 
method. Government has re-allocated 65 blocks through 
auction/allotment till date. 
2. Fuel linkages under SHAKTI:-Govt. of India, Ministry of Coal 
has approved a new coal linkage allocation policy on May 
17, 2017 i.e. SHAKTI (Scheme for harnessing & allocating 
koyla transparently in India). Under the scheme, coal 
linkages have been allotted under B(i) for 8870 MW 
capacity, 1st round of B(ii) for 7401MW capacity and 2nd 
round of B(ii) for 667.5 MW capacity. 
3. (i) Power Finance Corporation Consulting Limited (PFCCL) 
has issued Expression of Interest (EoI) for 3rd round Auction 
under Para B(ii) of SHAKTI Policy on January 8, 2020. 
(ii) CIL is conducting linkage auction under para B(iii) of 
SHAKTI for long/medium term PPA. The notice inviting 
registration was issued on 10.12.2019. The notice for inviting 
EoI from the interested bidders was also published on 
13.12.2019. 
 (iii) Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has published 
Guidelines for auction of coal linkage under SHAKTI Policy 
Para B(viii) (a) covering Para B(iii) on 14.01.2019. 
49 
 
Based on request of Ministry of Power, Ministry of Coal vide 
letter dated 13.04.2016 started separate e-auction window 
for power sector. MoC vide OM dated 25.03.2019 has issued 
an advisory to Coal India Limited for earmarking of at least 
50% of the total coal meant for e-auction for power sector. 
CIL intends to offer 10% of its targeted production of 660 
million tons in 2019-20 through e-auction and out of which 
50% of the quantity i.e. 33 million tons is planned to be 
offered under Special Forward e-Auction. An annual auction 
calendar has been put on the CIL website as well. 
4. Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power:- In order to 
address the problem of lack of Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) in the country, the Ministry of Power had notified a 
scheme for procurement of 2500 MW on competitive basis 
for a period of 3 years from the generators with 
commissioned projects having untied capacity. Bids received 
from 7 (seven) projects for aggregate power of 1900 MW. 
Letter of Award (LOA) was issued to all the successful 
bidders (1900 MW). 
5. Ministry issued an order on 28.06.2019 and subsequent 
corrigendum thereon on 17.07.2019 regarding opening and 
maintaining of adequate Letter of Credit (LC) as payment 
security mechanism under PPAs by Distribution Licensees. 
Vide the order, NLDC & RLDC have been directed to 
despatch power only after it is intimated by the Generating 
Company and Distribution Companies that a Letter of Credit 
for the desired quantum of power has been opened and to 
made available the copies to the concerned Generating 
Company. 

50 
 
6. Ministry issued direction to CERC under section 107 of The 
Electricity Act, 2003 on 27.08.2018 for allowing pass-through 
of any change in domestic duties, levies, cess and taxes 
imposed by Central Government, State Government/Union 
Territories or by any Government instrumentally leading to 
corresponding changes in the cost, may be treated as 
"Change in Law" and may unless provided otherwise in the 
PPA, be allowed as pass through. The order of pass through 
giving the calculation of per unit impact will be issued within 
1 month of filing petition. Where CERC has already passed 
an order to allow pass through of changes in domestic 
duties, levies, cess and taxes in any case under the Change-
in-law, this will apply to all cases ipso facto and no additional 
petition would need to be filed in this regard. 
7. Flexible Utilisation of Coal Linkage: States have been 
impressed upon to make use of the policy of flexibility in 
utilisation of domestic coal for reducing the cost of power 
generation i.e. use of linkage coal of State Gencos in IPPs 
and get cheaper power generated from such coal. 
8. SLC (LT) in its meeting held on 24.06.2019 has 
recommended for grant of linkages from Coal India Limited 
under Para B (iv) of SHAKTI policy to the States of Gujarat 
(4000 MW), Uttar Pradesh (1600 MW) & Madhya Pradesh 
(2640 MW), and for grant of linkage (around 10MT/annum) 
from CIL under para B (v) of SHAKTI policy. 
9. CERC and FoR have been requested to mandate that the 
Late Payment Surcharge (LPS) be paid in case of delay in 
payment by DISCOMs as per the provisions of PPA. 
10. Advisory issued to the States, PGCIL and MoEF&CC that 
PPA/FSA/Transmission connectivity/EC/FC/Water etc. not 
51 
 
be cancelled if project is referred to NCLT or is acquired by 
another entity. 
11. Advisory issued to the States that PPA not to be cancelled in 
case of delay in commissioning of project for reasons not 
attributable to the generator. 
The Government is taking all necessary steps to resolve the 
stress in the power sector. 
 [Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
The Committee have also observed that supply of coal is one of 
the main issues that are creating problems for the power sector. The 
issue of non-availability/short supply of coal, is not only causing stress 
to many power plants, but also adversely affecting the tariff of 
electricity. Despite raising this issue time and again, the Committee 
find that there is still no satisfactory resolution of this issue. In the view 
of the Committee, the short supply of coal for power, for whatever 
reason, is a matter of concern, more so, when there are abundant 
coal reserves in the country. Due to constraints in supply of domestic 
coal the power sector is resorting to import of costlier coal which 
obviously results in higher tariff of electricity. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Power should take up this 
matter at appropriate level to find a long term solution to this problem. 
The Committee are also aware that some flexible use arrangement/ 
rationalisation of coal supply from different sources has been done 
which has not only helped in optimizing operation of power plants but 
also resulted in considerable savings. The Committee laud this effort 
and also desire that similar efforts shall further be made to optimized 
utilization of available coal resources. 

52 
 
Reply of the Government 
The total receipt (domestic & imported) and consumption of coal 
by coal based thermal plants in the country during the last three years 
and the current year (Apr-Nov, 2019) are as under: 
                                     (Figures in Million Tonnes) 
Year Receipt 
Domestic Imported Total 
Receipt For 
blending 
purpose 
Imported 
coal based 
plants 
Total 
Imported 
2016-17 494.8 19.8 46.3 66.1 560.9 
2017-18 538.6 17.0 39.4 56.4 595.0 
2018-19 582.1 21.4 40.3 61.7 643.7 
2018-19 (Apr-
Nov) 
378.5 13.4 25.7 39.1 417.6 
2019-20 (Apr- 
Nov) 
362.8 16.3 30.2 46.5 409.4 
As can be seen from above, receipt of domestic coal has been 
increasing except, during current year 2019-20 (Apr-Nov), which has 
shown negative growth of 4% as compared to same period last year. 
This is due to less system demand during current year. Further, the 
coal stock available with the power plants as on 30.11.2019 was 
about 29.7 Million Tonnes (MT) showing an increase of about 67% as 
compared to same day last year (17.8 MT as on 30.11.2018). 
53 
 
Power plants designed on domestic coal are importing coal for 
blending purposes, considering their cost-economics and to bridge 
the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal, if any. However, the 
quantum of import for blending is very less as compared to domestic 
coal receipt. Further, power plants designed on imported coal, are 
importing coal to meet their fuel requirement as they are designed to 
operate on imported coal. Further, import of coal is under Open 
General License (OGL), and hence, the power utilities import coal 
considering their cost economics. As per Import substitution Notice of 
CIL dated 05.02.2019, power utilities were given option for supply of 
coal under Import substitution to meet their shortfall against ACQ for 
FY 2018-19. Subsequently, CIL has issued another notice dated 
27.05.2019 regarding import substitution for the year 2019-20 also. 
The total nos. of captive coal blocks that have been allocated to 
the Power Sector are 65 nos. Out of these 65 nos. coal blocks, 03 
nos. coal blocks have been surrendered and the total 11 nos. of coal 
blocks are under production. 
The Government in May, 2016 approved the proposal for allowing 
flexibility in utilization of domestic coal amongst power generating 
stations to reduce the cost of power generation through saving in the 
transportation cost and operating the most efficient plant. The 
State/Central Gencos have flexibility to utilize their coal in most 
efficient and cost effective manner in their own power plants as well 
as by transferring coal to other State Genco/Central Genco/IPP 
generating stations for generation of cheaper power. 
In order to augment coal supply to thermal power plants in the 
country, Government of India has introduced New Coal Linkage 
Policy namely ‘Scheme for Harnessing and Allocating Koyala (Coal) 
Transparently in India’ (SHAKTI)-2017 to provide coal linkages to 

54 
 
thermal power plants in the country. The policy has provisions for 
granting coal linkages under various categories of power plants. 
Efforts by NTPC to improve coal stock/coal supplies: 
 Coal is being diverted under Government policy on ‘Flexibility 
in utilization of domestic coal’ to Critical stations to help 
avoiding Generation loss, Annual Fixed Charges (AFC) under 
Recovery and resulting in optimum utilization of coal available. 
 NTPC has been allotted 10 coal blocks, out of which 3 coal 
blocks, namely Pakri-Barwadih, Dulanga and Talaipalli have 
started coal production. 
 [Ministry of Power OM.No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated  22/06/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
The Committee note that Plant Load Factor (PLFs) of thermal 
power plants over the years have been decreasing. The Committee 
was also informed that in future the PLF is going to come down 
further due to increase in renewable energy capacity. It was further 
submitted that indication of lower PLF, not for a particular power plant, 
but as a country, will be a good signal that we are more developed 
and more self sufficient in the power sector rather than taking it as not 
performing. The Committee do understand that lower PLF may be 
indication of having adequate generation capacity, nevertheless, in 
the interest of the country in general and the end consumers in 
particular, it is imperative that the available resources are optimally 
utilized. As the Committee have observed in the preceding para that 
abundant generation capacity per-se does not guarantee supply of 
the required power. The Country still has peak shortage of 0.7% 
despite having more than enough generation capacity. 
55 
 
The Committee, therefore, are of the view that instead of focusing 
only on augmentation of generation capacities there should be some 
study/planning as to how utilization of thermal power plants are not 
much impacted by the present and upcoming renewable energy 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that our efforts 
should not be targeted only to chase the peak demand but also to 
bring it down and even out the demand as far as possible so that 
optimum utilization of resources can be ensured. Further, as Pumped 
Storage Plants can be utilized as storage system for solar/ surplus 
power, the Ministry should make efforts to develop more and more of 
such projects.  
The Committee has been emphasizing the need to develop and 
harness the huge untapped hydro power potential in the country. 
Since the Country have sufficient generation capacities in the present 
time, the Ministry should go for long term planning to develop the 
sector in a desired manner. It is, therefore, high time to go whole hog 
to develop hydro power projects which takes comparatively longer 
time but are the source of clean and cheaper energy in the long run. 
Its role in grid stability and use as peaking power, adds to its various 
other advantages. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Considering the unique advantages of hydropower (including 
Pumped Storage projects) and the increasing critical need of 
hydropower for grid stability/ balancing in the light of planned 
integration of 440 GW of solar and wind (intermittent sources of 
power) into the grid, the government has targeted to add 30000 MW 
(Including about 7500 MW from Pumped Storage projects) of 
hydropower by the year 2030.CEA has also conducted a detailed 
study to determine the optimal energy mix till the year 2030 and as 
per the preliminary findings, the hydropower installed capacity should 

56 
 
be about 73500 MW in the year 2030 considering technical 
requirements of the grid and commercial viability of the projects. To 
achieve this long term goal, the govt. has also framed a five year 
vision as shown below: 
(In MW) 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
511 1575 2750 2303 5121 
2. As hydropower sector has been going through a challenging 
phase with several projects stalled midway and with reluctance of 
Discoms to purchase hydropower (due to high tariff in the initial years, 
though cheaper in the long run) the Union Cabinet approved the 
following measures to promote hydropower in the country: 
 Declaring Large Hydropower Projects (>25 MW) as 
Renewable Energy,  
 Hydropower Purchase Obligation(HPO),  
 Tariff rationalisation measures, 
 Budgetary support for flood moderation component & 
 Budgetary support for enabling infrastructure like bridges, 
roads etc.  
The above measures will help in rationalization/reduction in tariff 
of Hydro Power Project and enable them to sign Power Purchase 
Agreements. 
3. With the strong commitment of Government to promote 
hydropower, the following positive developments have already taken 
place: 
 Subansiri Lower (2000 MW), NHPC project in Arunachal 
Pradesh, which was stalled since December 2011, has been 
revived in July/ August 2019 after NGT clearance and after 
57 
 
resolving of local issues. This is the largest hydropower project 
under construction in the country. 
 Teesta – VI (500 MW), originally allotted to Lanco and had 
become a stressed project, was revived through NHPC’s 
successful bidding during NCLT process. 1st stressed power 
project to be taken over by a CPSU. CCEA accorded 
investment approval for this project in March 2019 
 Ratle (850 MW), originally allotted to GVK and was stalled, 
was revived in February 2019 through aMoU between NHPC, 
JKSPDC and Power Development Department (PDD) of J&K.  
 Teesta – III (1200 MW) in Sikkim, originally allotted to Teesta 
Urja Pvt. Ltd and had become stranded, was revived and 
made a State PSU of Govt. of Sikkim and commissioned in 
2017 
 Kiru (624 MW), J&K- CCEA accorded investment approval in 
March 2019 and foundation stone laid in February 2019 
 Rangit-IV (120 MW) project in Sikkim, which was stalled since 
October 2013, is being revived with NHPC emerging as the 
highest bidder in the NCLT bidding (Formal approval of NCLT 
yet to obtain). 
 Two units (300 MW) of Kameng HEP were commissioned by 
NEEPCO in February 2020. 
 Dibang Multipurpose Project (2880 MW), was accorded CCEA 
approval for pre-investment activities in July 2019. This is the 
largest ever hydropower project accorded approval in the 
country.  
4. On the advice of the Union Govt., the State Governments also 
have been coming forward to revive hydropower sector. To make 
hydropower tariff viable, the States have started offering various 
concessions on case to case basis: 

58 
 
 Himachal Pradesh has also deferred free power, agreed for 
50% reimbursement of State GST and for booking 1.5% LADF 
to any head other than project cost, BOOT/ BOOM for 70 
years. Govt. of Himachal Pradesh signed agreements with 3 
CPSUs viz. NTPC, NHPC and SJVN for setting up 11 
hydropower projects of 3357 MW entailing an investment of 
about Rs. 32,000 crore. 
 Jammu & Kashmir has deferred free power, exempted water 
cess for 10 years and have given exemptions from local taxes 
to Kiru and Kwar Projects.  
5. Further, on 08.11.2019, the Government has also issued 
guidelines to reduce incidents of time and cost overruns, which is one 
of the most critical reasons for high tariff of hydropower projects in the 
initial years. 
6. As regards NTPC, currently it has an 800 MW hydro plant 
operational in Koldam, Himachal Pradesh. Further, the details of its 
under-construction 640 MW hydro capacity are as under: 
 
Sl.No. State/Union Territory Project Capacity(MW) 
 1. Uttarakhand Tapovan Vishnugad 520 
 2. West Bengal Rammam-III 120 
   7. Further, NTPC has strengthened its position in hydropower 
sector by acquiring 100% shareholding of Government of India in 
THDC and NEEPCO in March 2020. 
 [Ministry of Power OM.No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
 
59 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE  
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

60 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH  
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
The Committee note that there is an elaborated monitoring 
mechanism under DDUGJY to ensure its proper implementation. At 
State level, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary 
is in place to monitor progress and resolve issues relating to 
implementation viz. allocation of land for sub-stations, right of way, 
forest clearance, railway clearance, safety clearance etc. At District 
level, District Development Co-ordination & Monitoring Committee 
namely DISHA (administered by Ministry of Rural Development) 
headed by senior most Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) is in place 
to review and monitor implementation of central sector schemes 
including DDUGJY. At Central level, Inter-Ministerial Monitoring 
Committee on DDUGJY headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, 
Government of India also monitors implementation of scheme. 
Besides, progress is also reviewed with States/Power Utilities in 
Review, Planning and Monitoring (RPM) meeting of Ministry of Power. 
REC Limited, the nodal agency, monitors implementation of scheme 
through its Project Offices at field level. The Project Management 
Agency (PMA) appointed by Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) 
assists them in implementation of projects in such activities which 
involves formulation of Detailed Project Report (DPRs), award of 
works, monitoring the progress, quality monitoring etc.   
61 
 
Despite all these mechanism in place, the Committee have been 
receiving feedback through Members of Parliament about the poor 
quality of work being done at the ground level. The main complaint in 
this regard is that despite pointing out to the poor quality of work, 
hardly any remedial measure is taken. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should keep track of the meetings of the 
DISHA and get report/feedback on matters discussed therein 
pertaining to electricity sector especially schemes such as DDUGJY 
and IPDS. The Committee also expect the Ministry to take prompt and 
sincere action on such issues under intimation to the respective 
Member of Parliament.  
Reply of the Government 
As per the Quality Assurance Mechanism established under the 
scheme, at first level; State Power Utilities carryout necessary quality 
checks including pre-despatch inspection of materials as well as 
quality of erection works in the field.  At second level, the Nodal 
agency, REC Limited has also been entrusted with the responsibility 
to carryout pre-despatch quality inspection of materials and erection 
works in villages on random sample basis through third party 
agencies designated as REC Quality Monitoring Agencies 
(RQMs).  The defects notified by quality monitoring agencies are 
forwarded to Project Implementing Agencies for rectification & 
corrective measures. 
The status of quality assurance is regularly reviewed by the nodal 
agency and the Ministry with the States/Power Utilities and necessary 
directions are issued from time to time in order to further improve the 
quality of materials as well as quality in erection works. 
Apart from aforesaid Quality Assurance Mechanism, Ministry of 
Power, through REC, has imparted trainings to the frontline 
supervisors of State Power Utilities, Turnkey Contractors & Project 

62 
 
Implementing Agencies (PIA) to improve quality of the works being 
executed under DDUGJY.  In order to enforce quality in the DDUGJY 
works, payment to the PIAs is linked with defect rectification and other 
quality compliances.  
In case of complaints from Public Representatives, a Committee/ 
Team consisting of officials from REC, State Power Utilities, Project 
Implementing Agencies, Quality Monitors etc., is constituted to 
enquire into the matter and ensure redressal of the concerns raised. 
[Ministry of Power OM No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter - I of the Report 
(Recommendations No. 4) 
Saubhagya Scheme 
The Committee note with satisfaction that Pradhan Mantri Sahaj 
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana- Saubhagya, a scheme to achieve universal 
household electrification by providing last mile connectivity and 
electricity connection to all remaining un-electrified households in 
rural and urban areas, has been a great success. All States declared 
electrification of all households as on 31st March, 2019 except 18,734 
households in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected areas of 
Chhattisgarh. Since launch of Saubhagya, 2.63 crore households 
were electrified across the country up to 31st March, 2019. The 
Committee, considering the scale of work and the limited time period, 
feel that it was indeed a herculean task. The Committee appreciate 
the Ministry for taking this much needed initiative and also 
accomplishing it in a time bound manner. This scheme has special 
significance for this Committee as they have since long been 
63 
 
persuading the Government to focus on electrification of all 
households instead of declaring a village electrified by providing 
electricity connection to households as few as 10% of that 
village.          
The Ministry have stated that subsequently seven States namely 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh reported that there are 19.09 lakh un-electrified 
households which were earlier un-willing, and now willing to get 
electricity connection, identified before 31st March, 2019. The Ministry 
have further informed that States have been asked to electrify these 
household under Saubhagya by 31st December, 2019. It is also stated 
that out of these, 3.44 lakh households, have been electrified up to 
27th September, 2019.  
The Committee do understand that electrification of household is 
an ongoing process, however, the number of ‘unwilling’ households is 
too large to be a regular affair. This figure also vindicates the 
apprehension of this Committee that a sizeable number of households 
were left out of the scheme for whatever reasons. The Committee 
expect that the Ministry would carry on the good work without slowing 
down its pace. The Committee, recommend that all the left out/now 
willing households be electrified within the targeted date of 
31stDecember, 2019. The Committee also expect that the Ministry of 
Power with the help of State Government would run awareness 
programme and encourage people to get electricity connection under 
the scheme.   
Reply of the Government 
The progress on household electrification is reviewed regularly by 
the nodal agency and the Ministry and the States / Power Utilities are 
advised to expedite the progress by promptly resolving the issues 

64 
 
hampering the progress. Out of 19.09 lakh un-electrified households 
which were earlier un-willing and now willing to get electricity 
connection, 9.85 lakh households have been electrified up to 
31.12.2019. 
The matter has also been reviewed in the Review, Planning and 
Monitoring meeting with all States / Power Utilities held on 9th -10th 
January, 2020 and all concerned States / Power Utilities have been 
advised to accelerate the pace of releasing electricity connections to 
the remaining households to ensure electrification of all willing 
households at the earliest. 
 [Ministry of Power  OM.No.10/1/2019-Budget  
Dated 22/06/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter - I of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI; 
18th March, 2021 
Phalguna 27, 1942 (Saka) 
RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS 
LALAN SINGH, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
  
 

66 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th March, 2021 from 1500 
hrs. to 1535 hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh—Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Kumari Shobha Karandlaje 
3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
4. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
5. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
6. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
7. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
8. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
10. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
11. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
67 
 
12. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
13. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                          — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan            — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora       — Additional Director 
4. Smt. L.N. Haokip                       —  Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then 
took up the following ten draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:— 
(a) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An Appraisal’; 
(b) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Power Sector’; 
(c) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised Framework for Resolution of 
Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity Sector’; 
(d) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas based Power 
Plants'; 
(e) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’;  

68 
 
(f) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy; 
(g) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
Power; 
(h) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy; 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
Power; and 
(j) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement of 175 
Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee 
adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/ 
modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget Session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Introduction of Report] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations: 16 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 
Total : 
Percentage : 
 
 
 
14 
87.5% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies: 
NIL 
Total : 
Percentage : 
 
 
 
 
00 
00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration:  
Serial Nos. 3 and 4 
Total : 
Percentage : 
 
 
 
 
02 
12.5% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
NIL 
Total : 
Percentage : 
 
 
 
00 
00% 
 