STANDING COMMITTEE  ON  ENERGY
(2021-2022)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in
Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22)
of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2022/Falguna, 1943 (Saka)
22


 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in Sixth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd March, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22nd March, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2022/ Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 


 
 
COE  NO.  346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001

 
 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………. (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………. 7 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………….. 20 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………………… 
 
21 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited…………………………………………. 24 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 15th March, 2022………… 25 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy…………………….. 
 
27 
         

 
 
(ii) 
    

 
 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2021-22) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh – Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3 Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
4 Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5 Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
6 Shri Kishan Kapoor 
7 Dr. A. Chella Kumar 
8 Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal ^ 
9 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
11 Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
12 Shri Velusamy P. 
13 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
14 Shri Gyaneshwar Patil @ 
15 Shri Jai Prakash 
16 Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
17 Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
18 Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar  
19 Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
20 Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
21 Vacant # 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24 Shri Rajendra Gehlot* 
25 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
26 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 

 
 
(iv) 
27  Shri S. Selvaganabathy* 
28 Shri Sanjay Seth 
29 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30 Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
31 Vacant $ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                       — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan        — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora      — Additional Director 
4. Ms. Deepika                              — Committee Officer 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f  01.12.2021 vice Smt. Sajda Ahmed.  
@ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f  07.02.2022 vice Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik.  
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11.11.2021 
$ Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 02.12.2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Second Report on action-
taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021 and was laid on 
table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government to the 
observations/recommendations contained in this Report were received on 24th December, 2021. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 15th 
March, 2022. 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                               Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
March 15, 2022                                                                                          Chairperson, 
Phalguna 24, 1943 (Saka)                                                             Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
(vi) 
  

 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- taken by the Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy on observations/ recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2020-21) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021 and was laid on 
table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 12 Recommendations/ 
Observations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12                                                             Total - 09 
                         Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies: 
                                                        Nil                                                                      Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
         Serial Nos. 2, 10, and 11                                                                                  Total– 03 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final replies of the Government 
are still awaited:  
                                                         Nil                                                                    Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
4. The Committee observe that the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 8th March, 2021 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The 
Ministry was required to submit the action-taken replies on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Report within a period of three months i.e. by 7th June, 
2021. However, the Ministry submitted the action-taken replies on 24th December, 2021 
after a delay of more than six months. The Committee deplore the delay on the part of the 

 
 
2 
Ministry in submission of action-taken replies. The Committee while expressing their 
displeasure caution the Ministry to ensure timely submission of replies to the Committee. 
It is also reiterated that the replies of the Government to the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee should be comprehensive and not inconclusive, vague or 
couched in general terms like ‘noted’, ‘accepted’, etc. 
5. The Committee further desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
6. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation No. 2 
7. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Gross Budgetary Support to the Ministry was substantially 
decreased at the time of revised estimates. The allocation was reduced by about 26 % 
during the year 2019-20 and about 38 % for 2020-21. The Committee observe that the 
Ministry has not been able to fully utilize even the decreased allocations during the previous 
years. It could utilize 86.97%, 91.53 % and 69.78% of revised budgetary allocations during 
the years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 (upto January, 2021) respectively. The 
Committee find it very strange that funds are un-spent in such an important and dynamic 
sector with a huge target of 175 GW to be achieved by the year 2022. Non-utilization of 
budgeted funds are unacceptable in a Country where budgetary resources are limited and 
so many dream projects are to be completed with prudent financial planning and therefore it 
is of utmost importance that the budgetary allocations are fully and properly utilized. The 
Budgetary allocations approved by the Parliament for a particular financial year cannot be 
left to remain only on paper as these are scarce lapsable funds which are meant to be 
properly spent and fully utilized within the prescribed budgetary time-frame well before the 
close of the particular financial year. The Committee are of the opinion that variation in 
budgetary allocations at the stage of revised estimates and low utilization of even the 
decreased allocated amounts under various Heads are symptomatic of poor financial 
planning by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
streamline its budget formulation process and increase its fund absorption capacity, as 
continuous shortfall in utilization of the allocated funds will have adverse impact on the 
demand of budgetary allocations of the Ministry for subsequent financial years.” 
8. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has stated as 
under: 
“The suggestion of the committed has been noted for compliance.  

 
 
3 
During the year 2020-21, against a BE of Rs.5753 crore and RE of Rs. 3591 crore actual 
expenditure was Rs. 3096.73 crore which was 86.24 % of RE. The Shortfall was mainly due to 
COVID outbreak and also because the Department of Economic Affairs issued guidelines to 
restrict the monthly expenditure to 5% of the Budget Outlay during each month upto 
December, 2020. 
Further, most of the grid connected renewable energy projects in the country are being 
implemented by private sector developers selected through transparent competitive bidding 
process. Because of fall in Renewable Energy (RE) tariff, no additional financial support is 
required for grid connected RE power. Hence, budgetary spending in a financial year does 
not have a high correlation with the RE capacity installed in that financial year.” 
9. The Committee in their recommendation had noted that Gross Budgetary Support 
to the Ministry was substantially decreased at the Revised Estimates stage. The allocation 
was reduced by about 26 % for the year 2019-20 and about 38 % for 2020-21. The 
Committee observed that the Ministry could not fully utilize even the decreased 
allocations during the previous years and found it strange that funds were un-spent in 
such an important and dynamic sector with a huge target to achieve. 
The Ministry in its reply has stated that the shortfall was mainly due to COVID 
outbreak and the consequent guidelines issued by the Department of Economic Affairs to 
restrict the monthly expenditure to 5% of the Budget Outlay during each month upto 
December, 2020. It has also been furnished that most of the grid connected renewable 
energy projects in the country are being implemented by private sector developers 
without any additional financial support. 
The Committee observe that the Ministry projected the budgetary requirements of 
Rs. 9523.04 crores and Rs. 9254.77 crores for the financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22 
respectively and BE of Rs. 5753.00 crores each were actually allocated in both the 
financial years which were reduced again at the time of Revised Estimates. Such a 
mismatch in the demand, allocation and actual utilization of funds clearly points towards 
the poor financial planning by the Ministry. The Committee feel that the excuse of covid 
pandemic is not tenable because the problem of non-utilization of the allocated funds by 
the Ministry precedes Covid-19 outbreak, as the Ministry has not been able to fully utilize 
its budgetary allocations since at least 2016-17. Further, the assertion by the Ministry that 
most of the renewable energy capacity is being added by the private sector without 
central financial assistance implies that the Ministry projected an inflated budgetary 
requirement for the financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22, even as private sector seemed to 
have become self sustainable in implementation of renewable energy projects and did not 
require any financial support from the Government. The Committee, therefore reiterate 
their recommendation that the Ministry should streamline its budget formulation process 
and increase its fund absorption capacity so that desired budgetary allocations are made 
in each financial year.  

 
 
4 
Recommendation No. 10 
10. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that 221 waste-to-energy plants based on Municipal Solid Waste 
(MSW), Urban, Industrial and agricultural waste/residues for generation of power and 
biogas to meet thermal and electrical energy needs of industries and for production of Bio-
CNG for transportation have been installed in the Country. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has more or less, been able to achieve the physical targets under waste to energy 
programme but the fund utilization has been poor as it could not utilize the full allocated 
amount. It can thus be inferred that there is scope to increase the physical target under this 
programme extending its reach further. The Committee also believe that use of agricultural 
waste/residue to produce energy may also help in reducing stubble burning and thereby 
addressing the problem of air pollution. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should encourage setting up of waste to energy plants in consultation with local 
bodies for better waste-management in urban as well as rural areas.” 
11. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“The recommendation offered by the Standing Committee is noted by the Division. In this 
connection it is to inform that this Ministry has been encouraging setting up of waste to 
energy plants for better waste-management in urban as well as rural areas under 
“Programme on Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues”. Central 
Financial support (CFA) to project developers was provided under this programme. During 
validity of this programme, sanctions to 29 nos of Waste to Energy projects including 5 nos. 
of MSW to Power projects were granted financial support by this Ministry. The programme 
expired on 31.03.2021. 
For continuation of the programme beyond 31.03.2021 an EFC proposal under Umbrella 
scheme of the National Bioenergy Programme was submitted to Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The proposal includes setting up of 50 nos. of MSW 
based power plants in urban areas initiated by local bodies. However during the EFC 
meeting held on 22.09.2021 it was recommended that the programme may be continued 
only to meet the already created liabilities and no new projects may be sanctioned under 
sub schemes of this programme.” 
12. The Committee in their recommendation had noted that the Ministry, more or 
less was able to achieve the physical targets under ‘waste to energy’ programme but the 
fund utilization was poor as it could not utilize the full allocated amount. Therefore, it 
could be inferred that there was a scope to increase the physical target under this 
programme to further extend its reach. However, the Ministry in its reply has stated that 
‘Programme on Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues’ has 
expired on 31.03.2021. 

 
 
5 
The Committee observe that the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) first 
recommended the continuation of the programme and a proposal to set up 50 nos. of MSW 
based power plants in urban areas initiated by local bodies was submitted to Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. However, later in its meeting held on 22.09.2021, EFC 
recommended that the programme may be continued only to meet the already created 
liabilities and no new projects may be sanctioned under sub schemes of this programme. In 
view of the Committee, the programme should be continued as the use of agricultural 
waste/ residue to produce energy has an added benefit of reducing stubble burning and 
thereby addressing the problem of air pollution. The Committee therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry should encourage setting up of ‘waste to energy’ plants 
in consultation with local bodies for better waste-management in urban as well as rural 
areas. The Committee desire that the Ministry should also furnish the reasons for change in 
recommendation of the EFC with respect to continuation of the programme.  
Recommendation No. 11 
13. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Ministry has not been able to fulfill its obligation regarding 
utilization of 10% of its annual budget for development of renewable energy in the North-
Eastern Region. It is submitted by the Ministry time and again that adequate proposals 
have not been received from North-East States, due to which there is substantial shortfall in 
fund utilization. It is also submitted that the potential for solar & wind energy in North-
Eastern Region is much less in comparison to other states, thus making solar & wind power 
produced in these areas non-remunerative. But we are aware that the north-eastern region 
has substantial potential for small hydro power; however its capacity addition since 2017-18 
has been zero except for minimal addition in 2018-19. Keeping in view the fact that the 
north-eastern states are more interested in off-grid and decentralized schemes of the 
Ministry, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should give priority to North-Eastern 
States in implementation of off-grid and decentralized application programme of the 
Ministry and specificities of this region should be kept in mind while formulating the 
schemes.” 
14. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“The details of funds allocated to North Eastern Region (NER) during the year 2020-21 are 
as follows: 
                                                                                                                       (Rs in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual expenditure 
2020-21 565.00 335.00 107.00 
The off-grid solar PV programme phase-II was exclusively extended for North Eastern 
Region from 1-4-2020 to 31-3-2021 for installation of solar street lights, distribution of solar 

 
 
6 
study lamps to school going children and solar power packs for public institutions with 
subsidy of 90%. 
During the year 2021-22, against a B.E. of Rs 565.00 crore, an expenditure of Rs 23.18 
crore has been incurred upto November 2021.” 
15. The Committee in their recommendation had noted that the Ministry has not been 
able to fulfill its obligation regarding utilization of 10% of its annual budget for 
development of renewable energy in the North-Eastern Region. During the financial years 
2020-21 and 2021-22, against the budgetary estimates of Rs. 565 crore each for North-East 
Region, only an expenditure of Rs 107 crore and Rs 23.18 crore (upto November 2021) 
have been incurred. It was submitted by the Ministry that substantial shortfall in fund 
utilization was due to non-receipt of adequate proposals from the North-East States. The 
Committee observe that the north-eastern region has substantial potential for small hydro 
power; however, the small-hydro programme of the Ministry has been under 
consideration since April, 2017. Further, the north-eastern states are interested in off-grid 
and decentralized schemes of the Ministry, but, the schemes like Atal Jyoti Yojana 
(AJAY), off-grid and decentralized solar PV application programme, etc have been 
closed/discontinued by the Ministry. It is perplexing to note that on the one hand, the 
Ministry has been complaining about lack of proposals from North-Eastern States and on 
the other hand, the relevant schemes have either been under consideration for about five 
years or discontinued or closed down. In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation that Ministry should give priority to North-Eastern States in 
implementation of off-grid and decentralized application programme of the Ministry and 
specificities of this region should be kept in mind while formulating the schemes. The 
Committee also desire that the off-grid solar PV programme should be further extended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
CHAPTER  II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) is the nodal 
Ministry of the Government of India for all matters relating to renewable energy sources. The 
Ministry had  projected the budgetary requirements of Rs. 9254.77 crores for the  financial year 
2021-22 but only Rs. 5753.00 crores have actually been allocated which is equivalent to the BE 
allocation of the Ministry for the financial year of 2020-21. Notwithstanding the reduction of about 
38% against the BE proposed by the Ministry, it has been given a huge responsibility of installing 
175 GW of renewable energy by the year 2022 which includes 100 GW of solar power, 60 GW of 
wind power, 10 GW of bio-power and 5 GW of small hydro power in accordance with our 
commitment to a healthy planet and Nationally Determined Contributions as per the Paris Accord 
on climate change. 
The Committee observe that as on 31st January, 2021, cumulative 92.54 GW of renewable 
energy capacity has been installed which is a little more than 50 % of the target. It means the 
remaining 82.46 GW capacity have to be installed in just one and a half year with gainful 
utilization of funds. However, the past trends reflect that the Ministry has not been able to fully 
utilize its budgetary allocations during the previous years. In such a situation, the Committee  
are apprehensive that any laxity on the part of the Ministry in achieving the assigned target may 
amount to reneging on our commitment. The Committee, therefore recommend that the  
Ministry should not only scientifically plan the expenditure of their allocated budget but also take 
up the work on mission mode so that the target of 175 GW is successfully achieved by the  
year 2022. 
Reply of the Government 
So far 104.03 GW of Grid Interactive Renewable Power Capacity (excluding large hydro) 
has been installed (as on 30.11.2021) in the Country. Around 52.00 GW renewable energy 
capacity is under installation, and an additional 31.82 GW capacity has been tendered. The 
Ministry has made all possible efforts to achieve the target of 175 GW of installed renewable 
energy capacity by December 2022. However, an extension of 7.5 months was granted to 
projects on account of the two waves of COVID. This delay might cause the achievement of the 
175 GW target to take some more months beyond December 2022. It may also be noted that 
most of the renewable energy capacity is being added by the private sector without central 
financial assistance and budgetary spending in a financial year does not have a high   correlation 
with the RE capacity added in the country in that financial year. 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
 

 
 
8 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry has continuously failed to achieve 
its yearly physical targets. For the years 2018-19 and 2019-20, against the Grid connected 
Renewable Energy target of 15,355 MW and 11,852 MW, the Ministry could achieve only 
8,519.52 MW and 8,761.26 MW respectively. There was shortfall of about 45 % and 26 % during 
these years. Similarly, during the year 2020-21 (upto January, 2021), 5473.08 MW could be 
installed against the target of 12,380 MW. The Committee feel that with continuous non-
achievement of the assigned yearly physical targets, the Ministry may find it extremely difficult to 
achieve 175 GW by 2022. Against such gross under-achievement, the Committee expect the 
Ministry to significantly improve its target fulfillment in the financial year 2021-22 and recommend 
that the Ministry should ensure continuous real-time monitoring of the working of the 
implementing agencies, support them vigorously in sorting out the glitches and take corrective 
action, wherever required without any delay so that the physical targets set for the financial year 
2021-22 under various Heads of the Grant are successfully achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
During the year 2020-21, a total of 7356.13 MW cumulative renewable energy capacity 
was achieved. The low achievement was due to impact of COVID-19 pandemic during the year 
2020-21. So far 104.03 GW of Grid Interactive Renewable Power Capacity has been installed (as 
on 30.11.2021) in the Country. Around 52 GW renewable energy capacity is under installation, 
and an additional 31.82 GW capacity has been tendered. Ministry has been making all efforts to 
achieve the 175 GW target by December 2022. However, an extension of 7.5 months was 
granted to projects on account of the two waves of COVID. This delay might cause the 
achievement of the 175 GW target to take some more months beyond December 2022. 
  [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee observe that the Green Energy Corridor Project aims at synchronizing 
electricity produced from renewable sources, such as solar and wind, with conventional power 
stations in the Grid. For evacuation of large-scale renewable energy, Intra State Transmission 
System project was sanctioned by the Ministry in the year 2015-16. The project is being 
implemented by eight renewable-rich states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh through their 
respective State Transmission Utilities (STUs). Its regular monitoring is done by the Ministry and 
it is understood that a Project Appraisal Committee in the Ministry also monitors the project and 
recommends on the disbursal of the central grant to the STUs. The Committee are however, 
pained to observe that despite having well placed mechanism, the project has not marched at the 
desired pace and the construction of cumulative 7365 ckm transmission lines and commissioning 
of 9976 MVA capacity substations during the last 5 years’ period (as on 31.12.2020) have been 
far from satisfactory and much below the target fixed which was 9700 ckm transmission lines and 

 
 
9 
22600 MVA substations. In the Committee’s opinion, among the various factors stated to be 
responsible for the slow pace in the progress of Green energy Corridor Project, the inadequate 
monitoring by the Ministry and lack of the priority which the project deserved to be given, have 
also contributed a lot in missing the target. The Committee are concerned about the already 
delayed implementation of the intra state Green Energy Project. The Committee observe that to 
meet the given target, 2335 ckm of transmission lines have to be installed and substations of 
aggregate capacity of 12624 MVA have to be charged by May 2021 so as to meet even the 
extended deadline, which seems highly unlikely seeing the track of past performance. The 
Committee observe that for the year 2021-22, Rs. 300 crores have been allocated at BE stage. 
Keeping in view the importance of the project for evacuation of power from renewable energy 
rich States and its integration with the Grid, the Committee would like to know the action plan 
now prepared by the Ministry and recommend the Ministry to work on mission mode to earnestly 
pursue the matter with the States concerned and get the Green Energy Corridor ready within the 
given time frame in order to avoid grid congestion and to facilitate evacuation of large scale 
renewable power capacity. 
Reply of the Government 
The Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) component of GEC with 3200 ckm 
transmission lines and 17,000 MVA sub-stations has been completed by March 2020. Under the 
Intra-State Transmission System (InSTS) component of GEC, approx. 8434 ckm of transmission 
lines have been constructed out of target of 9700 ckm, and 15268 MVA substations have been 
charged out of target of 22600 MVA, as on 30.11.2021. The InSTS component of GEC is being 
implemented by the State Transmission Utilities of the respective States. The commissioning 
schedule of InSTS GEC project was first extended till 31.12.2020 upon the requests from the 
State Governments and then further extended up to 31.05.2021 due to disruption of works 
because of COVID. Upon the requests received from the States the timeline for commissioning 
of projects under GEC has been further extended upto June-2022. The InSTS component has 
been delayed in all the States due to various reasons such as: 
(a) Some projects were retendered due to low bid turnout, hence delay in award of 
work (Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh). 
(b) Some projects had to be cancelled as the planned renewable energy generation 
projects did not come up (Rajasthan). Accordingly, alternate projects were 
planned and sanctioned. These projects are under implementation. 
(c) Some projects were cancelled due to no bid turnout (Maharashtra and Himachal 
Pradesh). 
(d) Some projects were cancelled by the State for their own reasons (Andhra 
Pradesh). 
(e) A few sanctioned projects have been delayed due to forest clearance and RoW 
issues. 
(f) Delay due to disruption of works because of COVID.  
  [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 

 
 
10 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that against the target of 60 GW of installed Wind Power to be 
achieved by the year 2022, a total capacity of 38.68 GW has been installed as on January 31, 
2021. The Committee observe that the Ministry could not achieve its  physical targets during the 
previous three years  as  shortfall of 53%, 63% and 30% were noticed  respectively in the years 
2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20. For the year 2020-21, against the target of 3000 MW, the Ministry 
has been able to achieve only 939.90 MW till January 31, 2021. Despite under-achievement of 
the physical targets, the Committee find it paradoxical that the funds allocated for the previous 
years have reportedly been fully utilized. In this regard, the Committee are informed that there is 
no linkage between capacity commissioned and budgetary allocations which is rather strange 
and unacceptable. A budget of Rs 1100 crores has been allocated for the financial year 2021-22 
for only clearing the past liabilities under GBI scheme which was operational till March, 2017 and 
now the Government has not been providing any direct central financial assistance at all for 
installing new wind power project. The Committee are astonished to note that the Government is 
no longer supporting the installation of wind power projects in the Country when more than 35% 
of the overall target of 60 GW of wind energy is yet to be achieved. For promotion of renewable 
power in the Country, the Committee  recommend that the Ministry should continue to financially 
support wind power projects and also facilitate private players in order to ensure  achievement of 
targets  of 60 GW Wind Energy by the year 2022  which will  give  a  much needed boost to the 
renewable energy sector. 
Reply of the Government 
Government is supporting renewable energy sector, including wind energy, in the country 
through various incentives and initiatives. These include: 
 permitting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 100 percent under the automatic 
route, 
 waiver of Inter State Transmission System (ISTS) charges for inter-state sale of solar 
and wind power for projects to be commissioned by 30th June 2025, 
 declaration of trajectory for Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) up to the year 
2022, 
 setting up of Ultra Mega Renewable Energy Parks to provide land and transmission to 
RE developers on a plug and play basis, 
 laying of new transmission lines and creating new sub-station capacity for evacuation 
of renewable power, 
 setting up of Project Development Cell for attracting and facilitating investments, 
 Standard Bidding Guidelines for tariff based competitive bidding process for 
procurement of Power from Grid Connected Solar PV and Wind Projects. 

 
 
11 
 Government has issued orders that power shall be dispatched against Letter of Credit 
(LC) or advance payment to ensure timely payment by distribution licensees to RE 
generators. 
 Conducting skill development programmes to create a pool of skilled manpower for 
implementation, operation and maintenance of RE projects. 
In addition to the above, the following steps have been taken specifically for promoting 
wind energy:  
 Concessional custom duty exemption on certain components required for 
manufacturing of wind electric generators. 
 Generation Based Incentive (GBI) is being provided to the wind projects 
commissioned on or before 31 March 2017. 
 Technical support including wind resource assessment and identification of potential 
sites through the National Institute of Wind Energy, Chennai.  
Presently, the wind power projects in the country are installed on the basis of commercial 
viability through tariff based competitive bidding process, which has reduced the tariff of wind 
power considerably, i.e. from Rs 3.51 - 5.92 per units during FiT to around Rs 2.80 per unit in 
bidding regime. The lowest tariff discovered in latest bid is Rs 2.69 per unit.   
The overall status of wind power projects are as under:  
(1) Cumulative commissioned capacity till 30/11/2021: 40.03 GW  
(2) Capacity under implementation: 9.67 GW 
(3) Bids issued: 1.50 GW 
Total (1+2+3): 51.20 GW 
Further, in order to ensure the timely execution of projects, MNRE is regularly monitoring 
the implementation of awarded wind power projects. Further, necessary amendments and 
changes in policy/ guidelines are being carried out from time to time in consultation with 
stakeholders. 
  [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that more than 60% Budget of the Ministry is allocated for 
development of Solar Power including PM-KUSUM Scheme. However, even here, the Ministry 
has not been able to achieve its yearly solar energy targets. It missed its target for the years 
2018-19 and 2019-20 with a shortfall of about 40 % and 25% respectively. During the year 2020-
21, the Ministry could achieve as low as 46% of its target till January, 2021. 
The Committee are also concerned with the weak performance of the Ministry in solar roof-
top programme since against the target of 40 GW of installed roof-top solar power by 2022, only 
an aggregate capacity of 3.73 GW has been installed as on December 31, 2020, that is, target 

 
 
12 
achievement of less than even 10%. It is observed that the roof-top systems are not proving to 
be attractive for the consumers due to time consuming and complicated procedures for setting it 
up and delays in disbursement of subsidy, etc. The Committee believe that given the 
performance of the Ministry in this Sector till date, the Roof-top Solar target of 40 GW by 2022 is 
highly unlikely to be achieved with the present pace of progress. In the Committee’s view, one 
major reason for such a tardy progress is lack of awareness about this scheme amongst the 
masses. The Committee thus recommend that: 
(i) The Ministry should widely advertise the benefits of having roof-top solar power 
system and also about the incentives being provided by the Government for the 
same in all vernacular print and electronic media so as to spread awareness among 
the masses. 
(ii) Single Window Clearance System should be put in place, in the first phase, in all 
District headquarters in the country to provide all assistance/services/information to 
the customers and facilitate them in getting roof top solar system installed in hassle 
free manner.  
(iii) The process of subsidy disbursement should be made transparent, simpler and 
faster through the aforesaid Single Window Clearance System and preferably a 
digital platform be developed for this purpose to reduce the human interface in the 
process. 
Reply of the Government 
Under the ongoing phase II of the Rooftop Solar (RTS) programme , aggregate capacity of 
3.34 GW has been sanctioned for residential sector under phase II of RTS programme of which 
over 1 GW capacity has been reported installed as on 30-11-20211 and rest is in various stages 
of implementation/tendering. Overall aggregate capacity of more than 6.0 GW RTS installations 
has been achieved till 30-11-2021 (with or without CFA) in various sectors e.g. residential, social, 
commercial, industrial, Government, institutional etc. Due to the emergence of situations due to 
Covid pandemic the growth in the sector was affected. On request of stakeholders, the Ministry 
has also provided blanket extension for the sanctioned projects for 9 months in addition to project 
specific extension.  
The prices of systems have also gone up. The issue of extension of timeline for 
achievement of 40 GW RTS capacity by December 2022 is being examined. In addition, while 
implementing the phase II of the programme, various issues such as delay in tendering and very 
low L1 rates, less number of bidders, changes in net-metering regulations, lack of awareness of 
prospective beneficiaries,  increase in GST rates etc. were observed. 
Following initiatives have been taken to address such issues:  
(i) w.r.t. the suggestions on awareness programme through print and electronic media 
the Ministry has prepared advertisement materials which have been shared with 
States for wider publicity. In addition, Ministry under the ongoing technical assistance 

 
 
13 
programme of the multilateral/bilateral agencies is supporting States for awareness 
and capacity building activities. Further, upto 25 % of the service charges of the 
projects can be used for publicity and awareness activities for which communication 
material has been shared with States. Publicity and awareness activities are also 
organized by States as a part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotshav. The best practices being 
adopted by States is being shared with other States .Around 4400 Discom 
engineers/officers have been trained under the various technical assistance 
programmes of multilateral and bilateral agencies. Further, an online learning portal 
“Solar Pathshala” has also been developed which is open to all interested persons. 
(ii) 30 nos of States/UTs have developed online portal for implementation of the RTS 
projects. These States has developed their procedure of receipt for RTS applications 
and its processing. The links of the portal are available in the online portal of MNRE 
(solarrooftop.gov.in). As per last reported data by various States/UTs about 3.45 lakh 
applications corresponding to 1.39 GW have been received of which about 3.02 lakh 
applications corresponding to 1.20 GW have been approved and over 1 GW capacity 
has been installed in residential sector under phase II of RTS Programme with central 
financial assistance. The programme is being implemented by the Electricity 
Distribution Companies of the States through their selected vendors. The interested 
customer can submit their proposal online and get the system installed through any of 
these empanelled vendors of the Discoms after necessary approval by DISCOMs. 
The Consumer has to pay the cost of the system minus CFA amount. 
(iii) Regarding the promotion of RTS in district headquarters, States/UTs have been 
requested to select at least one city in their States/UTs to be developed as solar 
cities.  24 States has identified their cities in this regard out of which some cities are 
also District Headquarter (list of cities is given below): 
S. 
No. 
State/UT Cities identified by States/UT to be developed 
as Solar Cities 
1 Assam Majuli District 
2 Bihar Bodh Gaya, Rajgir, Vaishali 
3 Chhattisgarh New Raipur 
4 Delhi NDMC 
5 Gujarat Dwarka 
6 Haryana Panchkula 
7 Himachal Pradesh Shimla 
8 Jharkhand Giridih 
9 Karnataka Hosapete city in Bellary and Bidar City 
10 Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 
11 Madhya Pradesh Sanchi 

 
 
14 
12 Meghalaya TURA Town of West Garo Hills 
13 Odisha Bhubaneswar 
14 Rajasthan Pushkar and Jaisalmer 
15 Uttar Pradesh Ayodhya and Prayag Raj 
16 Uttarakhand Dehradoon 
17 West Bengal Prantik in Birbhum, Shantiniketan 
18 Andaman and Nikobar Shaheed Dweep 
19 Punjab Amritsar 
20 Sikkim Jorethang 
21 Tripura Udaipur Town 
22 Mizoram Saitual 
23 Daman and Diu and Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
Diu city , Diu and Damanwada Panchayat, Daman 
24 Goa Panjim 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that PM-KUSUM is one of the major central sector schemes of the 
Ministry. An allocation of Rs. 1000 crores was made under this scheme for 2020-21 which has 
been reduced to Rs. 210 crores at the stage of Revised Estimates i.e. a massive reduction of 
about 80%. Against the target of 10,000 MW under Component A, the Ministry has sanctioned 
only 1000 MW and the achievement is zero as on 31st December, 2020. Under component B, 
against the target of 20 lakh stand alone solar water pumps, the Ministry has sanctioned only 
1,71,270 and the achievement is 16,546. Under component C, against the target of 15 lakh Grid-
connected Solar Powered Agriculture Pumps, the Ministry has sanctioned only 82,308 and the 
achievement is a miserable 24. The Committee are extremely disappointed with the performance 
of the Ministry under such a cutting-edge scheme touching the lives of rural masses. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should coordinate and hold consultations with 
the State Governments and actively encourage them to participate in the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
The implementation guidelines of PM-KUSUM Scheme were issued on 22.07.2019 and 
States/UTs were requested for sending demand for allocation of capacities under the three 
components of PM-KUSUM Scheme. The capacity allocation under the three components of the 
Scheme considering the demand and availability of targets under the Scheme were issued from 
August 2019 onwards for the year 2019-20. The centralized tendering for Component-B of PM-
KUSUM Scheme was finalized in December 2019 and States were requested for issuance of 
LOAs to the successful bidders. While some of the States issued LOAs to vendors by March 
2020, soon after the lockdown was imposed due to Covid-19 pandemic and the implementation 

 
 
15 
work was held up. Though after the first wave of Covid-19 pandemic situation was improved and 
implementation of PM-KUSUM started in August 2020, however, many States curtailed the State 
share to be provided for the Scheme resulting in lower capacity achievements than allocated. 
In case of Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme against the initial allocated capacity of 
1000 MW in 2019-20, LoAs for a total of 750 MW capacity were issued by September 2020 but 
the implementation on the ground could not be initiated due to non-availability of concessional 
and collateral free financing from banks which has resulted in delay in implementation of the 
capacity on the ground. Similarly, under the Component-C of the Scheme there has been 
reluctance for the desired State share of 30% and farmers share of 40% of total project cost, 
which has resulted in very low achievements under this component. 
Ministry had undertaken third party evaluation of the Component-A and C of the Scheme 
and based on the evaluation report a new variant in Component-C was introduced considering 
the non-availability of State and farmers share for individual grid connected pump solarisation. In 
the new variant, called feeder level solarisation, the need for mandatory State/ farmer share was 
removed and instead of installing solar panel for the individual agriculture pumps, a single solar 
power plant of few MW size is proposed to be installed catering to the power supply 
requirements of an agriculture feeder. 
The States have shown interest in this variant and against the target capacity of 
solarisation of 2 lakh existing grid connected pumps through feeder level solarisation, Ministry 
has received demand for around 43 lakh such pumps in 2020-21. Considering the demand 
variation between the components, Ministry proposed fungibility of CFA between Component-B 
and C which was agreed by Ministry of Finance, keeping in view that the total CFA amount was 
unchanged. So far, over 72000 stand-alone solar pumps have been installed under the 
Component-B, 18 MW capacity solar power plants installed under Component-A and over 1000 
pumps reported solarised under individual pump solarisation variant of Component-C. Ministry is 
regularly reviewing the progress of the three components on weekly basis with the State 
Implementing Agencies and timely resolving the issues in implementing the Scheme. 
  [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note that domestic manufacturing capacity in solar sector is limited and 
only 2.5 GW of solar cells and 9 to 10 GW of solar modules are manufactured in the Country 
against the annual demand of 30 GW in general and 100 GW in the context of achieving the 
target of 175 GW Solar Energy by the year 2022. A Productivity Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
has been announced in the Budget in order to encourage manufacturing of ‘High Efficiency Solar 
PV Modules’ with an outlay of Rs 4500 crores over 5 years. The Committee feel that though it 
took more than 5 years to formulate a dedicated scheme for encouraging domestic 
manufacturing in solar sector but nonetheless it is a welcome initiative taken by the Government. 
This assumes more significance in the wake of the “Atmanirbhar Bharat” mission. The 

 
 
16 
Committee hope that the Ministry will implement this scheme in all sincerity so that it yields the 
desired results which in turn will substantially reduce our dependence on import and thereby our 
precious foreign exchange will be preserved. 
The Committee observe that during examination of the subject, the Ministry had submitted 
that the cost difference between domestic and imported solar cells/modules is about 21-22% 
whereas the safeguard duty currently available is less than 15% and as stated by the Ministry, it 
is not helpful for domestic manufactures and they are not willing to put new plants. As informed 
to the Committee, it has been proposed to the Government to impose basic Custom Duty with a 
future date i.e. April, 2022 so that all existing projects can be commissioned before that. The 
Committee would expect that while considering the proposal for imposition of basic custom duty 
on imports related to solar sector, the Government must deeply analyze various ramifications 
taking into account the facts like availability of solar cells/modules in the domestic market, 
likelihood of rise in prices of imported products resulting in discouragement to potential 
customers, impact on achieving 100 GW solar energy target by the year 2022 etc.  The 
Committee desire that structured efforts need to be taken by the Government for incentivizing the 
domestic manufacturing of all solar energy related products to achieve the “Atmanirbhar Bharat” 
mission in real sense. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to enhance the domestic manufacturing capacity, MNRE has been consistently 
bringing out policies to support domestic solar PV manufacturing. Some of the recent initiatives 
are: 
 MNRE has created a market of more than 36 GW over the next 2 to 3 years for 
domestic cells and modules by making deployment of domestic cells and modules 
mandatory in schemes like PM-KUSUM, Solar Rooftops, CPSU Scheme. 
 Also, through implementation of ‘Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
Order’, procurement and use of domestically manufactured solar PV modules and 
solar inverters has been mandated for Govt/ Govt. entities. 
 The Government has issued Production Linked Incentive Scheme “National 
Programme on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules” to promote manufacturing of high 
efficiency solar PV modules, including the upstage vertical components like cells, 
wafers, ingots, polysilicon, in India and thus reduce the import dependence in solar 
PV sector. Under this Scheme, Letters of Award have been issued for setting up 
around 10.5 GW of fully integrated solar PV manufacturing. 
 Government has announced its decision to impose Basic Customs Duty (BCD) on 
import of solar PV cells and modules with effect from 01.04.2022. 
 Government has discontinued issuance of Customs Duty Concession Certificates for 
import of material /equipment for initial setting up of solar PV power projects. 

 
 
17 
 In order to ensure the reliability of solar PV modules being deployed in India, MNRE 
has brought in a mechanism of enlistment, after thorough inspection, of manufacturing 
facilities of solar PV cells and modules. The ALMM (Approved list of Models and 
Manufacturers) Order was issued on 02.01.2019. The first list under this Order, List-I 
for models and manufacturers of solar PV modules, has been published on 
10.03.2021 and is being updated periodically. This shall also provide an edge to 
domestic manufacturers by way of a lead time in enlistment. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for New National Bio-Gas and Organic 
Manure Programme (NNBOMP) since the year 2017-18 has been considerably reduced and the 
Ministry has consistently failed to utilize even the reduced financial allocation. The physical 
targets under this scheme also remain unachieved. The Committee are informed that the non-
achievement of targets is due to increase in cost of construction, low priority given to this scheme 
at the State level, impact of Ujjwala Scheme etc. The Committee observe that apart from 
electricity generation, Bio-Gas Plants not only meet the cooking fuel requirements of rural folks 
but also provide them organic bio-manure. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should widely publicise the benefits of this scheme and work towards providing 
affordable lending facilities for meeting the upfront cost for installation of Bio-Gas Plants. 
Reply of the Government 
Besides providing CFA for biogas plant installation under NNBOMP, the ministry has been 
providing the financial support for following biogas promotional activities: 
 Support training for farmers & biogas users, biogas turnkey workers/ installers and 
publicity awareness of the Biogas Programme in the country through the State / UT’s 
Programme Implementing Agencies (PIAs), Khadi & Village Industries Commission 
(KVIC); and National Dairy Development Board, (NDDB) Anand; and 
 Eight Biogas Development and Training Centres are working in different regions of 
the country for providing technical trainings for installation of biogas plants, skill 
development by imparting trainings to biogas turnkey workers and information & 
public awareness assistance, for implementing the national biogas programme in the 
country including rural areas.     
The NNBOMP which was valid till 31.03.2021, has been recommended for continuation by 
EFC for the period FY 2021-22 to 2025-26 only for meeting the already created liabilities.  Thus 
no new projects after 31.03.2021 are to be sanctioned. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
 

 
 
18 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) 
is a Mini Ratna (Category–I) Government of India Enterprise under the administrative control of 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. It is the only non-banking financial institution exclusively 
engaged in promoting, developing and extending financial assistance for setting up projects 
relating to renewable sources of energy. The Committee observe that IREDA has outstanding 
foreign currency loan of Rs. 8,857.20 crores guaranteed by the Government of India, for which it 
has also paid the guarantee fee of more than Rs. 96 crores in 2019-20 and Rs. 118 crores in 
2020-21. The Committee feel that the guarantee fee should not be levied on atleast those 
enterprises which are 100% owned by the Government of India. Further, it has also been 
submitted that IREDA has Non-performing Assets of Rs. 69.2237 crore in Biomass Sector and 
Rs. 628.4256 crores in Small Hydro Sector. The Committee specifically recommend the 
following: 
(i) The Ministry should explore the possibility of exempting IREDA  from payment of 
Guarantee fee which have been levied by the Government in lieu of extending 
sovereign guarantee which will help bolster its balance sheet; 
(ii) IREDA should gear up its machinery towards reducing its NPAs in accordance with 
norms of the RBI; and 
(iii) The details of the loans write-off made in the last three years may be furnished to the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
The NPA figures for Small Hydro Sector may be read as Rs.728.43 as on 31st March 2020. 
(i) IREDA has approached Ministry of Finance through MNRE, requesting for 
waiver/exemption/reduction of GoI guarantee fee for the sovereign guaranteed 
international lines of credit. Waiver of the GoI guarantee fee shall lower the overall cost 
of the foreign currency loans for lending to the renewable energy (RE) sector. This will 
enable the company to provide further benefit in the interest rates for RE project 
developer. DEA has reduced Sovereign Guarantee Fee (SGF) in some cases. DEA 
vide DO letter dated 11-03-2021 was requested that SGF may be kept at 0.1% per 
annum for USD 469 million line of credit of the ADB to IREDA to which it was reduced 
to 0.5% per annum from 1.2% per annum. MNRE is taking up the matter of 
waiving/reducing SGF with DEA on case to case basis. Presently the GoI guarantee fee 
is in the range of 0.5% - 1.2% p.a. 
(ii) IREDA is following various benchmarks of financial prudence as announced by Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) from time to time including, formation of its policies in line with RBI 
circulars on Prudential Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets & Other relevant 
Policies for timely identification of stress & its early resolution. IREDA has also taken 
various steps for improvement in system and processes such as:  

 
 
19 
 Financial concurrence has been introduced for all the projects, at the time of 
appraisal of projects, disbursement etc. 
 Setting up of Dedicated Risk and Monitoring Cell. 
 Periodic review and monitoring of entire loan portfolio including NPA accounts for 
identification of early warning signals & timely initiation of recovery actions, 
wherever required. 
 A separate Board Level Committee has been constituted for routine periodic 
monitoring of all the stressed assets including NPA. 
 IREDA is also doing regular monitoring and appointing Lender’s Independent 
Engineer (LIE) for knowing the early signals for issues related to projects delay, 
timely implementation of projects and also issues related to the projects during 
operations, so as to contain growth of NPAs. 
Further, IREDA has been taking timely steps such as: 
 Re-schedulement/Restructuring of loans/Change of Management, in deserving 
cases. 
 Resolution through National Company Law Tribunal, NCLT. 
 Recovery through Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial. Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, SARFAESI Act. 
 Filing Recovery suits in Debt Recovery Tribunal, DRT. 
 Initiation of insolvency proceedings/winding-up petition against guarantors.  
It may be observed that recent initiatives have resulted in further reduction of NPAs during 
first half of FY 2021-22, the gross NPA has been reduced from 8.77% as on 31.03.2021 to 
8.05% as on 30.09.2021 and Net NPA has been reduced from 5.61% as on 31.03.2021 to 
4.87% as on 30.09.2021. 
(iii) IREDA management has not written off any loan account in the previous 3 FYs, 
however, in case of one project, IREDA had to sacrifice Rs. 24.90 Cr, since it was a 
One Time Settlement (OTS) proposal lead by State Bank of India in the capacity of 
the Lead lender. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER  III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee note that Gross Budgetary Support to the Ministry was substantially 
decreased at the time of revised estimates. The allocation was reduced by about 26 % during the 
year 2019-20 and about 38 % for 2020-21. The Committee observe that the Ministry has not 
been able to fully utilize even the decreased allocations during the previous years. It could utilize 
86.97%, 91.53 % and 69.78% of revised budgetary allocations during the years 2018-19, 2019-
20 and 2020-21 (upto January, 2021) respectively. The Committee find it very strange that funds 
are un-spent in such an important and dynamic sector with a huge target of 175 GW to be 
achieved by the year 2022. Non-utilization of budgeted funds are unacceptable in a Country 
where budgetary resources are limited and  so many dream projects are to be completed with 
prudent financial planning and therefore it is of utmost importance that the budgetary allocations 
are fully and  properly utilized.  The Budgetary allocations approved by the Parliament for a 
particular financial year cannot be left to remain only on paper as these are scarce lapsable 
funds which are meant to be properly spent and fully utilized within the prescribed budgetary 
time-frame well before the close of the particular financial year. The Committee are of the opinion 
that variation in budgetary allocations at the stage of revised estimates and low utilization of even 
the decreased allocated amounts under various Heads are symptomatic of poor financial 
planning by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
streamline its budget formulation process and increase its fund absorption capacity, as 
continuous shortfall in utilization of the allocated funds will have adverse impact on the demand 
of budgetary allocations of the Ministry for subsequent financial years. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestion of the committed has been noted for compliance. During the year 2020-21, 
against a BE of Rs.5753 crore and RE of Rs. 3591 crore actual expenditure was Rs. 3096.73 
crore which was 86.24 % of RE. The Shortfall was mainly due to COVID outbreak and also 
because the Department of Economic Affairs issued guidelines to restrict the monthly 
expenditure to 5% of the Budget Outlay during each month upto December, 2020. 
Further, most of the grid connected renewable energy projects in the country are being 
implemented by private sector developers selected through transparent competitive bidding 
process. Because of fall in Renewable Energy (RE) tariff, no additional financial support is 
required for grid connected RE power. Hence, budgetary spending in a financial year does not 
have a high correlation with the RE capacity installed in that financial year. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

 
 
22 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee observe that 221 waste-to-energy plants based on Municipal Solid Waste 
(MSW), Urban, Industrial and agricultural waste/residues for generation of power and biogas to 
meet thermal and electrical energy needs of industries and for production of Bio-CNG for 
transportation have been installed in the Country. The Committee note that the Ministry has more 
or less, been able to achieve the physical targets under waste to energy programme but the fund 
utilization has been poor as it could not utilize the full allocated amount. It can thus be inferred 
that there is scope to increase the physical target under this programme extending its reach 
further. The Committee also believe that use of agricultural waste/residue to produce energy may 
also help in reducing stubble burning and thereby addressing the problem of air pollution. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should encourage setting up of waste to 
energy plants in consultation with local bodies for better waste-management in urban as well as 
rural areas. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation offered by the Standing Committee is noted by the Division. In this 
connection it is to inform that this Ministry has been encouraging setting up of waste to energy 
plants for better waste-management in urban as well as rural areas under “Programme on 
Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues”. Central Financial support 
(CFA) to project developers was provided under this programme. During validity of this 
programme, sanctions to 29 nos of Waste to Energy projects including 5 nos. of MSW to Power 
projects were granted financial support by this Ministry. The programme expired on 31.03.2021. 
For continuation of the programme beyond 31.03.2021 an EFC proposal under Umbrella 
scheme of the National Bioenergy Programme was submitted to Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance. The proposal includes setting up of 50 nos. of MSW based power plants in 
urban areas initiated by local bodies. However during the EFC meeting held on 22.09.2021 it was 
recommended that the programme may be continued only to meet the already created liabilities 
and no new projects may be sanctioned under sub schemes of this programme. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note that the Ministry has not been able to fulfill its obligation regarding 
utilization of 10% of its annual budget for development of renewable energy in the North-Eastern 
Region. It is submitted by the Ministry time and again that adequate proposals have not been 
received from North-East States, due to which there is substantial shortfall in fund utilization. It is 
also submitted that the potential for solar & wind energy in North-Eastern Region is much less in 
comparison to other states, thus making solar & wind power produced in these areas non-

 
 
23 
remunerative. But we are aware that the north-eastern region has substantial potential for small 
hydro power; however its capacity addition since 2017-18 has been zero except for minimal 
addition in 2018-19. Keeping in view the fact that the north-eastern states are more interested in 
off-grid and decentralized schemes of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should give priority to North-Eastern States in implementation of off-grid and decentralized 
application programme of the Ministry and specificities of this region should be kept in mind while 
formulating the schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 The details of funds allocated to North Eastern Region (NER) during the year 2020-21 are 
as follows: 
                                                                                                                             (Rs in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual expenditure 
2020-21 565.00 335.00 107.00 
The off-grid solar PV programme phase-II was exclusively extended for North Eastern 
Region from 1-4-2020 to 31-3-2021 for installation of solar street lights, distribution of solar study 
lamps to school going children and solar power packs for public institutions with subsidy of 90%. 
During the year 2021-22, against a B.E. of Rs 565.00 crore, an expenditure of Rs 23.18 
crore has been incurred upto November 2021. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 22/12/2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

 
 
24 
 
CHAPTER  V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                        Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
March 15, 2022                                                                                                             Chairperson, 
Phalguna 24, 1943 (Saka)                                                             Standing Committee on Energy. 

 
 
25 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2021-22) 
HELD ON 15th MARCH, 2022 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1030 hours to 1100 hours 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh   —   Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
3. Shri Velusamy P. 
4. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
6. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
7. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
8. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
10. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
11. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
12. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                                   —  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan                   — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                 — Additional Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about the 
agenda of the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports: 

 
 
26 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the   
6th Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy’. 
(ii)   Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the   
7th Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of Power’. 
(iii)  Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Power’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the aforementioned 
draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both Houses of 
the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12 
 
Total:  09 
Percentage:  
 
75 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 10 and 11 
 
Total:  03 
Percentage: 
 
25 % 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 