STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
 (2020-2021)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
20
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
TIDAL POWER DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August,  2021/Sravana, 1943 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale at
the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495,
23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi
(Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said information is available
on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available
on the website mentioned above."

TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-2021) 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
TIDAL POWER DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA 
 
 
 
 
Presented to the Lok Sabha on 05.08.2021 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 05.08.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2021/Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 

COE NO. 337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 

(i) 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)…………………………………………….… iii 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………………..……..… v 
 INTRODUCTION……………….…………………………………………….…………………… vii 
 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
CHAPTER  I  Introductory………………………………………………………………..……. 1 
CHAPTER II Harnessing of Tidal Power …………………………………………………….  
A.  Global Scenario…………………………………………………………….. 2 
B.  Initiatives taken in India………………….……………………………..…. 2 
C. Tidal Power Potential in India …………………………………………….. 3 
D.  Comparative Cost………………………………………………………….. 5 
E.  Budgetary Allocation for R&D………………….…………………….……. 5 
F.  Environmental Impact ……………………………………………..………. 6 
G.  Problems/Constraints in Harnessing of Tidal Power…..……………...... 6 
H.  Future Vision……………………………………….……….………………. 6 
 
PART II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee………………............. 7 
 
ANNEXURES 
I  Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 11.02.2021……………….. 9 
II Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 04.08.2021………………… 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed   
3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla   
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam   
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav   
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod ^ 
16. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
17. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
18. Shri P. Velusamy 
19. Shri Akhilesh Yadav   
20. Vacant@ 
21. Vacant@ 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 

(iv) 
 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant * 
31. Vacant # 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                      — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan       — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora     — Additional Director 
4. Ms. Deepika                           — Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
@Vacant vice Km. Shobha Karandlaje and Smt Anupriya Patel inducted in Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 07.07.2021 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 

(v) 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AFD  Agence Française de Dévelopement  
BE  Budget Estimates  
Committee  Standing Committee on Energy (2020-21) 
CRISIL  Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited 
GW  Giga-watt 
IIT, Chennai Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
IREDA  Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
IRENA  International Renewable Energy Agency 
LCOE  Levelized Cost of Electricity 
MNRE  Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
MoU   Memorandum of Understanding 
MW  Megawatt  
OTEC  Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion 
R&D  Research and Development  
RE  Revised Estimates  
RPO  Renewable Purchase Obligations  
WBREDA  West Bengal Renewable Energy Development Agency 
 

(vi) 
 

(vii) 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth Report of the Committee 
on ‘Tidal Power Development in India’ pertaining to the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
2. The Committee heard views of representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy on 11th February, 2021. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the desired 
information in connection with the issues relating to the subject. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
4th August, 2021. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the assistance rendered to them 
by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
  
   NEW DELHI;  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh, 
 04  August, 2021 Chairperson, 
13 Sravana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 

(viii) 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
  
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 As per the Government of India’ Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy inter-alia has been entrusted with the subject matter pertaining to Tidal 
Energy. 
1.2 Ocean Energy refers to all forms of renewable energy derived from the Sea. There are 
three main types of Ocean Energy: Wave, Tidal and Ocean- Thermal. Tidal Energy is harnessed 
by converting energy from natural rise and fall of ocean tides and currents to electricity. Wave 
Energy in the form of motion of ocean waves can be extracted using energy conversion devices. 
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) is based on generation of electricity utilizing the 
temperature difference between warm surface seawater and cold seawater at around 1,000 
meters depth. 
1.3 All forms of Ocean Energy are at an early stage of development. Tidal Energy Projects 
have been deployed globally in only a few locations where there is a strong tidal resource. Wave 
Energy and Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) technologies are still at an experimental 
stage. 
1.4 India has been playing an active role in harnessing of Renewable Energy in order to 
mitigate climate change. The Government has set a target to install 175 Giga-watts of 
Renewable power by the year 2022. However, Tidal Power has not been included in this target 
despite the fact that our Country is surrounded by sea on three sides and has a long coastline of 
around 7500 Kilometers with the estuaries and gulfs where Tidal Power can be harnessed. 

2 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
HARNESSING OF TIDAL POWER 
A. Global Scenario 
2.1 About the status regarding harnessing of Tidal Power in the World, the Ministry furnished 
the following:—  
“Tidal Energy represents the smallest share (approx. 535 MW) of global installed capacity 
of Renewable Energy. Two Tidal Energy Projects, namely the 240 MW La Rance station 
in France (installed in 1966) and the 254 MW Sihwa plant in South Korea (installed in 
2011), constitute more than 90% of the total installed capacity of Tidal Energy. At present 
Tidal Energy technologies are not cost competitive and the main focus is on technology 
development.” 
 2.2 On being asked about the capital cost and tariff of 240 MW project in France and 254   
MW project in South Korea, the Ministry stated as under:— 
“As per the report ‘Tidal Energy: Technology Brief’ published by the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in 2014, the estimated cost for 240 MW tidal power 
project in France and 254 MW tidal power project in South Korea were USD 817 million 
and  USD 298 million respectively. The report also states that levelized costs of electricity 
(LCOE) for tidal power are in the range of EUR 0.25-0.47/kWh with the lower range 
LCOE estimates based on high capacity factors and low capital cost estimates.” 
B. Initiatives taken in India 
2.3 Regarding efforts made in India to harness Tidal Power, the Ministry furnished the 
following:— 
“In the 1980s, Government of India initiated efforts to assess the tidal energy potential in 
the Country. Initial surveys suggested that the Gulf of Kambhat and the Gulf of Kutch in 
Gujarat and the Gangetic delta in the Sunderbans in West Bengal have tidal energy 
potential. Based on these surveys, two projects of 3.75 MW and 50 MW installed capacity 
were initiated in West Bengal and Gujarat.” 
2.4 About the 3.75 MW Durgaduani Tidal Power Project in West Bengal, the Ministry stated 
as under:— 
“MNRE sanctioned a demonstration project to West Bengal Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (WBREDA) in October, 2007 for setting up of 3.75 MW capacity 
tidal energy plant at Durgaduani creek in the Sunderbans region at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 48 crore. An amount of Rs. 3 crore was released for this project. However, only one 
bid was received for the project and the project cost was placed at Rs 238 crore (i.e. Rs. 
63.5 crore per MW). In view of such an exorbitant cost, the Government of West Bengal 
decided to drop the tidal energy project. MNRE grant was subsequently refunded by 
WBREDA.” 
2.5 Regarding 50 MW Tidal Power Project in Gujarat, the Ministry furnished the following:— 
“In 2011, the Government of Gujarat signed an MoU with M/s Atlantis Resources Limited 
(based in United Kingdom) for carrying out studies and for implementing a 50 MW Pilot 
Tidal energy project in the Gulf of Kutch at Mandvi. The Government of Gujarat 
sanctioned Rs. 70 crore as financial assistance for the project. Meanwhile, M/s Atlantis 

3 
 
Resources Ltd. estimated the cost of the project at Rs 750 crore (i.e. Rs. 15 crore per 
MW). Due to techno-economic non-viability of the project, it was dropped by the 
Government of Gujarat. No financial assistance was sanctioned for the project by the 
Government of India.” 
2.6 In 2012, West Bengal Renewable Energy Development Agency (WBREDA) made more 
attempts to harness Tidal Power; the information in this regard as furnished by the Ministry, is 
given below:— 
“In 2012, WBREDA informed that M/s Blue Water, headquartered in the Netherlands, 
approached WBREDA and offered turn-key solutions for generating power from river and 
tidal currents. The company claimed to have over 30 years of marine engineering 
experience with delivering large offshore projects worldwide. According to a WBREDA 
report, the agency made a presentation to WBREDA where it claimed that it had 
designed a floating platform capable of providing easy access from water surface, and 
which could hold multiple tidal turbines. It was moored with anchor lines to the sea floor, 
which could hold any type of turbines in any water depth. It also claimed that power 
cables were connected dry rather than under water thereby reducing risks and costs 
significantly. However, they could not submit documentary evidence in support of such 
projects. 
In addition to above, in 2012, WBREDA also informed that M/s Hammerfest Storm-
ANDRITZ Hydro approached them and claimed that they had the expertise to generate 
tidal energy. As per their version, the construction cost would be around Rs. 40 crore per 
MW which was not economically viable (in comparison, the normative cost of installation 
of 1 MW solar, wind, biomass, small & large hydro, and thermal power plants is Rs 3.5 
crore, Rs 5.5 crore, Rs 6 crore, Rs 10-15 crore, Rs 5 crore respectively). The proposing 
agency also could not submit any documentary evidence about any such project, then in 
operation.” 
2.7 On being queried about reasons for not being able to make any technological 
breakthrough even after about 40 years as the Government initiated efforts to assess and 
harness tidal power in 1980s, the Ministry stated as under:— 
“Globally, tidal energy is not cost competitive and is still at a nascent development stage. 
Efforts to set up tidal power projects in India could not succeed primarily due to techno-
economic considerations.” 
2.8 About the status of Tidal Power in India, the Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy, stated during the sitting of the Committee, as under:— 
“We have not seen any projects in the tidal power in the country and the primary reason 
for that is the high capital cost. Two State Governments initiated two projects which did 
not come off for this very reason. As far as international data is concerned, the share of 
tidal power in total renewable energy installed capacity is very, very slow. 
C. Tidal Power Potential in India 
2.9 The Ministry stated that the Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai in association with 
Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited (CRISIL) conducted a study on ‘Tidal & Wave 
Energy in India: Survey on the Potential & Proposition of a Roadmap’ in December 2014.  The 
study was funded by Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency Limited (IREDA) as part of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between 
IREDA and MNRE. As per this study, the estimated theoretical tidal power potential in India is 
around 12,455 MW. The most attractive locations are the Gulf of Khambat and the Gulf of Kutch 

4 
 
on the west coast. The Ganges Delta in the Sunderbans in West Bengal also has good locations 
for small scale tidal power development. 
2.10 The state-wise estimated theoretical potential of tidal power, as furnished by the Ministry 
is given below:— 
State Estimated Theoretical Potential 
of Tidal Power (MW) 
Gujarat 10,425 
West Bengal 900 
Odisha 400 
Tamil Nadu 230 
Maharashtra 200 
Andhra Pradesh 100 
Karnataka 100 
Kerala 100 
Total 12,455 
2.11 On being asked about the exploitable potential of tidal power in the Country, the Ministry 
stated as under:— 
“Estimation of tidal energy potential in the country at this juncture is purely theoretical. 
Estimating the exploitable potential is fraught with a number of barriers that include 
disproportionately high cost and adverse environmental impacts that have not yet been 
fully documented.” 
2.12 When asked about the potential of Wave Power and Ocean-Thermal Energy Conversion 
(OTEC) in the Country, the Ministry stated that the potential of OTEC has not been estimated. 
The estimated theoretical potential of Wave Power is given below:– 
State Estimated Theoretical Potential 
of Wave Power (MW) 
Gujarat 4100 
Maharashtra 8100 
Kerala 4900 
Tamil Nadu 10600 
Andhra Pradesh 6900 
Orissa 600 
Karnataka 6100 
Total 41,300 
2.13 When asked about the roadmap for harnessing Tidal Power that was proposed in IIT-
CRISIL Study, the Ministry furnished the following:— 
“The IIT, Chennai and CRISIL study has identified financial, technological, environmental 
and other risks associated with tidal energy. The roadmap has set a goal of commercial 
tidal energy projects by the year 2030.” 
 

5 
 
2.14 About action-taken on the IIT-CRISIL Study, the representative of the Ministry stated 
during the sitting of the Committee as under:— 
“We have a Report which was published in 2014; we can relook at the data validity, 
based on which we can put up a small report to our Ministry on the viability front and what 
sort of initiatives can be taken to make it more acceptable in terms of its economics.” 
D. Comparative Cost 
2.15 On being asked about capital cost for setting up of Tidal Power plants and how does it 
compare with capital cost of Solar, Wind, Bio, Small Hydro, Large Hydro and thermal Power 
plants, the Ministry stated as under:— 
“The Capital cost for a tidal energy project is site specific. In regards to two projects 
attempted in India the capital cost was in the range of Rs 15 - 60 crore per MW at the 
prevailing price. In comparison, the normative cost of installation of 1 MW solar, wind , 
biomass , small & large hydro and thermal power plants is Rs 3.5 crore, Rs 5.5 crore, Rs 
6 crore, Rs 10-15 crore, Rs 5 crore respectively.” 
E. Budgetary Allocation for R&D 
2.16 During examination of Demands of Grants (2021-22), the Ministry furnished the 
following with respect to budgetary allocation and actual expenditure incurred on research, 
design and development in New & Renewable Energy during the last three years:– 
(Amount in crore)  
Year Budget Estimate (BE) Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Expenditure 
2017-18 144.00 81.00 52.98 
2018-19 94.00 43.00 25.43 
2019-20 60.00 15.00 15.00 
2020-21 20.00 49.00* 17.60 
(till January, 2021) 
*RE-2020-21 was enhanced due to committed liabilities in R&D projects and fund will available in last week of 
March, 2021. 
2.17 On being queried about the progress made in Research and Development (R&D) 
regarding development of Tidal Power and funds earmarked and spent in this regard, the 
Ministry stated as under:— 
“The research and development (R&D) budget of the Ministry is a composite one without 
specific allocation to different new and renewable energy technologies. Further, since no 
viable tidal energy project was received, no R&D funds have been spent on tidal 
energy.” 
2.18 The Ministry stated that at present, the Government of India has no plan to set up any 
dedicated institution for research in tidal power. 
2.19 Further explaining about the lack of Research in Tidal Power Sector, the Secretary, 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, stated the following during the sitting of the Committee: 
“I will have to find out whether other institutions are relevant and can be assigned this 
task under the Ministry of Earth Sciences……. We can get in touch with that institute and 
see how we can further research in this area. We can also fund research activities under 
our R&D programme. We can even call for proposals for research. But we will have to 
examine and see what is worth investing in.” 

6 
 
F. Environmental Impact 
2.20 When asked whether the Government has conducted any study for assessment of 
environmental impact of Tidal Power Plant, the Ministry stated as under:— 
“No such study has been conducted. If tidal energy projects approach techno-economic 
viability, its environmental and ecological impact would be examined.” 
G. Problems/Constraints in Harnessing of Tidal Power 
2.21 About problems being faced in harnessing of Tidal Power, the Ministry furnished the 
following:— 
“Harnessing tidal power entails heavy cost with associated environmental problems. A 
barrage across an estuary is expensive to build and environmentally impacts a very wide 
area which may be affected for many miles upstream and downstream. Many birds that 
rely on the tide uncovering the mud flats for feeding could be affected. Further, damages 
like reduced flushing and erosion can change the vegetation of the area and disrupt the 
ecological balance.” 
H. Future Vision 
2.22 Efforts to set up even tidal energy pilot projects in the country have not been successful. 
Notwithstanding, on August 22, 2019, the Ministry issued a notification clarifying that energy 
produced using various forms of ocean energy such as tidal, wave, ocean thermal energy 
conversion, etc. shall be considered as Renewable Energy and shall be eligible for meeting non-
solar Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO). 
2.23 When asked about the rationale behind making tidal power eligible for non-solar 
Renewable Purchase Obligation in 2019 when we have not been able to harness any tidal power 
till date, the Ministry furnished the following:— 
“The notification of 2019, regarding eligibility of various forms of ocean energy for 
meeting non-solar Renewable Purchase Obligations, was in response to inquiries from 
industry. The inclusion was made to take care of the possibility that projects for 
producing such energy might be set up.” 
2.24 On being asked if the Ministry is planning to include tidal power in the enhanced target 
of having 450 GW of renewable energy by 2030, the Ministry stated as under:— 
“All sources of renewable energy, including tidal power, will be considered in the 
deployment targets for 2030.” 

7 
 
 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Assessment of Exploitable Potential 
1. The Committee note that there are three main types of Ocean Energy; Wave, Tidal 
and Ocean-Thermal. The estimated potential of tidal and wave power in India are 12,455 
MW and 41,300 MW respectively, while the potential for Ocean-Thermal has not been 
estimated till date. The Ministry has submitted that the estimated potential of tidal and 
wave power is purely theoretical and does not necessarily constitute practically 
exploitable potential. The Committee feel that as a first step, there is a need to find out the 
actual exploitable potential of tidal, wave and ocean-thermal power in the Country. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should get the potential of tidal, wave 
and ocean-thermal power reassessed in order to explore the practically exploitable 
potential. 
Cost of Tidal Power Plant 
2. The Committee note that two tidal power projects of 3.75 MW and 50 MW installed 
capacity were initiated in the years 2007 and 2011 in the states of West Bengal and 
Gujarat respectively. However, both these projects were dropped because of exorbitant 
cost. In the case of 3.75 MW Durgaduani Tidal Power Project in West Bengal, the project 
cost was placed at Rs. 238 crore i.e. Rs.  63.50 crore per MW and in the case of 50 MW 
Tidal Power Project at the Gulf of Kutch in Gujarat, the estimated cost of the project was 
placed at Rs. 750 crore i.e. Rs. 15 crore per MW. The Ministry has also submitted that the 
normative cost of installation of 1 MW Solar, Wind, Biomass, Hydro and Thermal Power 
Plant is Rs. 3.5 crore, Rs. 5.5 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 10-15 crore, Rs. 5 crore respectively. 
The Committee feel that comparing the project cost of Tidal Power that was arrived at 
around ten years back with the present project cost of Solar, Wind, Hydro etc is not 
justified. The cost of tidal power may have come down in the last ten years as is the case 
with other Renewable Energy like Solar Power. The Committee, therefore recommend that 
the Ministry needs to reassess the cost of Tidal Power in India in order to consider its 
economic viability and benefits in a longer time span.  
Setting Up of Demonstration/Pilot Tidal Power Project 
3. The Committee note that India has been playing an active role in harnessing of 
Renewable Energy in order to mitigate climate change as the Government has set a target 
to install 175 Giga-watts of Renewable power by the year 2022. However, tidal power has 
not been included in this target despite the fact that our Country is surrounded by sea on 
three sides and has a long coastline of around 7500 Kilometers with the estuaries and 
gulfs where tidal power can be harnessed. However, the Ministry has submitted that all 
sources of renewable energy, including tidal power will be considered in the deployment 
targets for 2030. Further, the Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – Survey on potential 
and proposition of Roadmap’ conducted by Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai in 
association with Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited (CRISIL) and funded 
by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA), has suggested a 
roadmap with a goal to set up commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. Also on 

8 
 
August 22, 2019, the Ministry issued a notification clarifying that energy produced using 
various forms of ocean energy such as tidal, wave, ocean thermal energy conversion, etc. 
shall be eligible for meeting non-solar Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO). As per the 
Ministry, this notification was in response to inquiries from industry and the inclusion was 
made to provide scope for tidal power projects. The Committee therefore desire that the 
Ministry must actively follow-upon this notification through appropriate incentives so that 
the Country can have commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. While the 
decision to make tidal power eligible for meeting Renewable Purchase Obligations is 
noteworthy, the Ministry cannot rest at that and it needs to actively participate in the 
process. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should set up one 
demonstration/pilot tidal power project in the Country at the most favourable cost-
effective location like Gulf of Kutch considering that the capital cost of a tidal power 
project is site specific. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the follow-up 
action taken by the Government on the findings of the Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in 
India – Survey on potential and proposition of Roadmap’. 
Environmental Impact of Tidal Power Plant 
4. The Committee also note that no study has been conducted for assessment of 
environmental and ecological impact of a tidal power plant. The Ministry has submitted in 
this regard that a barrage across an estuary may environmentally impact a very wide area 
ranging for many miles upstream and downstream. The Committee are of the opinion that 
while seeking to harness the potential of tidal power, there is also a need to pragmatically 
assess environmental impact and ecological sustainability of tidal power plants. The 
Ministry may also evaluate global experience in this regard; particularly the two projects 
installed in France and South Korea, which at present constitute 90 % of the installed 
capacity of tidal power in the World. 
R&D in Tidal Power Sector 
5. The Committee note that the Ministry has not spent any funds on development of 
tidal power so far. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry, the Committee had observed that the funds allocated to the Ministry for R&D in 
Renewable Energy Sector as a whole had been drastically reduced at the time of Revised 
Estimates and the Ministry could not utilize even the reduced amount since atleast 2017-
18. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry instead of curtailing R&D, 
should enhance its support significantly, particularly for un-harnessed sources like tidal 
power, which can go a long way in realizing the vast potential of Renewable Energy in the 
Country. 
 
     NEW DELHI; Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh,
04  August, 2021 Chairperson,
13 Sravana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.
 

9 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) HELD ON 11th FEBRUARY, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘3’,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh   -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Harish Dwivedi 
3.  Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
4.  Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
   7. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
   8. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
   9. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
    10. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
    11. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
     13. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
 14. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
 15. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari    — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan   — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   — Additional Director 
 
 

10 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
1. Shri Indu Shekhar Chaturvedi — Secretary 
2. Shri Aniruddha Kumar  — Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. P.C. Maithani   — Scientist – G 
4. Shri Pradip Kumar Das  — CMD, IREDA 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and informed them about the 
agenda of the sitting. The Chairperson also apprised them about the provision of Direction 55(1) 
of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. During the discussion, a presentation was made on the subject ‘Tidal Power 
Development in India’ which, inter-alia, covered Types of Ocean Energy, Indian Scenario 
regarding Development of Tidal Power, Study by IIT, Chennai and CRISIL, Problems being 
faced in exploitation of Tidal Energy, Status and Future Prospects, etc. 
4. The Ministry informed the Committee that harnessing of tidal energy entails high cost, its 
technology is in developmental stage and currently it is not ready for commercial deployment. 
The Committee suggested that the Ministry may focus on R&D in this sector and explore the 
harness-able potential strictly keeping in view economic viability and ecological sustainability. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

11 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE  II 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) HELD ON 4th AUGUST, 2021 IN ROOM No. ‘111’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
6. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
7. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
9. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
10. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
11. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
12. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
13. Shri P. Velusamy 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
15. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
16. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
17. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
18. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari  — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Additional Director 

12 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about the 
agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption:— 
a) Development of Coal Blocks allocated to Power Sector Companies. 
b) Delay in execution/completion of Power Projects by power sector companies. 
c) Tidal Power Development in India.  
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the 
aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 