STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-2021)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Power Sector]
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2020-2021)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
9

1 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-2021) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Stressed/ 
Non-performing Assets in Power Sector] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
2 
 
CoE No. 324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
 

(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE (2020-2021)….......................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………....... (iv) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………….... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government…………….. 28 
CHAPTER III Observation/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply………………………...... 78 
CHAPTER IV Observation/Recommendation in respect of 
which reply of Government has not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………………...................................... 79 
CHAPTER V Observation/ Recommendation in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited…………………………………………… 82 
APPENDICES 
I. Status of the Implementation of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA) 
Decision……......................................................... 83 
II. Status of 34 stressed thermal power  
projects …………………………………………… 88 
III. The    resolution  process of stressed assets 
hrough Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code 
(IBC) or through  National Company Law 
Tribunal (NCLT) ……………………………........ 91 
IV. Minutes of the sitting held on 18th March, 
2021……………………………………………….. 94 
V. Analysis of action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the 37th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Energy……………….... 97 
 
 
(ii) 
 
  

(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) 
     Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh —  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed 
  3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
  4. Shri Chandra  Sekhar Bellana 
  5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
  6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
  7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
  8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
  9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
12. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
13. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
14. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod^ 
18. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
21.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
(iv) 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant* 
31.  Vacant # 
 
 
 
 
 
 ^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020 # Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C.Tiwari — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K.Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Additional Director 
4. Smt. L.N. Haokip — Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Manish Kumar — Committee Officer 

(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Ninth Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-
seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy on the subject ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Power 
Sector’.  
2. The Thirty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha   
7th March, 2018 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the 
same day. Replies of the Government to the recommendations 
contained in this Report were received on 10th August, 2020. 
 3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
at their sitting held on 18th March, 2021. 
 4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-V. 
 5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations 
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ; 
 
18th March, 2021  
Phalguna 27, 1942 (Saka) 
Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias  
Lalan Singh, 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
  
(vi) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Stressed/Non-performing Assets 
in Power Sector. 
2. The Thirty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha  
on 7th March, 2018 and was laid same day on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha. The Report contained15 Observations/Recommendations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 10th August, 2020. These have been categorized as 
follows:— 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14 and 15 
  Total - 14        Chapter-II 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 -Nil- 
  Total – 00 Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Serial No. 10 
  Total-01                                                                                             Chapter IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the Government is still awaited:  
 -Nil   - 
  Total - 00 Chapter-V 
 
2 
 
4. The Committee observe that the 37th Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Power 
Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Power was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 7th March, 2018 and was laid on same day on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha and the Ministry was required to 
submit the action taken reply on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report within a period of 3 
months i. e. by 6th of June, 2018. The Committee, however, 
observe that the Ministry has submitted the requisite action 
taken reply on 10th August, 2020 after a delay of 2 years and 2 
months. The Committee deplore the abnormal delay on the 
part of the Ministry in submission of the action taken replies 
to the Committee. The Committee  while expressing their 
strong displeasure, caution the Ministry  to be extra cautious 
and vigilant in timely submission of  replies to the Committee 
and necessary instructions  be issued to all concerned  in the 
Ministry  to  strictly adhere to the timeline for responding to 
the Committee  in future.  The Committee further desire that 
the Action taken statement on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Recommendations that require 
reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Constitution of a Task Force 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
  “The Committee note that delicensing of power generation has 
been done to attract the entry of private sector into the power 
generation. This was done as the country was facing huge deficit in 
energy and peak power. The capacity addition targets required 
substantial capital addition per year with limited capacity addition 
expected from the public sector units (both Central and States). 

3 
 
Private participation became essential for achieving the fast growth 
of power generation keeping pace with the demand of the country. 
During the 11th plan period, private generating companies 
contributed in electricity generation in a substantial manner by 
outdoing both Central and State Sector put together. In the 
capacity addition targets of the Government Private Sector have 
also contributed during the 12th plan period as well. Their 
contribution to the sector has led the country to a power surplus 
situation from the power deficient one. Hence it is incumbent upon 
the Government to ensure the proper facilitation of capacity 
generation stuck due to several factors and forcing them to 
become NPA. The committee, therefore, recommend that an 
appropriate task force be formed/constituted to specifically look into 
the problems of the IPPs with a view to bring them out of 
NPAs/Stressed Asset mire so that the power generation in the 
country is given a fillip and the vision of power for all 24x7 is 
achieved sooner than later.” 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:— 
  “Government on 29.07.2018 had set up a High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) headed by the Cabinet Secretary 
to address the issues of Stressed Thermal Power Projects in the 
Country. The composition of the Committee was as under:—  
i.  Cabinet Secretary — Chairman  
ii.  Chairman Railway Board — Member  
iii.  Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs — Member  
iv.  Secretary, Department of Financial Services — 
Member  
v.  Secretary, Ministry of Power (MoP) — Member 
(Convener)  
vi.  Secretary, Ministry of Coal — Member  
4 
 
vii.  CMD, State Bank of India — Member  
viii. CMD, Power Finance Corporation — Member  
ix.  CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation — Member  
x.  CMD, Punjab National Bank — Member  
xi.  CMD, ICICI Bank — Member  
2. The Terms of Reference of the Committee were as 
follows:—  
a. To assess the nature of stressed assets with a view to 
resolving the crisis and maximising the efficiency of 
investment.  
b. Changes required to be made in the fuel 
linkage/allocation policy/ other modes to facilitate 
supply of fuel to the stressed power plants.  
c. To facilitate sale of power by these stressed power 
plants.  
d. Suggest changes required in regulatory 
framework/administrative measures to facilitate faster 
disposal of tariff petitions/disputes and ensure interim 
payments during the pendency of the disputes before 
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL) and other 
courts.  
e. Ensure timely payments by the Distribution Companies 
(DISCOMS), suggest payment security mechanism for 
IPPs.  
f. Changes required in the provisioning norms/Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) to facilitate restructuring of 
the stressed assets including the changes required in 
Asset Restructuring Company (ARC) Regulations.  

5 
 
g. Any other measures proposed for revival of stressed 
assets so as to avoid such investments becoming non-
performing asset (NPA).  
3. The report of the HLEC was submitted on 12.11.18 and 
was also placed in the public domain on the website of Ministry 
of Power. The Government thereafter constituted a Group of 
Ministers (GoM) to examine the specific recommendations of 
HLEC. The Group of Ministers (GoM) made recommendations 
regarding stressed power projects. On 07.03.2019, Government 
approved the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM). 
Subsequently, Ministry of Power vide OM dated 08.03.2019, 
notified the approval of the Government. The recommendations 
of GoM approved by the Government are under implementation. 
The action taken on the recommendations is attached as 
Appendix-I.” 
8. The Committee while recognizing the importance and 
contribution of Private Sector Participation in the development 
of Power Sector in the country had recommended that an 
appropriate task force be formed/constituted to specifically 
look into the problems of the Independent Power Producers 
(IPPs) with a view to bring them out from the list of 
Stressed/Non-performing Assets (NPAs). The Ministry in their 
reply have stated that the Government on 29.07.2018 had set 
up a High-Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) headed by the 
Cabinet Secretary to address the issues of Stressed Thermal 
Power Projects in the Country. The report of the HLEC was 
submitted on 12.11.18. The Government thereafter constituted 
a Group of Ministers (GoM) to examine the specific 
recommendations of HLEC. The Group of Ministers (GoM) 
made recommendations regarding stressed power projects. 
On 07.03.2019, the Government approved the 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers 
(GoM).Subsequently, Ministry of Power vide OM dated 
6 
 
08.03.2019, notified the approval of the Government. The 
Ministry has also informed about the action taken on the 
recommendations given by the Group of Ministers.  
The Committee note the efforts made by the 
Government at the appropriate level to resolve the issue of 
Stress/Non-performing Assets. The scrutiny of 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers by the Committee 
reveals that there is an attempt by the Government to address 
two of the main issues being faced by the IPPs viz. supply of 
coal to the power plants and power purchase agreements with 
the States/Discoms. The Committee is in agreement with the 
Government and of the belief that resolution of these two 
issues could help them to a great extent in coming out of 
stress. However, the effectiveness of the various steps taken 
by the Government has to be assessed at the ground level 
also. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of 
the effectiveness of the various steps taken by the 
Government to resolve the issue of Stress/NPA in Power 
Sector and the number of power plants that have been taken 
out of the stress due to implementation of the 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
Scheme for Harnessing and Allocating Koyala Transparently 
in India (SHAKTI) Policy 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
  “The Committee note that it was apprised during one of the 
interaction that there is no shortage of coal and the scheme 
SHAKTI formulated by the Government will take care of coal 
allocation for all the present and future power plants. The 

7 
 
Committee was also informed that there is no power plants 
which has PPA, but does not have coal linkage. During 
interaction with independent power producers of 34 stressed 
power projects, the Committee were apprised that despite 
allocation of coal linkage, letter of assurance has not been 
issued even after 3 months. The Committee expressed its 
anguish about the manner in which the SHAKTI scheme is 
being implemented and time is being taken to provide coal to 
eligible promoters. The Committee has also been apprised 
that there is no consistency with regard to policy of the coal 
allocation and e-auction of the coal. This has adversely 
impacted them. Although, NCDP (New Coal Distribution 
Policy) envisaged automatic conversion of LOA into FSA upon 
fulfillment of certain conditions but the CIL, Coal India Limited 
declined to sign the FSA despite fulfillment of laid down 
conditions. This is indeed a very serious matter and needs 
urgent remedial measures by the all concerned. This should 
not have been allowed to happen as the stakes involved are 
enormous. There are genuine apprehensions regarding 
availability and allocation of coal among the power producers. 
During the recent study visit, the Committee itself found that 
the availability of coal in one of the NTPC plants is very critical 
and this is the situation in several other plants of the NTPC as 
well. This affectively rebuts the claim of the Coal India that 
there is no shortage of coal in the country. The Committee 
expect that CIL would focus on the seriousness of the issues 
instead of making tall claims without any basis. The delay in 
the implementation of the scheme of SHAKTI should not have 
happened as it has disastrous entailing effects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL should make every 
effort to make the available the required quantity of coal to 
every developer in a time bound manner. Such timeframe for 
8 
 
provision of coal to developers be also notified for public 
information.” 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“The total receipt (domestic & imported) and 
consumption of coal by coal based thermal plants in the country 
during the last four years are as under:— 
 (Figures in Million Tonnes) 
Year Receipt Consu-
mption Domestic Imported Total 
Receipt For 
blending 
purpose 
Imported 
coal 
based 
plants 
Total 
Imported 
2016-17 494.8 19.8 46.3 66.1 560.9  574.3 
2017-18 538.6 17.0 39.4 56.4 595.0  608.0 
2018-19 582.1 21.4 40.3 61.7 643.7  628.9 
2019-20 569.5 23.8 45.5 69.2 638.7  622.2 
1.1 As can be seen from above, receipt of domestic coal has 
been increasing except, during the year 2019-20 which 
showed a minor decrease. The domestic coal consumption 
during the year 2019-20 was 577.3 Million Tonnes (MT) 
against the actual receipt of 569.5 MT from domestic 
sources while 23.8 MT coal was imported for blending 
purpose. As reported by Coal India Limited (CIL), 
availability of domestic coal in the country has improved 
with opening stock of 75 MT at mines end and 45 MT at 
Plant end as on 31.03.2020. 
1.2 Based on the generation target, the coal requirement for the 
plants designed on domestic coal during 2020-21 has been 
estimated to be about 645 MT. The expected availability of 
coal from various domestic sources during 2020-21 is about 

9 
 
668 MT against the requirement of 645 MT, which includes 
530 MT from CIL, 55 MT from SCCL and 63 MT from 
captive sources. As the expected availability of domestic 
coal is more than the requirement during 2020-21, there 
may be very little requirement of importing coal for blending 
purpose depending upon cost economics and transportation 
logistics. In light of this, MoP has requested all the 
Generating companies (Gencos) [who are importing coal for 
blending purpose], to make best efforts to replace their 
imports with domestic coal. At present, the availability of 
coal stock of 49.31 MT with Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) 
as on 18.06.2020 is sufficient to meet requirements of TPPs 
for about 28 days. 
1.3 Power plants designed on domestic coal are importing coal 
for blending purposes, considering their cost-economics 
and to bridge the shortfall in the availability of domestic 
coal, if any. However, the quantum of import for blending is 
very less as compared to domestic coal receipt. Further, 
power plants designed on imported coal, are importing coal 
to meet their fuel requirement as they are designed to 
operate on imported coal. Further, import of coal is under 
Open General License (OGL), and hence, the power utilities 
import coal considering their cost economics. As per Import 
substitution Notice of CIL dated 05.02.2019, power utilities 
were given option for supply of coal under Import 
substitution to meet their shortfall against Annual 
Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for FY 2018-19. Subsequently, 
CIL has issued another notice dated 27.05.2019 regarding 
import substitution for the year 2019-20 also. 
1.4 However, the Government has been making effort for 
reducing import of coal for blending purpose and replacing it 
with domestic coal because coal import entails outgo of 
scarce foreign exchange. For this, MoP has written to the 
10 
 
Gencos to make best efforts to reduce the imported coal 
with domestic coal for blending purpose. Further, MOP has 
also requested MoC to establish an electronic portal as e-
facilitation centre to facilitate necessary clearances and 
redressal of issues raised by Gencos which would enable 
them to replace the import of coal for blending purpose by 
the domestic coal. Further, an Inter- Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) for the purpose of coal import substitution has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary 
(Ministry of Coal). 
1.5 The total nos. of captive coal blocks that have been 
allocated to the Power Sector are 65 nos. Out of these 65 
nos. coal blocks, 03 nos. coal blocks have been surrendered 
and the total 11 nos. of coal blocks are underproduction. 
1.6 The Government in May, 2016 approved the proposal for 
allowing flexibility in utilization of domestic coal amongst 
power generating stations to reduce the cost of power 
generation through saving in the transportation cost and 
operating the most efficient plant. The State/Central Gencos 
have flexibility to utilize their coal in most efficient and cost 
effective manner in their own power plants as well as by 
transferring coal to other State Genco/Central Genco/IPP 
generating stations for generation of cheaper power. 
1.7 Government of India, Ministry of Coal has approved a new 
coal linkage allocation policy on May 17, 2017 named 
SHAKTI (Scheme for harnessing & allocating koyla 
transparently in India). Linkages granted under SHAKTI 
Policy:— 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i) : Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW under 
Central/State Sector category. 
 

11 
 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii) : Coal linkages have been allotted 
under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects having PPA 
but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity (32.68 MT) and 2nd 
round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW capacity (3.34 MT). In the 3rd 
round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, the auction has been held on 
11.05.2020, out of 5.66 MT offered, total 3.48 MT has been 
booked. 
c. Shakti Policy Para B(iii) : Bidding held from 5th to 7th 
February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW (Total 
5995 MW) has secured linkage for 6.49 MT. 
d. Shakti Policy Para B(iv) : Coal linkages granted to the 
State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of UP for 1,600 
MW and to the State of MP for 2640 MW power to be raised 
through tariff based competitive bidding. 
e. Under B(v), aggregator (PFC) has been allotted Coal linkage 
(10 MT) for aggregating demand for tariff based bidding. 
f. Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a) : Methodology issued by MoP on 
02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by CEA. Applications 
received from 14 nos. of bidders with plant capacity of 9,813 
MW and non-PPA capacity of 8145 MW. CIL has completed 
the process of conducting Tranche-I auction on 19.03.2020. 
Out of the total offered quantity of 5.77 MT, 1.34 MT has 
been booked with a zero premium. For 2nd round auction 
under SHAKTI B(viii)(a) for the quarter July- September, 
2020, out of the total offered quantity of 4.51 MT, 0.74 MT 
has been booked by 8 successful bidders with a zero 
premium. 
1.8 Thus it may be noted that Government has been making 
sustained efforts to optimize utilization of available coal 
resources.” 
12 
 
11. The Committee in their 37th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
had noted various efforts reportedly made by the Government, 
including implementation of the SHAKTI Scheme, to remove 
the constraints in availability/supply of coal to the power 
plants. However, they had also found that despite the efforts 
made by the Government there were still some issues which 
were creating hurdles for the power plants in getting the 
desired amount of coal. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended to make available the required quantity of coal 
to every developer in a time-bound manner. The Ministry now 
have enumerated various steps taken by them regarding 
making coal available to the power plants. The Committee 
have also be given to understand that there is no shortage of 
coal as it is available in sufficient amount. The Committee do 
acknowledge the various efforts being made by the 
Government to enhance the availability of coal to the power 
plants. Nevertheless, they also know that the availability of 
coal is the one thing and its actual supply to power plants is 
the other. The Ministry were also expected to provide the 
details of the power plants which are/were facing constraints 
in getting the desired amount of coal and the reasons for the 
same. The Committee believe that the efforts made by the 
Government may have eased out the constraints in getting 
coal in adequate amount, even so, they desired to be apprised 
of the details of power plants which are still facing any 
difficulty in this regard for whatever reason.  
 
 
 

13 
 
Inter-Ministerial group on NPAs 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that although generation is a 
delicensed activity, yet role of various agencies of the 
Government has been clearly outlined in the Electricity Act, 
2003. Electricity Act prescribed the constitution of Central 
Electricity Authority, its functions, duties and power to require 
statistics and returns. In addition to advice the Government on 
matters related to National Electricity Policy, it also formulate 
perspective plan for the development of electricity system, 
coordinating the activities of planning agencies for optimal 
utilization of resources to serve the interest of the nation and 
also to provide reliable and affordable electricity for all the 
consumers, prescribe technical standards for the construction of 
electrical plants connectivity to the grid, safety requirements of 
construction, operational and maintenance of plant and timely 
completion of schemes and projects for improving the system 
etc. It is also empowered to carry out any investigation for the 
purpose of generating, transmitting or developing electricity. In 
view of the Committee, these are the wide ranging powers 
which can be exercised to streamline the sector. The absence 
of licenses for generation of electricity has only provided an 
opportunity for the developers to eschew an inconsequential 
formality as sector have to be opened if we want to invite 
competition, efficiency, transparency and growth. Rest of the 
activities associated with are very much there and the 
promotional and regulatory framework have not been tinkered. 
The responsibility dwells upon the Ministry of Power to ensure 
that promotional and regulatory activities are done in an 
expected manner. They cannot be absolved from their role and 
responsibility on the ground of the generation being delicensed. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Power 
14 
 
and its associate bodies should become pro-active in 
understanding and redressing the woes of the sector and 
expect the inter-Ministerial group of the Ministry will come out 
with the specific remedies to the different maladies plaguing the 
sector and distracting its growth. It is expected that the 
views/suggestions of the IMG will be realistic, sector friendly 
and spur the growth of the electricity sector.” 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“Government of India constituted a High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) under the Chairmanship of 
Cabinet Secretary to address the issues of stressed thermal 
power projects. The report of the HLEC was submitted on 
12.11.18 and was also placed in the public domain on the 
website of Ministry of Power. The Government thereafter 
constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) to examine the specific 
recommendations of HLEC. The Group of Ministers (GoM) 
made recommendations regarding stressed power projects. On 
07.03.2019, the Government approved the recommendations of 
Group of Ministers (GoM). Subsequently, MoP vide OM dated 
08.03.2019, notified the approval of the Government. The 
recommendations of GoM approved by the Government are 
under implementation. The action taken on the 
recommendations is annexed as Appendix-I. 
2. The status of 34 stressed thermal power projects 
analysed by Ministry of Power is as follows: 
i. 14 projects with a total capacity of 16,450 MW have 
been resolved. 
ii. 13 projects with a total capacity of 16,270 MW are at 
various stages of resolution. 
iii. 7 projects with a total capacity of 7,410 MW are at very 
initial stage of construction and are totally stalled. Such 
projects have either been ordered to be liquidated or 
heading towards liquidation. 
 

15 
 
2.1 It may be summed up as follows:— 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Status Nos. of 
projects 
Capacity 
(MW) 
Commissioned 
(MW) 
PPA Tied 
(MW) 
Fuel tied 
up (MW) 
I Resolved 14 16,450 15850 10746 13122 
II Likely to be 
resolved 
13 16,270 10269 6817 10654 
III Heading for 
Liquidation 
7 7,410 135 1484.5 971 
 Total 34 40,130 26,254 19,047.5 24,747 
 
 2.2 Detailed status is enclosed as Appendix -II. 
 
 3. The following steps have been taken by the Government 
to resolve the stress in thermal power sector: 
 
i. After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Government of 
India formulated a transparent policy for re-allocation of 
cancelled coal mines in a fair and transparent method. 
Government has re-allocated 62 blocks through 
auction/allotment till date to power sector. 
ii. Based on the request of Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 13.04.2016 
started separate e-auction window for power sector under 
which Coal India Limited (CIL) is making arrangements 
for conduct of special forward e-auction (SFeA) of coal 
exclusively for power sector on a sustained basis, 
offering adequate quantities at regular intervals so that 
coal is made available to such power plants on regular 
basis. CIL has allocated 27.12 million tonnes of coal 
through SFeA to the power sector during Apr, 2019 to 
March,2020. 
iii. Based on inputs provided by MoP, MoC vide letter dated 
08.02.2016 had notified policy guidelines for grant of 
Bridge Linkage to specified end use plants of Central and 
State Public Sector Undertakings (Both in Power as well 
16 
 
as Non-Power sector) which have been allotted coal 
mines or blocks. Bridge linkages applications for public 
sector power projects in prescribed formats have been 
approved. 
iv. Fuel Linkages under SHAKTI: Government of India, 
Ministry of Coal has approved a new coal linkage 
allocation policy on May 17, 2017 named SHAKTI 
(Scheme for harnessing & allocating koyla transparently 
in India). Linkages granted under SHAKT IPolicy: 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i): Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii): Coal linkages have been 
allotted under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects 
having PPA but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity 
(32.68 MT) and 2nd round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW 
capacity (3.34 MT). In the 3rd round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, 
the auction has been held on 11.05.2020, out of 5.66 
MT offered, total 3.48 MT has been booked. 
c.  Shakti Policy Para B(iii): Bidding held from 5th to 
7
th
February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW 
(Total 5995 MW) has secured linkage for 6.49MT. 
d.  Shakti Policy Para B(iv): Coal linkages granted to the 
State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of UP for 
1,600 MW and to the State of MP for 2640 MW power 
to be raised through tariff based competitive bidding. 
e.  Under B(v), aggregator (PFC) has been allotted Coal 
linkage (10 MT) for aggregating demand for tariff 
based bidding. 
f.  Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a):Methodology issued by 
MoP on 02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by CEA. 
Applications received from 14 nos. of bidders with 
plant capacity of 9,813 MW and non-PPA capacity of 
8145 MW. CIL has completed the process of 

17 
 
conducting Tranche-I auction on 19.03.2020. Out of 
the total offered quantity of 5.77 MT, 1.34 MT has been 
booked with a zero premium. For 2nd round auction 
under SHAKTI B(viii)(a) for the quarter July- 
September, 2020, out of the total offered quantity of 
4.51 MT, 0.74 MT has been booked by 8 successful 
bidders with a zero premium. 
3.1 Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power: In 
order to address the problem of lack of Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPAs) in the country, the Ministry of Power had 
notified a scheme for procurement of 2500 MW on competitive 
basis for a period of 3 years from the generators with 
commissioned projects having untied capacity. 
a. 1st Round (2500 MW): Letter of Award (LOA) was issued 
to all the successful bidders (1900 MW) - PPA signed for 
1900MW. 
b. 2nd Round (2500 MW): Bid Security for 21 bidders for a 
total capacity of 6000 MW was received. Bids opened on 
07.02.2020. 12 bidders were successful with capacity of 
2500 MW. The State of Tamil Nadu has shown interest for 
procuring 500MW. 
 
3.2 Payment Security Mechanism: Ministry issued an order 
on 28.06.2019 and subsequent corrigendum thereon 
17.07.2019. National & Regional Load Despatch Centres 
(NLDC & RLDC) have been directed to dispatch power only 
after it is intimated by the Generating Company 
and/Distribution Companies that a Letter of Credit (LC) for the 
desired quantum of power has been opened. This has 
ensured timely payments by Discoms to the generators. 
 
3.3 In view of the above, it may please be noted that Ministry 
of Power is taking all the necessary steps to reduce the stress 
in the power sector. It may be observed that sincere efforts 
have been made by the Government to make these assets 
standard by providing all possible assistance to them in terms 
of proving them options for coal linkage or offer of PPAs 
through Pilot schemes. 
18 
 
4. As per Section 7 of the Electricity Act, 2003, any generating 
company can establish, operate and maintain a generating 
station without obtaining a license/ permission if it complies 
with the technical standards relating to connectivity with the 
grid. 
4.1 As power generation is a de-licensed activity, decision to 
set up a power plant is taken by the concerned developer 
based on his /her assessment of market conditions, demand 
of power in future, finance options, viability of the project etc. 
In order to finance the project, a Financial Agreement is 
signed between the developer and the lender based on mutual 
negotiation and understanding, and the risk is entirely borne 
by the developers and the lenders. Lenders normally deploy a 
Project Engineer to assess and evaluate the project financing 
costs based on the extant lending norms of the 
Banks/Financial Institutions etc. Ministry of Power has no role 
to play in any kind of financial tie-up of such power generation 
projects. 
4.2 There are extant norms of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) for the Operation & Maintenance (O&M) 
expenses already in place on per MW basis to check whether 
the developer is gold plating O&M expenses. It is also 
mentioned that the bankers appoint a Lenders' Financial 
Advisor (LFA) and Lenders' Engineer for a particular project to 
monitor the cash flow of the project. 
4.3 The sectoral issues as identified by HLEC as the causes of 
stress have been resolved by different policy interventions 
taken by the Government. 
4.4 The details of resolution process of the stressed assets 
through Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and through 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) have been given at 
Appendix -III to this Note. It may be seen from Appendix -III 
that the resolution of a stressed projects is done as per the 
guidelines issued by RBI and/or under the IBC Act or NCLT. 
The process of resolution by lenders is overseen by 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) which is the 

19 
 
administrative Ministry for all Financial Institutions/ Banks. The 
frame-work and role for NCLT come under the jurisdiction of 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA). Thus, it may be seen that 
project developers/ lenders can seek remedy in case of Non-
Performing Asset under the above two resolution processes. It 
is pertinent to note that Ministry of Power has no role in the 
aforesaid process of resolution of stressed assets through 
IBC/NCLT.” 
14. The Committee, considering the wide-ranging powers 
of Central Electricity Authority (CEA) which can be exercised 
to streamline the sector, had opined that the responsibility to 
ensure that promotional and regulatory activities are done 
expectedly dwells upon the Ministry of Power also. Thus they 
cannot be absolved from their role and responsibility on the 
ground of the generation being de-licensed. The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the Ministry of Power and its 
statutory organizations should become pro-active in 
understanding and redressing the woes of the sector. Though 
the Ministry have enumerated various steps taken by them 
including implementation of recommendations of High-Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC)/Group of Ministers (GoM), they 
have not mentioned anything about any changes 
made/proposed in the functioning of statutory organizations 
of the Ministry particularly CEA to make them pro-active as 
desired by this Committee. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that apart from investigating the matter of Stress/Non-
Performing Assets (NPAs) in the power sector to find out 
reasons and authorities responsible, efforts should also be 
made to ensure that such situation does not reoccur. Prima 
facie, problems such as inadequate supply/availability of coal, 
issues relating to Power Purchase Agreements, lack of 
working capital, etc., may appear the reasons for the present 
condition of Stress/NPAs in the power sector. However, the 
Committee believe that this situation arose as several thermal 
power projects were commissioned in a short span of time 
20 
 
due to oversight by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA). 
Since CEA is also involved in the formulation of short-term 
and perspective plans for the development of the electricity 
system and co-ordinates the activities of the planning 
agencies for the optimal utilization of resources, therefore, 
they have to share the responsibility for the present situation. 
Considering the recent development in the power sector 
wherein more impetus is being given to renewable energy 
which being intermittent in nature can deter optimum 
utilization of present generation capacity, the Committee are 
concerned that similar situation may also arise in future. 
Moreover, the present generation capacity is characterized by 
the dominance of coal-based power plants and less than the 
desired share of hydropower. The Committee are aware that 
for a robust, sustainable and efficient power sector there must 
be an ideal mix of power generation capacity. Although 
electricity generation is a de-licensed activity but allowing its 
lopsided development is not in the interest of the country 
either. The Committee, would therefore re-emphasise that the 
Ministry of Power and its associate bodies should become 
pro-active in understanding and redressing the issues of the 
sector. The Committee expect that the Ministry would come up 
with an action plan to effect tangible changes in their 
functioning with provisions of accountability in the system. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Regulatory Issues 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
 
“The Committee note that Ministry of Power has made 
attempts to facilitate the resolution of issues concerning 
stress in power sector. Several meeting have taken place 
from July, 2015 onwards with lenders and others but 

21 
 
nothing concrete has come out so far. The Committee feel 
that in addition to financial matters, stress in the sector is 
also caused by various operational/ commercial/ regulatory 
issues. Regulatory matters keep on pending for years 
without any decision. Even the decisions of the regulatory 
bodies regarding change in law are not honoured by 
Discoms and various regulators interpret change in law 
differently leading to the confusion in the sector. Any 
situation arising out of the change in law should be uniform 
all across and if possible be kept out of the purview of the 
regulators. The Committee are aware that this is a 
Concurrent Subject and generation is a delicensed activity, 
but within these limitations some uniform mechanism will 
have to be explored and established to make the sector 
stable. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
appropriate steps should be taken to ensure that there 
should be consistency and uniformity with regard to orders 
emanating from the status of change in law. Provisions 
should also be made for certain percentage of payments of 
regulatory dues to be paid by Discoms in case the orders of 
regulators are being taken to APTEL/higher judiciary for 
their consideration and decision.” 
 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
 
“Regarding Change-in-Law, the Tariff Policy notified by 
Central Government on 28.01.2016 at Para 6.2.4 provides 
that after the award of bids, if there is any change in 
domestic duties, levies, cess and taxes imposed by Central 
Government, State Governments/Union Territories or by any 
Government instrumentality leading to corresponding 
changes in the cost, the same may be treated as “Change in 
Law” and may unless provided otherwise in the PPA, be 
allowed as pass through subject to approval of Appropriate 
Commission.  
22 
 
 2. In regard to uniformity of Decisions, the Regulatory orders 
regarding Change in Law mainly depend on provisions in the 
PPA as also on the interpretation of these provisions. The 
Electricity Act has not envisaged a hierarchical relationship 
between the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and 
the State/ Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions. State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs)/ Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions (JERCs) may provide 
their own interpretation. However, aggrieved parties are free 
to approach the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL)/ 
Supreme Court challenging the decision of the SERC/ JERC 
as the case may be. However, the Orders of APTEL/ 
Supreme Court are applicable uniformly across the 
jurisdictions of all SERCs/ JERCs. It is pertinent to mention 
that a number of cases regarding “Change-in-Law” have 
been decided by APTEL and they will be uniformly applicable 
to all.  
 3. As regards recommendation that certain percentage of 
payment should be made when order is challenged in higher 
judicial forum, it may be noted that, the Electricity Act does 
not envisage any provision for payment of certain percentage 
of regulatory dues at the time of filing of appeal against the 
Order of the Regulatory Commission, such provision may 
have to be made in PPA.  
 4. Ministry of Power vide letter dated 27.08.2018 has issued 
following directions to Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission under section 107 of the Electricity Act:  
 (i) Any change in domestic duties, levies, cess and taxes 
imposed by Central Government, State Governments/Union 
Territories or by any Government instrumentality leading to 
corresponding changes in the cost, may be treated as 
"Change in Law" and may unless provided otherwise in the 
PPA, be allowed as pass through  
 (ii) Central Commission will only determine the per unit 
impact of such change in domestic duties, levies, cess and 
taxes, which will be passed on.  

23 
 
 (iii) A draft Order for determination of per unit impact under 
change in law shall be circulated by Central Commission to 
all the States/Beneficiary on 14th Day of filing of petition. Any 
objection/ representation shall be submitted by them within 
21 days of filing of petition.  
 (iv) The order for pass through giving the calculation for per 
unit impact will be issued within 30 days of filing of petition.  
 (v) The impact of such Change in law shall be effective from 
the date of change in law.  
 (vi) Where CERC has already passed an order to allow pass 
through of changes in domestic duties, levies, cess and 
taxes in any case under Change-in-Iaw, this will apply to all 
cases ipso facto and no additional petition would need to be 
filed in this regard.” 
17. The Committee while advocating for consistency and 
uniformity about orders emanating from the status of change 
in law, had also desired that provisions should be made for 
certain percentage of payments of regulatory dues to be paid 
by Discoms in case the orders of regulators are being taken to 
Appellate Tribunal For Electricity (APTEL)/higher judiciary for 
their consideration and decision. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply have stated that the Electricity Act does not 
envisage any provision for payment of certain percentage of 
regulatory dues at the time of filing of appeal against the 
Order of the Regulatory Commission, therefore, such 
provision may have to be made in Power Purchase 
Agreement. The Committee had expected the Ministry to 
examine their recommendation on its merit by weighing its 
expected benefits and drawbacks and have apprised the 
Committee about its implementability accordingly. The 
Committee knew that there is no such provision in the statute, 
therefore, they had recommended to make one in this regard. 
The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their 
24 
 
recommendation and expect that the Ministry would sincerely 
examine their recommendation for its implementation. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
Role of RBI 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that RBI has issued guidelines for 
Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme. Under the scheme, for 
viability accounts facing financial difficulties, lenders may 
consider restructuring the debt. RBI has also formulated the 
Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A) 
an optional framework for the resolution of large stressed 
accounts. The S4A envisages determination of sustainable 
level for a stressed borrower and bifurcation of outstanding 
debt into sustainable debt and equity/quasi equity instruments 
which are expected to provide upside to the lenders when the 
borrowers turn-round. In view of the Committee, the scheme of 
the RBI seems to be appropriate to help the sector but in 
reality the situation is not as real as has been attempted to. 
During interaction with various IPPs regarding the reasons for 
NPA and financing of sector, the Committee were apprised 
that NPA in power sector has been abetted by high rate of 
interest by finances, denial of variables of interest to 
developers, cost escalation due to extraneous reasons like 
court cases, delayed decision by lending consortium, lack of 
working capital, etc. These financial issues are from 
commonplace in nature but have the potential to affect the 
viability of the project. No extraordinary measures are required 
to address these problems which if resolved have the potential 
to affect a turn-around in the project. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the revival schemes of the RBI or 
the Government should be realistic and not symbolic. Every 
effort should be made to see that projects with huge 
investment do not become NPA for want of marginal financial 
infusion or adjustment in the way of making working capital 

25 
 
available for passing on the interest variable to the stressed 
asset.” 
 
19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
 
“RBI vide circular DBR.No.BP.BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 dated 
12.02.2018, withdrew all debt restructuring schemes like 5/25 – 
flexible restructuring scheme, Strategic Debt Restructuring 
(SDR), Outside SDR, Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of 
Stressed Assets (S4A) etc along with the Joint Lenders Forum 
(JLF) mechanism. As per the circular, the loan accounts, where 
the aggregate exposure of lenders is more than Rs. 2,000 crore 
and where the accounts are classified as restructured accounts 
or where restructuring under earlier RBI Schemes is underway, 
Resolution Plan needed to be implemented within 180 days 
from 1 Mar, 2018 or 180 days from the date of first default after 
1 Mar, 2018. If Resolution Plan was not implemented within the 
above stipulated timeline by RBI, lenders would have to file 
insolvency application under IBC (Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) 
within 15 days from the date of expiry of the said timeline. 
 2. The circular was challenged by APP, IPPAI and several 
power developers vide various petitions in High Courts across 
the country, which were clubbed and transferred to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 declared that the impugned 
RBI circular is ultra vires Section 35AA of the Banking 
Regulation Act and therefore, it is unnecessary to go into any of 
the other contentions that have been raised in the transferred 
cases and petitions. 
 3. Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a .  Review Period — once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a 
prima facie review of the borrower account within thirty 
days from such default. 
26 
 
b .  Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA): In cases where RP is to 
be implemented, all lenders shall enter into an ICA, during 
the above-said Review Period, to provide for ground rules 
for finalization and implementation of the RP. 
c .  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by lenders 
representing 75 per cent by value of total outstanding 
credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders by number shall 
be binding upon all the lenders. 
d .  An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for no 
restructuring/no change in ownership case) the borrower 
is not in default with any of the lenders as on 180th day 
from the end of the Review Period. Any subsequent 
default after the 180 day period shall be treated as a fresh 
default, triggering a fresh review. 
e .  Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP:- For all accounts- Where a viable 
RP in respect of a borrower is not implemented within the 
timelines given below, all lenders shall make additional 
provisions  asunder: 
 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning 
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of 
Review Period 35% 
f .  Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They are 
free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. However, it 
gives certain incentives in the form of reversal of 
additional provisioning if a stressed asset is taken to IBC. 
g .  Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with.” 
 
20. The Committee had recommended that the revival 
schemes of the RBI or the Government should be realistic and 

27 
 
not symbolic. They had also desired that every effort should 
be made to see that projects with huge investment do not 
become Non-performing Assets for want of marginal financial 
infusion or adjustment in the way of making working capital 
available for passing on the interest variable to the stressed 
asset. The Ministry in their action taken reply have now 
informed that RBI by its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019 had allowed various 
steps. The Committee believe that these steps would help 
ameliorate the situation of stress in the power sector. The 
Committee, however, find that there is no specific information 
regarding making working capital available to the stressed 
power plants. The Committee desire that short term business 
glitches or unprecedented condition beyond the control of the 
developers should not lead power plants to become 
stressed/NPAs just for want of working capital. Due to COVID-
19 pandemic, the issue of making available working capital to 
the power plants has become more pertinent. The Committee, 
therefore, expect the Government to take the required steps to 
address this issue with utmost sincerity. 
28 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that delicensing of power generation 
has been done to attract the entry of private sector into the power 
generation. This was done as the country was facing huge deficit in 
energy and peak power. The capacity addition targets required 
substantial capital addition per year with limited capacity addition 
expected from the public sector units (both Central and States). 
Private participation became essential for achieving the fast growth 
of power generation keeping pace with the demand of the country. 
During the 11th plan period, private generating companies 
contributed in electricity generation in a substantial manner by 
outdoing both Central and State Sector put together. In the 
capacity addition targets of the Government Private Sector have 
also contributed during the 12th plan period as well. Their 
contribution to the sector has led the country to a power surplus 
situation from the power deficient one. Hence it is incumbent upon 
the Government to ensure the proper facilitation of capacity 
generation stuck due to several factors and forcing them to 
become NPA. The committee, therefore, recommend that an 
appropriate task force be formed/constituted to specifically look into 
the problems of the IPPs with a view to bring them out of 
NPAs/Stressed Asset mire so that the power generation in the 
country is given a fillip and the vision of power for all 24*7 is 
achieved sooner than later. 
Reply of the Government 
1 .   Government on 29.07.2018 had set up a High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) headed by the Cabinet Secretary to 
address the issues of Stressed Thermal Power Projects in the 
country. The composition of the Committee was as under:— 
i. Cabinet Secretary — Chairman 
ii. Chairman Railway Board — Member 
iii. Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs — Member 

29 
 
iv. Secretary, Department of Financial Services —Member 
v. Secretary, Ministry of Power (MoP) —
Member(Convener) 
vi. Secretary, Ministry of Coal — Member 
vii. CMD, State Bank of India — Member 
viii.   CMD, Power Finance Corporation — Member 
ix.    CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation — Member 
x.     CMD, Punjab National Bank — Member 
xi.    CMD, ICICI Bank — Member 
 
2. The Terms of Reference of the Committee were as follows:— 
 
(i)  To assess the nature of stressed assets with a view to 
resolving the crisis and maximizing the efficiency of 
investment. 
(ii)     Changes required to be made in the fuel 
linkage/allocation policy/ other modes to facilitate 
supply of fuel to the stressed power plants. 
(iii) To facilitate sale of power by these stressed power 
plants. 
(iv) Suggest changes required in regulatory 
framework/administrative measures to facilitate faster 
disposal of tariff petitions/disputes and ensure interim 
payments during the pendency of the disputes before 
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL) and other 
courts. 
(v) Ensure timely payments by the Distribution Companies 
(DISCOMS), suggest payment security mechanism for 
IPPs. 
(vi) Changes required in the provisioning norms/Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) to facilitate restructuring of 
30 
 
the stressed assets including the changes required in 
Asset Restructuring Company (ARC) Regulations. 
(vii) Any other measures proposed for revival of stressed 
assets so as to avoid such investments becoming non-
performing asset (NPA). 
 
3. The report of the HLEC was submitted on 12.11.18 and was 
also placed in the public domain on the website of Ministry of 
Power. The Government thereafter constituted a Group of 
Ministers (GoM) to examine the specific recommendations of 
HLEC. The Group of Ministers (GoM) made recommendations 
regarding stressed power projects. On 07.03.2019, Government 
approved the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM). 
Subsequently, Ministry of Power vide OM dated 08.03.2019, 
notified the approval of the Government. The recommendations of 
GoM approved by the Government are under implementation. The 
action taken on the recommendations is annexed as Appendix -I. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M No. P-6/2018-IPC ,  Date: 28/07/2020]                    
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Stressed Assets in Power Sector 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
      The Committee note that with the delicensing of the generation, 
private entrepreneurs have entered into the foray of electricity 
generation in a big way. The electricity sector has its own inherent 
uncertainties and volatile conditions. The stability of the sector 
hinges of many sectors such as demand-supply equilibrium, signing 
of PPA, backing of FSA, availability of transmission and distribution 
network, financial health of distribution companies and other 
regulatory framework. Any lack of updation in any of the areas has 

31 
 
the potential to destabilize the delivery capacity of the entire chain. 
It also has its economic and sectoral implications. If the policy 
certainty, stable financial arrangements and transparent regulatory 
framework is permitted slight deviation in between, it may derail the 
entire activity with unforeseen consequences. Social/ political 
issues, reneging of parties from contractual obligations and non-
fulfillment of enshrined promises make the situation worse. The 
issue of NPA/Stressed Assets in power sector is nothing but a 
combination of all the factors cited above. Collectively, it is 
unimaginative and more of a fire fighting exercise than a well 
thought-out, coordinated and impeccably executed attempt for the 
growth of the power sector. The Committee have heard the views 
on the status and fate of each of the 34 projects in question and are 
inclined to infer that it is a concrete manifestation of lack of 
collective will power, imagination, determination and action plan on 
the part of all concerned. However, the silver lining is also lurking as 
now the serious attempts are being made to address the issue and 
make as many NPAs in power sector productive as possible. The 
Committee appreciate the effort of various agencies/ organizations 
involved in the exercise and presume that they will display courage 
and a sense of purpose to solve the issue. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that there should be no let up in the efforts to 
pick up the cudgels of the Stressed Assets and NPA and should 
focus our resolve for solving the problem. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The status of 34 stressed thermal power projects identified 
by Department of Financial Services (DFS) and analysed by 
Ministry of Power (MoP) is as follows:— 
i. 14 projects with a total capacity of 16,450 MW have been 
resolved. 
ii. 13 projects with a total capacity of 16,270 MW are at 
various stages of resolution. 
32 
 
iii. 7 projects with a total capacity of 7,410 MW are at very 
initial stage of construction and are totally stalled. Such 
projects have either been ordered to be   liquidated or 
heading towards liquidation. 
 
1.1  The summary status of 34 stressed thermal projects are as 
follows:— 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Status Nos. of 
projects 
Capacity 
(MW) 
Commissioned 
(MW) 
PPA Tied 
(MW) 
Fuel tied 
up(MW) 
I. Resolved 14 16,450 15850 10746 13122 
II. Likely to be  
resolved 13 16,270 10269 6817 10654 
III. Heading for 
Liquidation 7 7,410 135 1484.5 971 
 Total 34 40,130 26,254 19,047.5 24,747 
1.2 Detailed status is enclosed as Appendix -II. 
 
2. The following steps have been taken by the Government to 
resolve the stress in thermal power sector:— 
i.  After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Government of 
India formulated a transparent policy for re-allocation of 
cancelled coal mines in a fair and transparent method. 
Government has re-allocated 62 blocks through 
auction/allotment till date to power sector. 
ii.   Based on the request of Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 13.04.2016 
started separate e-auction window for power sector under 
which Coal India Limited (CIL) is making arrangements for 
conduct of Special Forward e-auction (SFeA) of coal 

33 
 
exclusively for power sector on a sustained basis, offering 
adequate quantities at regular intervals so that coal is 
made available to such power plants on regular basis. CIL 
has allocated 27.12 million tonnes of coal through Special 
Forward e-Auction (SFeA) to the power sector during Apr, 
2019 to March, 2020. 
iii. Based on inputs provided by Ministry of Power(MoP), 
Ministry of Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 08.02.2016 had 
notified policy guidelines for grant of Bridge Linkage to 
specified end use plants of Central and State Public 
Sector Undertakings (Both in Power as well as Non-Power 
sector) which have been allotted coal mines or blocks. 
Bridge linkages applications for public sector power 
projects in prescribed formats have been approved. 
iv.  Fuel Linkages under SHAKTI : Government of India, 
Ministry of Coal has approved a new coal linkage 
allocation policy on May 17, 2017 named SHAKTI 
(Scheme for Harnessing & Allocating Koyla Transparently 
in India). Linkages granted under SHAKTI Policy: 
 Shakti Policy Para B(i) : Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
 Shakti Policy Para B(ii) : Coal linkages have been 
allotted under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects 
having Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) but no 
linkage) for 9045 MW capacity (32.68 MT) and 2nd 
round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW capacity (3.34 MT). In the 
3rd round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, the auction had been 
held on 11.05.2020, out of 5.66 MT offered, total 3.48 
MT has been booked. 
34 
 
 Shakti Policy Para B(iii) : Bidding held from 5th to  
7th February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW 
(Total 5995 MW) have secured linkage for 6.49MT. 
 Shakti Policy Para B(iv) : Coal linkages granted to the 
State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of Uttar 
Pradesh (UP) for 1,600 MW and to the State of 
Madhya Pradesh (MP) for 2640 MW power to be 
raised through tariff based competitive bidding. 
 Under B(v), aggregator Power Finance Corporation  
demand for tariff based bidding.  
 Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a):Methodology issued by 
MoP on 02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA). Applications received from 
14 nos. of bidders with plant capacity of 9,813 MW 
and non-PPA capacity of 8145 MW. Coal India 
Limited(CIL)has completed the process of conducting. 
 Tranche-I auction on 19.03.2020. Out of the total 
offered quantity of 5.77 MT, 1.34 MT has been booked 
with a zero premium. For 2nd round auction under 
SHAKTI B(viii)(a) for the quarter July- September, 
2020, out of the total offered quantity of 4.51 MT,                
0.74 MT has been booked by 8 successful bidders 
with zero premium. 
2.1   Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power: In order 
to address the problem of lack of Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) in the country, the Ministry of Power had notified a scheme 
for procurement of 2500 MW on competitive basis for a period of  
3 years from the generators with commissioned projects having 
untied capacity. 
i. 1st Round (2500 MW): Letter of Award (LOA) was 
issued to all the successful bidders (1900 MW) — PPA 
signed for 1900MW. 

35 
 
ii. 2nd Round (2500 MW): Bid Security for 21 bidders for a 
total capacity of 6000 MW was received. Bids opened 
on 07.02.2020. 12 bidders were successful with capacity 
of 2500 MW. The State of Tamil Nadu has shown 
interest for procuring 500MW. 
2.2  Payment Security Mechanism: Ministry issued an order on 
28.06.2019 and subsequent corrigendum thereon 17.07.2019. 
National & Regional Load Despatch Centres (NLDC & RLDC) have 
been directed to dispatch power only after it is intimated by the 
Generating Company and Distribution Companies that a Letter of 
Credit (LC) for the desired quantum of power has been opened. 
This has ensured timely payments by Discoms to the generators. 
2.3 In view of the above, it may please be noted that 
Ministry of Power is taking all the necessary steps to reduce the 
stress in the power sector. It may be observed that sincere efforts 
have been made by the Government to make these assets 
standard by providing all possible assistance to them in terms of 
proving them options for coal linkage or offer of PPAs through 
Pilotschemes. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. P-6/2018-IPC, Date: 28/07/2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that as per the directions of Reserve Bank 
of India, an asset is classified as NPA if a loan or an advance 
where interest or instalment of principal remains overdue for a 
period of 90 days in respect of term-loan. Similarly, stressed assets 
are accounts where there has been delay in payment of interest 
and/ or payment as against the repayment scheduled on account 
of financial difficulties faced by the borrower. As per Income 
Recognisation/ Asset Classification norms of RBI, when an asset 
fails to serve its debt obligation within the prescribed timeframe, it 
is symptomatic of an incipient stress and potential NPA. This could 
36 
 
be due to various reasons and may not be limited to timely project 
implementation only. In such a situation, corrective measures of 
various grades, i.e., rectification, restructuring and recovery should 
be considered keeping in view the totality of the situation. The 
Committee have been given to understand that now-a-days, 
prevalent practice of expected loss method to rate power sector the 
delay in fulfilment of obligation even by a day leads to asset being 
de-rated. As the rating goes down, the bank starts charging penal 
interest rather than supporting the asset/project. This kind of 
practice will only compound the situation rather than easing it. If the 
lenders allow a period of 90 days before classifying the asset as 
NPA, they should be guided by their own norms for charging 
interest rather than by the grading of assets by the rating agencies. 
The committee, therefore, recommend that for classification of 
assets as NPA and consequential action as a result thereof lender 
should follow their own norms regarding charging of interest. They 
should also keep in view the factors that are responsible for an 
asset becoming NPA and try to help the asset to the extend 
possible in not becoming NPA. 
Reply of the Government 
1 .    Reserve Bank of India (RBI) vide circular DBR. No. BP. 
BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 dated 12.02.2018, withdrew all debt 
restructuring schemes like 5/25 – flexible restructuring scheme, 
Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR), Outside SDR, Scheme for 
Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A) etc along with 
the Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) mechanism. As per the circular, the 
loan accounts, where the aggregate exposure of lenders is more 
than Rs.2,000 Crs and where the accounts are classified as 
restructured accounts or where restructuring under earlier RBI 
Schemes is underway, Resolution Plan needed to be implemented 
within 180 days from 1 Mar., 2018 or 180 days from the date of first 
default after 1 Mar., 2018. If Resolution Plan was not implemented 
within the above stipulated timelines by RBI, lenders would have to 

37 
 
file insolvency application under IBC (Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) 
within 15 days from the date of expiry of the said timeline. 
2 .  The circular was challenged by Association of Power 
producers (APP), Independent Power Producers Association of 
India (IPPAI) and several power developers vide various petitions 
in High Courts across the country, which were clubbed and 
transferred to the Hon’ble Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 
declared that the impugned RBI circular is ultra vires Section 35AA 
of the Banking Regulation Act and therefore, it is unnecessary to 
go into any of the other contentions that have been  raised in the 
transferred cases and petitions. 
3 .  Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a. Review Period — once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a 
prima facie review of the borrower account within thirty 
days from such default. 
b. Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA): In cases where 
Resolution Plan (RP) is to be implemented, all lenders 
shall enter into an ICA, during the above- said Review 
Period, to provide for ground rules for finalization and 
implementation of the RP. 
c.  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by 
lenders representing 75 per cent by value of total 
outstanding credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders by 
number shall be binding upon all the lenders. 
d. An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for 
no restructuring/no change in ownership case) the 
borrower is not in default with any of the lenders as on 
180th day from the end of the Review Period. Any 
38 
 
subsequent default after the 180 day period shall be 
treated as a fresh default, triggering a fresh review. 
e. Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP:— For all accounts — Where a 
viable RP in respect of a borrower is not implemented 
within the timelines given below, all lenders shall make 
additional provisions as under:— 
f. Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They 
are free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. However, 
it gives certain incentives in the form of reversal of 
additional provisioning if a stressed asset is taken to 
IBC. 
g. Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with. 
[Ministry of Power,  O.M. No. P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 
Recommendation ( Sl. No. 4) 
       The Committee note that credit related issues are 
deregulated and banks are required to take credit related decisions 
based on their internal assessment of the commercial viability of 
loan within their approved policies and relevant regulatory 
guidelines. However, Reserve Bank of India and Department of 
Banking Supervision check the implementation and enforcement of 
guidelines at various stages. Non-compliance of guidelines are 
communicated to the respective banks by the RBI with a view to 
make required provisions putting in place the requisite monitoring 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning 
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of Review 
Period 35% 

39 
 
and control mechanism. The compliance of banks to these 
observations are tracked through monitoring action plan/ risk 
mitigation plan. Banks’ internal audit, concurrent audit and statutory 
audit verify the instructions on income recognition, classification 
and provisioning norms as laid down by the RBI. The Committee 
note that sufficient checks and balances have been introduced with 
regard to the lending by the banks. Despite this provision, it is felt 
that due prudence have not been observed by the banks while 
considering the loan. Therefore, the process and stages of granting 
a loan along with the criteria for loan grant needs a revisit. A 
realistic and comprehensive approach should be taken keeping in 
view of the vital factors necessary for the exercise. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that the process of grant of loan, 
supervisory mechanism and its subsequent monitoring should be 
given a relook to make it more realistic and productive. 
Reply of the Government 
1 .  RBI vide circular DBR.No.BP.BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 
dated 12.02.2018, withdrew all debt restructuring schemes like  
5/25 — flexible restructuring scheme, Strategic Debt Restructuring 
(SDR), Outside SDR, Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of 
Stressed Assets (S4A) etc along with the Joint Lenders Forum 
(JLF) mechanism. As per the circular, the loan accounts, where the 
aggregate exposure of lenders is more than Rs. 2,000 Crs and 
where the accounts are classified as restructured accounts or 
where restructuring under earlier RBI Schemes is underway, 
Resolution Plan needed to be implemented within 180 days from 1 
Mar., 2018 or 180 days from the date of first default after 1 Mar., 
2018. If Resolution Plan was not implemented within the above 
stipulated timelines by RBI, lenders would have to file insolvency 
application under IBC (Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) within 15 days 
from the date of expiry of the said timeline. 
2 .  The circular was challenged by APP, IPPAI and several 
power developers vide various petitions in High Courts across the 
country, which were clubbed and transferred to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 declared that the impugned 
RBI circular is ultra vires Section 35AA of the Banking Regulation 
40 
 
Act and therefore, it is unnecessary to go into any of the other 
contentions that have been raised in the transferred cases and 
petitions. 
3 .  Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a .  Review Period — once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a 
prima facie review of the borrower account within thirty 
days from such default. 
b .  Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA): In cases where RP is to 
be implemented, all lenders shall enter into an ICA, 
during the above-said Review Period, to provide for 
ground rules for finalization and implementation of the 
RP. 
c .  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by 
lenders representing 75 per cent by value of total 
outstanding credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders by 
number shall be binding upon all the lenders. 
d .  An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for no 
restructuring/no change in ownership case) the borrower 
is not in default with any of the lenders as on 180th day 
from the end of the Review Period. Any subsequent 
default after the 180 day period shall be treated as a 
fresh default, triggering a fresh review. 
e .  Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP :— For all accounts— Where a 
viable RP in respect of a borrower is not implemented 
within the timelines given below, all lenders shall make 
additional provisions as under:— 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning 
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of Review Period 35% 
 
 

41 
 
f .  Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They are 
free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. However, it 
gives certain incentives in the form of reversal of additional 
provisioning if a stressed asset is taken to IBC. 
g .  Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with. 
      [Ministry of Power, O.M.No. P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that Section 35A of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 empowers RBI to issue directions to banking 
companies regarding conduct of their affair. From time to time, RBI 
also revises its guidelines keeping in view the prevailing macro-
economic situation, systematic risk and an assessment of the 
health of the banking system. There are three such categories 
under Special Mention Account (SMA) as : (a) AMA-0: Principal or 
interest payment not overdue for more than 30 days but account 
showing signs of incipient stress; (b) SMA-1: Principal or interest 
payment overdue between 31-60 days; and (c) SMA-2: Principal or 
interest payment overdue between 61-90 days. These categories 
prescribe the stages for identifying the brewing stress in the 
account. Once an account comes in the category of SMA-2, banks 
are mandatorily required to form a committee called Joint Lenders 
Forum ensuring time-bound detection and resolution of stress. 
However, the Committee note that all these exercises trigger only 
by the  
non-fulfilment or non-payment of the credit repayment obligation. 
Centrality of the entire exercise revolves around the safe recovery 
of the loans granted to the project rather than resolving the issue of 
stress and making the asset productive. The Committee are of the 
considered view that providing finances, though vital, to the project  
is only one of the several factors essential for the commissioning of 
the project. As of now, commissioned plants worth of thousands of 
MWs are under severe financial stress and are currently under 
SMA-1/2 stage or on the brink of becoming NPA. This is due to fuel 
42 
 
shortage, sub-optimal loading, untied capacities, absence of FSA 
and lack of PPA, etc. These projects were commissioned on the 
basis of national need/ demand of electricity, availability of all other 
essentials required in this regard. However, due to unforeseen 
circumstances, these plants are suffering from cash flows, credit 
rating, interest servicing etc. Hence, simply applying the RBI 
guidelines mechanically by the banks, financial institutions, joint 
lender forums will push these plants further into trouble without any 
hope of recovery. The Government of India proposed new credit 
rating system for fundamentally strong projects which face 
temporary cash flow mismatch. The emphasis was on various 
inbuilt credit enhancement structures. The Committee understand 
that banks have not adopted these guidelines for assessing the 
credit risk of infrastructure companies. The new norms provided 
the risk weight corresponding to each rating levels which the banks 
have to use for their capital adequacy. The Committee are of the 
opinion that banks and other financial institutions should analyse 
and adopt these guidelines in the proper spirit to provide some 
succor to the stress assets. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that RBI should advise all Commercial Banks to follow the credit 
rating system proposed by the Government for assessing the credit 
risk of infrastructure companies and prescribe risk weight 
accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. Department of Financial Services(DFS) (Department of 
Economic Affairs(DEA)) has informed that Credit Rating Agencies 
after consulting DEA, Regulators and stakeholders has launched a 
New Credit Rating System. This has been done to enable investors 
to take a long-term view while investing in infrastructure. The new 
Rating system is based on Expected Loss (EL) model that captures 
the recovery prospects of the asset under evaluation. 
2. According to RBI, Expected Loss (EL) methodology is 
appropriate for determining the provisioning requirements while 

43 
 
Probability of Default (PD) approach (the existing methodology) is 
appropriate for determining capital requirements. 
 
3. Banks are free to consider the EL based ratings for pricing 
and other credit decisions but not for determining capital 
requirements which shall continue to be based on PD based 
ratings, as per internationally accepted BASEL norms. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No.P-6/2018-IPC,  Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 
Power Purchase Agreement  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that credit decisions by banks are 
taken on the basis of the assessment of commercial viability of the 
loan and extant regulatory norms and guidelines. Further, the 
norms issued by CERC (Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission) regarding capital cost, generation cost and regulation 
of power tariff are taken into consideration while assessing the 
viability of the power projects. Power projects involve medium to 
long-term gestation and given the nature of the project finance, 
FSAs and PPAs are very crucial for the project. However, the 
Committee note that for entering into FSA/ Coal linkages, one of 
the pre- condition stipulated by coal producers is to have PPA and 
Independent Power Producer has to enter PPA with State 
Discoms. Discom will not enter into PPA unless the project is 
nearing completion and rather  Discom issue Letter of Intent to 
power producing companies (Power Purchase Agreement entered 
only after the completion of minimum of 80 per cent of the project). 
PPA is usually entered into before 6 months from the date of the 
commencement of the commercial operation. Based on such Letter 
of Intent issued by Discoms, coal producing companies such as 
Coal India Ltd. also issue Letter of Assurance for entering into fuel 
supply agreement, 6 to 9 months before the date of 
commencement of commercial operation. The Committee note that 
44 
 
the entire process of power plant becoming a reality work in a 
cyclic manner based on the good intent, trust and assurance of 
each other. Based on this cycle only, huge investments are done 
and massive exercise to establish the plants are also undertaken 
by the all concerned. This in totality becomes the symbol of 
collective efforts of public importance. The letter of intent and letter 
of assurance assume the sanctity of such proportion that on their 
basis, loans are granted/ disbursed and the chain of the events 
begin. Any rethinking on this have severe repercussions. The 
Committee are of the opinion that these documents should be 
given the status of Testaments and be made justiciable so as to 
ensure that the commitments made by respective 
Department/agency are honoured and no reneging is allowed. Any 
subsequent policy formulation must have in view the commitment 
made in such letter of intent or letter of assurances. The pool of 
efforts in this regard cannot work in isolation and will have to work 
in tandem to see the success. The committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that keeping in view the enormity of the efforts and the 
consequences, any commitment from any side with regard to 
establishing infrastructure projects like power plant should sincere, 
honest and transparent without any scope of backtracking so that 
collective efforts of nation building are taken to logical end. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Ministry of Coal has informed that as per the New Coal 
Distribution Policy (NCDP), Letter of Assurances (LoAs) were to be 
issued by coal producing companies (Subsidiaries of Coal India 
Limited (CIL)) to the consumers based on the recommendations of 
the Standing Linkage Committee(Long-Term). 
2. In terms of the Presidential Directive (PD) dated 17.02.2012 
and subsequent modification dated 17.07.2013, the designated 
power plants of about 78,000 MW enlisted in the Presidential 
Directive dated 17.07.2013 which were likely to be commissioned 
by March, 2015 were eligible for entering into Fuel Supply 

45 
 
Agreement (FSA) upon achievement of milestones. However, 
regular supply of coal would start on submission of long term 
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) and achievement of CoD 
(Commercial Operation date). Subsequently, direction was given 
for signing of FSAs with the power plants enlisted in the PD dated 
17.07.2013 which were commissioned/to be commissioned within 
March, 2016 and, finally, SHAKTI policy dated 22.05.2017, inter 
alia stipulated that FSAs may be signed with all the pending LoA 
holders after ensuring that the plants are commissioned, respective 
milestones met, all specified conditions of the LoA fulfilled within 
the specified time frame and are commissioned/to be 
commissioned by 2022 subject to the condition that nothing 
adverse has been detected against them. 
3. Therefore, the LoAs issued have been honoured by the coal 
companies and the SHAKTI policy also directs that FSAs shall be 
signed with LoA holders subject to fulfillment of certain conditions 
stipulated above. 
4. Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has informed that the 
Procurers (Distribution Licensees) and the suppliers (Developers) 
are bound by the terms and conditions of Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) including conditions for termination of PPA. Each 
case in which attempt is made by any party to terminate PPA on 
arbitrary grounds will have adverse impact on investment climate 
for power sector. However, it may be added that such arbitrary 
action by any of the party is challengeable in appropriate legal 
forum by the other party. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No.P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that there are 34 power plants which have 
been categorized as “stressed”. The different categories of 
stressed power plants are (i) plants having PPA and requiring coal; 
(ii) plants having neither coal- linkage nor PPA; (iii) plants having 
46 
 
coal block but the issue of coal block is sub-judice; and (iv) the 
plants stressed on account of reasons other than coal linkage/block 
issues. The Committee has been informed that upon cancellation 
of 204 coal blocks by Supreme Court in September, 2014, coal 
mines (Special Provision Act, 2015) was notified on 30th March, 
2015. Under the provisions of the said Act, 84 coal mines have so 
far been successfully allocated. Of these coal mines, 58 coal mines 
have been allocated to power sector while rest have gone to other 
areas. The Committee has also been informed that with a view to 
ensure that there is no disruption in the power generation 
arrangements for coal block allottees, it was decided that coal may 
be supplied to such plants through a separate MoU route till 
31.03.2016 as many of the plants were already commissioned or to 
be commissioned in 2015-16 and had long- term PPAs. The 
position was reviewed on expiry of the term, i.e., 31.03.2016 and it 
was decided that these plants may take the coal being made 
available through the process of special forward e-auction of coal 
for power sector. In order to ensure that there is no disruption in 
coal availability to these plants, the term of MoU with these plants 
which expired on 31.03.2016, was extended till 30.06.2016 so as to 
facilitate smooth transaction to the special forward e-auction 
system of CIL. The Committee note that despite serious attempts 
made by the Government to make available coal to the power 
sector, the desired results are not achieved and the sector is 
starving for fuel. Despite separate MoU route, special forward          
e-auction, extension of the term of MoU, there isno improvement in 
the ground situation. This has seriously hampered not only the 
growth of the sector, but has also become one of the major 
contributory factors for pushing the assets into NPA. This is a very 
serious situation and requires urgent remedial measures. The 
committee, therefore, recommend that instead of indulging into 
futile attempts of different kinds exhibiting hollow exercises only, all 

47 
 
efforts should be made to display that there is no mismatch 
between words, action and the result. 
Reply of the Government 
i. After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Government of 
India formulated a transparent policy for re-allocation of cancelled 
coal mines in a fair and transparent method. Government has re-
allocated 62 blocks through auction/allotment till date to power 
sector. 
ii. Based on the request of Ministry of Power (MoP), Ministry of 
Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 13.04.2016 started separate e-auction 
window for power sector under which Coal India Limited (CIL) is 
making arrangements for conduct of special forward e-auction 
(SFeA) of coal exclusively for power sector on a sustained basis, 
offering adequate quantities at regular intervals so that coal is 
made available to such power plants on regular basis. CIL has 
allocated27.12 million tonnes of coal through SFeA to the power 
sector during Apr., 2019 to March, 2020. 
The year- wise performance of Special Forward eAuction is given 
as below:— 
Year Quantity Offered (in 
Million Tonnes) 
Quantity booked (in 
Million Tonnes) 
2017-18 61.95 28.93 
2018-19 39.688 27.14 
2019-20 44.045 27.12 
 
iii. Based on inputs provided by MoP, MoC vide letter dated 
08.02.2016 had notified policy guidelines for grant of Bridge 
Linkage to specified end use plants of Central and State Public 
Sector Undertakings (Both in Power as well as Non-Power sector) 
which have been allotted coal mines or blocks. Bridge linkages 
applications for public sector power projects in prescribed formats 
have been approved. 
48 
 
iv. Fuel Linkages under SHAKTI ; Government of India, Ministry 
of Coal has approved a new coal linkage allocation policy on  
May 17, 2017 named SHAKTI (Scheme for harnessing & allocating 
koyla transparently in India). Linkages granted under SHAKTI 
Policy:— 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i): Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii): Coal linkages have been allotted 
under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects having 
PPA but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity (32.68 MT) 
and 2nd round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW capacity (3.34 MT). 
In the 3rd round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, the auction has been 
held on 11.05.2020, out of 5.66 MT offered, total 3.48 MT 
has been booked. 
c. Shakti Policy Para B(iii): Bidding held from 5th  to  
7th February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW 
(Total 5995 MW) has secured linkage for 6.49 MT. 
d. Shakti Policy Para B(iv): Coal linkages granted to the 
State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of UP for 
1,600 MW and to the State of MP for 2640 MW power to 
be raised through tariff based competitive bidding. 
e. Under B(v), aggregator (PFC) has been allotted Coal 
linkage (10 MT) for aggregating demand for tariff based 
bidding. 
f. Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a):Methodology issued by MoP 
on 02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by CEA. Applications 
received from 14 nos. of bidders with plant capacity of 
9,813 MW and non-PPA capacity of 8145 MW. CIL has 
completed the process of conducting Tranche-I auction 
on 19.03.2020. Out of the total offered quantity of 5.77 
MT, 1.34 MT has been booked with a zero premium. For 
2nd round auction under SHAKTi B(viii)(a) for the quarter 
July- September, 2020, out of the total offered quantity of 
4.51 MT, 0.74 MT has been booked by 8 successful 
bidders with a zero premium. 
            [Ministry of Power, O.M. No.P-6/2018-IPC ,Dated 28/07/2020] 

49 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee note that it was apprised during one of the 
interaction that there is no shortage of coal and the scheme 
SHAKTI formulated by the Government will take care of coal 
allocation for all the present and future power plants. The 
Committee was also informed that there is no power plants which 
has PPA, but does not have coal linkage. During interaction with 
independent power producers of 34 stressed power projects, the 
Committee were apprised that despite allocation of coal linkage, 
letter of assurance has not been issued even after 3 months. The 
Committee expressed its anguish about the manner in which the 
SHAKTI scheme is being implemented and time is being taken to 
provide coal to eligible promoters. The Committee has also been 
apprised that there is no consistency with regard to policy of the 
coal allocation and e-auction of the coal. This has adversely 
impacted them. Although, NCDP (New Coal Distribution Policy) 
envisaged automatic conversion of LOA into FSA upon fulfillment 
of certain conditions but the CIL, Coal India Limited declined to 
sign the FSA despite fulfillment of laid down conditions. This is 
indeed a very serious matter and needs urgent remedial measures 
by the all concerned. This should not have been allowed to happen 
as the stakes involved are enormous. There are genuine 
apprehensions regarding availability and allocation of coal among 
the power producers. During the recent study visit, the Committee 
itself found that the availability of coal in one of the NTPC plants is 
very critical and this is the situation in several other plants of the 
NTPC as well. This affectively rebuts the claim of the Coal India 
that there is no shortage of coal in the country. The Committee 
expect that CIL would focus on the seriousness of the issues 
instead of making tall claims without any basis. The delay in the 
implementation of the scheme of SHAKTI should not have 
happened as it has disastrous entailing effects. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that CIL should make every effort to make 
the available the required quantity of coal to every developer in a 
time bound manner. Such timeframe for provision of coal to 
developers be also notified for public information. 
50 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.  The total receipt (domestic & imported) and consumption of 
coal by coal based thermal plants in the country during the last four 
years are as under :— 
(Figures in Million Tonnes) 
Year Receipt Consum- 
ption Domestic Imported Total  
Receipt For blending  
purpose 
Imported  
coal 
based  
plants 
Total  
Imported 
2016-17 494.8 19.8 46.3 66.1 560.9 574.3 
2017-18 538.6 17.0 39.4 56.4 595.0 608.0 
2018-19 582.1 21.4 40.3 61.7 643.7 628.9 
2019-20 569.5 23.8 45.5 69.2 638.7 622.2 
1 . 1   As can be seen from above, receipt of domestic 
coal has been increasing except, during the year 2019-20 which 
showed a minor decrease. The domestic coal consumption during 
the year 2019-20 was 577.3 Million Tonnes (MT) against the actual 
receipt of 569.5 MT from domestic sources while 23.8 MT coal was 
imported for blending purpose. As reported by Coal India Limited 
(CIL), availability of domestic coal in the country has improved with 
opening stock of 75 MT at mines end and 45 MT at Plant end as 
on31.03.2020. 
1.2 Based on the generation target, the coal requirement 
for the plants designed on domestic coal during 2020-21 has been 
estimated to be about645 MT. The expected availability of coal 
from various domestic sources during 2020-21 is about 668 MT 
against the requirement of 645 MT, which includes 530 MT from 
CIL, 55 MT from SCCL and 63 MT from captive sources. As the 
expected availability of domestic coal is more than the requirement 
during 2020-21, there may be very little requirement of importing 
coal for blending purpose depending upon cost economics and 
transportation logistics. In light of this, MoP has requested all the 

51 
 
Generating companies (Gencos) [who are importing coal for 
blending purpose], to make best efforts to replace their imports with 
domestic coal. At present, the availability of coal stock of 49.31 MT 
with Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) as on 18.06.2020 which is 
sufficient to meet requirements of TPPs for about 28days. 
1.3 Power plants designed on domestic coal are importing 
coal for blending purposes, considering their cost-economics and 
to bridge the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal, if any. 
However, the quantum of import for blending is very less as 
compared to domestic coal receipt. Further, power plants designed 
on imported coal, are importing coal to meet their fuel requirement 
as they are designed to operate on imported coal. Further, import 
of coal is under Open General License (OGL), and hence, the 
power utilities import coal considering their cost economics. As per 
Import substitution Notice of CIL dated 05.02.2019, power utilities 
were given option for supply of coal under Import substitution to 
meet their shortfall against Annual Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for 
FY 2018-19. Subsequently, CIL has issued another notice dated 
27.05.2019 regarding import substitution for the year 2019-20 also. 
1.4 However, the Government has been making effort for 
reducing import of coal for blending purpose and replacing it with 
domestic coal because coal import entails outgo of scarce foreign 
exchange. For this, MoP has written to the Gencos to make best 
efforts to reduce the imported coal with domestic coal for blending 
purpose. Further, MOP has also requested MoC to establish an 
electronic portal as e-facilitation centre to facilitate necessary 
clearances and redressal of issues raised by Gencos which would 
enable them to replace the import of coal for blending purpose by 
the domestic coal. Further, an Inter- Ministerial Committee (IMC) 
for the purpose of coal import substitution has been constituted 
under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Ministry of Coal). 
1.5 The total nos. of captive coal blocks that have been 
allocated to the Power Sector are 65 nos. Out of these 65 nos. coal 
52 
 
blocks, 03 nos. coal blocks have been surrendered and the total  
11 nos. of coal blocks are underproduction. 
1.6 The Government in May, 2016 approved the proposal 
for allowing flexibility in utilization of domestic coal amongst power 
generating stations to reduce the cost of power generation through 
saving in the transportation cost and operating the most efficient 
plant. The State/Central Gencos have flexibility to utilize their coal 
in most efficient and cost effective manner in their own power 
plants as well as by transferring coal to other State Genco/Central 
Genco/IPP generating stations for generation of cheaper power. 
1.7 Government of India, Ministry of Coal has approved a 
new coal linkage allocation policy on May 17, 2017 named SHAKTI 
(Scheme for harnessing & allocating koyla transparently in India). 
Linkages granted under SHAKTI Policy:— 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i): Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii): Coal linkages have been 
allotted under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects 
having PPA but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity 
(32.68 MT) and 2nd round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW 
capacity (3.34 MT). In the 3rd round of B(ii) of 
SHAKTI, the auction has been held on 11.05.2020, 
out of 5.66 MT offered, total 3.48 MT has been 
booked. 
c. Shakti Policy Para B(iii): Bidding held from 5th to  
7th February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW 
(Total 5995 MW) has secured linkage for 6.49 MT. 
d. Shakti Policy Para B(iv): Coal linkages granted to the 
State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of UP for 

53 
 
1,600 MW and to the State of MP for 2640 MW power 
to be raised through tariff based competitive bidding. 
e. Under B(v), aggregator (PFC) has been allotted Coal 
linkage (10 MT) for aggregating demand for tariff 
based bidding. 
f. Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a) : Methodology issued by 
MoP on 02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by CEA. 
Applications received from 14 nos. of bidders with 
plant capacity of 9,813 MW and non-PPA capacity of 
8145 MW. CIL has completed the process of 
conducting Tranche-I auction on 19.03.2020. Out of 
the total offered quantity of 5.77 MT, 1.34 MT has 
been booked with a zero premium. For 2nd round 
auction under SHAKTi B(viii)(a) for the quarter July- 
September, 2020, out of the total offered quantity of 
4.51 MT, 0.74 MT has been booked by 8 successful 
bidders with a zero premium. 
1.8 Thus it may be noted that Government has been making 
sustained efforts to optimize utilization of available coal resources. 
[Ministry of Power,   O.M.No.  P-6/2018-IPC,  Dated: 28/07/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Inter-Ministerial Group on NPAs 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that although generation is a delicensed 
activity, yet role of various agencies of the Government has been 
clearly outlined in the Electricity Act, 2003. Electricity Act 
prescribed the constitution of Central Electricity Authority, its 
54 
 
functions, duties and power to require statistics and returns. In 
addition to advice the Government on matters related to National 
Electricity Policy, it also formulate perspective plan for the 
development of electricity system, coordinating the activities of 
planning agencies for optimal utilization of resources to serve the 
interest of the nation and also to provide reliable and affordable 
electricity for all the consumers, prescribe technical standards for 
the construction of electrical plants connectivity to the grid, safety 
requirements of construction, operational and maintenance of plant 
and timely completion of schemes and projects for improving the 
system etc. It is also empowered to carry out any investigation for 
the purpose of generating, transmitting or developing electricity. In 
view of the Committee, these are the wide ranging powers which 
can be exercised to streamline the sector. The absence of licenses 
for generation of electricity has only provided an opportunity for the 
developers to eschew an inconsequential formality as sector have 
to be opened if we want to invite competition, efficiency, 
transparency and growth. Rest of the activities associated with are 
very much there and the promotional and regulatory framework 
have not been tinkered. The responsibility dwells upon the Ministry 
of Power to ensure that promotional and regulatory activities are 
done in an expected manner. They cannot be absolved from their 
role and responsibility on the ground of the generation being 
delicensed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of 
Power and its associate bodies should become pro-active in 
understanding and redressing the woes of the sector and expect 
the inter-Ministerial group of the Ministry will come out with the 
specific remedies to the different maladies plaguing the sector and 
distracting its growth. It is expected that the views/suggestions of 

55 
 
the IMG will be realistic, sector friendly and spur the growth of the 
electricity sector. 
Reply of the Government 
1.  Government of India constituted a High Level Empowered 
Committee (HLEC) under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary 
to address the issues of stressed thermal power projects. The 
report of the HLEC was submitted on 12.11.18 and was also 
placed in the public domain on the website of Ministry of Power. 
The Government thereafter constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) 
to examine the specific recommendations of HLEC. The Group of 
Ministers (GoM) made recommendations regarding stressed power 
projects. On 07.03.2019, the Government approved the 
recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM). Subsequently, 
MoP vide OM dated 08.03.2019, notified the approval of the 
Government. The recommendations of GoM approved by the 
Government are under implementation. The action taken on the 
recommendations is annexed as Appendix -II. 
2.  The status of 34 stressed thermal power projects analysed 
by Ministry of Power is as follows:— 
i. 14 projects with a total capacity of 16,450 MW have been 
resolved. 
ii. 13 projects with a total capacity of 16,270 MW are at 
various stages of resolution. 
iii.    7 projects with a total capacity of 7,410 MW are at very 
initial stage of construction and are totally stalled. Such 
projects have either been ordered to be liquidated or 
heading towards liquidation. 
56 
 
2.1 It may be summed up as follows:— 
Sl. 
No. 
Status No. of  
projects 
Capacity 
(MW) 
Commiss- 
ioned 
(MW) 
PPA 
Tied 
(MW) 
Fuel tied 
 up(MW) 
I. Resolved 14 16,450 15850 10746 13122 
II. Likely to be 
resolved 
13 16,270 10269 6817 10654 
III Heading for 
Liquidation 7 7,410 135 1484.5 971 
 Total 34 40,130 26,254 19,047.5 24,747 
 
2.2 Detailed status is enclosed as Appendix -I. 
 
3.  The following steps have been taken by the Government to 
resolve the stress in   thermal power sector:— 
 
i. After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Government of 
India formulated a transparent policy for re-allocation of 
cancelled coal mines in a fair and transparent method. 
Government has re-allocated 62 blocks through 
auction/allotment till date to power sector. 
ii. Based on the request of Ministry of Power (MoP), Ministry 
of Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 13.04.2016 started separate 
e-auction window for power sector under which Coal India 
Limited (CIL) is making arrangements for conduct of special 
forward e-auction (SFeA) of coal exclusively for power 
sector on a sustained basis, offering adequate quantities at 
regular intervals so that coal is made available to such 
power plants on regular basis. CIL has allocated 27.12 
million tonnes of coal through SFeA to the power sector 
during Apr, 2019 to March,2020. 
iii. Based on inputs provided by MoP, MoC vide letter dated 
08.02.2016 had notified policy guidelines for grant of Bridge 
Linkage to specified end use plants of Central and State 

57 
 
Public Sector Undertakings (Both in Power as well as Non-
Power sector) which have been allotted coal mines or 
blocks. Bridge linkages applications for public sector power 
projects in prescribed formats have been approved. 
iv. Fuel Linkages under SHAKTI ; Government of India, 
Ministry of Coal has approved a new coal linkage allocation 
policy on May 17, 2017 named SHAKTI (Scheme for 
harnessing & allocating koyla transparently in India). 
Linkages granted under SHAKTI Policy: 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i): Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii): Coal linkages have been 
allotted under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects 
having PPA but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity (32.68 
MT) and 2nd round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW capacity (3.34 
MT). In the 3rd round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, the auction has 
been held on 11.05.2020, out of 5.66 MT offered, total 
3.48 MT has been booked. 
c.  Shakti Policy Para B(iii): Bidding held from 5th to 
7th February, 2020. A non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW 
(Total 5995 MW) has secured linkage for 6.49MT. 
d.  Shakti Policy Para B(iv): Coal linkages granted to 
the State of Gujarat for 4,000 MW, to the State of UP for 
1,600 MW and to the State of MP for 2640 MW power to 
be raised through tariff based competitive bidding. 
e.  Under B(v), aggregator (PFC) has been allotted 
Coal linkage (10 MT) for aggregating demand for tariff 
based bidding. 
f.  Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a):Methodology issued by 
MoP on 02.12.2019. Guidelines issued by CEA. 
Applications received from 14 nos. of bidders with plant 
58 
 
capacity of 9,813 MW and non-PPA capacity of 8145 MW. 
CIL has completed the process of conducting Tranche-I 
auction on 19.03.2020. Out of the total offered quantity of 
5.77 MT, 1.34 MT has been booked with a zero premium. 
For 2nd round auction under SHAKTi B(viii)(a) for the 
quarter July- September, 2020, out of the total offered 
quantity of 4.51 MT, 0.74 MT has been booked by 8 
successful bidders with a zero premium. 
3.1 Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power: In 
order to address the problem of lack of Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPAs) in the country, the Ministry of Power had 
notified a scheme for procurement of 2500 MW on competitive 
basis for a period of 3 years from the generators with 
commissioned projects having untied capacity. 
a. 1st Round (2500 MW): Letter of Award (LOA) was 
issued to all the successful bidders (1900 MW) - PPA 
signed for 1900MW. 
b. 2nd Round (2500 MW): Bid Security for 21 bidders for 
a total capacity of 6000 MW was received. Bids 
opened on 07.02.2020. 12 bidders were successful 
with capacity of 2500 MW. The State of Tamil Nadu 
has shown interest for procuring 500MW. 
3.2 Payment Security Mechanism: Ministry issued an order 
on 28.06.2019 and subsequent corrigendum thereon 17.07.2019. 
National & Regional Load Despatch Centres (NLDC & RLDC) have 
been directed to dispatch power only after it is intimated by the 
Generating Company and/Distribution Companies that a Letter of 
Credit (LC) for the desired quantum of power has been opened. 
This has ensured timely payments by Discoms to the generators. 
3.3 In view of the above, it may please be noted that 
Ministry of Power is taking all the necessary steps to reduce the 
stress in the power sector. It may be observed that sincere efforts 

59 
 
have been made by the Government to make these assets 
standard by providing all possible assistance to them in terms of 
proving them options for coal linkage or offer of PPAs through Pilot 
schemes. 
4.  As per Section 7 of the Electricity Act, 2003, any generating 
company can establish, operate and maintain a generating station 
without obtaining a license/ permission if it complies with the 
technical standards relating to connectivity with the grid. 
 
4.1 As power generation is a de-licensed activity, decision to 
set up a power plant is taken by the concerned developer based on 
his /her assessment of market conditions, demand of power in 
future, finance options, viability of the project etc. In order to 
finance the project, a Financial Agreement is signed between the 
developer and the lender based on mutual negotiation and 
understanding, and the risk is entirely borne by the developers and 
the lenders. Lenders normally deploy a Project Engineer to assess 
and evaluate the project financing costs based on the extant 
lending norms of the Banks/Financial Institutions etc. Ministry of 
Power has no role to play in any kind of financial tie-up of such 
power generation projects. 
4.2 There are extant norms of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) for the Operation & Maintenance (O&M) 
expenses already in place on per MW basis to check whether the 
developer is gold plating O&M expenses. It is also mentioned that 
the bankers appoint a Lenders' Financial Advisor (LFA) and 
Lenders' Engineer for a particular project to monitor the cash flow 
of the project. 
4.3 The sectoral issues as identified by HLEC as the causes 
of stress have been resolved by different policy interventions taken 
by the Government. 
60 
 
4.4 The details of resolution process of the stressed assets 
through Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and through National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) have been given at Appendix -III 
to this Note. It may be seen from Appendix -III that the resolution of 
a stressed projects is done as per the guidelines issued by RBI 
and/or under the IBC Act or NCLT. The process of resolution by 
lenders is overseen by Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
which is the administrative Ministry for all Financial Institutions/ 
Banks. The frame-work and role for NCLT come under the 
jurisdiction of Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA). Thus, it may be 
seen that project developers/ lenders can seek remedy in case of 
Non-Performing Asset under the above two resolution processes. It 
is pertinent to note that Ministry of Power has no role in the 
aforesaid process of resolution of stressed assets through 
IBC/NCLT. 
[Ministry of Power,  O.M.No. P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
National Electricity Policy 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that Electricity Act, 2003 mandated the 
Government to prepare a National Electricity Policy in consultation 
with the all concerned for the development of power system based 
on optimal utilization of resources such as coal, natural gas, 
nuclear substances, hydro and sources of renewable energy. The 
Central Government notified the National Electricity Policy on 10th 
February, 2015 after taking into account the views of the State 
Governments, Central Electricity Authority, Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and other stake holders. The policy aims 
at accelerated development of power sector, supplying electricity to 
all areas and protecting interests of consumers and other stake 

61 
 
holders. It also provides for increasing of per capita availability of 
electricity, financial turn round and commercial viability of electricity 
sector. The policy also seeks to address the issues of financing of 
sector programmes including private sector participation and 
ushering in competition aimed at consumer benefits. The 
Committee observe that power sector in the country has developed 
in such a manner which is not balanced and wherein coordinated 
approach is missing. Delicensing of generation led to spurt in 
generation activities. However the other essential ingredients 
associated with it have not been given due attention. A general 
tendency is observed where the sanctity of PPAs are being 
questioned. This kind of move is fraught with ramification which is 
injurious to entire sector. Long-term PPAs are not being signed, 
absence and inadequacy of fuel linkages has added woes to the 
sector. All these factors have led to stress of the sector and it is 
reeling under such cyclical and interlinked problems that if not 
addressed in a holistic, honest and transparent manner, it may lead 
to ominous portend for the survival of the sector. Other areas which 
the Electricity Policy have not taken into account are the issues of 
various clearances, land acquisition, continuance of old and 
inefficient plants, instability in FSA policies, lack of unanimity on the 
common issue of ‘change in law’, regulatory uncertainties and 
delay, etc. The Committee feel that these are the basic issues for 
the balanced and efficient growth of power sector which need to be 
addressed at policy level. As it is quite a long period since the 
Electricity Policy was last announced, the Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in view of the prevailing dichotomy, self-defeating 
situation in the power sector, National Electricity Policy need to be 
revisited without taken into account the ground realities to bring 
suitable amendments so as to address the problems of the 
electricity sector. 
 
 
62 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. In line with the provisions of Section 3 (1) of the Electricity 
Act, the Government of India had notified the National Electricity 
Policy on 12th February 2005. The objectives of the National 
Electricity Policy, inter alia are supply of reliable and quality power 
of specified standards in an efficient manner and at reasonable 
rates, financial turnaround and commercial viability of the Electricity 
Sector, protection of consumers interest etc. 
Section 3. (National Electricity Policy and Plan) — 
(1) The Central Government shall, from time to time, prepare the 
National Electricity Policy and tariff policy, in consultation with the 
State Governments and the Authority for development of the power 
system based on optimal utilisation of resources such as coal, 
natural gas, nuclear substances or materials, hydro and renewable 
sources of energy. 
2. Further, Section 3 (3) of the Electricity Act provides that the 
Central Government may, from time to time, in consultation with 
the State Governments and the Central Electricity Authority, review 
or revise, the National Electricity Policy and Tariff policy. The 
Working Group on Power for 12th Plan had also made 
recommendations for amendments in National Electricity Policy. 
“Section 3 (3) of the Electricity Act”, 
“The Central Government may, from time to time, in 
consultation with the State Governments and the Authority, 
review or revise, the National Electricity Policy and tariff 
policy referred to in sub-section(1).” 
3. Draft National Electricity Policy is under preparation which 
shall be finalized after considering due process. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No. P-6/2018-IPC,  Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 

63 
 
Role of RBI 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12) 
The Committee note that RBI has issued guidelines for Strategic 
Debt Restructuring Scheme. Under the scheme, for viability 
accounts facing financial difficulties, lenders may consider 
restructuring the debt. RBI has also formulated the Scheme for 
Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A) an optional 
framework for the resolution of large stressed accounts. The S4A 
envisages determination of sustainable level for a stressed 
borrower and bifurcation of outstanding debt into sustainable debt 
and equity/ quasi equity instruments which are expected to provide 
upside to the lenders when the borrowers turn-round. In view of the 
Committee, the scheme of the RBI seems to be appropriate to help 
the sector but in reality the situation is not as real as has been 
attempted to. During interaction with various IPPs regarding the 
reasons for NPA and financing of sector, the Committee were 
apprised that NPA in power sector has been abetted by high rate of 
interest by finances, denial of variables of interest to developers, 
cost escalation due to extraneous reasons like court cases, 
delayed decision by lending consortium, lack of working capital, 
etc. These financial issues are from commonplace in nature but 
have the potential to affect the viability of the project. No 
extraordinary measures are required to address these problems 
which if resolved have the potential to affect a turn-around in the 
project. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the revival 
schemes of the RBI or the Government should be realistic and not 
symbolic. Every effort should be made to see that projects with 
huge investment do not become NPA for want of marginal financial 
infusion or adjustment in the way of making working capital 
available for passing on the interest variable to the stressed asset. 
 
64 
 
Reply of the Government 
1 .  RBI vide circular DBR. No. BP. BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 
dated 12.02.2018, withdrew all debt restructuring schemes like 
5/25 – flexible restructuring scheme, Strategic Debt Restructuring 
(SDR), Outside SDR, Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of 
Stressed Assets (S4A) etc along with the Joint Lenders Forum 
(JLF) mechanism. As per the circular, the loan accounts, where the 
aggregate exposure of lenders is more than Rs. 2,000 Crs and 
where the accounts are classified as restructured accounts or 
where restructuring under earlier RBI Schemes is underway, 
Resolution Plan needed to be implemented within 180 days from  
1 Mar, 2018 or 180 days from the date of first default after 1 Mar, 
2018. If Resolution Plan was not implemented within the above 
stipulated timelines by RBI, lenders would have to file insolvency 
application under IBC (Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) within 15 days 
from the date of expiry of the said timeline. 
2 .  The circular was challenged by APP, IPPAI and several 
power developers vide various petitions in High Courts across the 
country, which were clubbed and transferred to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 declared that the impugned 
RBI circular is ultra vires Section 35AA of the Banking Regulation 
Act and therefore, it is unnecessary to go into any of the other 
contentions that have been raised in the transferred cases and 
petitions. 
3 .  Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a .  Review Period: Once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a 
prima facie review of the borrower account within thirty 
days from such default. 

65 
 
b .  Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA): In cases where RP is 
to be implemented, all lenders shall enter into an ICA, 
during the above-said Review Period, to provide for 
ground rules for finalization and implementation of the 
RP. 
c .  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by 
lenders representing 75 per cent by value of total 
outstanding credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders 
by number shall be binding upon all the lenders. 
d .  An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for 
no restructuring/no change in ownership case) the 
borrower is not in default with any of the lenders as on 
180th day from the end of the Review Period. Any 
subsequent default after the 180 day period shall be 
treated as a fresh default, triggering a fresh review. 
e .  Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP:- For all accounts- Where a 
viable RP in respect of a borrower is not implemented 
within the timelines given below, all lenders shall make 
additional provisions  as under:— 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning  
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of Review Period  
35% 
f .   Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They 
are free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. 
However, it gives certain incentives in the form of 
reversal of additional provisioning if a stressed asset is 
taken to IBC. 
66 
 
g .  Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with. 
[Ministry of Power,  O.M.No.P-6/2018-IPC,  Dated: 28/07/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Strategic Debt Restructuring 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that the major reasons for stress in 
most of the thermal power projects have been attributed to (i) non-
availability of Fuel (a) Cancellation of coal block, (b) projects set up 
without linkage, (ii) lack of enough PPA by states, (iii) inability of 
the promoter to infuse the equity and working capital, (iv) 
contractual/ tariff related disputes, (v) issues related to banks/ 
financial institutions (FIs), (vi) delay in project implementations 
leading to cost overrun and (vii) aggressive bidding by developers 
in PPA. Once the project is categorized as NPA, remedial 
measures of different efficacy follow. One of the remedies available 
is Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme. Under this scheme 
restructuring of accounts has been envisaged by change in 
ownership where borrowers’ companies are not able to come out of 
stress due to operational/ managerial inefficiencies despite 
substantial sacrifices made by the lending banks. The Joint Lender 
Forum review the account and examine whether the account will 
be viable by affecting the change in ownership. It also envisages 
that the new promoter should not be a person/ entity/ subsidiary/ 
associate etc. from the existing promoter or group and the bank 
should clearly establish that the acquirer does not belong to the 
existing promoter group. In case efforts under SDR do not yield 
desired results, the banks may refer the case to NCLT. The SDR is 
executed only in cases where change in ownership is likely to 
improve the economic value of loan asset and the prospects of the 
recovery of their dues. It provides lenders with enhanced 

67 
 
capabilities to initiate change in ownership in accounts which failed 
to achieve projected viability milestones. The basic object of the 
restructuring is to preserve economic value of units. The 
Committee find that Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme is not 
efficacious enough as it does not resolve the reasons which have 
made the project NPA. The Committee have been informed that 
restructuring is considered only after technical and economic 
viability is established through a TEV study by an independent 
consultant. Assumptions like confirm sourcing of fuel at certain rate 
and selling of generated power at certain price are considered in 
the study. Operations of the restructured plans can be on expected 
lines subject to compliance of assumptions and other conditions 
including timely fixation of tariff by the regulator, availability of 
schedule for drawl of power and adherence to PPA. The 
Committee observe that even after SDR, the factors which are 
responsible for stress remain unscathed. There is no guarantee 
that with the substitution of ownership there will be experts, 
technocrats with required operational expertise and managerial 
efficiency which will certainly bring a turn-around. Therefore, 
exercise under SDR is based on assumptions as it is very difficult 
to pinpoint operational/ managerial inefficiencies because the 
factors which have been enumerated as reasons for NPA are also 
beyond managerial control and management. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the guidelines regarding SDR 
should be reviewed and a pragmatic and genuine mechanism be 
explored instead of changing the management. Change in 
management should be considered only after it has been 
established with certainly that the negligence on the part of the 
management is the sole reason for the stressed state of affairs of 
the project. 
Reply of the Government 
1 .  RBI vide circular DBR.No.BP.BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 
dated 12.02.2018, withdrew all debt restructuring schemes like  
68 
 
5/25 – flexible restructuring scheme, Strategic Debt Restructuring 
(SDR), Outside SDR, Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of 
Stressed Assets (S4A) etc along with the Joint Lenders Forum 
(JLF) mechanism. As per the circular, the loan accounts, where the 
aggregate exposure of lenders is more than Rs. 2,000 Crs. and 
where the accounts are classified as restructured accounts or 
where restructuring under earlier RBI Schemes is underway, 
Resolution Plan needed to be implemented within 180 days from 1 
Mar, 2018 or 180 days from the date of first default after 1 Mar, 
2018. If Resolution Plan was not implemented within the above 
stipulated timelines by RBI, lenders would have to file insolvency 
application under IBC (Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) within 15 days 
from the date of expiry of the said timeline. 
2 .  The circular was challenged by APP, IPPAI and several 
power developers vide various petitions in High Courts across the 
country, which were clubbed and transferred to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 declared that the impugned 
RBI circular is ultra vires Section 35AA of the Banking Regulation 
Act and therefore, it is unnecessary to go into any of the other 
contentions that have been raised in the transferred cases and 
petitions. 
3 .  Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a .  Review Period : once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a 
prima facie review of the borrower account within thirty 
days from such default. 
b .  Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA): In cases where RP is 
to be implemented, all lenders shall enter into an ICA, 
during the above-said Review Period, to provide for 
ground rules for finalization and implementation of the 
RP. 

69 
 
c .  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by 
lenders representing 75 per cent by value of total 
outstanding credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders 
by number shall be binding upon all the lenders. 
d .  An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for 
no restructuring/no change in ownership case) the 
borrower is not in default with any of the lenders as on 
180th day from the end of the Review Period. Any 
subsequent default after the 180 day period shall be 
treated as a fresh default, triggering a fresh review. 
e .  Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP:- For all accounts- Where a 
viable RP in respect of a borrower is not implemented 
within the timelines given below, all lenders shall make  
additional provisions as under:— 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning 
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of ReviewPeriod 35% 
f .  Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They 
are free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. 
However, it gives certain incentives in the form of 
reversal of additional provisioning if a stressed asset is 
taken toIBC. 
g .  Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with. 
[Ministry of Power,  O.M.No.  P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 
 
70 
 
Sufficient Coal to Power Plants 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee note that the major reason for stress of 
most of the said 34 power projects has been cited as lack of 
adequate amount of Fuel Supply Agreement. The Committee 
further note that as per the information furnished by the Ministry of 
Power, a substantial power project capacity is yet to be provided 
with the coal linkages. The Ministry of Coal has stated that they 
have started SHAKTI Scheme under which many stressed power 
projects have been allocated coal linkages. Nonetheless, there are 
still power projects which do not have FSA for various reasons 
including not having Long-term Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPA). The developers of the stressed power project, which are 
having FSA, are complaining that they have not been provided/ 
contracted with the adequate amount of coal to run the power 
plants at 85% PLF. Further, at various occasions they have been 
provided inferior than contracted quality of coal due to various 
reasons leading to further gap in the coal requirement and supply. 
Though the Coal India have stated that they have started to bill as 
per the report of Independent Third Party Audit of Coal supplied, 
the developers have the complain that this mechanism provided for 
refund of quality gap of coal only and not  the royalty and taxes 
being paid. Also, due to lesser calorific value of the inferior coal 
being supplied they are not able to generate the 
contracted/promised amount of power for the Discoms, making 
them liable for penalty under the Power Purchase Agreement. The 
Committee after having discussions with all the authorities 
concerned/stakeholders in the matter, have found out that the root 
cause of this problem is the absence of any platform for 
coordination among the authorities and power developers. Most of 
the matters will be resolved easily if all the concerned stakeholders 

71 
 
sit together to discuss the issues/problems being faced, at regular 
intervals. The Ministry of Coal have categorically stated that they 
are having adequate coal reserves and excavation capacity to fully 
cater to the need of all the power plants of the country. In view of 
the above, the Committee strongly recommend the following: 
The power plants should be provided enough coal to enable 
them to run at 85% of PLF, if they desire soo. 
The Committee while appreciating the step of Coal India Ltd. to 
bill as per the report of Independent Third Party, recommend that 
the issue of proportionate reduction in royalty and taxes may also 
be looked into. 
The Committee through are of the view that domestic coal 
should be used as much as possible for being economical, 
nonetheless, they desire that if any power plants find it convenient 
to use certain percentage of imported coal say 15-20% and yet 
remains economically viable, than they should be allowed to do so. 
The Committee desire that the Government should not put any 
restriction or impediments in import of coal for such power projects 
if these projects desire to import coal in a transparent manner. 
Reply of the Government 
1 .  Ministry of Coal has informed that as per coal consumption 
norms issued by Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Annual 
Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for thermal power plants is calculated 
at 85% PLF. However, for pre- 2009 plants, the ACQ has been 
fixed based on their consumption pattern of last 5 years. Coal 
companies supply coal to Thermal power plants (TPPs) with 
minimum commitment level (Trigger level). The trigger level for pre-
2009 plants is 90% of ACQ while for post-2009 plants, it is 75% 
continuing since 2016-17 based on the decision of the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) The minimum commitment 
72 
 
level does not ensure operation of the power plants at 85% PLF. 
However, CIL is supplying coal to many power plants more than 
the minimum commitment level. In some cases, coal supply is also 
affected due to production issue in mines, less supply of rakes by 
Railways as well as less off take of coal by power plants due to low 
power demand, non-payment of dues, unloading constraints etc. 
2 .  To bridge the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal and 
considering their cost-economics, the power utilities are importing 
coal for blending purposes. Further, the power plants designed on 
imported coal, are importing coal to meet their requirement of fuel. 
3 .  The total receipt (domestic & imported) and consumption of 
coal by coal based thermal plants in the country during the last four 
years are as under:— 
          (Figures in Million Tonnes) 
Year Receipt Consum- 
ption Domestic Imported Total  
Receipt For 
blending  
purpose 
Imported 
coal  
based  
plants 
Total  
Imported 
2016-17 494.8 19.8 46.3 66.1 560.9 574.3 
2017-18 538.6 17.0 39.4 56.4 595.0 608.0 
2018-19 582.1 21.4 40.3 61.7 643.7 628.9 
2019-20 569.5 23.8 45.5 69.2 638.7 622.2 
3 . 1  As can be seen from above, receipt of domestic coal has 
been increasing except, during the year 2019-20 which showed a 
minor decrease. The domestic coal consumption during the year 
2019-20 was 577.3 Million Tonnes (MT) against the actual receipt 
of 569.5 MT from domestic sources while 23.8 MT coal was 
imported for blending purpose. As reported by Coal India                

73 
 
Limited (CIL), availability of domestic coal in the country has 
improved with opening stock of 75 MT at mines end and 45 MT at 
Plant end as on 31.03.2020. 
3.2 Based on the generation target, the coal requirement for 
the plants designed on domestic coal during 2020-21 has been 
estimated to be about 645 MT. The expected availability of coal 
from various domestic sources during 2020-21 is about 668 MT 
against the requirement of 645 MT, which includes 550 MT from 
CIL, 55 MT from The Singareni Coal Collieries Limited (SCCL) and 
63 MT from captive sources. As the expected availability of 
domestic coal is more than the requirement during 2020-21, there 
may be very little requirement of importing coal for blending 
purpose depending upon cost economics and transportation 
logistics. In light of this, MoP has requested all the Generating 
companies (Gencos) [who are importing coal for blending purpose], 
to make best efforts to replace their imports with domestic coal. At 
present, the availability of coal stock of 49.31 MT with Thermal 
Power Plants (TPPs) as on 18.06.2020 which is sufficient to meet 
requirements of TPPs for about 28 days. 
3.3 Power plants designed on domestic coal are importing 
coal for blending purposes, considering their cost-economics and 
to bridge the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal, if any. 
However, the quantum of import for blending is very less as 
compared to domestic coal receipt. Further, power plants designed 
on imported coal, are importing coal to meet their fuel requirement 
as they are designed to operate on imported coal. Further, import 
of coal is under Open General License (OGL), and hence, the 
power utilities import coal considering their cost economics. As per 
Import substitution Notice of CIL dated 05.02.2019, power utilities 
were given option for supply of coal under Import substitution to 
meet their shortfall against Annual Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for 
FY 2018-19. Subsequently, CIL has issued another notice dated 
27.05.2019 regarding import substitution for the year 2019-20 also. 
74 
 
3.4 However, the Government has been making effort for 
reducing import of coal for blending purpose and replacing it with 
domestic coal because coal import entails outgo of scarce foreign 
exchange. For this, MoP has written to the Gencos to make best 
efforts to reduce the imported coal with domestic coal for blending 
purpose. Further, MOP has also requested MoC to establish an 
electronic portal as e-facilitation centre to facilitate necessary 
clearances and redressal of issues raised by Gencos which would 
enable them to replace the import of coal for blending purpose by 
the domestic coal. Further, an Inter- Ministerial Committee (IMC)for 
the purpose of coalim port substitution has been constituted under 
the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Ministry of Coal). 
3.5 The total nos. of captive coal blocks that have been 
allocated to the Power Sector are 65 nos. Out of these 65 nos. coal 
blocks, 03 nos. coal blocks have been surrendered and the total 11 
nos. of coal blocks are underproduction. 
3.6 The Government in May, 2016 approved the proposal 
for allowing flexibility in utilization of domestic coal amongst power 
generating stations to reduce the cost of power generation through 
saving in the transportation cost and operating the most efficient 
plant. The State/Central Gencos have flexibility to utilize their coal 
in most efficient and cost effective manner in their own power 
plants as well as by transferring coal to other State Genco/Central 
Genco/IPP generating stations for generation of cheaper power. 
3.7 In addition to the monitoring mechanism available at 
coal companies and CIL, coal supplies to Power utility sector is 
monitored regularly by an Inter- Ministerial Sub-Group comprising 
representatives of Ministry of Power, Ministry of coal and Ministry 
of Railways Constituted by the Infrastructure Review Committee of 
Cabinet Secretariat. This Sub-Group takes various operational 
decisions for meeting any contingent situations relating to Power 
sector including critical coal stock position for power plants. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No.  P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
 

75 
 
Placing out of old power plants 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee observe that the country has come a long way from 
a power starving to a power sufficient country as far as power 
generation capacity is concerned. Till recent times, there was acute 
shortage of power in the country. Considering the yawning gap 
between demand and supply of power due to ever-growing power 
demand of the country, private players started to come in a big 
way, leading to a massive capacity addition of 99,209.5 MW 
against the target of 88,537 MW during the 12th Five Year Plan 
period viz. 2012-2017. During the said period, the private sector 
alone contributed 53,660.5 MW in thermal power generation. This 
mammoth generation capacity addition in a short span provided a 
much greater power generation capacity base than the actual 
power demand, forcing many power plants to run at much lower 
Plant Load Factor (PLF) and even made some of them redundant. 
During the same period, a low industrial powers demands due to 
sluggishness in the economy of the country added fuel to the fire. 
Many power projects, which were planned and initiated in 
anticipation of growing power demand, started showing signs of 
stress due to a sudden change in power demand and supply 
scenario of the country. The Committee feel that the present 
scenario of being ‘power surplus’ is not true. There are crores of 
households in the country which do not have electricity access. 
The per capita electricity consumption of the country is nowhere as 
compared that to the developed nations. Discoms generally under-
supply power by preferring power outages to procure costly 
electricity. However, the Committee are sanguine that the economy 
of the country may gain momentum in the coming years 
consequently, the power demand from industrial side is also bound 
to grow. In the supply side, there are many power plants in the 
country which have long ago outlived their expected life, and there 
is hardly any fresh proposal for installation of new thermal power 
76 
 
project. During the examination of the subject, the Committee were 
apprised that despite all the upcoming renewable energy, the 
thermal power will remain the mainstay of the power generation in 
the country due to various reasons. Considering all this, the 
Committee believe that the present crisis of low demand-high 
supply is transient in nature and may be resolved to a great extent 
if effective and timely interventions are made. The Committee, 
therefore strongly recommend that the Government should make 
efforts to boost electricity demand in the country as the per- capita 
electricity consumption in the country is still very low and the 
mission to provide 24*7 electricity supply to all household, is yet to 
be accomplished. Simultaneously, the Government should 
expedite the phasing out process of the old power plants which 
have already outlived their expected life higher than prescribed 
emission rate with no plan for their Renovation & Modernization. As 
these power plants ultimately have to be phased out sooner or 
later, expediting this process will greatly help in making the new but 
stressed power projects become standard assets. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should plan new 
thermal power projects and phasing out of old plants in such a 
manner that the resources are optimally utilized, benefitting not 
only the power sector but the banking sector too. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Government of India has taken a joint initiative with all the 
States/UTs for providing “24x7 Power for All” to all households, 
industrial & commercial consumers and adequate supply of power 
to agricultural consumers as per State policy. All the State 
Governments and Union Territories have signed the “24 x 7 Power 
for All” document. In addition, Government of India supplements 
the efforts of the State through its schemes including DeenDayal 
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY); and Integrated Power 
Development Scheme(IPDS). 

77 
 
2. Further, Government of India has launched Pradhan Mantri 
Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana —“Saubhagya” with the objective to 
achieve universal household electrification by providing last mile 
connectivity and electricity connections to all households in rural 
and all poor households in urban areas. It has achieved 
100%electrification. 
3. Electricity is concurrent subject. However, Central 
Government is supporting States in strengthening of their 
transmission and distribution network through various Central 
Government funded schemes. 
4. Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has informed that as per 
the National Electricity Plan, 2018 a coal based capacity of 22,716 
MW (5,927 MW + 16,789 MW) has been considered for retirement 
during 2017-22. This is based upon the assessment made by CEA, 
which consists of 5,927 MW of old and inefficient units along with a 
coal based capacity of 16,789 MW which doesn't have space for 
installation of FGD (Flu Gas Desulphurization) system to curb SOx 
emissions as per the new environmental norms. 
5. All these measures would improve the consumption of 
electricity in the country. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No. P-6/2018-IPC, Dated: 28/07/2020] 
78 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

79 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF  
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE  
REITERATION 
 
Regulatory Issues 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee note that Ministry of Power has made attempts to 
facilitate the resolution of issues concerning stress in power sector. 
Several meeting have taken place from July, 2015 onwards with 
lenders and others but nothing concrete has come out so far. The 
Committee feel that in addition to financial matters, stress in the 
sector is also caused by various operational/ commercial/ 
regulatory issues. Regulatory matters keep on pending for years 
without any decision. Even the decisions of the regulatory bodies 
regarding change in law are not honoured by Discoms and various 
regulators interpret change in law differently leading to the 
confusion in the sector. Any situation arising out of the change in 
law should be uniform all across and if possible be kept out of the 
purview of the regulators. The Committee are aware that this is a 
Concurrent Subject and generation is a delicensed activity, but 
within these limitations some uniform mechanism will have to be 
explored and established to make the sector stable. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that appropriate steps should be 
taken to ensure that there should be consistency and uniformity 
with regard to orders emanating from the status of change in law. 
Provisions should also be made for certain percentage of 
payments of regulatory dues to be paid by Discoms in case the 
orders of regulators are being taken to APTEL/higher judiciary for 
their consideration and decision. 
80 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Regarding  Change-in-Law, the Tariff Policy notified by Central 
Government on 28.01.2016 at Para 6.2.4 provides that after the 
award of bids, if there is any change in domestic duties, levies, 
cess and taxes imposed by Central Government, State 
Governments/Union Territories or by any Government 
instrumentality leading to corresponding changes in the cost, the 
same may be treated as “Change in Law” and may unless provided 
otherwise in the PPA, be allowed as pass through subject to 
approval of Appropriate Commission. 
 In regard to uniformity of Decisions, the Regulatory orders 
regarding Change in Law mainly depend on provisions in the PPA 
as also on the interpretation of these provisions. The Electricity Act 
has not envisaged a hierarchical relationship between the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission and the State/ Joint Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions. State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs)/ Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
(JERCs) may provide their own interpretation. However, aggrieved 
parties are free to approach the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity 
(APTEL)/ Supreme Court challenging the decision of the SERC/ 
JERC as the case may be. However, the Orders of APTEL/ 
Supreme Court are applicable uniformly across the jurisdictions of 
all SERCs/ JERCs. It is pertinent to mention that a number of 
cases regarding “Change-in-Law” have been decided by APTEL 
and they will be uniformly applicable to all. 
  As regards recommendation that certain percentage of payment 
should be made when order is challenged in higher judicial forum, 
it may be noted that, the Electricity Act does not envisage any 
provision for payment of certain percentage of regulatory dues at 
the time of filing of appeal against the Order of the Regulatory 
Commission, such provision may have to be made in PPA. 

81 
 
1. Ministry of Power vide letter dated 27.08.2018 has issued 
following directions to Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
under section 107 of the ElectricityAct : 
(i) Any change in domestic duties, levies, cess and taxes 
imposed by Central Government, State 
Governments/Union Territories or by any Government 
instrumentality leading to corresponding changes in the 
cost, may be treated as "Change in Law" and may 
unless provided otherwise in the PPA, be allowed as 
pass through 
(ii) Central Commission will only determine the per unit 
impact of such change in domestic duties, levies, cess 
and taxes, which will be passed on. 
(iii)   A draft Order for determination of per unit impact under 
change in law shall be circulated by Central 
Commission to all the States/Beneficiary on 14th Day 
of filing of petition. Any objection/ representation shall 
be submitted by them within 21 days of filing of petition. 
(iv) The order for pass through giving the calculation for per 
unit impact will be issued within 30 days of filing of 
petition. 
(v) The impact of such Change in law shall be effective 
from the date of change in law. 
(vi) Where CERC has already passed an order to allow 
pass through of changes in domestic duties, levies, 
cess and taxes in any case under Change-in-Iaw, this 
will apply to all cases ipso facto and no additional 
petition would need to be filed in this regard. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M.No. P-6/2018-IPC,  Dated: 28/07/2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
82 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT  
OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLY OF THE  
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               - Nil   - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;      Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh, 
18 March, 2021 Chairperson, 
Phalguna 27,1942(Saka) Standing Committee on Energy. 

83 
 
APPENDIX I 
Status of the Implementation of Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs(CCEA )Decision vide OM dated 08.03.2019 
Para 
No. 
Action Status 
1 2 3 
2 Amendments to be made in the SHAKTI 
Policy issued vide MoC letter no. 
23011/15/2016-CPD/CLD dated 
22.05.2017: 
MoC vide OM dated 
25.03.2019 has issued 
the amendments in 
SHAKTI Policy,2017 
2.1 The following clause is to be added after 
clause B(vii) of SHAKTI Policy: 
 
 B(viii): Notwithstanding anything in the 
foregoing paras, it is further provided as 
follows: 
Added 
 
(a) “All such power plants including private 
generators which do not have PPAs, shall 
be allowed Coal Linkage under B(iii) and 
B(iv) of Shakti Policy for a period of 
minimum of 3 months upto a maximum of 
1 year , provided further that the power 
generated through that linkage is sold in 
Day Ahead Market (DAM) through power 
exchanges or in short term through a 
transparent bidding process through 
Discovery of Efficient Energy Price 
(DEEP) portal. A methodology in this 
regard shall be formulated by Ministry of 
Power in consultation with Ministry of 
Coal.” 
 MoC vide OM dated 
25.03.2019 has issued 
the amendments in 
SHAKTI Policy, 2017. 
MoP vide OM dated 
02.12.2019 issued the 
methodology for 
allocation of coal as 
per the provision of 
para B(viii)(a) covering 
para B(iii) of Shakti. 
Bidding was held on 
19.03.2020 and a total 
quantity of 1.34 MT 
coal was allocated. For 
2nd round auction for 
the quarter July-
September, 2020, out 
of the total offered 
quantity of 4.51 MT, 
0.74 MT has been 
booked by 8 
successful bidders with 
a zero premium. 
 
84 
 
1 2 3 
(c) The provision of para B(v) of Shakti Policy 
above shall also be applicable in cases 
where the nodal agency designated by 
Ministry of Power aggregates/ procures the 
power requirement for a group of states 
even without requisition from such States.” 
PFC has been 
designated as nodal 
agency. A linkage of 
10 MT has been 
allocated. 
(d) Central and State generating companies 
can act as an aggregator of power of such 
stressed power assets and procure it 
through transparent bidding process and 
offer that power to the DISCOM against 
their existing PPAs to such DISCOMS, till 
such time their own plants get 
commissioned. It is proposed that Central 
and State generating companies may be 
allowed to use the existing unutilized 
Bridge Linkages for such stressed power 
assets provided they meet other 
parameters of tolling guidelines including 
competitive bidding. 
 NTPC vide letter dated 
04.12.2019 has 
informed that in 
response to NTPC’s 
letter for procurement of 
power from stressed 
assets, so far only one 
State has given its 
requirement/ initial 
consent. The final 
acceptance will be 
subject to discovery of 
acceptable rates 
through bidding. 
NTPC is following up 
with other States so 
that the total 
requirement is large 
enough to attract 
competitive rates. The 
process for issue of 
tenders has also been 
taken up in parallel. 
(e) In all cases where provisions of 
B(viii)(a)(b)(c)and (d) above are utilized, 
net surplus after meeting operating 
expenses generated in this manner shall 
be entirely used for servicing debt in the 
first place. MoPwill work out in 
consultation with DFS – a mechanism to 
ensurethis.” 
 The mechanism to 
ensure that net surplus 
generated to be used 
for debt servicing in the 
first place has been 
issued on 05.08.2019. 
Corrigendum issued on 
20.08.2019 
  
  

85 
 
 
1 2 3 
2.2 Following is to be added at the end of first 
para of B(ii) of Shakti Policy, after the 
words “withPPAs”: 
Added 
(i) The power plants which were having valid 
already concluded Long Term PPA, based 
on domestic coal on or 
before17.05.2017and   who   could   not   
participate   in the linkage auctions under 
SHAKTI B(ii) due to any
 reason, may be allowed to 
participate in the B(ii) auctions of SHAKTI 
scheme. 
 
 
 The bidding held. 
(ii) Bidders who have already participated in 
SHAKTI B(ii) auctions and could not secure 
linkage for the full ACQ, may obtain the 
linkage for the balance quantity also by 
participating in future auctions at a later 
stage under B(ii) after benchmarking 
discount. 
 
2.3 Following is to be added at the end of para 
B(iii) of Shakti Policy, after the words 
“auction process”: “Such auctions/ bids 
shall be held at regular intervals”. 
MoP vide OM dated 
02.12.2019 issued the 
methodology for 
allocation of coal as per 
the provision of para 
B(viii)(a) covering para 
B(iii) of Shakti. 
 As per the 
methodology, auctions 
shall be carried out 
every quarter. An 
annual calendar shall 
be published on Coal 
Companies website 
showing the months in 
which the auctions will 
beheld. 
3. Other Approvals:   
  
86 
 
1 2 3 
3.1 Approval with regard to increase in quantity 
of coal for e-Auction for power sector: 
Ministry of Coal may earmark more coal for 
power sector under special forward e-
auction by reducing the equivalent quantity 
from the spot e auction. The Coal India Ltd. 
may earmark at least 50 percent of the total 
coal meant for e-auction (including spot 
auction and special forward e- auction) for 
power. The increase in supply of coal for 
forward e-auction will be in addition to 
regular requirement of linkage coal for the 
power sector and the requirements of other 
sectors. 
MoC vide OM dated 
25.03.2019 has issued 
the order. 
CIL has allocated 27.12 
MT o f coal under 
Special Forward          
ze-Auction (SFeA) 
during Apr.,2019 to 
March,2020. 
3.2 Approval with regard to non-lapsing of short
 supplies of coal: If the power 
plant fulfills its obligations limited to making 
advance payments as due to coal 
companies, payments to Indian Railways as 
due and making arrangements for 
unloading of the rakes at its plants, then, 
any short supply for that month of coal, 
either on account of short supply of coal in 
the coal company or on account of 
unavailability of rakes, may not lapse and 
be carried over (without current limitations 
of 5% or same quarter) to the subsequent 
months upto a maximum period of 3 
months. In this regard, a suitable 
methodology shall be evolved for 
implementation. 
 The methodology 
has been issued 
on19.08.2019. 
 CIL vide letter dated 
18.09.2019 has 
circulated the Standard 
Operating Procedure 
(SoP), jointly prepared 
by CIL & Railways. 
3.3 Approval with regard to ACQ based on 
efficiency: ACQ per MW entitlements for all 
thermal power plants, irrespective of their 
age or technical parameters, shall be 
calculated based on Normative Station 
Heat Rate with upper ceiling of 2600 
kcal/kwh 
CEA has issued new 
coal consumption norms 
on 27.03.2019 w.e.f. 
01.04.2019. 
CIL has revised the 
ACQ entitlements for 
plants having SHR more 
than 2600 kCal/kWh on 
06.09.2019. 
  

87 
 
1 2 3 
3.4 Approval with regard to mandatory payment 
of Late Payment Surcharge (LPS): Ministry 
of Power may engage with the Regulators 
to ensure that LPS is paid in case of delay 
in payment by DISCOMs as per the 
provisions of PPA. Appropriate Regulatory 
Commissions may ensure compliance. 
 MoP vide letter dated 
25.03.2019 has 
requested CERC/ 
Forum of Regulators to 
ensure that the 
decision of the 
Government is 
implemented. 
3.5 Approval with regard to cancellation of 
PPA/FSA/Transmission 
connectivity/Environmental 
Clearance(EC)/Forest Clearance 
(FC)/Water etc.: DISCOMS, CIL, Power 
Grid Corporation  of India 
Limited (PGCIL), Ministry of Environment 
and Forests, and 
appropriate Governments may be 
advised not to cancel  
 MoP vide OM dated 
04.06.2019 has issued 
an Advisory letters to 
the States, (PGCIL) 
and Ministry of 
Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC). 
3.6 Approval with regard to cancellation of PPA 
for non-compliance of  Commercial 
Operation Date (COD): If there is any delay 
in the commissioning of a project for 
reasons not attributable to the generator, 
the DISCOMs may be advised not to cancel 
those PPAs. The PPA may be kept on hold 
for a certain period, so as to enable 
removal of impediments in the execution of 
the project. In the meantime, power can be 
procured through the mechanism 
suggested in previous proposals. 
 MoP vide OM dated 
24.04.2019 has issued 
an advisory to all the 
States requesting them 
to convey the decision 
of the Govt. regarding 
approval with regard to 
cancellation of PPA for 
non-compliance of 
COD, to their Discoms. 
 
 
 
88 
 
APPENDIX II 
STATUS OF 34 STRESSED THERMAL POWER PROJECTS 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the  
Project 
State Capacity Commiss- 
ioned 
PPA 
Tied 
Fuel 
Tied 
I. Projects Resolved 
1. DVC Raghunathpur West Bengal 1200 1200 654 1200 
2. KantiBijliUtpdan 
Nigam Ltd.—NTPC 
Bihar 390 390 390 390 
3. Adani 
Power 
Maharashtr
a Limited 
Maharashtra 3300 3300 3300 3300 
4. Adhunik Power 
Limited 
Jharkhand 540 540 354 540 
5. GMR Warora Energy 
Limited 
Maharashtra 600 600 600 600 
6. DB Power Limited Chhattisgarh 1200 1200 576 600 
7. Korba West Power  
Company Ltd. 
Chhattisgarh 600 600 30 600 
8. Lanco/Anpara UP 1200 1200 1000 1200 
9. GMR Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh 1370 1370 0 0 
10. SKS Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 1200 600 330 850 
11. Jaypee Bina MP MP 500 500 350 350 
12. JaypeeNigrie MP 1320 1320 495 660 
13. GMR Kamalanga 
Limited 
Odisha 1050 1050 885 1050 
14. Prayagraj 
Power Gen. 
Corp. Ltd. 
UP 1980 1980 1782 1782 
 Total  16450 15850 10746 13122 
 
 
II. Projects likely to be resolved / can be resolved (under NLCT or outside) 
1. RKM Powergen 
Limited 
Chhattisgarh 1440 1440 1293 900 
2. Essar Power Mahan 
Limited 
MP 1200 1200 240 0 

89 
 
3. Rattan India Power 
Limited ‐Nashik 
Maharashtra 1350 1350 0 986 
4. Athena 
Chhattisgarh 
Power 
Limited 
Chhattisgarh 1200 0 0 600 
5. Coastal Energen 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Tamil Nadu 1200 1200 558 1200 
6. GVK Goindwal 
Sahib Power 
Plant 
Punjab 540 540 540 335 
7. IndBarathUtkal 
Limited 
Odisha 700 339 584 616 
8. Jindal India 
Thermal 
Power Ltd. 
Odisha 1200 1200 903 600 
9. Jhabua Power Ltd 
(Avantha) 
Mad
hya 
Prad
esh 
600 600 425 600 
10. KSK Mahanadi 
Power Co. Ltd. 
Chhattisgarh 3600 1800 2274 1800 
11. LancoAmarkantak 
Power Ltd. 
Chhattisgarh 1320 0 0 1320 
 12. LancoVidarbha 
Power Limited 
Maharashtra 1320 0 0 1097 
  13. Simhapuri Energy 
Limited 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
600 600 0 600 
Total  16270 10269 6817 10654 
  I. Project unlikely to 
be resolved 
(Stalled/ no 
resolution 
possible) 
     
1. East Coast Energy 
Pvt. Ltd. 
(Athena) 
AP 1320 0 0 0 
2. Essar Power 
Jharkhand 
Limited 
Jharkhand 1200 0 1135 0 
3. Monnet Power Co. 
Ltd. 
Odisha 1050 0 262 0 
4. LancoBabandh Odisha 1320 0 0 660 
5. VandanaVidyut 
Limited 
Chhattisgarh 270 135 0 0 
  
90 
 
6. Visa Power Limited Chhattisgarh 1200 0 0 0 
7. KVK Nilanchal 
Power Limited 
Odisha 1050 0 88 311 
 Total  7410 135 1484.5 971 
 Grand Total  40130 26254 19047.5 24747 
 N.B. the above data 
is prepared from 
various sources and 
hence tentative/ 
subject to verification
     
 
  

91 
 
APPENDIX III 
The resolution process of stressed assets through  
Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code (IBC) or through  
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
1 .  Reserve Bank of India (RBI) vide circular 
DBR.No.BP.BC.101/21.04.048/2017-18 dated 12.02.2018, 
withdrew all debt restructuring schemes like 5/25 – flexible 
restructuring scheme, Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR), Outside 
SDR, Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets 
(S4A) etc along with the Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) mechanism. As 
per the circular, the loan accounts, where the aggregate exposure 
of lenders is more than Rs. 2,000 Crs and where the accounts are 
classified as restructured accounts or where restructuring under 
earlier RBI Schemes is underway, Resolution Plan needed to be 
implemented within 180 days from 1 Mar, 2018 or 180 days from 
the date of first default after 1 Mar, 2018. If Resolution Plan was 
not implemented within the above stipulated timelines by RBI, 
lenders would have to file insolvency application under IBC 
(Insolvency Bankruptcy Code) within 15 days from the date of 
expiry of the said timeline. 
2. The circular was challenged by APP, IPPAI and several 
power developers vide various petitions in High Courts across the 
country, which were clubbed and transferred to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court later. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide its judgment dated 02.04.2019 declared that the impugned 
RBI circular dated 12.02.2018 is ultra vires. 
3. Thereafter, RBI vide its Prudential Framework for Resolution 
of Stressed Assets dated 07.06.2019, allowed the following:— 
a. Review Period : once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the lenders, lenders shall undertake a prima facie 
review of the borrower account within thirty days from such default. 
b. Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA) : In cases where 
Resolution Plan (RP) is to be implemented, all lenders shall enter 
into an ICA, during the above- said Review Period, to provide for 
ground rules for finalization and implementation of the Resolution 
Plan(RP). 
92 
 
c.  The ICA shall provide that any decision agreed by 
lenders representing 75 per cent by value of total outstanding 
credit facilities and 60 per cent of lenders by number shall be 
binding upon all the lenders. 
d. An RP shall be deemed to be ‘implemented’ only if (for no 
restructuring/no change in ownership case) the borrower is not in 
default with any of the lenders as on180th day from the end of the 
Review Period. Any subsequent default after the 180 day period 
shall be treated as a fresh default, triggering a fresh review. 
e. Additional Provisioning on account of delayed 
implementation of RP: For all accounts— Where a viable RP in 
respect of a borrower is not implemented within the timelines given 
below, all lenders shall make additional provisions as under:— 
 
Timeline for RP Add. provisioning 
180 days from the end of Review Period 20% 
365 days from the commencement of Review Period 35% 
 
f. Lenders may or may not take a case to the IBC. They are 
free to formulate RP outside or under IBC. However, it gives 
certain incentives  in the form of reversal of additional provisioning 
if a stressed asset is taken to IBC. 
g. Requirement of 100% consent of lenders for resolution 
outside IBC is done away with. 
2 .  The insolvency resolution process (IRP) is a process under 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, where the National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) initiates a corporate insolvency 
resolution process (CIRP) when a company defaults on making 
payment to creditors. A financial creditor, operational creditor or 
corporate itself can file an application before NCLT for initiating IRP 
when default has occurred. Under IRP, an interim resolution 
professional is appointed with the power to take charge of the 
company which has defaulted. The professional’s task is to take 

93 
 
necessary steps to revive the company. Appointed professional 
also has the power to raise fresh funds to continue operations. The 
IRP is granted 180 days to find a resolution, which can be 
extended by 90 days. If the IRP fails to find a resolution by then, 
the company is liquidated to pay the creditors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
 
APPENDIX IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON 18th MARCH, 
2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘2’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE  
ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 15.35 hrs. 
  
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  —    Chairperson 
                                              
      MEMBER 
 
                                      Lok Sabha 
 
 
  2. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik  
  3. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
  4. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel  
  5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod  
  6. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy  
  7. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
 
                                    Rajya Sabha 
 
 
  8. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  9. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba  
10. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala  
11. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
12. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi  

95 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then 
took up the following ten draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:— 
(a) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission—An Appraisal’; 
(b) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-performing Assets in 
Power Sector’; 
(c) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised Framework for 
Resolution of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity 
Sector’; 
(d) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas 
based Power Plants'; 
(e) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report (16th  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’; and 
(f) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (17th  
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy; 
(g) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (17th  
96 
 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the 
Ministry of Power; 
(h) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report (17th  
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy’. 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (17th  
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the 
Ministry of Power. 
(j) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement of  
175 Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee 
adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget 
Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

97 
 
APPENDIX V 
 (Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 Sl.Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14  
and 15 
Total:14  
Percentage: 93.33% 
 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 - Nil   - Total:00  
Percentage:00% 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply 
of the Government has not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Sl. No. 10  
 
Total:01 
Percentage:6.67% 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply 
of the Government are still awaited: 
 - Nil   -  
 
Total:00 
Percentage:00% 
  
 