STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
16
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Power’]
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna,1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."

 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT  STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (20
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-2022)
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of the Ministry of Power] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2021
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
(2020-21) 
2022) 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
 
.2021 
 
 
COE No. 330  
                                    
© 2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct  
of Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by  
Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) …………...............     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …........................................................................  (v) 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I Report.............................................................  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government.................  16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply...................................  68 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which reply of Government has not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration........................................................  69 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited…........................................................  71 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18th 
March, 2021………........................................................  72             
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 37th 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Energy.......................................................................  75 
  
ii 
 
  

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) 
   Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh – Chairperson
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed   
  3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla   
  4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
  5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
  6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
  7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam   
  8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav   
  9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
12. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
13. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
14. Smt. Anupriya Patel   
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod ^ 
18.  Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20.  Shri P. Velusamy 
21. Shri Akhilesh Yadav   
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
iv 
 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant * 
 31. Vacant # 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari  — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Addl. Director 
4. Smt. L.N. Haokip  — Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Manish Kumar  — Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
^  Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020. 
*  Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020. 
#  Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Power. 
 2. The Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented 
to the Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2020 and was laid in Rajya Sabha 
on the same day. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 9th July, 
2020. 
 3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
at their sitting held on 18th March, 2021. 
 4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee 
is given at Appendix-II. 
 5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations 
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
    NEW DELHI;                  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh, 
18 March, 2021         Chairperson, 
27 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Energy. 
  
vi 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Power. 
 2. The Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to  
Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2020 and was laid same day on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha. The Report contained 28 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
 3. Action taken replies in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
were received on 9th July, 2020. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 
 Total – 27 
Chapter-II                                                          
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
-  Nil -     
         Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the 
reply of the Government has not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
  Serial No. 21 Total–01                                                                                             
Chapter-IV 
2 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the 
final reply of the Government is still awaited: 
-  Nil -              
Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 4. The Committee desire that action taken statement on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee within three 
months of its presentation.  
 5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that 
require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
Saubhagya Scheme 
 6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee noted that all the States have declared 
electrification of all households on 31st March, 2019, except 
18,734 households in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected 
areas of Chhattisgarh. The Ministry have stated that 
subsequently seven States namely Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh 
reported that there are 19.09 lakh un-electrified households 
which were earlier un-willing, and now willing to get electricity 
connection, identified before 31st March, 2019. The Ministry 
had informed that States were asked to electrify these 
household under Saubhagya by 31st December, 2019. 
However, out of 19.09 lakh only 10.71 lakh households have 
been electrified upto 31st January, 2020. Most of the 
remaining households (6.5 lakh) are in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. 

3 
 
The Committee are appreciative of the good work done under 
the Saubhagya Scheme by which a large number of 
household were provided electricity connection in a time 
bound manner. The Committee also expect that the remaining 
households need to be provided connection at the earliest. 
Since most of the left out households are in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
coordinate and provide necessary assistance to the State if so 
required.” 
 7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“Ministry is in constant touch with the state for early 
completion of work.” 
 8. The Committee in their original Report had observed 
that the remaining households were needed to be provided with 
electricity connections at the earliest. Taking into account the 
fact that most of the remaining households (6.5 lakh) were in 
the State of Uttar Pradesh as per Ministry’s own submission, 
the Committee had recommended the Ministry to co-ordinate 
and provide necessary assistance to the State, if so required. In 
their action taken reply, the Ministry has simply stated that they 
are in constant touch with the State for early completion of 
work. The Committee is of the view that instead of submitting 
one liner reply to such an important recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry should have shared with the 
Committee, the details of the problems being faced by the 
States in the electrification of remaining households and also 
the details of the assistance extended by the Ministry to the 
State to resolve those issues.  The Committee expressed their 
anguish over the over the manner in which the Ministry has 
responded. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should avoid such vague and cryptic reply to the 
4 
 
recommendations of the Committee and should furnish a self 
contained and comprehensive reply on the action taken on the 
various recommendations of the Committee in future.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) 
 9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that the core activities of the Central 
Power Research Institute (CPRI) are Applied Research in 
electrical power engineering, Testing & Certification of Power 
equipment, Consultancy and Field testing services to Power 
Utilities and Industries, Third Party Inspection and Vendor 
Analysis, Organizing Customized Training programs for 
Utilities and Industries. Since CPRI is the leading research 
institute in the field of Power, the Committee believe that they 
have to play a vital role in transformation and modernization of 
Power Sector. However, the Committee note that their 
financial performance has not been up to the mark. During the 
last five years they have never been able to fully utilize the 
allocated fund. Their actual utilization against the Budgetary 
Estimate for the year 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 
and 2018-19 have only been 27%, 30%, 53%, 34% and 100 
63% respectively. The Committee, during the examination of 
previous year's Demands for Grants had highlighted the need 
to augment the budgetary provisions for Research and 
Development purpose in the country. But the Committee are 
not satisfied with performance of CPRI in utilization of funds 
that have been allocated to them during the last five years. 
However, the Committee note with satisfaction that they have 
already utilized Rs. 178 crore (as on 31.01.2020) of the 
Budgetary Estimate of Rs. 200 crore for the year 2019-20 
which is 89% of the BE. The Committee believe that they will 

5 
 
be able to fully utilize the allocated fund this time. The 
Committee recommend that in future also it must be ensured 
that whatever fund is allocated to CPRI is fully utilized. 
Simultaneously, the Committee also desire to review the 
budgetary provisions for CPRI with a view to enhance it.” 
 10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“Adequate grants for approved capital projects to augment test 
facilities of CPRI are being provided by Ministry of Power 
which can also be seen from the Budget allocations to CPRI in 
previous years. Besides, funds are also being provided for 
carrying out and coordinating research on the state of the art 
technologies on the Power sector and facilitating technology 
upgradation under National Perspective Plan (NPP) and 
Research Scheme on Power (RSoP). A Budget provision for 
Rs.200 Crore has been made for CPRI in the BE 2020-21. 
The budgetary estimate is arrived at by taking into 
consideration the annual action plan including procurement 
that can be completed during the year, the balance payments 
to be made to the vendors, payments for establishing LC 
(Letter of Credit), and Funds required for R&D projects. Any 
requirement of funds by CPRI over and above the B.E. 2020-
21 will be addressed in the Revised Estimates stage of 2020-
21.”  
  11. The Committee in their original Report had noted that 
the core activities of the Central Power Research Institute 
(CPRI) were Applied Research in electrical power engineering, 
Testing & Certification of Power equipment, Consultancy and 
Field testing services to Power Utilities and Industries, Third 
Party Inspection and Vendor Analysis, Organizing Customized 
Training programs for Utilities and Industries.  The Committee 
had expressed their view that since CPRI was the leading 
6 
 
research institute in the field of Power, they have to play a vital 
role in transformation and modernization of Power Sector but 
their financial performance had not been up to the mark as 
during the last five years the Institute had never been able to 
fully utilize the allocated funds.  The Committee had therefore 
recommended for enhancement of the fund of CPRI.  The 
Committee observe that the Ministry, in their action taken reply, 
has assured that any requirements of funds of CPRI over and 
above the BE 2020-21 will be addressed in the Revised 
Estimates stage of 2020-21.  The Committee re-emphasize that 
to promote research and development activities, there is a need 
to increase the budgetary allocation of the CPRI. The 
Committee believe that the Ministry would not only have taken 
additional funds for CPRI at the RE stage as per the 
requirements of the Institute but also have made structured 
efforts for its gainful utilization to realize the mandated 
objectives of the Institute.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16) 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
 12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that National Power Training Institute 
(NPTI) is a National Apex body for fulfilling the training 
requirements of the power sector in the Country. Also, NPTI 
has been appointed as the Certifying Authority for SYSTEM 
OPERATOR of NLDC, RLDCs, SLDCs. NPTI also functions as 
an Apex Cadre Training Institute for Engineer/Officer of 
Central Power Engineering Service (Ministry of Power, Govt. 
of. India). The Committee further note that the performance of 
NPTI in terms of utilization of allocated fund has been good 
during the last three years as there have been no shortfalls. 
For the year 2019-20, NPTI was allocated a fund of  

7 
 
Rs. 69 crore at BE which was revised to Rs. 50 crore at RE. 
As on 05.02.2020, they have utilized only Rs. 28.90 crore. 
Since the budgetary allocation has direct correlation with the 
work to be done at the ground, the Committee are a bit 
surprised as to why the budgetary allocation which was  
Rs. 100.5 crore in the year 2018-19 was brought down to  
Rs. 69 crore only in the year 2019-20. Considering the number 
of trained personnel required for implementation of various 
programmes pertaining to Power Sector and to adapt 
according to rapid technological changes being effected in the 
system, the Committee are of the view that there is a need to 
augment and further strengthen the training facilities. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to provide the 
required financial support to NPTI for the approved training 
infrastructure and to meet the upcoming requirements. The 
Committee also expect the Ministry to provide 103 assistance 
to NPTI in allotment of land for establishment of new units for 
expansion of training facility.” 
 13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
"Adequate grants for capital projects are being provided by 
Ministry of Power to NPTI based on approved projects. A 
Budget provision for Rs. 82.34 crore has been made for NPTI 
in the Budget Estimate 2020-21, keeping in view the annual 
action plan of NPTI including procurement that can be 
completed during the year and balance payments to be made 
to the vendors based on the progress of the project. Any 
requirement of funds by NPTI over and above the B.E 2020-
21, will be addressed in the Revised Estimates stage of 2020-
21." 
 14. The Committee in their original Report had noted that 
the National Power Training Institute (NPTI) is a national apex 
8 
 
body for fulfilling the training requirements of the power sector 
in the country and the performance of NPTI in terms of 
utilization of allocated funds had been good during the last 
three years but to the surprise of the Committee, the Budgetary 
Allocation which was Rs. 100.5 crore in the year 2018-19 was 
brought down to Rs. 69 crore in the year 2019-20.  The 
Committee had observed that there was a need to augment and 
further strengthen the training facilities because of requirement 
of trained personnel for implementation of various programmes 
in the power sector with the fast changing technology.  The 
Committee had therefore recommended for providing the 
required financial support to NPTI for the approved training 
infrastructure and to meet the upcoming requirements. In the 
action taken reply, the Ministry had assured that any 
requirement of funds by NPTI over and above the BE 2020-21 
will be addressed in the RE stage of 2020-21. Since the financial 
year 2020-21 is almost over, the Committee believe that the 
Ministry would have taken additional funds for NPTI at RE stage 
of 2020-21 and also must have made structured planning for 
gainful utilization of additional funds.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the status in this regard. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY) 
 15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that UDAY (Ujwal DISCOM Assurance 
Yojana), a scheme for financial and operational turnaround of 
Power Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) was formulated 
and launched by the Government on 20th November, 2015 in 
consultation with the various stakeholders to ensure a 
sustainable permanent solution to the problem of legacy of 
debts and address potential future losses. The Committee also 

9 
 
note that there have been reduction in ACS-ARR Gap as it 
has came down to Rs.0.27 per kWh in FY-2019 from Rs. 0.60 
per kWh in FY-2016. It has also been submitted that UDAY 
states have showcased an improvement in annual book losses 
from Rs. 51,562 crore in FY-2016 to Rs. 27.250 crore in FY-
2019. AT&C losses have also came down slightly from 
20.81% in FY-2016 to 18.19% in FY-2019. The Committee 
feel that UDAY scheme has been successful in improving the 
situation to some extent, however, it has not been able to fully 
address the problem as the losses of Discoms, after showing 
dip in the initial years, have once again started rising. The 
Committee were given to understand that the Ministry is 
working on a new 104 scheme and its details would be shared 
as and when it is finalized. However, so far there is no 
announcement in this regard. The Committee being well 
aware of the importance of Distribution Sector's economic 
viability, desire that the Government would make all out effort 
to improve the financial health of Discoms on sustainable 
basis. They also expect that the new Scheme in this regard 
would soon be formulated and announced.” 
 16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“UDAY was launched in 2015 to facilitate the financial and 
operational turnaround of State Power distribution utilities. 
While several target states that were in financial and 
operational problems before the onset of UDAY have shown 
signs of improvement, some states that were performing well 
before UDAY have deteriorated their performance, because of 
which the overall national position has been impacted. 
2. The main reasons for limited success of the scheme are: 
inability of the states to improve their billing and collection 
efficiencies and thereby AT&C losses as per defined 
10 
 
trajectories; tariffs not being reflective of costs; and delays in 
payments by Government departments and local bodies in 
paying up for their electricity bills. 
3. A reforms based results linked scheme (including 
provisioning for Smart meters) is under consideration of the 
Ministry. The proposed scheme will be an all-encompassing 
scheme with several components which includes a complex 
technological intervention of Smart meters and other reforms, 
and therefore, requires time for finalizing the bidding 
ecosystem, and specifications etc." 
 17. The Committee in their original Report had observed 
that UDAY (Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana), a scheme for 
financial and operational turnaround of Power Distribution 
Companies (DISCOMs) was formulated and launched by the 
Government on 20th November, 2015 in consultation with the 
various stakeholders to ensure a sustainable permanent 
solution to the problem of legacy of debts and address 
potential future losses.  The Committee had observed that 
UDAY Scheme had been successful in improving the situation 
to some extent, but it has not been able to fully address the 
problem.  The Committee had, therefore, desire that the 
Government should make all out efforts to improve the financial 
health of Discoms on sustainable basis and it was also 
expected that the new scheme in this regard would soon be 
formulated and announced.  The Ministry in their action taken 
reply has inter alia informed that a reform based results linked 
scheme (including provisioning for Smart meters) is under 
consideration of the Ministry and the proposed scheme will be 
an all-encompassing scheme with several components which 
includes a complex technological intervention of Smart meters 
and other reforms. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry 
will expeditiously formulate and announce the proposed new 

11 
 
scheme for resolving the issue of Discom's financial distress 
on a sustainable basis. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 2.19) 
Development of Power Sector 
 18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that there was a gap of 7.1 Billion Units 
in Energy Requirement and the Energy Supplies in the year 
2018-19. There was also a gap of 1,494 MW in Peak Demand 
and Peak Met. The Committee also note that we have 
generation capacity to the tune of 3,67,280 MW while the 
Peak Demand was only 1,77,022. Despite that we were not 
able to fully meet the demand. The Ministry have submitted 
that it is due to constraints in sub transmission and distribution 
network, commercial reasons, financial constraints of State 
utilities, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to remove all the constraints in fully meeting the 
demand of power in the country. The Committee expect that 
the Ministry would provide a detailed road map in this regard 
at the time of furnishing action taken notes.” 
 19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“Distribution of electricity to various consumers is the 
responsibility of the State power utilities particularly the 
Distribution licensee. The Intra state electricity supply is 
regulated by the respective State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs). 
ii. Distribution licensees within the States continuously keep on 
updating and augmenting their distribution system to improve 
12 
 
the reliability of supply to the consumers within their financial 
resources. 
iii. Government of India from time to time provides financial 
assistance through various schemes like DDUGJY, IPDS, 
SAUBHAYA and PSDF, for augmenting the distribution 
system and providing last mile connectivity for the consumers. 
iv. The total financial assistance provided to the States under 
the various schemes for the period 2014-15 to 2019-20 is 
approximately ₹ 80115.03 crores. 
v. The Indian electricity grid is one of the largest synchronous 
grid in the world. Ideally all electrical equipment should be 
available 100% of time but due to inherent nature the 
generator, transmission lines, distribution lines and other 
associated equipment, they undergo outage due to various 
technical reasons. Due to the efforts made by the various 
stakeholders of the power sector, the restoration of faulty 
equipment has been expedited. This has led to reduction in 
the gap between demand and supply to less than 1%. Making 
improvements to reduce the deficit is a continuous process, in 
which action is being taken." 
20. The Committee in their Fourth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) had recommended the Ministry to remove all 
constraints in meeting the power demand so far assessed in 
the Country. The Ministry in their reply have enumerated 
various steps, direct or indirect, being taken by the Ministry in 
this regard. The Committee do understand the intricacies of 
distribution of electricity to consumers and that the 
responsibility of the State power utilities particularly the 
Distribution licensee need to be fixed. They are also aware that 
the gap between the demand and supply has considerably 
fallen in recent years. Nonetheless, the Committee are of the 
view that the endeavour of the Government should be to 

13 
 
completely bridge the gap between the demand and supply of 
power in the country. The Committee while acknowledging the 
good work being done by the Ministry in this regard, also desire 
that they should remove the constraints in fully meeting the 
demand of power in a time-bound manner by focusing on the 
States/areas where such issues are being faced. The Committee 
also expect that the Ministry at the time of furnishing action 
taken statement will provide the information regarding remedial 
measures taken and their result.    
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 2.21) 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
 21. The Committee, in their Original Report, had 
recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee observe that the issue of long term Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA) has become a conundrum. Since 
the advent of Solar Power, its tariff is on a constant decline. In 
the recent years, Solar Power tariff has aggressively been 
quoted making the Discoms reluctant to enter any long term 
PPA. This situation is causing disruption as long term PPA is a 
pre-requisite for financing of any new power project. In 
absence of long term PPAs it may be difficult to attract 
investment in Power Sector. On one hand, there are Power 
Generators who insist on honoring of long term PPAs at any 
cost as they have made huge investment in their projects. On 
the other hand, there are Discoms who do not want to 
purchase power at higher rate through long term PPAs as it is 
available at much cheaper rate in short term market. The 
Committee have been apprised that the Ministry is looking for 
a possible solution to this problem and will come out with a 
Policy Paper in this regard. The Committee expect that the 
Ministry would expeditiously finalize the Policy Paper. The 
Committee, however, would like to recommend the Ministry to 
14 
 
make a provision for review of such PPAs, wherein, tariff has 
been increased owing to cost overrun due to delay in 
development of a Power Project.” 
 22. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
under:— 
“It may not be possible to suddenly shift from game of long-
term PPAs to short-term or medium terms agreements for sale 
of power. The Banks may be reluctant to finance projects 
entirely based on short or medium term agreements. However, 
Banks may be willing to finance a project in which most of the 
output is tied up in long-term PPA but remaining output can be 
sold through medium term or short-term agreements. 
Therefore, avenues will have to be provided for sale of power 
generated, particularly from RE projects in platforms such as 
Power Exchanges. In this context, Ministry of Power had 
constituted a Group of Officers drawing officers from CEA, 
CTU, CERC and POSOCO. The group has submitted its 
report on 20th April 2020. The Group has inter-alia 
recommended introduction of separate day-ahead market 
segment for RE power. Such separate segment will facilitate 
clear identification of buyers for RPO. The group has also 
recommended a fixed term of waiver of transmission charges 
and losses for energy bought and sold in this segment." 
 23. During examination of the Demand for Grants of the 
Ministry of Power for the year 2020-21, the Committee had 
raised the problems being faced in power sector due to long 
term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) and the Committee 
was apprised that the Ministry was looking for a possible 
solution to this problem and would come with a policy paper in 
this regard.  While recommending the Ministry to make a 
provision for review of such PPAs wherein tariff has been 
increased owing to cost overrun due to delay in development of 

15 
 
power project had also expected the Ministry to expeditiously 
finalize the Policy Paper.  The Ministry in their action taken 
reply has stated that it may not be possible to suddenly shift 
from gain of long term PPAs to short term or medium terms 
agreements for sale of power and in this context, the Ministry of 
Power has constituted a Group of Officers drawing officers 
from Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Central Transmission 
Utility (CTU), Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) 
and Power System Operation Corporation (POSOCO). The 
Group has submitted its report on 20th April 2020. The Group 
has inter-alia recommended introduction of separate day-ahead 
market segment for renewable energy power and such separate 
segment will facilitate clear identification of buyers for 
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO).  The Group has also 
recommended a fix term of waiver of transmission charges and 
losses for energy bought and sold in this segment.  While 
acknowledging the efforts made by the Ministry to seriously 
address the issues, the Committee observe that the Ministry is 
silent on the specific recommendation of the Committee to 
make a provision for review of such PPAs wherein the tariff has 
been increased owing to cost overrun due to delay in the 
development of a Power Project. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to reiterate this specific recommendation of the 
Committee. The Committee expect that the Ministry will 
consider the recommendation positively and provide the details 
of the efforts made by them in this regard at the time of 
furnishing action taken statement. 
  
16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 2.1 The Committee noted that the electricity sector is passing 
through a turbulent phase and witnessing the change of 
unprecedented nature. We have more than adequate generation 
capacity, one unified synchronous grid and a huge consumer base. 
However, the issues like quality and affordable electricity to common 
men, low per capita electricity consumption and distressed Discoms 
are also haunting the sector. Despite various initiatives taken by the 
Government, the conundrum of sluggishness is all pervasive. 
Demands broadly remain stagnant, AT&C losses defying all efforts 
to contain them, assured fuel supply to generating units still illusive 
and long-term PPAs under severe strain can be summed-up as 
salient features of the electricity sector. Electricity policy inter alia 
laid down that supply of reliable and quality power of specified 
standard in an efficient manner and at reasonable rates, increase in 
per capita availability of electricity by 1000 units and financial turn-
around/commercial viability of the electricity sector as its goals. 
These objectives were envisaged way back in the year 2005. 
However, we have been able to achieve a little on all these fronts. 
The committee, therefore, desire that instead of ad hoc and eye-
wash measure, a long-term, thoughtful and efficacious planning is 
the need of the hour to make the sector healthy, competitive, 
sustainable and vibrant. 
Reply of the Government 
 In accordance with the Section 3(4) of the Electricity Act, 
2003, Central Electricity Authority prepares National Electricity Plan 
(NEP) for generation and transmission in accordance with the 
National Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in five years. 
 Although the Generation is delicensed activity, this document 
serves as a roadmap for Electricity generation sector of the country 

17 
 
and gives signals to the developers for going ahead with future 
investments in electricity 
 NEP (Generation) covers the review of last five-years, detailed 
plan for current five-year plan, and perspective plan for next five 
years, giving capacity addition requirements for power generation 
from various sources, details about requirement of key inputs 
(Cement, Steel and other materials) & funds and also man-power 
requirement to meet the projected capacity addition. It also highlights 
the fuel requirement to meet the projected energy generation and 
environmental impact (especially CO2 emissions). 
 During the formulation of the National Electricity Plan, CEA 
consults all the stakeholders including State Governments. Numbers 
of Sub-Committees are formed to look into different aspects of 
power sector and to provide inputs, such as energy efficiency 
measures taken by Government, requirement of Cement, Steel, 
Human Resources, etc. NEP is based on choosing different 
technologies available for efficient generation keeping in view fuel 
choices based on economy, energy security and environmental 
consideration. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Annual Plan Outlay 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2) 
 2.2 The committee noted that the Gross Budgetary Support 
(GBS) of the Ministry of Power for the year 2020-21 is Rs. 15,874.82 
crore. However, the Ministry of Power had made a proposal of Rs. 
33,366.75 crore. Similarly, for the year2019-20 the Ministry was 
allocated Rs. 15,874.82 crore only against the demand of Rs. 
32,001.11 crore. The Committee further noted that the year 2018-19 
an allocation of Rs. 15,046.92 crore was made against the demand 
of Rs. 36,843.32 crore. The Committee also noted that the Ministry 
have been able to fully utilize the allocated fund. 
 
18 
 
 The Committee are appreciative of the good performance of 
the Ministry as far as utilization of fund is concerned. The Committee 
have observed that there is visible change in functioning of the 
Ministry in the recent years and full utilization of fund is its testimony. 
The Committee also noted that the Government have achieved 
various goal for which they have been aspiring for long and in some 
case even before their targeted timeline. In view of the Committee 
this was made possible not only by sincere efforts of the Ministry but 
also due to the fact that they were allocated more funds. The 
Committee do understand that the resources of the country are 
limited and are to be utilized in the best possible manner taking a 
holistic picture of various sectors. Nonetheless, there is need to give 
priority to some programmes/sectors which are not only necessary 
for socio-economic upliftment of the people of the country but also 
play important role in the economic growth of the country. The 
Power Sector and their some of the flagship programmes 
doubtlessly fall under this category. DDUGJY/Saubhagya are not 
only schemes to provide electricity access to each and every 
household in the country but also an instrument to increase the 
demand of electricity. Similarly, IPDS scheme would immensely help 
in making the Distribution Sector economically viable and ensuring 
uninterrupted and quality power supply. Besides that, it will also 
enable to reduce high AT&C losses which monetary value runs in 
tens of thousands crores. 
 Considering the financial performance of the Ministry in the 
recent years, the Committee are surprised that this year also the 
Ministry of Finance resorted to a budgetary cut of more than 50%. 
Even the projection of the Ministry of Power for raising Extra 
Budgetary Resources (EBR) for DDUGJY, has also been curtailed. 
Against the demanded EBR of Rs. 10,491 crore only Rs. 5500 crore 
is approved by the Ministry of Finance. Likewise, a budgetary 
allocation of only Rs. 5300 crore has been approved against the 
projection of Rs. 7000 crore for DDUGJY. 
 Considering the importance of various flagship programmes of 
the Ministry of Power and their financial performance in the recent 

19 
 
years, the Committee are disappointed by the Budgetary cut made 
by the Ministry of Finance as it may adversely affect the progress of 
these programmes. The committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that adequate fund should be provided to the Ministry of Power at 
the stage of Revised Estimate so that timely implementation of 
important programmes can be ensured. The Committee also expect 
that the Ministry of Power will not slow down their pace of work in 
view of the budgetary cut. The Committee recommend the Ministry 
of Power to utilize whatever they have been allocated as Budgetary 
Estimate so that they can post demands for more funds at the time 
of Revised Estimate. 
Reply of the Government 
 We are thankful to the committee for appreciating Ministry of 
Power about its budget utilization in previous years. We assure the 
committee that the Ministry of Power will keep utilizing the Budget 
provisions in the best possible manner. 
 2. Ministry of Power regularly seeks the required amount for 
Schemes of M/o Power in Revised Estimates through pre-budget 
discussion meeting and also by way of various Supplementary 
demand for grants and at various other forums from time to time. 
The Ministry also ensures that all flagship programmes of MoP do 
not suffer due to inadequacy of fund. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
 2.3 The Committee noted that apart from Rural Electrification, 
there are two other components under DDUGJY viz. separation of 
agriculture and non- agriculture feeders to facilitate Discoms in the 
judicious rostering of supply to agricultural and uninterrupted quality 
power supply to non-agricultural consumers and strengthening and 
augmentation of Sub-Transmission & Distribution infrastructure in 
rural areas, including metering of distribution transformers/ 
feeders/consumers. 
20 
 
 In regard to achievement under separation of agriculture and 
non- agriculture feeders, strengthening and augmentation of sub-
transmission & distribution infrastructure components, it has been 
submitted that they have generally been satisfactory considering a 
large focus towards expeditious completion of village and household 
electrification. It has further been informed that States have reported 
that feeder separation involving 1,00,901 ckm of 11 KV line has 
been completed. Under system strengthening component States 
have reported that 3190 new Sub-Stations have been 
established/augmented; 4,97,268 DT installed; 3,55,708 km LT and 
1,76,045 km HT (11KV and 33/66 KV) line erected. 
 The reason for slow progress in some of the States, has been 
attributed to delay in award of the contract, delay in getting forest & 
railway clearances, land acquisition for sub-stations, Right of Way 
(RoW) issues, law & order issues and difficult terrain etc. However, it 
has also been stated that though DDUGJY scheme is available till 
2021-22, the Government of India is impressing upon States for 
completion of all the component of DDUGJY before the schedule 
time. The Committee have consistently been emphasizing the 
importance of DDUGJY and its earliest possible implementation. The 
remaining components of DDUGJY are equally important and 
supplementary to rural electrification, therefore, every effort should 
be made to ensure their timely completion. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to closely monitor the progress of the 
scheme and provide guidance and assistance to the States where 
the pace of implementation of this programme is not satisfactory. 
Reply of the Government 
 The progress of the scheme and its other components are 
reviewed regularly by the Ministry. Issues are regularly taken up with 
the concerned Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries 
Energy/Power of the States/UTs highlighting specific details advising 
them to promptly resolve the issues hampering the progress to 
ensure timely completion of works. Keeping in view the important 
aspects of each of the components of the scheme, the Ministry has 

21 
 
requested all the concerned States to ensure early completion of 
sanctioned works. 
 Under DDUGJY new projects, 3,231 new sub-stations have 
been established/augmented, work on 1,07,842 Ckm feeder 
segregation have been completed, 3,23,725 new distribution 
transformers have been installed and 2,08,438 Ckm LT & 1,21,624 
Ckm HT new lines have been erected, as on 29.02.2020. Under the 
scheme, the overall progress in the country is 86%. 
 The DDUGJY projects are regularly reviewed in the Review, 
Planning and Monitoring (RPM) meetings with all States/Power 
Utilities and all concerned States/Power Utilities have been advised 
to accelerate the pace of execution of works to ensure completion of 
works at the earliest. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 2.4 The Committee noted that there is an elaborated 
monitoring mechanism under DDUGJY to ensure its proper 
implementation. In regard to specification of material it has been 
submitted that the nodal agency has specified broad technical 
specifications of major material/equipment for the scheme as part of 
Standard Bidding Documents. As per the Quality Assurance 
Mechanism established under the scheme, at first level; State Power 
Utilities carryout necessary quality checks including pre-dispatch 
inspection of materials as well as quality of erection works in the 
field. At second level, the Nodal agency, REC Limited has also been 
entrusted with the responsibility to carryout pre-dispatch quality 
inspection of materials and erection works in villages on random 
sample basis through third party agencies designated as REC 
Quality Monitoring Agencies (RQMs). The defects notified by quality 
monitoring agencies are forwarded to Project Implementing 
Agencies for rectification & corrective measures. Despite all these 
mechanism in place, the Committee have been receiving feedback 
through Members of Parliament about the poor quality of work being 
22 
 
done at the ground level. The Ministry have also agreed that the 
defects generally found are relating to erection of poles (tilted pole, 
improper grouting), earthing (inadequate or loose), proper use of 
hardware (loose Nuts & Bolts, lugs not crimped, PG Clamps not 
used), oil leakage in transformers, stay wire and guard wire) etc. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure the quality 
of materials being used under the Scheme as well as the work being 
done at the ground level. The Committee desire that in quest of 
meeting deadlines, there should not be any compromise in quality of 
work as it leaves a bad impression on the minds of people. The 
Committee also expect the Ministry to take prompt and sincere 
action on the feedback/complaints of the Members of Parliaments 
regarding implementation of this Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry through nodal agency constantly monitors the 
adherence of Quality Assurance Mechanism by the project 
implementing agencies (PIA) of all the States. Prime responsibility of 
ensuring quality of materials and works lies with PIA of the states. In 
addition, pre-dispatch inspection of material is witnessed randomly 
for the selected lot by REC Quality Monitoring (RQM) agencies 
appointed by the nodal agency to ensure quality of materials and 
field inspection is carried out on random sampling basis as per 
approved guidelines to ensure quality in erection works and the 
defects observed by RQM agency is conveyed to PIA for rectification 
of the defects. 
 In order to enforce quality in the DDUGJY works, the payment 
to the PIAs is also linked with defect rectification and other quality 
compliances besides progress of works. Further, in case of 
complaints from Public Representatives, a Committee/Team 
consisting of officials from REC, State Power Utilities, Project 
Implementing Agencies, Quality Monitors etc., is constituted to 
enquire into the matter and ensure redressal of the concerns raised. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 

23 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5) 
 2.5 The Committee also observe that despite multi-level of 
monitoring, the problem of sub-standard materials and poor quality 
of work continues unabated. This also reflects that either we are not 
serious in our approach for quality improvements or there is gross 
systemic malaise. It cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely. Some 
abiding solution will have to be worked out. The routine and usual 
mechanism has failed to deliver. Some unconventional methodology 
need to be explored. It would be in the fitness of things if the current 
system of monitoring is dispensed with altogether. A new set of 
system, which is independent of prevailing processes and persons, 
should be entrusted with the responsibility of quality monitoring. 
Random checking or sampling of only 10% of the material be done 
away with. It should be percent quality checking and made 
mandatory. Ways and means of implementing it can be worked out. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under DDUGJY scheme, the ownership of the electricity 
infrastructure created lies with the State Governments & State 
Power Utilities/DISCOMs. Therefore, Quality Assurance Mechanism 
guidelines of DDUGJY scheme mandated State Power Utilities/ 
DISCOMs solely responsible and accountable for ensuring quality of 
materials and execution of works. The State Power 
Utilities/DISCOMs/PIAs are carrying out 100% pre-dispatch 
inspections of all the materials and 100% inspection of works 
executed at site under the scheme. 
 The Nodal agency, REC has been entrusted with the 
responsibility to ensure that above Quality Assurance Mechanism 
guidelines is adhered to in each & every project under the 
schemes.REC through third party agencies designated as REC 
Quality Monitoring Agencies (RQMs) are performing following two 
types of inspections through on random sample basis: 
 Field (Village & Substation) inspections of erected assets 
24 
 
 Pre-dispatch material inspections at manufacturers 
premises. 
 The performance of quality monitoring mechanism under 
DDUGJY scheme has generally been satisfactory and the defects 
pointed out by RQM agencies are pertaining to quality of 
workmanship. In order to overcome the issue of quality of 
workmanship, Ministry of Power, through nodal agency REC has 
imparted trainings to the frontline supervisors of State Power 
Utilities, Turnkey Contractors & Project Implementing Agencies 
(PIA). 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 2.6 The Committee noted that feeder separation and 
strengthening of sub- transmission and distribution system in rural 
areas including metering are the basic features of the DDUGJY. For 
the metering purpose, a data-hub is also created. It has been 
informed that the Discom will prioritize strengthening of rural 
infrastructure works considering specific network requirement and 
will formulate detailed project reports of the projects for coverage 
under the scheme. These DPRs through procedural compliance will 
be submitted to the Monitoring Committee for approval. The scheme 
(DDUGJY) has been in operation in some or the other form since 
more than one and a half decade, but the pattern of its 
implementation has not been evolved. The Committee are aware 
that we are in a federal system, wherein, working is streamlined in a 
particular manner, but that should not be an alibi for our slumber, 
lack of application of innovations and treading over the beaten 
tracks. If data-hub on rural electrification has been created, then 
further DPR should be considered only in the light of these data for 
the purpose of priority. A representative body consisting of all the 
concerned should also examine it instead of the usual and routine 
administrative set-up that has been associated with the process. 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Online DPRs were submitted by states for various works 
under DDUGJY. The DPRs are prepared by the States DISCOMs 
after conducting site survey and as per ground requirement. Ministry 
has already deployed DDUGJY portal where data regarding all work 
sanctioned under DDUGJY is available. In addition to that ministry 
has also deployed National Power Portal (NPP) which provides 
various data pertaining to power value chain. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7) 
 2.7 The Committee is also inclined to infer that village 
electrification repeat village electrification have become an unending 
process despite the claim of all the villages having been electrified 
much before the target date. The focus on village and household 
electrification have impacted the desired results in the other 
components of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the critical areas of the DDUGJY scheme in the form of its 
various components should be given due attention so that it fortifies 
the electrification network in the rural areas. Simultaneously, 
household electrification can go parallel as the work involved therein 
is not very enormous.  
Reply of the Government 
 The progress of the scheme and its other components are 
reviewed regularly by the Ministry. Issues are regularly taken up with 
the concerned Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries 
Energy/Power of the States/UTs highlighting specific details advising 
them to promptly resolve the issues hampering the progress to 
ensure timely completion of works. Keeping in view the important 
aspects of each of the components of the scheme, the Ministry has 
requested all the concerned States to ensure early completion of 
sanctioned works. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
26 
 
Saubhagya Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
 2.8 The Committee noted that all the States have declared 
electrification of all households on 31stMarch, 2019, except 18,734 
households in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected areas of 
Chhattisgarh. The Ministry have stated that subsequently seven 
States namely Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Manipur, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh reported that there are 19.09 
lakh unelectrified households which were earlier un-willing, and now 
willing to get electricity connection, identified before 31stMarch, 
2019. The Ministry had informed that States were asked to electrify 
these household under Saubhagya by 31stDecember, 2019. 
However, out of 19.09 lakh only 10.71 lakh households have been 
electrified upto 31.01.2020. Most of the remaining households (6.5 
lakh) are in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
 The Committee are appreciative of the good work done under 
the Saubhagya Scheme by which a large number of household were 
provided electricity connection in a time bound manner. The 
Committee also expect that the remaining households need to be 
provided connection at the earliest. Since most of the left out 
households are in the State of Uttar Pradesh, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to coordinate and provide necessary 
assistance to the State if so required. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry is in constant touch with the state for early completion 
of work. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9) 
 2.9 In regard to progress of implementation of IPDS scheme, 
the Committee noted that the scheme has been sanctioned in 546 

27 
 
circles across the country and till date 403 circles have been 
completed. The Committee further noted that some of the States 
have done exceedingly well in completion of the Scheme, Whereas, 
some States particularly Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir and the States of 
North-Eastern Region are lagging behind. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all out efforts be made to expedite the execution of 
work under the scheme especially in the aforementioned States. 
Since this scheme has technical complexities and it also requires 
trained manpower in adequate numbers, the Committee expect the 
Ministry of Power to do hand-holding of those States which are 
facing difficulties in implementation of this scheme. Also, there 
should be a regular exchange of best practices and lesson learned 
in implementation of this scheme among the States at an 
appropriate forum. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Power, Government of India is paying utmost 
attention to the implementation of IPDS across the country to ensure 
that works awarded are completed within timelines and quality as 
prescribed by IPDS Monitoring Committee. IPDS implementation is 
being rigorously monitored at highest levels of Ministry of Power and 
M/s Power Finance Corporation, designated as nodal agency by 
MoP for operationalization of the scheme. The scheme is being 
monitored at various levels to ensure speedy implementation is as 
follows: 
Central level monitoring at Ministry of Power 
 Monthly Review, Panning & Monitoring (RPM) meetings by 
Ministry of Power with Secretaries (Power/Energy) of States/CMD’s 
of Discoms. Such meetings are often chaired by the Hon’ble Minister 
of State for Power, GoI. IPDS Monitoring Committee under 
chairmanship of Secretary (P) reviews implementation of IPDS 
(including subsumed R-APDRP) for operationalization of the 
Programme.  
28 
 
State level monitoring in respective States 
 Regular monitoring and review at State level by the 
Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC), chaired by Energy Secretary 
of the State and by the concerned CMDs/MDs of Discoms. Also, 
periodic reviews of Social Sector schemes including IPDS is carried 
out by DISHA (District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee) under the Hon’ble Member of Parliament. 
Monitoring by PFC 
 Regular review by PFC, the nodal agency along with Web 
based project monitoring. Also, day–to-day monitoring at the level of 
Nodal/Zonal Officers of PFC with States/Utilities to resolve 
implementation issues, expediting progress of project 
implementation and release of funds. In addition to this, handholding 
of Discoms is being done by Urban Vidyut Abhiyantas (UVAs), 
stationed at Discom HQs. 
Quality Monitoring 
 The Project Management Agency (PMA) appointed by 
Discoms to assist them in project management for ensuring timely 
implementation of project. Concurrent and post implementation 
evaluation by Third Party Concurrent Evaluating Agency (TPCEA) 
for verification of material and process at site, reporting of progress 
etc. 
 Rigorous monitoring of IPDS implementation and handholding 
has resulted in overall progress level of 84.90% as on 24th April’ 20 
with reported completion of 430 Circles as on date against earlier 
reported 403 Circles as on 5th February’20.These additional 
27 Circles completed also include the following: 
o Additional 8 Circles reported completion in NER (Assam-3, 
Nagaland-2, Meghalaya-2, Mizoram-1)with 100% Circle 
completion reported in Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland 
o Additional 3 Circles reported completion in Bihar 

29 
 
o NER progress reported as 76% while that of Bihar reported 
as 80%against All India progress of84.9% 
 Above progress in NER and Bihar was facilitated by various 
high level review meetings held by Nodal Agency in said States and 
handholding of State Utilities by PFC nodal officers and Urban 
Vidyut Abhiyantas (UVA) posted in said States. 
 Efforts are being made by Nodal Agency to push IPDS 
implementation in Jammu, Kashmir & Ladakh also. J&K Govt. has 
entrusted 05/12 circles (04 in J&K and 01 circle of Ladakh) to 
RECPDCL as PIA for implementation of scheme. 
 Further, Ministry of Power (MoP) /Power Finance Corporation 
(PFC) is facilitating sharing of information, best practices and 
success stories amongst the Discoms under IPDS in following ways: 
 Technical Guidance is provided to State Utilities to facilitate 
scheme implementation. PFC / MoP also issues guidelines 
for simplification of implementation procedures 
 Dedicated workshops are organized for sharing of Best 
Practices in IPDS Implementation/online monitoring. 
 Best practices and success stories of Discoms are regularly 
shared during the various review meetings organized by 
PFC and MoP and also on social media platforms 
 Separate Review meetings/visits to handhold the States 
where progress of implementation is slow. Workshops/ 
meetings with other stakeholders including Project 
Management Agencies and work contractors are also  held 
 Capacity building / training of Utility personnel is also 
carried out under IPDS – RAPDRP to enhance their skill. 
PFC / MoP also organizes workshops on technical areas, 
guidelines, best practices etc. for dissemination of 
information. 
30 
 
 Fund release under IPDS is being done through Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS). State Utilities have 
also been trained on use of said system 
 Revamped IPDS web-portal with provision of on-line 
submission of IPDS DPRs and maintaining MIS. All the 
model documents, guidelines, Links for bidding documents 
of Utilities, events etc. are regularly posted on dedicated 
IPDS web portal. 
 A system has been developed in-house for web-based 
project monitoring of IPDS/R-APDRP on IPDS web portal. 
Discoms are uploading award details, work execution 
details along with financial progress of the projects on the 
portal at regular intervals. MoP/PFC is monitoring the 
progress of project implementation online through the 
system. 
 Sharing of Best Practices in IPDS Implementation with all 
State Utilities at various forums. 
 As such, MoP/PFC are periodically undertaking various pro-
active measures for speedy implementation of the scheme, providing 
assistance to the States to resolve critical issues hampering 
implementation, sharing of best practices at various forums etc. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10) 
 2.10 The Committee noted that the IPDS envisages to bring 
down AT&C losses to the level of 15% by establishment of IT 
enabled energy accounting/auditing, improvement in billed energy 
based on metered consumption and improvement in collection 
efficiency. However, when the Committee asked about the reduction 
of AT&C losses in the town where it has already been implemented, 
it has been submitted by the Ministry that the scheme does not 
specify monitoring of AT&C losses at circle level, but at Discom 
level. It has been further submitted that as per IPDS Guidelines the 

31 
 
Discoms-wise AT&C Losses are determined by PFC in its ‘Report on 
Performance of State Power Utilities’ which shall be source of 
examining compliance of the above condition. Work in 403 Circles 
have been completed in FY-2018-19 & FY-2019-20, but ‘Report on 
Performance of State Power Utilities’ is yet to be released for said 
Financial Year. In view of the submission made by the Ministry, the 
Committee infer that it is yet to be seen that how far the work done 
under the scheme has helped in reduction of AT&C losses. The 
Committee expect that the Report of PFC will be released soon to 
assess the situation accurately. However, the Committee expected 
that the Ministry should have put in place some mechanism that can 
indicate the effectiveness of the scheme, so that any loopholes left in 
the scheme could be plugged. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that efforts should be made to assess the effectiveness 
of IPDS in reduction of AT&C losses, wherein, it has been already 
been implemented with a view to further improve this scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 As already informed, IPDS scheme intends to supplement the 
efforts of States/Discoms and synergize with other initiatives of GoI 
(viz. UDAY, DDUGJY, SAUBHAGYA) in distribution system 
strengthening, metering etc. and collectively reduce AT&C losses at 
Discom level, progressively. 
Regarding ‘Report on Performance of State Power Utilities’: 
o It is to inform that ‘Report on Performance of State Power 
Utilities’ for FY 17-18 has been released on 25thApril’2020. 
o Further, ‘Report on Performance of State Power Utilities’ for 
FY 18-19 too is in final stages of compilation and is likely to 
be released within next three- four months. 
o ‘Report on Performance of State Power Utilities’ for FY19-
20 shall be compiled only after receipt of audited accounts 
of State Utilities for FY19- 20which is likely by September, 
32 
 
2020. Efforts will be made to finalize the report for FY 2019-
20 also at the earliest.  
 It is also submitted that the third party evaluation of the 
scheme would be carried out upon its completion. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11) 
 2.11 The Committee noted that there is provision of 
underground cabling under IPDS Scheme. Underground cabling are 
not only beneficial from an aesthetic standpoint but also a great help 
in checking pilferage of electricity. The Ministry have submitted that 
underground cabling cost 8 to 10 times more than the overhead 
wiring, nevertheless, as per experience its higher cost have been 
recovered within three years of their lying in the areas prone to 
pilferage. The Committee understand that higher cost of 
underground cabling is a deterrent, even then, they support it as it 
would be cost effective in the long run. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should endeavor to lay underground 
cabling on priority basis in the areas which are highly prone to power 
theft. 
Reply of the Government 
 Entire outlay earmarked for IPDS has already been sanctioned 
to various States/UTs under the scheme. 
 Moreover, 20130 ckt.km of underground cables has been 
sanctioned out of which 16679 ckt.km has already been laid. 
Nevertheless, the recommendations by Standing Committee 
regarding emphasis on underground cabling can be considered 
suitably in future schemes of Ministry of Power, Government of India 
after taking into consideration techno/commercial aspects of the 
same. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 

33 
 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12) 
 2.12 The Committee noted that Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) is the nodal central statutory body to assist the Government in 
implementing the provision of the Energy Conservation Act. As a 
quasi-regulatory and policy advisory body, the Bureau helps in 
developing policies and strategies that emphasize self-regulation 
and market principles to achieve the primary objective of reducing 
the energy intensity of the Indian Economy. 
 The Committee also find that the benefits derived from Energy 
Efficiency (EE) programme in the country have been astonishing. 
The Committee noted that there has been a saving of 109.54 BUs 
i.e. 7% of total electricity consumption of the country which has 
resulted in cost saving worth Rs. 54.770 crore. Whereas, there has 
been a saving of 18.82 Million Tonnes of oil Equivalent i.e. 2% of 
total primary energy supply of the country. Also. a reduction in CO2 
emission of around 125.18 Million Tonnes has been reported. 
 Considering the benefits already derived and the mammoth 
potential which is yet to be realized. The Committee believe that the 
budgetary allocation of the organization involved in energy efficiency 
and conservation has been insufficient. There has been Budgetary 
Allocation of Rs. 48 crore, Rs. 63 crore and Rs. 49 crore for the year 
2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18. However, this allocation has been 
increase to Rs. 100 crore since the year 2018-19. Still, the 
Committee are of the view that there is a need to further enhance 
the budgetary provisions for BEE with a view to intensify various 
energy efficiency programmes in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 Energy efficiency has the potential to bring many significant 
economic and environmental benefits. In the current context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, energy efficiency can play a role in stimulating 
the economy as well as supporting progress towards clean energy 
transition. 
34 
 
 The budgetary allocation of Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
together with allocation for Energy Conservation for financial year 
2019-20 and 2020-21 is Rs. 213.37 crores. At present the Budget 
provisions are adequate as the Investment in EE Projects are done 
by beneficiaries and the Role of Ministry/BEE is to facilitate policies 
and capacity building activities. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13) 
 2.13 The Committee noted that the implementation and 
enforcement of the provisions of the Energy Conservation Act in the 
States is to be carried out by State Designated Agencies (SDAs). 
The Ministry have submitted that as on date, the SDAs have been 
set up in 36 states/UTs by designating one of the existing 
organizations as required under section 15(d) of the EC Act. These 
agencies differ from State to State with the Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (44%), Electrical Inspectorate (19%), 
Distribution Companies (19%), Power Department (11%) and others 
(6%). 
 The Committee have been emphasizing that Energy Efficiency 
programmes are not only beneficial from environmental perspective 
but also a profitable business as it leads to reduction in energy cost. 
It has already been mentioned in the preceding para as to how tens 
of thousands crores have been saved due to energy efficiency 
programmes with paltry budgetary provisions. Though remarkable 
achievements have been made under these programmes, the 
Committee are of the belief that there is still great potential in the 
field of energy efficiency. The potential of energy efficiency can be 
understood by the fact that the MSME (micro, small and medium 
enterprises) sector accounts for about 33% of the India's 
manufacturing output and around 28% contribution in the GDP. 
There are about 8 million MSMEs in India — and majority of them 
have not been exposed to energy efficiency/technology up-gradation 
measures since they continue to depend on obsolete, low efficiency 

35 
 
technologies that result in wasteful energy consumption, thereby 
reducing their profitability and competitiveness in the sector. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that institutional 
capacities of States Designated Agencies should be strengthened to 
make them capable of enforcing various provisions of EC Act in their 
respective States. The Committee expect the Ministry to provide all 
necessary financial assistance to these Agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Power through Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) have been making efforts to strengthen the institutional 
capacities of State Designated Agencies (SDAs) to coordinate, 
regulate and enforce efficient use of energy and its conservation at 
the State level. Once they acquire the capacity, the SDAs will be 
able to undertake various energy efficiency projects, capacity 
building of key stakeholders and create awareness amongst the 
masses. Hon'ble Minister of State for Power and New & Renewable 
Energy (Independent Charge) has earlier written to all Hon'ble Chief 
Ministers of the States for establishment of "Stand- Alone SDAs”. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
 2.14 The Committee noted that the core activities of the 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) are Applied Research in 
electrical power engineering, Testing & Certification of Power 
equipment, Consultancy and Field testing services to Power Utilities 
and Industries, Third Party Inspection and Vendor Analysis, 
Organizing Customized Training programs for Utilities and 
Industries. Since CPRI is the leading research institute in the field of 
Power, the Committee believe that they have to play a vital role in 
transformation and modernization of Power Sector. However, the 
Committee noted that their financial performance has not been up to 
the mark. During the last five years they have never been able to 
36 
 
fully utilize the allocated fund. Their actual utilization against the 
Budgetary Estimate for the year 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-
18 and 2018-19 have only been 27%, 30%, 53%, 34%, and 63% 
respectively. The Committee, during the examination of previous 
year’s Demands for Grants had highlighted the need to augment the 
budgetary provision for Research and Development purpose in the 
country. But the Committee are not satisfied with performance of 
CPRI in utilization of funds that have been allocated to them during 
the last five years. However, the Committee noted with satisfaction 
that they have already utilized Rs.178 crore (as on 31.01.2020) of 
the Budgetary Estimate of Rs. 200 crore for the year 2019-20 which 
is 89% of the BE. The Committee believe that they will be able to 
fully utilize the allocated fund this time. The Committee recommend 
that in future also it must be ensured that whatever fund is allocated 
to CPRI is fully utilized. Simultaneously, the Committee also desire 
to review the budgetary provisions for CPRI with a view to enhance 
it. 
Reply of the Government 
 Adequate grants for approved capital projects to augment test 
facilities of CPRI are being provided by Ministry of Power which can 
also be seen from the Budget allocations to CPRI in previous years. 
Besides, funds are also being provided for carrying out and 
coordinating research on the state of the art technologies on the 
Power sector and facilitating technology upgradation under National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) and Research Scheme on Power (RSoP). 
 A Budget provision for Rs. 200 crore has been made for CPRI 
in the BE 2020-21. The budgetary estimate is arrived at by taking 
into consideration the annual action plan including procurement that 
can be completed during the year, the balance payments to be made 
to the vendors, payments for establishing LC (Letter of Credit), and 
Funds required for R&D projects. Any requirement of funds by CPRI 
over and above the B.E 2020-21 will be addressed in the Revised 
Estimates stage of 2020-21. 
[Ministry of Power OM, No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 

37 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15) 
 2.15 The Committee noted that CPRI has strength of around 
545 personnel of which over 200 are well qualified and experienced 
Scientists/Engineers. CPRI is the only testing Laboratory in the world 
having all the test facilities for power equipment under one roof. The 
Institute has completed over more than 400 R&D projects and has 
been awarded 25 patents over the years and 72 patents are in 
process for the award. To its credit, the Institute has published over 
3700technical and research papers in national & international 
forums. The Institute has also brought out over 450 technical reports 
which are widely referred to by both the utilities and industry. The 
senior scientists & engineers represent CPRI in various Electro-
Technical Committees of BIS. CPRI officers are also represented in 
International Standards Committees like IEC, IEEE, and CIGRE etc. 
The Committee appreciate the good work being done by the CPRI 
and congratulate them for achieving various feats. However, the 
Committee at the same time feel that there is a need to further 
intensify the Research and Development projects specially related to 
Power Sector. The Committee have time and again been 
emphasizing the need to bring efficiency and cost effectiveness in 
Power Sector which can be made possible by technological 
interventions and up-gradation of infrastructure. The Committee 
have also been stressing on the need to focus our Research and 
Development activities on the areas which are necessary to cater 
the needs of electrical industry of the country for development of 
products indigenously. The Committee also believe that it is high 
time to take the quality of R&D to the next level to become globally 
competitive. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to: 
(i) Provide assistance to CPRI in making its test certificate 
globally acceptable. 
(ii) Provide adequate Grant in Aid for approved capital 
projects to augment test facilities of CPRI, and 
(iii) Provide assistance in allotting land for establishment of 
new units for expansion of Research and Test facilities. 
38 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) CPRI with the assistance of IEEMA is promoting CPRI test 
certificates globally. Countries where CPRI test certificates are 
not accepted have been identified with the help of market 
survey of CPRI customers and IEEMA. CPRI has written 
letters to the concerned utilities explaining the credentials of 
CPRI and requested them to accept CPRI certificates. 
(ii) Adequate grants for approved capital projects to augment test 
facilities of CPRI are being provided by Ministry of Power 
which can also be seen from the Budget allocations to CPRI in 
previous years. A Budget provision for Rs.200Crore has been 
made for CPRI in the BE 2020-21. Any requirement of funds 
raised by CPRI over and above the Budget provisions will be 
addressed in the RE 2020-21. 
(iii) Ministry of Power is extending all help to CPRI for their 
requirement of Land, based on requests received from CPRI. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16) 
 2.16 The Committee noted that National Power Training 
Institute (NPTI) is a National Apex body for fulfilling the training 
requirements of the power sector in the Country. Also, NPTI has 
been appointed as the Certifying Authority for SYSTEM OPERATOR 
OF NLDC, RLDCs, SLDCs. NPTI also functions as an Apex Cadre 
Training Institute for Engineer/Officer of Central Power Engineering 
Service (Ministry of Power, Govt of India). The Committee further 
noted that the performance of NPTI in terms of utilization of allocated 
fund has been good during the last three years as there have been 
no shortfalls. For the year 2019-20, NPTI was allocated a fund of 
Rs.69 crore at BE which was revised to Rs.50 crore at RE. As on 
05.02.2020, they have utilized only Rs.28.90 crore. Since the 
budgetary allocation has direct correlation with the work to be done 
at the ground, the Committee are a bit surprised as to why the 

39 
 
budgetary allocation which Rs. 100.5 crore in the year 2018-19 was 
brought down to Rs. 69 crore only in the ear 2019- 20. 
 Considering the number of trained personnel required for 
implementation of various programmes pertaining to Power Sector 
and to adapt according to rapid technological changes being 
effected in the system, the Committee are of the view that there is a 
need to augment and further strengthen the training facilities. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to provide the required 
financial support to NPTI for the approved training infrastructure and 
to meet the upcoming requirements. The Committee also expect the 
Ministry to provide assistance to NPTI in allotment of land for 
establishment of new units for expansion of training facility. 
Reply of the Government 
 Adequate grants for capital projects are being provided by 
Ministry of Power to NPTI based on approved projects. A Budget 
provision for Rs. 82.34 crores has been made for NPTI in the Budget 
Estimate 2020-21, keeping in view the annual action plan of NPTI 
including procurement that can be completed during the year and 
balance payments to be made to the vendors based on the progress 
of the project. Any requirement of funds by NPTI over and above the 
B.E 2020-21, will be addressed in the Revised Estimates stage of 
2020-21. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
 2.17 The Committee Noted that UDAY (Ujwal Discom 
Assurance Yojana), a scheme for financial and operational 
turnaround of Power Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) was 
formulated and launched by the Government of India on 
20thNovember, 2015 in consultation with the various stakeholders to 
ensure a sustainable permanent solution to the problem of legacy of 
debts and address potential future losses. 
40 
 
 The Committee also Noted that there have been reduction in 
ACS-ARR Gap as it has come down to Rs.0.27 per Kwh in FY-2019 
from Rs. 60 per Kwh in FY 2015-16. It has also been submitted that 
UDAY States have showcased an improvement in annual book 
losses from Rs. 51,562 crore in FY 2016 to Rs.27,250 crore in FY 
2019. AT&C loss have also came down slightly from 20.81% in FY- 
2016 to 18.19% in FY-2019. The Committee feel that UDAY scheme 
has been successful in improving the situation to some extent, 
however, it has not been fully address the problem as the losses of 
Discoms, after showing dip in initial years, have once again started 
rising. The Committee were given to understand that the Ministry is 
working on a new scheme and its details would be shared as and 
when it is finalized. However, so far there is no announcement in this 
regard. The committee being well aware of the importance of 
Distribution Sector’s economic viability, desire that the Government 
would make all out effort to improve the financial health of Discoms 
on sustainable basis. They also expect that the new scheme in this 
regard would soon be formulated and announced. 
Reply of the Government 
 UDAY was launched in 2015 to facilitate the financial and 
operational turnaround of State Power distribution utilities. While 
several target states that were in financial and operational problems 
before the onset of UDAY have shown signs of improvement, some 
states that were performing well before UDAY have deteriorated 
their performance, because of which the overall national position has 
been impacted. 
2. The main reasons for limited success of the scheme are: 
inability of the states to improve their billing and collection 
efficiencies and thereby AT&C losses as per defined 
trajectories; tariffs not being reflective of costs; and delays in 
payments by Government departments and local bodies in 
paying up for their electricity bills. 
3. A reforms based results linked scheme (including provisioning 
for Smart meters) is under consideration of the Ministry. The 

41 
 
proposed scheme will be an all- encompassing scheme with 
several components which includes a complex technological 
intervention of Smart meters and other reforms, and therefore, 
requires time for finalizing the bidding ecosystem, and 
specifications etc. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Development of Power Sector 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.18) 
 2.18 The Committee noted that at present there is 3,67,280 
MW of total installed generation capacity in the Country. The 
Committee further noted that as per the National Electricity Plan for 
Generation, it is estimated that there would be Generation capacity 
to the tune of 6,19,066 MW by the end of 2026-27. Whereas, as per 
19 Electric Power Survey there would be Peak Demand of only 
2,98,800 MW in the year 2026-27. 
 The Committee also noted that the Central Electricity Authority 
(CEA), as a statutory organization, is responsible for overall power 
sector planning, coordination, according concurrence to hydro-
electric schemes, promoting and assisting the timely completion of 
projects, specifying technical standards and safety requirements, 
Grid Standards etc,. The Committee feel that despite the fact that 
generation is a de-licenced activity, it is an obligation on part of the 
Ministry/CEA to ensure that the power sector is developed in a 
balanced manner. Though we have been able to create enough 
generation capacities in the recent years, it has also created several 
issues. There are issues of stressed assets, low PLF of thermal 
power plants, falling share of hydro power in energy mix, difficulty in 
accommodation of intermittent renewable energy, etc. The 
Committee believe that all these issues cropped up due to 
inaccurate projections, faulty execution and inability to change as 
per the new situation. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that while making plans to 
meet future power generation requirements, it should invariably be 
42 
 
taken into account that the demand has to be met by an optimum 
energy mix comprising hydro, nuclear, thermal and the renewable in 
right proportion. There should also be planning as to how those 
generation resources would be utilized optimally. 
Reply of the Government 
 CEA has carried out studies to project “Optimal Generation 
Capacity mix by the year 2030" to assess optimal generation and 
capacity mix, using sophisticated modeling tool in view of the high 
penetration of Renewables sources envisaged in the coming 
decade. In the studies all the technological options for power 
generation including Grid scale battery energy storage systems , 
which is expected to play an important role in balancing the 
Electrical Grid has been studied and projections for Battery storage 
systems requirement has been carried out along with the optimal 
utilization of Coal, Hydro, Nuclear and Gas etc. Further, Hourly 
Economic dispatch has been carried out in detail to study the 
behavior of various power generation technologies during extreme 
Grid variability constraints. The economic dispatch studies also 
looked into various technical constraints such as ramp rates, 
technical minimum load of operation, and variability of RE, etc. in 
detail. The studies have also projected the fuel requirement and 
Carbon emissions by the year 2030. The studies have been carried 
out so that the INDCs announced by India during Paris Climate 
conventions are fulfilled. 
       CEA had published the draft report on “Optimal Generation 
Capacity Mix for the year 2030” for stakeholder’s comments. Based 
on the comments received from various stakeholders the report has 
been finalized and approved by Ministry of Power. Now it is available 
on the CEA website. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 2.19) 
 2.19 The Committee noted that there was a gap of 7.1 Billion 
Units in Energy Requirement and the Energy Supplies in the year 

43 
 
2018-19. There was also a gap of 1,494 MW in Peak Demand and 
Peak Met. The Committee also noted that we have generation 
capacity to the tune of 3,67,280 MW while the Peak Demand was 
only 1,77,022 MW. Despite that we were not able to fully meet the 
demand. The Ministry have submitted that it is due to constraints in 
sub-transmission and distribution network, commercial reasons, 
financial constraints of State utilities, etc. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to remove all the constraints in fully meeting 
the demand of power in the country. The Committee expect that the 
Ministry would provide a detailed road map these constraints in this 
regard at the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes. 
Reply of the Government 
i. Distribution of electricity to various consumers is the 
responsibility of the State power utilities particularly the 
Distribution licensee. The Intra state electricity supply is 
regulated by the respective State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs). 
ii. Distribution licensees within the States continuously keep on 
updating and augmenting their distribution system to improve 
the reliability of supply to the consumers within their financial 
resources. 
iii. Government of India from time to time provides financial 
assistance through various schemes like DDUGJY, IPDS, 
SAUBHAYA and PSDF, for augmenting the distribution system 
and providing last mile connectivity for the consumers. 
iv. The total financial assistance provided to the States under the 
various schemes for the period 2014-15 to 2019-20 is 
approximately ₹ 80115.03 crores. 
v. The Indian electricity grid is one of the largest synchronous 
grid in the world. Ideally all electrical equipment should be 
available 100% of time but due to inherent nature the 
generator, transmission lines, distribution lines and other 
associated equipment, they undergo outage due to various 
44 
 
technical reasons. Due to the efforts made by the various 
stakeholders of the power sector, the restoration of faulty 
equipments have been expedited. This has led to reduction in 
the gap between demand and supply to less than 1%. Making 
improvements to reduce the deficit is a continuous process, in 
which action is being taken. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Stress Assets in Power Sector 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 2.20) 
 2.20 The Committee noted that there were 34 Power Plants 
having capacity of 40,130 MW which were stressed. In regard to 
their present status, the Ministry have stated that 14 projects with a 
total capacity of 16,450 MW have been resolved. 14 projects with a 
total capacity of 17,320 MW are at various stages of resolution, 
whereas, 6 projects with a total capacity of 6,360 MW are at very 
initial stage of construction and are totally stalled. Such projects 
have either been ordered to be liquidated or heading toward 
liquidation. The Ministry have enumerated various steps to take the 
remaining projects out of stress. The Committee, however, 
recommend the followings: 
I.    The Ministry should make sincere effort while resolving the 
issue of stress in power sector with a view to bring out 
maximum possible power plants from the stress category 
especially those which have suffered because of the faults 
of others. The Committee have also found that in most of 
the cases, lack of coal supply is the prime reason for their 
stress. 
II.    The Committee are surprised that despite having more 
than enough coal reserves we are not able to supply 
adequate coal to our power plants. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that efforts should also be made to 
ensure adequate supply of coal to the power plants by 
raising this issue at the appropriate level. 

45 
 
III.   The Committee also recommend an impartial and 
independent investigation into the entire episode of 
Stress/NPA in Power Sector and process of its resolution 
so as to identify the malpractices and willful defaults in 
making these assets non-performing including the aspect 
of gold-plating/siphoning of funds which is perceived to 
have been done in some cases. 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to point no. (i) & (ii): 
 Department of Financial Services (DFS) on 22.03.2017 had 
provided a list of 34 coal based Thermal Power Projects, mostly 
private, totaling to 40,130 MW which were considered ‘Stressed’ by 
Ministry of Power. Status of these 34 thermal power projects under 
stress is as follows: 
i. 14 projects with a total capacity of 16,450 MW have been 
resolved. 
ii. 14 projects with a total capacity of 17,320 MW are at 
various stages of resolution. 
iii. 6 projects with a total capacity of 6,360 MW are at very 
initial stage of construction and are totally stalled. Such 
projects have either been ordered to be liquidated or 
heading towards liquidation. 
2. The following steps have been taken by the Government 
to resolve the stress in thermal power sector: 
i. After the cancellation of 204 coal blocks, Government of 
India formulated a transparent policy for re-allocation of 
cancelled coal mines in a fair and transparent method. 
Government has re-allocated 62 blocks through 
auction/allotment till date to power sector. 
ii. Based on the request of Ministry of Power (MoP), Ministry 
of Coal (MoC) vide letter dated 13.04.2016 started 
separate e-auction window for power sector under which 
46 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) is making arrangements for 
conduct of special forward e-auction (SFeA) of coal 
exclusively for power sector on a sustained basis, offering 
adequate quantities at regular intervals so that coal is 
made available to such power plants on regular basis. CIL 
has allocated 33.1 million tonnes of coal through SFeA to 
the power sector during Apr., 2019 to March, 2020. 
iii. Based on inputs provided by MoP, MoC vide letter dated 
08.02.2016 had notified policy guidelines for grant of 
Bridge Linkage to specified end use plants of Central and 
State Public Sector Undertakings (Both in Power as well as 
Non-Power sector) which have been allotted coal mines or 
blocks. Bridge linkages applications for public sector power 
projects in prescribed formats have been approved. 
iv. Introduction of Transparent Linkage policy: On 
22.05.2017, Government introduced Scheme for 
Harnessing and Allocating Koyala Transparently in India 
(SHAKTI) Policy for grant of linkage to power sector. 
Linkages granted under SHAKTI Policy are as follows: 
a. Shakti Policy Para B(i): Linkage granted to 23 nos. 
Thermal Power Projects (TPPs) totaling 25,060 MW 
under Central/State Sector category. 
b. Shakti Policy Para B(ii): Coal linkages have been 
allotted under 1st round of B(ii) of Shakti (IPP Projects 
having PPA but no linkage) for 9045 MW capacity 
(32.68 MT) and 2nd round of B(ii) for 877.4 MW 
capacity (3.34 MT). In the 3rd round of B(ii) of SHAKTI, 
the auction has been held on 11.05.2020, 5 IPPs have 
booked a total quantity of 3.48 MT. 
c. Shakti Policy Para B(iii) for IPPs having no PPA and 
no linkage: Bidding held from 5th to 7th February, 
2020. The non-PPA capacity of 3775 MW (out of Total 
5995 MW) have secured linkage for 6.49MT. 

47 
 
d. Shakti Policy Para B(iv): Coal linkages granted to the 
States- Gujarat (for 4,000 MW), UP (for 1,600 MW) 
and MP (for 2640 MW) to be allocated through tariff 
based competitive bidding. 
e. Shakti Policy Para B(viii)(a): Methodology issued by 
MoP for IPPs not having PPAs for short term linkage (3 
months to one year) for selling power through Day 
Ahead Market (DAM) or through Discovery of Efficient 
Electricity Prices (DEEP) portal. Applications were 
received from 14 nos. of bidders with plant capacity of 
9,813 MW and non-PPA capacity of 8145 MW. CIL has 
completed the process of conducting Tranche-I auction 
on 19.03.2020. A total quantity of 1.34 MT has been 
booked. 
v. Pilot project for procurement of 2500 MW power: In 
order to address the problem of lack of Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPAs) in the country, the Ministry of Power 
had notified a scheme for procurement of 2500 MW on 
competitive basis for a period of 3 years from the 
generators with commissioned projects having untied 
capacity. 
a. 1st Round (2500 MW): Letter of Award (LOA) was 
issued to all the successful bidders (1900 MW) - PPA 
signed for 1900MW. 
b. 2nd Round (2500 MW): Bid Security for 21 bidders for 
a total capacity of 6000 MW was received. Bids 
opened on 07.02.2020. 12 bidders were successful 
with capacity of 2500MW. 
vi. Government of India constituted a High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) under the Chairmanship 
of Cabinet Secretary to address the issues of stressed 
thermal power projects. The report of the HLEC was 
submitted on 12.11.18 and was also placed in the public 
48 
 
domain on the website of Ministry of Power. The 
Government thereafter constituted a Group of Ministers  
(GoM)  to  examine   the   specific   recommendations   of   
HLEC. The Group of Ministers (GoM) made 
recommendations regarding stressed power projects. On 
07.03.2019, the Government approved the 
recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM). 
Subsequently, MoP vide OM dated 08.03.2019, notified the 
approval of the Government. The recommendations of 
GoM approved by the Government are under 
implementation. The action taken on the recommendations 
is annexed as Annexure-2.20(I). 
vii. Payment Security Mechanism: Ministry issued an order 
on 28.06.2019 and subsequent corrigendum thereon 
17.07.2019. National & Regional Load Dispatch Centres 
(NLDC & RLDC) have been directed to dispatch power only 
after it is intimated by the Generating Company and/ 
Distribution Companies that a Letter of Credit (LC) for the 
desired quantum of power has been opened. This has 
ensured timely payments by Discoms to the generators. 
 In view of the above, it may please be noted that Ministry of 
Power is taking all the necessary steps to reduce the stress in the 
power sector. 
 The domestic coal consumption during the year 2019-20 was 
577.3 Million Tonnes (MT) against the actual receipt of 569.5 MT 
from domestic sources while MT coal was imported for blending 
purpose. As reported by Coal India Limited (CIL), availability of 
domestic coal in the country has improved with opening stock of 
75MT at mine send as on 01.04.2020.The expected availability of 
coal from various domestic sources during 2020-21 is about 648 MT 
against the requirement of 645 MT, which includes 530 MT from CIL, 
55 MT from SCCL and 63 MT from captive sources. 
 As the expected availability of domestic coal is more than the 
requirement during 2020-21, there may be very little requirement of 

49 
 
importing coal for blending purpose depending upon cost economics 
and transportation logistics. In light of this, MoP has requested all 
the Generating companies (Gencos) [who are importing coal for 
blending purpose], to make best efforts to replace their imports with 
domestic coal. However, due to Covid-19 pandemic, there is shortfall 
in demand of power in the first two months in the current year and 
therefore, coal demand is also low. This has resulted into availability 
of coal stock of 50 MT with Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) as on 
15.05.2020 which is sufficient to meet requirements of TPPs for 
about 30days. 
Reply to point no. (iii): 
1. As per Section 7 of the Electricity Act, 2003, any 
generating company can establish, operate and maintain a 
generating station without obtaining a license/permission if 
it complies with the technical standards relating to 
connectivity with the grid. 
2. As power generation is a delicensed activity, decision to 
set up a power plant is taken by the concerned developer 
based on his /her assessment of market conditions, 
demand of power in future, finance options, viability of the 
project etc. In order to finance the project, a Financial 
Agreement is signed between the developer and the lender 
based on mutual negotiation and understanding, and the 
risk is entirely borne by the developers and the lenders. 
Lenders normally deploy a Project Engineer to assess and 
evaluate the project financing costs based on the extant 
lending norms of the Banks/Financial Institutions etc. 
Ministry of Power has no role to play in any kind of 
financial tie-up of such power generation projects. 
3. There are extant norms of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) for the Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) expenses already in place on per MW basis to 
check whether the developer is gold plating O&M 
expenses. It is also mentioned that the bankers appoint a 
50 
 
Lenders' Financial Advisor (LFA) and Lenders' Engineer 
for a particular project to monitor the cash flow of the 
project. 
4. The sectoral issues as identified by HLEC as the causes of 
stress have been resolved by different policy interventions 
taken by the Government. 
5. The details of resolution process of the stressed assets 
through Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and through 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) have been given 
at Annexure-2.20(II) to this Noted. It may be seen from 
Annexure-II that the resolution of a stressed projects is 
done as per the guidelines issued by RBI and/or under the 
IBC Act or NCLT. The process of resolution by lenders is 
overseen by Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
which is the administrative Ministry for all Financial 
Institutions/Banks. The frame-work and role for NCLT 
come under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
(MCA).Thus, it may be seen that project developers / 
lenders can seek remedy in case of Non- Performing Asset 
under the above two resolution processes It is pertinent to 
noted that Ministry of Power has no role in the aforesaid 
process of resolution of stressed assets through 
IBC/NCLT. 
6. In view of the facts brought out as above, an independent 
investigation into the entire episode of Stress/NPA in 
Power Sector and process of its resolution as 
recommended by the Standing Committee on Energy will 
not fall  within  the  domain  of   Ministry   of   Power.   
However,   the   aforesaid recommendation of the Standing 
Committee is being sent to Department of Financial 
Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance with a copy to Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs (MCA) for appropriate action in the 
matter. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 

51 
 
Hydro-Power 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 2.22) 
 2.22 The Committee noted that India is blessed with immense 
amount of hydro- electric potential and ranks 5th in terms of 
exploitable hydro potential on global scenario. As per assessment 
made by CEA, India is endowed with economically exploitable 
hydro-power potential to the tune of 1,48,700 MW of installed 
capacity. Against this capacity the present hydro power installed 
capacity in the country is 45,399 MW. The Committee have 
constantly been raising the issue of slow development of hydro 
power in the country and recommending the Government to take 
various steps to promote and expedite development of hydro power 
sector. The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Government 
of India has brought out an Office Memorandum on 08.03.2019, 
wherein, apart from declaring all hydro power projects as renewable 
energy irrespective of capacity, they have also stipulated for 
budgetary support for the infrastructure (roads & bridges) as well as 
flood moderation, Hydro Purchase Obligation, tariff rationalization 
etc. The Committee expect that the Government would further be 
making efforts to enable this sector grow at the desired speed. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to recommend some of the steps 
that are yet to be taken. The issue of water cess imposed by the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir is one of them which need to be removed 
permanently as it is making hydro power projects unviable. Apart 
from the Central Government, it is equally important that State 
Government should also facilitate the development of hydro power to 
reap its benefits in long term. Himachal Pradesh have taken various 
measures that promote development of hydro-power. Other States 
endowed with hydro power potential may also be persuaded to take 
such measures. 
52 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As on date ( i.e. 6.5.2020), the installed capacity of hydropower 
in the country is 45,699 MW which includes 4,786 MW of pumped 
storage schemes. The hydropower potential of 1,45,320 MW has 
been identified for the country by CEA in the year 1979-87. A re-
assessment study is underway to identify the existing potential in the 
light of exploited potential, basin studies etc. 
 As part of Nationally Determined Contribution to Climate 
Change submitted to UNFCCC, India has committed to increase its 
generation capacity from non- fossil resources to 40% of the total 
generation capacity by the year 2030. To honour this commitment, 
India has targeted to add 4,40,000 MW of solar and wind power, 
which are both infirm sources of power. 
 To send the right market signals and to create an enabling 
environment to achieve the target of adding 30000 MW by 2030, 
Union Cabinet decided to introduce Hydropower Purchase 
Obligation (HPO) mandating all Obligated Entities to purchase a 
certain percentage of their consumption from hydropower on the 
lines of RPO, apart from other measures like declaring all 
hydropower as renewable energy, tariff rationalization measures and 
budgetary support for enabling infrastructure and flood moderation. 
Apart from these, Central Govt. has requested State Govts to take 
measures to promote hydropower. 
 Through constant follow-up, the State of Himachal Pradesh 
has decided to certain incentives to developers to promote 
hydropower which included staggering/ deferring free power, 
reimbursing 50% State GST and allowing 1.5% pre-construction 
LADF to be excluded from project cost etc. with an intent to bring 
down the hydropower tariff. These measures adopted by Himachal 
Pradesh and the measures approved the Union Cabinet were 
presented by the Ministry of Power in the Power Ministers 

53 
 
Conference held at Tent City Narmada on 11-12 October, 2019. All 
other hydro-rich states were requested to consider to grant similar 
incentives to hydro power projects in their state. Minister of State for 
Power (IC) has also written to the Chief Ministers of hydro-rich states 
to consider to grant similar incentives to hydro power projects in their 
state and also to consider allotting hydro projects to CPSUs. 
 The UT of Jammu & Kashmir has also exempted water cess 
for upto 10 years in certain projects, viz., PakalDul (1000 MW), Kiru 
(624 MW) and Ratle  (850MW). 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
New Emission Norms of Power Plants 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 2.23) 
 2.23 The Committee noted that the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) have notified new Emission 
Norms on 07.12.2015, which was to be complied by December, 
2017. The Committee have been apprised that after extensive 
consultations held between stakeholders, an year wise 
implementation plan (FGD installation in 1,67,552 MW (415 units) 
and Electrostatic Precipitator Up gradation in 65,952 MW (231 units) 
starting from 2018 till December 2022 has been prepared, keeping in 
mind the techno economic feasibility and ensure availability of power 
to all at affordable cost without affecting the electricity requirement of 
the country. The same has been forwarded to MoEF&CC/CPCB has 
given directions to TPPs under Section 5 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 regarding compliance to new environment 
norms. The Ministry of Power have enumerated various steps being 
taken to facilitate implementation of new norms. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to ensure strict and time bound compliance 
of these norms as it is not only beneficial from environmental 
perspective but also helpful in phasing out old and inefficient power 
plants. 
54 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) CEA is monitoring the implementation of installation of 
pollution control equipments in 437 units. Latest status of FGD 
installation in these units is as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector 
(Capacity 
in MW) 
FGD 
planned 
Feasibility 
Study 
Started 
Feasibility 
Study 
Completed 
Tender 
Specification 
Made 
NIT 
Issued 
Bids 
Awarded 
FGD 
Commi- 
ssioned 
1. Central 53850  
(145) 
53850 
(145) 
53850 
(145) 
51960 
(136) 
51960 
(136) 
32840 
(73) 
420 
(2) 
2. State 50855  
(159) 
49205 
(153) 
43545 
(142) 
28295 
(88) 
23675 
(69) 
1000 
(2) 
0 
3. Private 61237  
(133) 
59327 
(129) 
49122 
(100) 
40400 
(75) 
38000 
(70) 
6000 
(10) 
1320 
(2) 
 Total 165942  
(437) 
162382 
(427) 
146517 
(387) 
120655 
(299) 
113635 
(275) 
39840 
(85) 
1740 
(4) 
(ii) Hon'ble Minister of State (IC) Power & NRE vide DO letter 
dated 16 April  2020 has requested Hon’ble CMs of 15 states 
having coal based Thermal Power Plants to give directions to 
TPPs/IPPs (FGD status of State and Private sector plants also 
provided) in their State to take all actions necessary to meet 
the timelines prescribed by CPCB/MoEF&CC for complying 
with the new emission norms so that the operation of these 
plants are not stopped by CPCB under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, adversely affecting the availability of 
power in the State. 
(iii)  CEA vide letter(s) dated 10.02.2020, 19.02.2020, 20.02.2020 
(2 letters) have advised utilities that in order to meet the target 
of FGD phasing plan, the process of awarding the tender 
should have been completed 30 months prior to the target 

55 
 
date. For units having target date of completion by 31.12.2022, 
Letter of award (LoA) need to be placed by June 2020 for 
meeting the deadline. 
(iv)  Ministry of Power has no locus standi to consider any time 
extension for installation of FGD as the installation of pollution 
control measures are being closely monitored by Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India as well as by Ministry of Environment 
Forest & Climate Change and Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB) as per time lines given by MoEF&CC and CPCB in 
this regard. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Performance of Power Sector PSUs  
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited (NEEPCO) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 2.24) 
 2.24 The Committee noted that NEPCO was incorporated in 
1976 to plan, investigate, design, construct, generate, operate & 
maintain power stations in the North Eastern Region of India. The 
Committee further noted that NEEPCO operates 7 hydro, 3 thermal 
and 1 solar power stations with a combined installed capacity of 
1,457 MW. Considering the fact that NEEPCO is a specialized 
organization of North-Eastern Region where most of the hydro 
power potential lies, their performance in terms of their present 
installed capacity leaves much to be desired. The Committee, 
therefore, are of the opinion that NEEPCO’s performance should be 
reviewed with a view to make it proactive in obtaining and 
developing of more hydro power projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 NEEPCO is the only CPSU to have hydropower installed in 
the states of Arunachal Pradesh (815 MW), Assam (275 MW), 
Nagaland (75 MW) and Mizoram (60 MW). Apart from these,  
56 
 
300 MW (2 units of Kameng HEP) in Arunachal Pradesh is to be 
commissioned in 2020-21. Further, NEEPCO has been allotted  
3 hydropower projects in WahUmiam basin in Meghalaya consisting 
of three cascade projects, of which DPR of Stage-III project is under 
examination in CEA. Further, NEEPCO is under discussion with 
Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh for development of some projects in 
Bichom and Siang basins in Arunachal Pradesh. 
 In the Siang basin, NEEPCO had undertaken S&I (survey and 
investigation) activities in respect of the 3750 MW Siang Upper St-II 
HEP. However, the same is held up as Government is contemplating 
a single integrated project by combining both the St-I and St-II 
projects. 
 Further, with the intent to undertake some other major projects 
in the state of Arunachal Pradesh, NEEPCO has already joined 
hands with SJVNL. Projects are being identified for joint execution, 
based on the desktop studies and data available with various 
authorities. 
 Government has divested its 100% shares in NEEPCO to 
NTPC Ltd, a Maharatna CPSU, through a strategic disinvestment. 
NTPC, being a world class company with strong management 
capabilities and financial position, the strategic disinvestment will 
support NEEPCO's endeavor to implement more hydro projects in 
North Easter Region. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Damodar Valley Corporation 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No. 2.25) 
 2.25 The Committee noted that Damodar Valley Corporation, 
the first major Multipurpose integrated River Valley Project of the 
country, conceived in line with Tennesse Valley Authority (TVA), 
came into existence on 7th July, 1948 by an Act of Central 
Legislature for the integrated development of Damodar Valley region 
in the State of Bihar (presently Jharkhand) and West Bengal.  
At present, Thermal Power Generation Capacity of DVC is 7,090 

57 
 
MW and Hydel Power Generation Capacity is 147.2 MW. The 
Committee further noted that DVC during April-2019 to Dec.-2019 
and FY 2019-20 has incurred losses from Power Generation to the 
tune of Rs. 1,166 crore and Rs. 1,235 crore respectively. The 
scrutiny of the Committee has revealed that there has been 
mismanagement in marketing of electricity by DVC. It is found that 
there was surplus power ranging from 836 MW to 1,666 MW during 
the period 2013-14 to 2017-18. Their decision to invest in a new 
power projects i.e. Raghunathpur Thermal Power having total 
capacity of 1,200 MW, seems imprudent as they were already 
finding it difficult to sell electricity of their existing power plants due to 
lack of buyers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of 
Power to review the functioning of DVC with a view to improve its 
financial heath and submit a detailed report in this regard at the time 
of furnishing Action Taken Noted. Also, the Ministry should provide 
assistance to DVC in recovery of due from the State Government of 
Jharkhand. 
Reply of the Government 
 DVC is in the business of both generation and distribution. 
Presently, installed capacity of DVC is 7107.5 MW consisting of 
6960 MW of thermal and 147.2 MW of hydro capacity. Sale of power 
by DVC is primarily to two sets of consumers viz. High Tension (HT) 
power supply to the consumers present in DVC command area in 
West Bengal & Jharkhand State and sale of balance power to 
various DISCOMS for which bilateral PPAs have been signed. DVC 
is committed to its consumers to provide reliable power supply. 
Accordingly, DVC has planned to supply uninterrupted (24X7) power 
to its valley consumers throughout the year considering rotational 
overhauling of units, contingency for forced outage of any units etc. 
In bilateral mode, DVC is selling power to various DISCOMS as per 
the contracted quantum in terms of PPA. In addition, DVC takes 
necessary action for sale of its surplus power from time to time in the 
power exchanges (IEX and PXIL). For sale of surplus power, DVC 
from time to time explores feasibility for export of power to 
58 
 
neighboring countries. For example, DVC is exporting 300 MW 
power to Bangladesh through NVVN. 
 Presently there is a surplus power of only 270MW (after taking 
into account the scheduling of 300 MW power to MPPCL as per 
CERC order) which is required to take care of additional load 
requirement of consumers, overhauling of units, forced outages and 
non-availability of fuel. In view of above, it may be appreciated that 
DVC is not having any significant surplus power as of now. 
 As regards investment in Phase-II of Raghunathpur Thermal 
PowerStation, it is stated that the decision was taken by DVC 
management to supplement the capacity addition programme in the 
12thPlan. As per decision of DVC Board, a consultant (M/s Deloitte) 
was engaged for due diligence study for revival. Report submitted by 
the Consultant is under examination by DVC and final decision will 
be taken by the DVC Board in view of viability, sustainability of DVC 
projects as well as long term PPA with West Bengal State Electricity 
Development Corporation Limited. 
Steps taken for improvement of the Financial Status 
 DVC operates in its command area of 24235 sq. km in the 
States of West Bengal and Jharkhand. In the last few years, DVC 
was unable to recover full Depreciation, Interest and Return on 
Equity on annual basis through its tariff due to dis-allowance of 
Capital Cost by CERC for various projects of DVC due to non- 
admittance of IDC for time overrun and also the allowed O&M costs 
by CERC for the DVC employees was not sufficient to meet the 
entire liability of DVC on this account. To improve the financial 
status, DVC has taken up the dis-allowance of Capital Cost by 
CERC by submitting appeal before APTEL, the decision is under 
active consideration of APTEL. Also, DVC has improved its Plant 
Availability Factor in the current Financial Year and thereby 
improved recovery of fixed charges. Again taking advantage of the 
recent market scenario, DVC tied up long term loans and working 
capital at a very considerable low rate of interest than even before. 
There has been improvement in power generation consistently over 

59 
 
the last five years. In the year 2017-18 and 2018-19, the power 
generation was 35692 MU and 36677 MU respectively. In the year 
2019-20, the Thermal Power Generation of DVC is 36998 MU. Again 
the PLF for the year 2017-18 and 2018-19 was 56.04% and 59.05% 
respectively. In the Financial Year 2019-20, the DVC achieved PLF 
of 60.52%. Further, the DVC registered Profit After Tax (PAT) of  
Rs. 65 crore (provisional) in Financial Year 2019-20, as against the 
loss of Rs 1115 crore in Financial Year2018-19. 
Monitoring the activities of DVC 
 DVC was established for integrated development of Damodar 
Valley region in the State of Bihar (now Jharkhand) and West 
Bengal. Major activities of DVC are power generation and 
transmission. Regarding development of coal block, it  is stated that 
two coal blocks namely, Khagra Joydev in West Bengal and Tubed 
in Jharkhand have been allotted by the Ministry of Coal as captive 
coal blocks for meeting the coal requirement of Mejiaand 
Chandrapura Thermal Power Stations of DVC respectively. Through 
development of these coal blocks, quality and surety of coal to the 
DVC power plants will be ensured. The quarterly performance of 
DVC is reviewed by Ministry of Power. Recently, a review was done 
by the Secretary (Power) in the month of November, 2019 at 
Kolkata. In addition, the important issues and performance of DVC 
are reviewed by the Hon’ble Minister of State (IC) for Power and 
NRE from time to time. The last review of DVC was done by the 
Hon’ble Minister on 17.01.2020. 
Slow Progress of Capital Expenditure 
 The capital expenditure of DVC for the Financial Year 2019-20 
was fixed at Rs. 1835.26 crore. Major portion of this Budget Estimate 
was for development of two coal blocks (Rs. 609.34 crore) and 
installation of FGD Plants (Rs. 813.64 crore) in Thermal Power 
Stations to meet the environmental norms as per instructions of 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Changes. The reason 
for slow progress of expenditure was the delay in acquisition of land 
60 
 
for development of Khagra Joydev Coal Mine and award of contract. 
The land price and R&R package for acquisition of land for the said 
coal mine is yet to be finalized by the District Level Committee of 
Birbhum District of West Bengal. Orders for installation of FGD 
plants were supposed to be placed in March 2019 but due to some 
procedural requirement, these were placed in July 2019. In view of 
the slow progress of expenditure, the budget for capital expenditure 
has been revised at Rs. 1410crore. 
Steps taken for improvement of the Financial Status 
 DVC operates in its command area of 24235 sq. km in the 
States of West Bengal and Jharkhand. In the last few years, DVC 
was unable to recover full Depreciation, Interest and Return on 
Equity on annual basis through its tariff due to dis-allowance of 
Capital Cost by CERC for various projects of DVC due to non- 
admittance of IDC for time overrun and also the allowed O&M costs 
by CERC for the DVC employees was not sufficient to meet the 
entire liability of DVC on this account. To improve the financial 
status, DVC has taken up the dis-allowance of Capital Cost by 
CERC by submitting appeal before APTEL, the decision is under 
active consideration of APTEL. Also, DVC has improved its Plant 
Availability Factor in the current Financial Year 2019-20 and thereby 
improved recovery of fixed charges. Again taking advantage of the 
recent market scenario, DVC tied up long term loans and working 
capital at a very considerable low rate of interest than even before. 
There has been improvement in power generation consistently over 
the last five years. In the year 2017-18 and 2018-19, the power 
generation was 35692 MU and 36677 MU respectively. In the year 
2019-20, it is expected to be at 39000 MU. Again, the PLF for the 
year 2017-18 and 2018-19 was 56.04% and 59.05% respectively. In 
the current financial year, it is expected to be at 63.79%. 

61 
 
Surplus power and rates for sale 
 Presently there is a surplus power of only 270 MW only (after 
taking into account the scheduling of 300 MW power to MPPCL as 
per CERC order) which is required to take care of valley load growth, 
overhauling of units, forced outages and non-availability of fuel. In 
view of above it may be appreciated that DVC is not having any 
significant surplus power as of now. The average rate of selling of 
power (Rs./Kwh) by DVC to its consumers (bilateral/direct/ 
exchange/export) for the months of November, 2019, December, 
2019 and January, 2020 are 4.69; and 4.61, respectively. 
New Power Projects by DVC 
 Presently, there is no proposal under consideration to set up 
new power plant by the DVC. However, the Phase-II of 
Raghunathpur TPS could not be completed in time due to various 
reasons. A decision was taken during DVC Board Meeting held on 
24.03.2018 to start discussion with respective vendors for revival of 
the contracts short closed earlier and also to undertake Due 
Diligence Study by engagement of a reputed consultant. 
Accordingly, on 26.07.2018, M/s. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India 
LLP was engaged as consultant through open bidding for carrying 
out “Due Diligence Study with respect to revival of RTPS Phase-II”. 
Discussions with vendors have also been held to firm up contract 
price in respect of changed scenario. 
Liabilities of DVC 
 As on 31.01.2020, DVC have the liability of repayment of loan 
of Rs. 17,737 crore as long term loan; Rs. 5300 crore as short term 
loan and Rs. 3856 crore as cash credit taken from financial 
institutions. An amount of Rs.6346.25 crore (approx.) is due to be 
paid to DVC by various Distribution Companies (DISCOMS) for 
power supplied to them. Major defaulter is the Jharkhand Bijlee 
Vitran Nigam Limited (JBVNL) who owns Rs. 5018.77 crore liability 
to the DVC. Following steps are being taken to improve the financial 
status of DVC: 
62 
 
i. Regular persuasion for realization of outstanding dues 
from various DISCOMS. 
ii. Regular interaction with various DISCOMS for their 
power requirement. 
iii. Regular discussions with the existing valley consumers 
for their additional requirement of power. 
iv. Induction of new Valley HT consumers. 
Development of two coal blocks to ensure supply of requisite 
quantity of coal to its power plants. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Strengthening of Power System 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, Para No. 2.26) 
 2.26 The Committee noted that the Ministry of Power, for 
improvement of transmission system in the North-Eastern Region, is 
implementing North-Eastern Region Power System Improvement 
Project (NERPSIP). It has been submitted that a total of Rs. 
2,610.33 crore has been received while amount of Rs. 1,886.31 
crore has been spent. In regard to fund utilization, the Ministry have 
stated that the fund allocated has not been fully utilized because the 
elements covered under the scheme are under implementation and 
expected to be completed progressively by December, 2020. 
 The Committee do appreciate this initiative of the Government 
as implementation of this project would strengthen the Intra-State 
transmission & Distribution infrastructure of six States of North 
Eastern Region (Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland 
and Tripura); improve its connectivity to the upcoming load centres, 
and thus would extend the benefits of the grid- connected power to 
all the consumers. The project would also provide the required grid 
connectivity to such villages and towns of the States, where 
development of distribution system at the downstream level has 
been taking place under Government of India sponsored RGGVY/ 
APDRP/ R-APDRP schemes. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the project should be properly implemented within the stipulated 

63 
 
timeline. Needless to say that paucity of fund should not get in the 
way of timely and proper implementation of this project. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
North Eastern Regional Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP) was sanctioned by Government of India for improvement 
in intra-state transmission and distribution (33 kv and above) for six 
States i.e. Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura. Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd (PGCIL) is 
implementing the project. The progress of the works is regularly 
monitored by PGCIL, Central Electricity Authority and Ministry of 
Power. Besides, a Project Screening Committee (PSC) comprising 
of representatives of DONER, Central Electricity Authority, PGCIL 
and six participating State Governments regularly review the 
progress of the work and facilitates timely completion of the project. 
The last meeting of the PSC was held on 31st Jan.-1st Feb. 2020. 
 Progress of the works was affected due to difficult terrains, 
poor participating of contractors in the bidding process, delayed 
handing over of land by State Governments, severe Right of Way 
(RoW) problems and Forest/ Wild life related issues. As on date (i.e. 
14.5.2020), all 55 packages have been awarded and the works 
under all awarded packages are under progress. Till April 2020, 
physical progress of works is 42%. The works are scheduled for 
completion progressively till December 2020. However, prevailing 
country wide lockdown measures to contain outbreak of COVID-19, 
may affect the pace of construction activities, and consequently 
scheduled date of completion of works. 
 The project is undergoing cost revision due to higher 
discovered prices of packages through bidding compared to 
estimated cost, changes in taxes, inclusion of new elements in 
project, impact of GST etc. An Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) memo has been circulated for appraisal of the proposed 
revised cost. 
64 
 
 Till 31.03.2020, Rs. 2,810.33 crore has been released by 
Ministry of Power and out of that, Rs. 2,114.63 crore has been spent 
till 30.04.2020. During 2020-21, Rs. 770 crore of budget allocation 
has been made against project to take care of anticipated 
expenditure. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Smart Grid 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27, Para No. 2.27) 
 2.27 The Committee noted that Smart Grid is an Electrical 
Grid with Automation, Communication and IT Systems that can 
monitor power flows from points of generation to points of 
consumption (even down to appliances level) and control the power 
flow or curtail the load to match generation in real time or near real 
time. The Committee considering the importance of Smart Grid in 
integration and optimization of renewable power, maximizing the 
conventional sources for power generation etc. are disappointed with 
the delay in its implementation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the work related to Smart Grid should be expedited 
and implemented in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 The deployment of Smart Grids can be expedited with timely 
monitoring at various levels (viz. DISCOM, State and Central levels) 
and regularly attending the issues through agenda discussions in 
RPM meetings of MoP. Also, the State Level Project Management 
Units (SLPMU) established in the states as the nodal group for 
implementing smart grid be advised to hold regular meetings with 
the stakeholders. The sanction of future projects is being linked to 
tie-up of balance 70% funds beforehand and a dedicated and skilled 
smart grid team. 

65 
 
 The complete smart grid at CED, Chandigarh may be test 
case for above actions and it’s timely execution can be better 
ensured on Deposit work basis (including Consultancy and 
Implementation) through CPSUs (like POWERGRID, NTPC, EESL 
etc.) considering their expertise in managing projects. The 
committee is also apprised that the Smart Grid outlays under NSGM 
are not enough to cater to the complete requirement of Smart grids 
across the country, and therefore, an approach using smart meters 
as a building block is being contemplated to build up smart grids 
across the country. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
Smart Meters 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28, Para No. 2.28) 
 2.28 The Committee noted that Smart Meter is an electronic 
device capable of recording electricity consumption, operating via 2-
way communication and having an internal load switch. It records 
various types of meter data such as load profile, daily billing profile, 
monthly billing profile, instantaneous profile, events etc. and is 
capable of remote configuration change and remote firmware 
upgrade. Smart meters conforming to IS 16444 can be configured to 
work as prepaid meters. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that followings: 
i. As there is need to augment the manufacturing base of the 
Smart Meters to ensure supply of adequate number of 
meters to be installed all over country, it should be ensured 
that there are multiple players in the field to rule out 
monopoly or any constraints in supply of Smart Meters in 
future. 
ii. The Ministry should encourage States to submit their plans 
for complete switchover to Smart meters as done by UT of 
Chandigarh. 
66 
 
iii. The Ministry should also ensure that henceforth only Smart 
Meters are installed under Saubhagya Scheme to avoid 
duplicity of work. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) EESL has completed procurement of 10 Million Smart Meters 
through International Competitive Bidding and has engaged 5 
different Smart Meter manufacturers. Considering the 
requirement of 250 Million Smart Meters, engagement with 
industry is necessary for getting them to ramp up their 
manufacturing capacity and also to get BIS certification for all 
Smart Meters. As per the mandate issued by Ministry of Power 
for deployment of Smart/Prepaid meters in the country within a 
span of 3 years time, a standard bidding documents (SBD) for 
appointment of Advanced Metering Infrastructure Service 
Provider (AMISP) for rollout of Smart/Prepaid meters by the 
DISCOMs has been developed. The SBD has been discussed 
with multiple stakeholders including MoP, CEA, CSPUs, 
Industry etc. and a Draft is under finalization/approval. The 
AMISP SBD aims to encourage the state DISCOMs to initiate 
adoption of Smart/Prepaid meters on OPEX model (For approx 
10 years (configurable) period including Establishment and 
O&M) through multiple players. Once the SBD is finalized and 
released, the DISCOMs shall be asked to take up projects on 
OPEX model. 
(ii) In addition to the states where EESL is implementing Smart 
Prepaid Meter projects, EESL has been in active engagement 
with other states/ UTs like West Bengal, Gujarat, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka etc. for deployment of Smart Meters and 
sharing the immense benefits experienced with 12 Lakhs 
Smart Meters under operations in UP, Haryana, Bihar and 
NDMC. 
 As per Saubhagya scheme guidelines, electricity connections 
to un-electrified households includes provision of energy meter 
including prepaid/smart meter. Installation of meters for every 

67 
 
consumer is the responsibility of the respective State Distribution 
Utilities. Ministry of Power had already issued an advisory to all 
DISCOMs to cover all consumers in the next three years. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
  
68 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

69 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND  
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 2.21) 
 2.21 The Committee observe that the issue of long term Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA) has become a conundrum. Since the 
advent of Solar Power, its tariff is on a constant decline. In the recent 
years, Solar Power tariff has aggressively been quoted making the 
Discoms reluctant to enter any long term PPA. This situation is 
causing disruption as long term PPA is a pre-requisite for financing 
of any new power project. In absence of long term PPAs it may be 
difficult to attract investment in Power Sector. On one hand, there 
are Power Generators who insist on honoring of long term PPAs at 
any cost as they have made huge investment in their projects. On 
the other hand, there are Discoms who do not want to purchase 
power at higher rate through long term PPAs as it is available at 
much cheaper rate in short term market. The Committee have been 
apprised that the Ministry is looking for a possible solution to this 
problem and will come out with a Policy Paper in this regard. The 
Committee expect that the Ministry would expeditiously finalize the 
Policy Paper. The Committee, however, would like to recommend 
the Ministry to make a provision for review of such PPAs, wherein, 
tariff has been increased owing to cost overrun due to delay in 
development of a Power Project. 
Reply of the Government 
 It may not be possible to suddenly shift from game of long-term 
PPAs to short-term or medium terms agreements for sale of power. 
The Banks may be reluctant to finance projects entirely based on 
short or medium term agreements. However, Banks may be willing 
to finance a project in which most of the output is tied up in long-term 
70 
 
PPA but remaining output can be sold through medium term or 
short-term agreements. Therefore, avenues will have to be provided 
for sale of power generated, particularly from RE projects in 
platforms such as Power Exchanges. In this context, Ministry of 
Power had constituted a Group of Officers drawing officers from 
CEA, CTU, CERC and POSOCO. The group has submitted its report 
on 20th April 2020. The Group has inter-alia recommended 
introduction of separate day-ahead market segment for RE power. 
Such separate segment will facilitate clear identification of buyers for 
RPO. The group has also recommended a fixed term of waiver of 
transmission charges and losses for energy bought and sold in this 
segment. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No.10/1/2020-Budget, Dated: 09/07/2020] 
  

71 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      NEW DELHI; 
18 March, 2021  
Phalguna 27, 1942 (Saka) 
RAJIV RANJAN SINGH alias  
LALAN SINGH,                 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Energy. 
72 
 
APPENDIX I 
 MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON 18th MARCH, 
2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘2’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI  
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1535 hrs. 
PRESENT 
        Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  —  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  2. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
  3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
  4. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
  5. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
  6. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
  7. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
  8. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
  9. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
10. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
11. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
12. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
13. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  – Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Additional Director 
4. Smt. L. N. Haokip             –      Deputy Secretary 

73 
 
 2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then 
took up the following ten draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption: 
(a) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An Appraisal’; 
(b) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Power 
Sector’; 
(c) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised Framework for 
Resolution of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity 
Sector’; 
(d) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas based 
Power Plants'; 
(e) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’; and 
(f) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy; 
(g) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
Power; 
74 
 
(h) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy’. 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
Power. 
(j) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement of 175 
Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
 3.   After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee 
adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget 
Session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

75 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FOURTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 28 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 
18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 
 Total: 27 
 Percentage: 96.42% 
(iii) Observation/ Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
- Nil   -   
 Total: 00 
 Percentage: 00% 
(iv)  Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of 
the Government has not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
 Sl. No. 21  
 Total: 01 
 Percentage: 3.57% 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited: 
- Nil   -   
 Total: 00 
 Percentage: 00% 
76 
 
 