STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
11
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations
contained in the Forty-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on
'Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas based Power Plants’]
ELEVENTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna,1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."

ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
[Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in Forty-Second Report(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Stressed/             
Non-Performing Assets in Gas based Power Plants'] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
COE NO. 326 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat,  
New Delhi-110 001 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………..............................
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………….. 
 
(v) 
 CHAPTER I Report  …………………………………….................. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government ………………………… 
 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ………………………………………………… 
 
  
22 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………………… 
  
25 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited ……................................................................. 
 
  
33 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 18th March, 2021 ………………………………………… 
 
 
34 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 42nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy …………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
ii 
 
 
  

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON ENERGY (2020-21) 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed   
  3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla   
  4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
  5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
  6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
  7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam   
  8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav   
  9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
12. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
13. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
14. Smt. Anupriya Patel   
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod ^ 
18.  Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
iv 
 
21. Shri Akhilesh Yadav   
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant * 
31. Vacant # 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                        — 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan         — 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora      — 
4. Smt. L.N. Haokip                       — 
5. Ms. Deepika                               — 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
Additional Director 
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Officer  
 
 ^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020. * Vacant vice  Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020. # Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eleventh Report on action-taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Energy on the subject ‘Stressed/Non-Performing 
Assets in Gas based Power Plants'. 
2. The Forty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 4th 
January, 2019 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations contained in 
this Report were received on 26th April, 2019, 13th June, 2019 and 29th 
June, 2020. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 18th March, 2021. 
4. An Analysis of the Action-taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
NEW DELHI;       RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS   LALAN SINGH, 
18  March ,2021                                                                            Chairperson, 
27 Phalguna , 1942 (Saka)                          Standing  Committee   on  Energy. 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with 
Action- taken by the Ministry of Power, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas and Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2018-19) on the subject 
‘Stressed/Non Performing Assets in Gas based Power Plants’. 
2. The Forty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 4th 
January, 2019 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
The Report contained 11 Recommendations/Observations. 
    3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows:— 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7 and 9   
    Total - 05 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. 8 and 11  
       Total - 02 
     Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. 2, 4, 5, and 10  
    Total– 04 
 Chapter-IV 
2 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil 
  Total - 00 
    Chapter-V 
4. The Committee observe that the 42nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Stressed/Non Performing Assets in Gas based Power Plants’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Power was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
4th January, 2019 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same 
day. The Ministry was required to submit the action-taken replies on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report within a period 
of three months i.e. by 3rd April, 2019. The Committee, however observe 
that the Ministry submitted the complete action-taken replies on 29th 
June, 2020 after a delay of one year and two months. The Committee 
deplore the delay on the part of the Ministry in submission of complete 
action-taken replies to the Committee. The Committee while expressing 
their displeasure caution the Ministry to be extra vigilant in timely 
submission of replies to the Committee and desire that the necessary 
instructions be issued to all concerned in the Ministry to strictly adhere 
to the time line for responding to the Committee in future. The 
Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government 
on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
Recommendation No. 2 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:— 
“The Committee note that in view of increasing Renewable Energy 
Capacity which is intermittent in nature, the Gas based Capacity can 
be utilized for peaking demand due to its higher ramp up rate and 
quick start time. These Plants can play a role in balancing of the Grid 
by maintaining uninterrupted electricity supply, especially when 
Solar Plants shuts down in the evenings and coal based plants take 

3 
 
time to ramp up. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Gas 
based Plants can be operated as Peaking Plants as they can switch on 
quickly when there is high demand and running these plants as 
Peaking Plants will also optimize the use of scarcely available 
domestic natural gas.” 
7. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as 
under:— 
“The sale of power during peaking operation is a market dependent, 
and the viability will be generally a function of rate of sale of power 
of peak demand viz- a-viz the cost of generation. Presently the cost 
of generation from LNG (imported gas) is around Rs. 7.0/kwh which 
may not match with the prevailing rate of sale of power. In case the 
cost of power from LNG is matching with sale price of power, the 
peaking operation would become usable. 
The Power Plants are free to sell the power in exchange in the peak 
demand period”. 
8. The Committee, in their recommendation, had observed that in 
view of increasing Renewable Energy Capacity which is intermittent in 
nature, the Gas based capacity can be utilized for peaking demand due 
to its higher ramp up rate and quick start time. These plants can play a 
role in balancing of the Grid by maintaining uninterrupted electricity 
supply, especially when solar plants shut down in the evenings and coal 
based plants take time to ramp up.  However, the Ministry in its reply 
has stated that the sale of power during peaking operation is market 
dependent. The Committee are, however, of the opinion that with the 
installation of 175 GW of Renewable Power in the Country by 2022 as 
per the target fixed by the Government, it is imperative to ensure 
availability of adequate balancing power to take care of the variability 
and uncertainty associated with renewable energy generation. The Gas-
based Power Plants along with Hydro Power Plants will invariably be 
needed to cater to the requirement of the balancing power.  The Gas 
based power plants played an important role in maintaining the balance 
of the Grid during the unprecedented Light Switch off Event in April 
2020. The Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation that 
gas based plants can be operated as peaking plants as they can switch on 
quickly when there is high demand and running these plants as peaking 
plants will also optimize the energy-mix in the Country. The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry should furnish its action plan regarding 
4 
 
smooth integration of Renewable Energy into the Indian Electricity 
Grid. 
Recommendation No. 4 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:— 
“The Committee note that the peak flow of the gas from KG D6 was 
expected to be about 80 MMSCMD by the end of the year 2009 and 
to increase further in subsequent years. But the production from KG 
D6 started declining from 55.35 MMSCMD in 2010-11 to 5.5 
MMSCMD in 2017-18 and today the production is as good as nil. 
This decline is contrary to the estimates made. The Committee also 
note that as per Guidelines issued by the Government in 2010, Gas 
based Power Plants were put above the City Gas Distribution 
(CGD) Systems for domestic and transport requirements in order of 
priority for allocation of domestic Natural Gas. However, as per 
Guidelines issued in the years 2013 and 2014, Gas allocation/supply 
to the CGD Systems was placed under no cut category, 
consequently giving CGD higher priority than Power Sector. 
Further, in view of the decrease in the production from KG D6, the 
Government issued an order to apply pro-rata cuts in the supply of 
natural gas to all the stakeholders. However, it was notified that if 
the gas production is insufficient to meet the demand of the core 
sectors, then cuts could be imposed in the reverse order of priority. 
This reverse cut policy proved detrimental to power sector leaving it 
in a fix. 
The Committee are of the view that these policy flip-flops crippled 
the gas based power plants consequently making them stranded. 
These plants are now unable to service their debt obligations and are 
on the verge of becoming NPAs. The Committee find that instead of 
taking a holistic view for resolution of the problem, as is where is 
approach has been adopted. This kind of approach is fraught with 
inconceivable consequences for the sector as well as the Country, 
besides compromising the reliability of policy of the Government. 
The Committee hope that the Ministry would avoid such erratic 
policy shifts in the future. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that some consistency and predictability should be maintained in 
policy making so as to avoid giving sudden shocks to the 
stakeholders concerned. Also any policy/guidelines with respect to 

5 
 
the change in allocation of gas should be prospective and it should 
not impact the existing users.” 
10. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas has stated as under:— 
“Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) has been consistent 
in policy regarding allocation of Domestic gas. It is also to inform 
that the Policies have been notified with the approval of the 
competent authority in public interest. At present, allocation and 
supply of domestic gas is being made as per the relevant gas 
utilization policies issued from time to time. About 108.69 
MMSCMD (Firm-90.60 MMSCMD and Fall back-18.09 
MMSCMD) domestic gas has been allocated to Power sector under 
various gas utilization policies from time to time. 
These allocations are being made to Power sector based on the 
projected availability at that time and without any firm commitment 
to power generators to have gas supply in perpetuity. Due to limited 
availability of domestically produced natural gas in the country, the 
domestic gas supply to various sectors including Power sector is 
limited. 
Domestic Gas production and Domestic Gas supply to power sector 
in MMSCMD is tabulated below. It can be seen that production has 
gone down in the country and therefore present gas supplies are not 
meeting the gas allocations. However, supply of Domestic Gas to 
Power sector has increased in last 2 years. At present, power sector 
is the largest consumer of domestic gas in the country. 
(in MMSCMD) 
 
         
Year 2013-14  2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Domestic Gas 
Production 
97.00 90.99 88.12 87.39 89.45 
Domestic Gas Supply 
to power sector 
27.26 25.33 22.87 25.00 25.71 
6 
 
To attract investment in E&P activities and enhance domestic gas 
and crude production, Government has introduced various policy measures 
which include: — 
(i) Policy Frame work for Relaxation, Extension and 
Clarification under PSC for early Monetization of 
Hydrocarbon Discoveries. 
(ii) Discovered Small Fields Policy. 
(iii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Discovered Fields. 
(iv) Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP). 
(v) Gas Pricing Reforms. 
(vi) National Seismic Programme. 
(vii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Exploration Blocks. 
(viii) Policy Framework for Early Monetization of CBM Blocks. 
(ix) National Data Repository. 
(x) Policy Framework for streamlining the working of PSCs. 
(xi) Policy Framework for Exploration and Exploitation of 
Unconventional hydrocarbons under existing PSCs, CBM 
Contracts and Nomination Fields. 
(xii) Policy Framework to promote and incentivize Enhanced 
Recovery Methods for Oil and Gas. 
(xiii) Policy Reforms in Exploration and Licensing Policy for 
enhancing domestic exploration and production of oil and 
gas. 
RLNG (Imported) gas is under Open General Licence which is sold 
on mutually agreed terms between buyers and sellers on market 
based mechanism. Power plants can source RLNG as per their 
needs.” 
11. The Committee, in their recommendation, had noted that as 
per Guidelines issued by the Government in 2010, Gas based power 
plants were put above the City Gas Distribution (CGD) Systems for 
domestic and transport requirements in order of priority for allocation 
of domestic Natural Gas. However, as per Guidelines issued in the years 
2013 and 2014, Gas allocation/supply to the CGD Systems was placed 
under no cut category consequently giving CGD higher priority than 
Power Sector. Further, in view of the decrease in the production from 
KG D6, the Government issued an order to apply pro-rata cuts in the 
supply of natural gas to all stakeholders. However, it was notified that if 
the gas production is insufficient to meet the demand of the core sectors, 

7 
 
then cuts could be imposed in the reverse order of priority. This reverse 
cut policy proved detrimental to power sector leaving it in a fix. 
 The Ministry, in its reply, has stated that it has been consistent in 
policy regarding allocation of Domestic gas. However, based on the 
factual position about guidelines issued by the Ministry, as mentioned 
above, the reply of the Ministry does not appear to be tenable. Further, 
the Ministry has not responded to the Committee’s recommendation that 
any policy guidelines with respect to the change in allocation of gas 
should be prospective and it should not impact the existing users. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that some consistency and 
predictability needs to be maintained in policy making so as to avoid 
giving sudden shocks to the stakeholders concerned and further, any 
policy guidelines with respect to the change in allocation of gas should be 
prospective and it should not impact the existing users. 
Recommendation No. 5 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:— 
“The Committee note that the present condition of the gas-based 
power plants is largely due to non-fulfillment of commitment 
regarding supply of domestic gas by the Government. The changes 
in policy for domestic gas allocation have made these plants 
unviable jeopardizing the huge public investment. The Committee 
also note that the RLNG is under Open General Licence and can be 
sold on mutually agreed terms between Buyers and Sellers on 
Market Based Mechanism and power plants are allowed to source 
RLNG as per their requirement. The Committee appreciate the fact 
that RLNG has been put under Open General Licence and there are 
no restrictions on its import. However, the Committee feel that since 
the cost of producing power from RLNG is unaffordable and makes 
it difficult for scheduling in merit order dispatch, importing RLNG 
even under open general licence does not help in making the 
stranded Gas based Power Plants viable. The Committee have also 
been apprised that one of the gas-based power plants has been 
established with the co-operation of South Korean Government and 
decline in the availability of gas has also affected this plant. 
International co-operation and commitment in addition to foreign 
8 
 
investment are the angles which need to be taken care of, so the 
Committee desire that gas should also be supplied to this plant. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
explore all possibilities to revive these stranded gas-based plants 
which may inter-alia include assured gas allocation to stranded Gas 
based Power Plants from ONGC deep-water fields, diversion of 
domestic gas from non-core sectors to power sector and cost 
moderation of RLNG till sufficient domestic gas is made available.” 
13. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas has stated as under:— 
“Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) has not made any 
erratic policy shift regarding allocation of Domestic gas. At present, 
allocation and supply of domestic gas is being made as per the 
relevant gas utilization policies issued from time to time. About 
108.69 MMSCMD (Firm - 90.60 MMSCMD and Fall back- 18.09 
MMSCMD) domestic gas has been allocated to Power sector under 
various gas utilization policies from time to time. 
These allocations are being made to Power sector based on the 
projected availability at that time and without any firm commitment 
to Power generators to have gas supply in perpetuity. Due to limited 
availability of domestically produced natural gas in the country, the 
domestic gas supply to various sectors including Power sector is 
limited. 
Domestic Gas Production and Domestic Gas supply to Power sector 
in MMSCMD is tabulated below. It can be seen that production has 
gone down in the country and therefore present gas supplies are not 
meeting the gas allocations. However, supply of Domestic Gas to 
Power sector has increased in last 2 Years. At present, Power sector 
is the largest consumer of domestic gas in the country. 
 (in MMSCMD) 
Year 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Domestic Gas Production 97.00 90.99 88.12 87.39 89.45 
Domestic Gas Supply to power sector 
27.26 25.33 22.87 25.00 25.71 

9 
 
To attract investment in E&P activities and enhance domestic gas and 
crude production, Government has introduced various policy measures which 
include: — 
(i) Policy Framework for Relaxation, Extension and 
Clarification under PSC for early Monetization of 
Hydrocarbon Discoveries. 
(ii) Discovered Small Fields Policy. 
(iii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Discovered Fields. 
(iv) Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP). 
(v) Gas Pricing Reforms. 
(vi) National Seismic Programme. 
(vii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Exploration Blocks 
(viii) Policy Framework for Early Monetization of CBM Blocks. 
(ix) National Data Repository. 
(x) Policy Framework for streamlining the working of PSCs. 
(xi) Policy Framework for Exploration and Exploitation of 
Unconventional hydrocarbons under existing PSCs, CBM 
Contracts and Nomination Fields. 
(xii) Policy Framework to promote and incentivize Enhanced 
Recovery Methods for Oil and Gas. 
(xiii) Policy Reforms in Exploration and Licensing Policy for 
enhancing domestic exploration and production of oil and 
gas. 
Imported Gas (RLNG) was supplied to gas based power plants with 
various incentives as per CCEA approval dated 25.3.2015 for FY 
2015-16 and FY 2016-17. It helped in reviving Stranded Power 
Plants.  It has also helped in improving utilization of LNG terminals 
and gas pipeline infrastructures, besides improving power 
availability in the country.  Various incentives provided in the 
scheme includes custom duty waiver on imported LNG, waiver of 
various state taxes, reduction in pipeline tariffs, reduction in Re-
gasification charges, reduction in Marketing Margin and support 
from Power Sector Development Fund (PSDF) etc. 
RLNG gas is under Open General Licence which is sold on mutually 
agreed terms between buyers and sellers on market based 
mechanism.  Power plants can source RLNG as per their needs. 
Korea Western Power Company Limited (KOWEPO) in January, 
2012 made investment a gas based power plant located in Raigad 
District Maharashtra which is owned and operated by Pioneer Gas 
10 
 
Power Limited (PGPL).  Central Electricity Authority (CEA), in 
March, 2011 had already issued advisory to caution all prospective 
developers that their respective application for the allocation of gas 
would only be taken up once additional gas availability is known.  
Further, in March 2012, CEA again issued an advisory explicitly 
stating that no additional gas is likely to be available till 2015-16, 
and advised developers not to plan projects based on domestic gas at 
least till such time.  On the contrary, KOWEPO continued to make 
investment in said power plant based on its own due diligence.  The 
plant has not been allotted any domestic gas due to limited 
availability of domestic gas.  As an alternate, the foreign investor has 
been suggested to explore the options to procure the gas from 
available market based gas sources (imported RLNG domestic gas 
sources having marketing and pricing freedom) for operation of 
power plant. 
Government of India has constituted a High Level Empowered 
Committee to address the issue of stressed Thermal power Plants 
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary Recommendations of 
the committee have been processed by the Ministry of Power.” 
14. The Committee had recommended that the Government 
should explore all possibilities to revive these stranded gas based plants 
which may inter-alia include assured gas allocation to stranded gas 
based power plants from ONGC deep water fields, diversion of domestic 
gas from non-core sectors to power sector and cost moderation of RLNG 
till sufficient domestic gas is made available. However, the reply of the 
Ministry does not directly deal with the recommendation of the 
Committee. Reply given here is mostly a repetition of its response to the 
Recommendation number 4 of the Report. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that the Government should explore all 
possibilities to revive these stranded gas based plants which may inter-
alia include assured gas allocation to stranded gas based power plants 
from ONGC deep water fields, diversion of domestic gas from non-core 
sectors to power sector and cost moderation of RLNG till sufficient 
domestic gas is made available. The Committee would also like the 

11 
 
Ministry of Power to furnish a brief on recommendations of the High 
Level Empowered Committee constituted by the Government to address 
the issue of stressed Power Plants and action taken thereon by the 
Government. 
Recommendation No. 10 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:— 
“The Committee note that in order to improve utilization of gas 
based capacity in the country, the Government came out with E-Bid 
RLNG scheme in 2015 for importing spot Re-gasified liquefied 
Natural Gas (RLNG) for the stranded gas based power plants.  The 
Scheme provided financial support from PSDF (Power System 
Development Fund).  The Scheme also included exemptions from 
applicable taxes and levies/ duties.  However, the Scheme was 
discontinued in 2017 as many States such as Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh, etc. refused to sign PPAs with gas based plants and 
exemptions/waivers required were not extended by the States of 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand. It is beyond 
comprehension that why the States did not cooperate, when the 
scheme was introduced after consultation with the States concerned. 
The Committee observe that the other reason, given by the Ministry, 
for discontinuation of the Scheme is that any additional generation 
from gas based plants would have reduced the demand from the coal 
based thermal plants. The Committee feel that the natural gas is 
cleaner fuel, so the Ministry may consider giving it due priority over 
coal. 
As the electricity demand is expected to pick up and the Committee 
have been assured of significant jump in the production of domestic 
gas in the near future, so there is a need to hand hold these stranded 
gas based power plants for next 2-3 years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend  that: — 
(i) The Government should come up with a scheme like E-Bid 
RLNG Scheme to support these stranded plants in the 
intervening period with necessary exemptions, waivers and 
desired modifications. 
(ii) The financial support/subsidies required for the scheme may 
be sourced from Power System Development Fund/National 
12 
 
Clean Energy Fund/Budgetary Grants. The Ministry of 
Power should pursue the same with the Ministry of Finance. 
(iii) The power so produced under the scheme may be used for 
bundling with other low cost power as has been done by 
NTPC earlier. 
(iv) RLNG may be pooled with the domestic gas through an 
aggregator such as GAIL, so as to achieve a reasonable 
price.” 
16. In its Action-taken Reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as 
under:— 
“(i) A draft proposal based on the recommendations of HLEC was 
discussed in 2nd GoM meeting held on 25.02.2019, wherein the 
proposal was deferred for further examination as the issue involves 
large financial implications. Under the proposal a subsidy of around 
Rs. 3.30/kWh was estimated for generation from LNG, and for an 
incremental of around 61 BUs at 42% PLF would entail subsidy of 
around 19000 crores/annum. The above amount of subsidy is 
required considering the sale of power at Rs. 3.75/kWh, and the 
subsidy would vary with the rate of sale of power. 
(ii) The funds in the PSDF are already tied up and further as 
informed by Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance vide O.M. dtd.. 
27.02.2019, Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 
2017, provides that coal cess, along with some other cess, along with 
some other cess would constitute GST Compensation Fund and the 
same would be utilized to compensate the states for 5 years to 
Compensate the potential losses on account of GST 
implementation.”  
17. The Committee observe that in response to part (i) of the 
recommendation, the Ministry has informed that a draft proposal based 
on the recommendations of HLEC was discussed in 2nd GoM meeting 
held on 25.02.2019 wherein the proposal was deferred for further 
examination as the issue involves large financial implications. In this 
regard, the Committee would like to know the updated status and details 

13 
 
regarding the above mentioned proposal. In response to part (ii) of the 
recommendation, the committee observe that the Ministry has submitted 
that the funds in the PSDF has already been tied up. In this context, the 
Committee would like to know the total corpus of PSDF and the details 
regarding all the schemes/programmes/projects etc. for which funds 
have been disbursed from PSDF. The Committee further observe that 
surprisingly, the Ministry has not responded to part (iii) and (iv) of the 
recommendation of the Committee given in the original Report which 
were related to the bundling of the gas based power with other low cost 
power and also for pooling of Regasified Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG) 
with the domestic gas through an aggregator such as GAIL. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their original recommendation that:— 
(i) The Government should come up with a scheme like E-
Bid RLNG scheme to support these stranded plants in 
the intervening period with necessary exemptions, 
waivers and desired modifications. 
(ii) The financial support/subsidies required for the scheme 
may be sourced from Power System Development Fund/ 
National Clean Energy Fund/Budgetary Grants. The 
Ministry of Power should pursue the same with the 
Ministry of Finance. 
(iii) The Power so produced under the scheme may be used 
for bundling with other low cost power as has been done 
by NTPC earlier. 
(iv) RLNG may be pooled with the domestic gas through an 
aggregator such as GAIL, so as to achieve a reasonable 
price. 
  
14 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 1 
 The Committee note that out of the total installed capacity of about 
345 GW, a capacity of 24,867 MW is from Gas based Power Plants.  
However, 14,305 MW of gas based capacity is stranded due to shortage of 
domestic gas supply and competitive tariff scenario. There are 31 stranded 
gas based power plants which include one power plant of Central Sector 
(1967 MW), six power plants of State Sector (2665.30 MW) and 24 power 
plants of Private Sector (9673 MW). It means a majority of the stranded gas 
based plants belong to the private sector. 
 The Committee also note that these power plants were planned with 
the expectation of considerable increase in the volume of domestic gas 
production, particularly from KG D6 field. But the projections regarding 
availability of domestic gas have turned out to be terribly wrong as the 
production from KG D6 field has reduced drastically to zero supply for 
power sector since March, 2013. The Committee feel that since these gas 
based power plants were set up on the basis of the Government’s assurance 
regarding supply of gas, it becomes incumbent upon the Government to help 
them come out of stress. 
 The Committee are apprised that an investment ranging from INR 4 - 
5 crores per MW has been made into these projects and approx 70% - 80% of 
the project cost has been financed by the banks using public money. It means 
a sum of about Rs. 65,000 crores have been invested into 14,305 MW of 
stranded capacity, out of which about 50,000 crores have been funded by the 
banks. The Committee feel that since this stranded gas based capacity 
involves a significant amount of public money, it can not be allowed to 
become junk. Allowing slippages of these projects tantamount to causing 
wastage of national resources which we can ill-afford irrespective of many 
practical hurdles and unforeseen impediments in our way. The Committee are 
of the opinion that efforts should be made to ensure these plants remain an 
asset to the country. 

15 
 
 Keeping in view of the above, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should hand-hold these stranded gas based power plants and 
provide them requisite support so that they can come out of stress. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) A draft proposal based on the recommendations of HLEC was 
discussed in 2nd GoM meeting held on 25.02.2019, wherein the proposal was 
deferred for further examination as the issue involves large financial 
implications. Under the proposal a subsidy of around Rs. 3.30/kWh was 
estimated for generation from LNG, and for an incremental of around 61 BUs 
at 42% PLF would entail subsidy of around 19000 crores/annum. The above 
amount of subsidy is required considering the sale of power at Rs. 3.75/kWh, 
and the subsidy would vary with the rate of sale of power. 
(ii) The funds in the PSDF are already tied up and further as informed 
by Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance vide O.M. dtd. 27.02.2019, Goods 
and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, provides that coal 
cess, along with some other cess, along with some other cess would 
constitute GST Compensation Fund and the same would be utilized to 
compensate the states for 5 years to Compensate the potential losses on 
account of GST implementation. 
[Ministry of  Power  , O.M. No. 13/9/2018-Th-I, Dated: 24/04/2019] 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee note that the domestic natural gas production in the 
country during 2017-18 was about 86.93 MMSCMD as against 89.57 
MMSCMD in 2014-15. From 2011-12 to 2016-17, domestic gas production 
had been continuously declining, while in 2017-18, there was a slight 
increase. The import of RLNG has been continuously increasing from 50.78 
MMSCMD in 2014-15 to 72.13 MMSCMD in 2017-18 and about 50% of the 
country’s requirement of gas has now been met by the imported gas. Further, 
the total domestic gas allocated to power projects is 87.12 MMSCMD and 
the average domestic gas supplied to gas based power plants during 2017-18 
was only 25.71 MMSCMD which is 70% short of the allocation. Due to this 
shortfall, the PLF of gas based power plants has come down to 24% which 
used to be 67% in 2009-10. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Committee have been assured by the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas that the production of domestic gas 
would undergo a significant jump in the years to come i.e. it is expected to go 
up to 60.50 billion cubic meters by 2021-22. The Committee hope that this 
16 
 
time the Ministry has made a realistic assessment unlike in the case of KG 
D6, which triggered the setting up of gas based power plants in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that, the Ministry should be 
cautious in making future projections with respect to the availability of 
domestic natural gas so as to avoid the implications caused by KG D6, as 
such situations reflects poorly on the credibility and reliability of the 
Government's projections and policies. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the committee is noted and DGH, responsible 
for Contract Management, has been instructed to be more cautious in making 
projections. 
 To improve data management, the National Data Repository (NDR) 
has been established by the government to assimilate, preserve and upkeep 
the vast amount of data which could be organized and regulated for use in 
future exploration and development of hydrocarbon resources. 
 [Ministry of  Petroleum and  Natural Gas, O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that before the KG D6 gas got infused into the 
system in 2009, there were 44 number of gas based power plants of the 
capacity of 13577.60 MW in the country and 42.83 MMSCMD gas was 
allotted to these 44 power plants, out of which 36.69 MMSCMD gas was 
supplied/consumed during the year 2008-09. It is beyond comprehension of 
the Committee that when power sector could have been supplied with 36.69 
MMSCMD of gas even before the infusion of KG D6 gas, then why the gas 
supply to power sector got reduced after KG D6. 
Further, the peak flow of gas from KG D6 fields was expected to be 
about 80 MMSCMD and consequently with the expectation of considerable 
increase in the volume of production, a number of gas based plants were 
taken up for implementation. 30 number of gas based power plants with a 
capacity of 14,504 MW were allocated gas from KG D6 on firm basis but 
without any commitment regarding supply of Gas.  However, the supply of 
gas from KG D6 field to power sector is nil since March 2013 as a result of 
which these plants are now stranded. Even Banks/lenders issued credit 

17 
 
facilities to these plants on the basis of the projections/assumptions made 
regarding the increase in production of gas. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that State Bank of India, the 
largest lender in the county, does not have any solution regarding these 
stranded plants and wants to write off the investment made in these gas based 
plants. In the opinion of the Committee, such an attitude of the lenders 
reflects that they just want to shrug off the responsibility of this crisis by 
referring the stressed plants to the NCLT. The Committee are disappointed 
with the attitude of the Ministry as well as the Banks/lenders towards this 
problem. The Committee feel that the Ministry and the Banks/lenders, both 
are responsible for this crisis. The Ministry owe the responsibility for 
superfluous projections regarding production of gas from KG D6 and the 
banks for unrealistic lending of public money. Instead of ensuring how these 
stranded power plants can be efficiently utilized, there is an air of 
despondency and increasing clamour to send these plants to NCLT. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas should come out with the reasons, in the lucid 
terms, for zero production of gas from KG D6 as the estimated production of 
80 MMSCMD that was envisaged earlier and the steps taken by the 
Government against those who are responsible for this gross miscalculation 
about the production of gas from KG D6 which has put the reliability of the 
Ministry at stake. The Committee also recommend that the banks/lenders 
should own the responsibility and work towards finding the appropriate 
solution in the national interest. 
Reply of the Government 
1.  Status of Block 
 1.1 As per Addendum to Initial Development Plan (AIDP) of D1-D3 
gas field in the Block KG-DWN-98/3, the contractor was required to drill, 
connect and put on production 22 wells by April 01, 2011 with an envisaged 
production rate of 61.88 MMSCMD and 31 wells by April 1, 2012 with an 
envisaged production rate of 80 MMSCMD and 40 wells by April, 2013 and 
50 wells by April, 2014 respectively with an envisaged production rate 80 
MMSCMD. 
 1.2 As on 31.03.2019, production from D1-D3 and MA fields 
of KG-DWN-98/3 Block has ceased. However, the Field Development 
18 
 
Plan (FDP)/Revised Field Development Plans (RFDP) for D-34 field, 
D-2 & D-22, D-29 & D-30 and MJ (D-55) fields have been approved by 
Management Committee (MC) monetize hydrocarbon. 
 1.3  As per information available, the decline in gas production from 
KG-D6 Block is due to the following reasons:– 
(i)  Due to water loading/sand ingress in wellbores, 13 wells ceased 
to  produce gas, out of total 18 gas producing wells in D1 & 
D3 fields. 
(ii)  Due to water ingress in wellbores, declining in 
pressure,variance in  reservoir behavior etc, all 7 oil/gas 
producing wells in MA field, have  ceased to flow oil/gas. 
(iii)  Non-drilling of the required number of gas producing we s in 
D1& D3 fields by the Contractor in line with the AlDP 
approved by the  Management Committee (MC). 
1.4  The Contractor of Block KG-DWN-98/3 in violation of Article 15 
PSC claimed cost recovery beyond the entitlement out of cost petroleum due 
to creation of excess capacity and failure to adhere to the drilling schedule 
approved under Addendum to Initial Development Plan (AIDP), resulting in 
under-utilization of assets/facilities. The Government vide notice dated 
03.06.2016 disallowed cumulative cost recovery of US$ 2756 billion  
and demanded additional profit petroleum of US$ 246.9 million upto FY 
2014-15. Upto Financial Year 2013-14, cumulative contract cost of US$ 
2.376 billion was disallowed for cost recovery purpose. For Financial year 
2O14-15, the cost recovery of US$ 380 million was disallowed. The 
contractor invoked arbitration. So far, Rs. 491.26 crore has been credited in 
Gas Pool Account against the additional profit petroleum due and payable by 
contractors. The matter is under arbitration. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas , O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
(i) Most of the funding done by lenders/Fls for gas-based projects 
was before 2010 wherein the scenario was considered 
favourable for gas based projects and expected to improve in 
view of commissioning of KG D6 basin but the same did not 
materialize into actual With the rise in cost of imported gas, the 

19 
 
generation cost became unviable leaving these Projects 
unviable. 
(ii)  Lenders have extended full support to the stranded projects by 
giving priority to continued plant operations, 
restructuring/refinancing the loans as per extant RBI guidelines, 
including resorting to extension of repayment tenor, 
moratorium for repayments and reduction in interest rates and 
funded interest term loans were extended wherever availability 
of cash flow for interest servicing were not sufficient till the 
time Project comes out of stress. 
(iii) Despite lenders extending full support, the sector is still 
continuing under stress due to scarcity of domestic Gas 
availability at affordable rates. As the cost of generation based 
on imported gas is higher, Discoms are reluctant in procuring 
power at higher cost from these gas-based projects. It may be 
appreciated that addressing these issues are beyond the realm of 
the lenders. 
(iv) Regarding the observations of the Committee that lenders want 
to shrug off the responsibility by just referring to NCLT, 
lenders are willing to walk the extra mile to salvage the 
projects, which are national assets and this is evident from the 
resolution being attempted for various projects by lenders 
during the recent years. To arrive at any viable and sustainable 
resolution, constraints of supply side and off-take arrangements 
need to be addressed, without which any resolution efforts by 
lenders alone will be short-lived. 
(v) Lenders continue to explore various options for stress 
resolution such as restructuring, with existing promoters 
wherever the projects are viable with paring down of debt to 
sustainable levels and where cash flows can be reasonably 
estimated, compromise settlement and resorting to sale to ARC 
etc. 
(vi) SBI has suggested the following steps to revive the sector:— 
(a) A long-term policy intervention for optimal utilization of 
gas-based capacity including revival of RLNG Scheme. 
20 
 
(b) Extending 'Must Run' status to the sector similar to 
renewable energy. 
(c) Extending financial support from collections of coal 
energy through National Clean Energy & Environment 
Fund (NCEEF). 
(d) Discoms entering into long term PPAs as a part of 
purchase obligations with these stranded gas-based 
projects. Fixed cost may be reimbursed from NCEEF. 
(e) Waiver of taxes and duties on natural gas/re-gasification 
by state governments or binging natural gas under GST.  
[Department of  Financial Services,  Ministry of Finance F.No.15/6/2019-1 
F-I, dated 03/10/2019 vide Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 13/9/2018 -Th-I, 
Dated: 29/06/2020] 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that due to inadequate domestic production, the 
country has been importing RLNG to meet the shortfall in supply of natural 
gas and LNG terminals are in operation for re-gasification of imported LNG. 
The Committee observe that all the existing operational LNG terminals (of 
the capacity of 95 MMSCMD) are situated on the West Coast of the country, 
whereas the eastern coast has been completely neglected. Although the 
Ministry is said to have planned re-gasification terminals on the Eastern 
coast, but nothing has materialized till date. The Committee want the 
Ministry to speed up the work related to building of new re-gasification 
terminals. As the eastern coastal region has many gas based power plants 
which are stranded due to lack of supply of natural gas, the Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should focus on building LNG re-
gasification terminals at the east coast of the country in a time bound manner 
as it would cost less for the industries/plants at the eastern side to source gas 
from east coast terminals than piping the fuel across the country from the 
West coast. 
Reply of the Government 
Most of the LNG terminals are situated in west coast of the country 
and Government is taking all efforts to develop LNG terminal in eastern part 
for the development of gas based economy in the country. Ennore LNG 

21 
 
terminal with 5 MMTPA capacity in Tamilnadu has been commissioned. 
Work is under progress in Dhamra LNG terminal with 5 MMTPA capacity in 
Odisha. These terminals will connect demand centers in Eastern and 
Southern India to LNG supplies to be used by all sectors of the economy. 
 [Ministry of  Petroleum  and  Natural Gas, O.M. No.L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
Recommendation No. 9 
 The Committee note that apart from the basic cost, VAT (as high as 
26%), CST & entry tax, pipeline tariff, marketing margin by gas transporter 
etc. are levied on domestic natural gas/RLNG. In case of RLNG,  
re-gasification process involves an extra cost of $ 1.0-1.5/MMBTU and 
service tax on re-gasification is also levied. Consequently, the gas price at 
power plants goes up in the range of $ 4.0-5.5/MMBTU for domestic gas and 
$ 10-12/MMBTU for RLNG. 
The Committee observe that while the Coal has been included and 
taxed at 5% GST, Natural Gas has been kept outside the GST purview. The 
Committee feel that natural gas being a cleaner fuel should not be placed at a 
disadvantageous position vis-a-vis other sources of energy like coal. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that natural gas should be brought under 
GST, so that the taxes get rationalized and gas becomes cheaper and 
affordable. 
Reply of the Government 
MoP&NG has already taken up the issue with Ministry of Finance 
for inclusion of Natural Gas under GST 
 [Ministry of  Petroleum  and Natural Gas, O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
 
  
22 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE  
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN  
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note that the price of natural gas produced from 
domestic fields is determined as per the pricing formula envisaged in New 
Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014, under which, the price of 
domestic natural gas is linked to the prices at US Henry Hub, Canada’s 
Alberta Gas, UK’s National Balancing Point (NBP) and Russian Hub.  
Natural gas prices in the country are revised every six months. Also, the price 
of natural gas is dollar denominated that keeps on fluctuating, so having a 
long term PPA with DISCOMs is a challenge for Gas based Power Plants.  
The Committee observe that the price of domestic natural gas has 
been increasing from a low of $ 2.48/MMBTU (April, 2017 to Sept., 2017) to 
$3.36/MMBTU (October, 2018 to March, 2019). The gas price at power 
plants remains in the range of $4.0-5.5/MMBTU for domestic gas and  
$10-12/MMBTU for RLNG.  
The Committee observe that the Government has already introduced 
pricing and marketing freedom for High Pressure-High Temperature (HPHT) 
discoveries and now the free-market pricing for natural gas produced from all 
fields is under active consideration. The Committee are of the opinion that 
because of shortage in availability of gas and demand being much higher than 
supply, the free-market pricing will result in exorbitant prices. Although free 
market pricing may be beneficial to the producers of natural gas but this will 
be detrimental to the users such as power sector which is regulated and where 
more than 50% of the gas based capacity is already stranded. 
The Committee have come to know that the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas has proposed removal of Power Sector from the priority 
allocation. The Committee are of the view that Power Sector being a 
regulated Sector needs domestic gas allocation more than any other Sector. It 

23 
 
will be a major setback for this sector and may make even operational gas 
based plants stranded. The Committee, therefore, recommend that: — 
(i) The Government should rethink its plan of introducing free 
market pricing for natural gas as any attempt to gain at the 
cost of consumers will be counter-productive  and may not be 
in the public interest. 
(ii) Any proposal for removal of Power Sector from the priority 
allocation should also be reconsidered. 
Reply of the Government 
As per policies issued in recent years, the Government has granted 
marketing and pricing freedom to the gas produced/to be produced from 
difficult fields. These policies are expected to attract investment in 
Exploration & production sector and enhance domestic Oil & Gas 
production. Increased production will be used for all sectors of economy 
including Power sector. 
 These are progressive steps to create a domestic free gas market 
regime which will provide level playing field to the gas producers and 
consumers including power sector also. It has potential to offer new 
opportunities to gas based power units to explore & develop new power 
consuming markets which have affordability to consume gas based power. It 
is also felt that price may come down with development of Gas markets. 
 Ministry of Power may review the existing power policy & regulatory 
framework for creating sustainable power market within the sector and 
aligned it with energy markets. 
 [Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas , O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee have come to know that the National Clean Energy 
Fund (NCEF) was created out of cess on Coal at Rs. 400 per tonne to provide 
financial support to clean energy initiatives and an Inter Ministerial Group 
chaired by the Finance Secretary was constituted to approve the 
project/schemes eligible for financing under NCEF. The coal cess collected 
24 
 
from 2010-11 to 2017-18 amounts to Rs. 86,440.21 crore, out of which only 
Rs. 29,645.29 crore have actually been transferred to NCEF. Whereas, the 
amount financed from NCEF for projects is only 15,911.49 crore i.e. only 
about 19% of the total amount collected as coal cess.  
The Committee feel that this fund should be used for its intended 
purpose i.e. to support clean energy initiatives and it should not be diverted to 
compensate GST losses. Diversion of this fund to unrelated activities reflects 
poorly on our commitment towards cleaner environment and shows 
Government's apathy towards clean energy projects. Since it is levied on coal 
as that is a polluting fuel, so the amount collected should be used to promote 
cleaner fuel. The Committee, therefore, recommend that financial support 
should be extended to gas based power projects from NCEF for their 
sustainability as natural gas is also a clean energy source. The Ministry of 
Power should pursue this matter with the Ministry of Finance.  
Reply of the Government 
As informed by Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance vide O.M. dtd. 
27.02.2019, the Goods and Services Tax (compensation to states) Act., 2017, 
provides that coal cess, along with some other cess would constitute GST 
compensation Fund and the same would be utilized to compensate the States 
for 5 years to compensate the potential losses on account of GST 
implementation. 
 [Ministry of Power , O.M. No. 13/9/2018-Th-I, Dated: 24/04/2019] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED      
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH  REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee note that in view of increasing Renewable Energy 
Capacity which is intermittent in nature, the Gas based Capacity can be 
utilized for peaking demand due to its higher ramp up rate and quick start 
time. These Plants can play a role in balancing of the Grid by maintaining 
uninterrupted electricity supply, especially when Solar Plants shuts down in 
the evenings and coal based plants take time to ramp up. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Gas based Plants can be operated as Peaking 
Plants as they can switch on quickly when there is high demand and running 
these plants as Peaking Plants will also optimize the use of scarcely available 
domestic natural gas. 
Reply of the Government 
The sale of power during peaking operation is a market dependent, 
and the viability will be generally a function of rate of sale of power of peak 
demand viz- a-viz the cost of generation. Presently the cost of generation 
from LNG (imported gas) is around Rs. 7.0/kwh which may not match with 
the prevailing rate of sale of power. In case the cost of power from LNG is 
matching with sale price of power, the peaking operation would become 
usable. 
 The Power Plants are free to sell the power in exchange in the peak 
demand period. 
 [Ministry of Power , O.M. No. 13/9/2018-Th-I, Dated: 24/04/2019] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee note that the peak flow of the gas from KG D6 was 
expected to be about 80 MMSCMD by the end of the year 2009 and to 
increase further in subsequent years. But the production from KG D6 started 
declining from 55.35 MMSCMD in 2010-11 to 5.5 MMSCMD in 2017-18 
and today the production is as good as nil. This decline is contrary to the 
26 
 
estimates made. The Committee also note that as per Guidelines issued by the 
Government in 2010, Gas based Power Plants were put above the City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) Systems for domestic and transport requirements in order 
of priority for allocation of domestic Natural Gas. However, as per 
Guidelines issued in the years 2013 and 2014, Gas allocation/supply to the 
CGD Systems was placed under no cut category, consequently giving CGD 
higher priority than Power Sector. 
 Further, in view of the decrease in the production from KG D6, the 
Government issued an order to apply pro-rata cuts in the supply of natural 
gas to all the stakeholders. However, it was notified that if the gas production 
is insufficient to meet the demand of the core sectors, then cuts could be 
imposed in the reverse order of priority. This reverse cut policy proved 
detrimental to power sector leaving it in a fix. 
 The Committee are of the view that these policy flip-flops crippled the 
gas based power plants consequently making them stranded. These plants are 
now unable to service their debt obligations and are on the verge of becoming 
NPAs. The Committee find that instead of taking a holistic view for 
resolution of the problem, as is where is approach has been adopted. This 
kind of approach is fraught with inconceivable consequences for the sector as 
well as the Country, besides compromising the reliability of policy of the 
Government. 
The Committee hope that the Ministry would avoid such erratic 
policy shifts in the future. The Committee, therefore, recommend that some 
consistency and predictability should be maintained in policy making so as to 
avoid giving sudden shocks to the stakeholders concerned. Also any 
policy/guidelines with respect to the change in allocation of gas should be 
prospective and it should not impact the existing users. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) has been consistent 
in policy regarding allocation of Domestic gas. It is also to inform that the 
Policies have been notified with the approval of the competent authority in 
public interest. At present, allocation and supply of domestic gas is being 
made as per the relevant gas utilization policies issued from time to time. 
About 108.69 MMSCMD (Firm-90.60 MMSCMD and Fall back-18.09 
MMSCMD) domestic gas has been allocated to Power sector under various 
gas utilization policies from time to time. 
 These allocations are being made to Power sector based on the 
projected availability at that time and without any firm commitment to power 

27 
 
generators to have gas supply in perpetuity. Due to limited availability of 
domestically produced natural gas in the country, the domestic gas supply to 
various sectors including Power sector is limited. 
 Domestic Gas production and Domestic Gas supply to power sector in 
MMSCMD is tabulated below. It can be seen that production has gone down 
in the country and therefore present gas supplies are not meeting the gas 
allocations. However, supply of Domestic Gas to Power sector has increased 
in last 2 years. At present, power sector is the largest consumer of domestic 
gas in the country. 
(in MMSCMD) 
Year 2013-14  2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Domestic Gas 
Production 
97.00 90.99 88.12 87.39  89.45 
Domestic Gas Supply 
to power sector 
27.26 25.33 22.87 25.00  25.71 
To attract investment in E&P activities and enhance domestic gas and 
crude production, Government has introduced various policy measures which 
include: — 
(i) Policy Framework for Relaxation, Extension and 
Clarification under PSC for early Monetization of 
Hydrocarbon Discoveries. 
(ii) Discovered Small Fields Policy. 
(iii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Discovered Fields. 
(iv) Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP). 
(v) Gas Pricing Reforms. 
(vi) National Seismic Program me. 
(vii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Exploration Blocks. 
(viii) Policy Framework for Early Monetization of CBM Blocks. 
(ix) National Data Repository. 
(x) Policy Framework for streamlining the working of PSCs. 
(xi) Policy Framework for Exploration and Exploitation of 
Unconventional hydrocarbons under existing PSCs, CBM 
Contracts and Nomination Fields. 
28 
 
(xii) Policy Framework to promote and incentivize Enhanced 
Recovery Methods for Oil and Gas. 
(xiii) Policy Reforms in Exploration and Licensing Policy for 
enhancing domestic exploration and production of oil and 
gas. 
 RLNG (Imported) gas is under Open General Licence which is sold 
on mutually agreed terms between buyers and sellers on market based 
mechanism. Power plants can source RLNG as per their needs. 
 [Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas ,O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that the present condition of the gas-based 
power plants is largely due to non-fulfillment of commitment regarding 
supply of domestic gas by the Government. The changes in policy for 
domestic gas allocation have made these plants unviable jeopardizing the 
huge public investment. The Committee also note that the RLNG is under 
Open General Licence and can be sold on mutually agreed terms between 
Buyers and Sellers on Market Based Mechanism and power plants are 
allowed to source RLNG as per their requirement. The Committee appreciate 
the fact that RLNG has been put under Open General Licence and there are 
no restrictions on its import. However, the Committee feel that since the cost 
of producing power from RLNG is unaffordable and makes it difficult for 
scheduling in merit order dispatch, importing RLNG even under open general 
licence does not help in making the stranded Gas based Power Plants viable. 
The Committee have also been apprised that one of the gas-based power 
plants has been established with the co-operation of South Korean 
Government and decline in the availability of gas has also affected this plant. 
International co-operation and commitment in addition to foreign investment 
are the angles which need to be taken care of, so the Committee desire that 
gas should also be supplied to this plant. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should explore all possibilities to revive 
these stranded gas-based plants which may inter-alia include assured gas 
allocation to stranded Gas based Power Plants from ONGC deep-water fields, 
diversion of domestic gas from non-core sectors to power sector and cost 
moderation of RLNG till sufficient domestic gas is made available. 

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) has not made any 
erratic policy shift regarding allocation of Domestic gas. At present, 
allocation and supply of domestic gas is being made as per the relevant gas 
utilization policies issued from time to time. About 108.69 MMSCMD (Firm-
90.60 MMSCMD and Fall back- 18.09 MMSCMD) domestic gas has been 
allocated to Power sector under various gas utilization policies from time to 
time. 
 These allocations are being made to Power sector based on the 
projected availability at that time and without any firm commitment to Power 
generators to have gas supply in perpetuity. Due to limited availability of 
domestically produced natural gas in the country, the domestic gas supply to 
various sectors including Power sector is limited. 
 Domestic Gas Production and Domestic Gas supply to Power sector in 
MMSCMD is tabulated below. It can be seen that production has gone down 
in the country and therefore present gas supplies are not meeting the gas 
allocations. However, supply of Domestic Gas to Power sector has increased 
in last 2 Years. At present, Power sector is the largest consumer of domestic 
gas in the country. 
 (in MMSCMD) 
Year 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Domestic 
Gas 
Production 
97.00 90.99 88.12 87.39 89.45 
Domestic Gas 
Supply to 
power sector 
27.26 25.33 22.87 25.00 25.71 
 To attract investment in E&P activities and enhance domestic gas and 
crude production, Government has introduced various policy measures which 
include: — 
(i) Policy Frame work for Relaxation, Extension and Clarification 
under PSC for early Monetization of Hydrocarbon Discoveries. 
(ii) Discovered Small Fields Policy. 
(iii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Discovered Fields. 
(iv) Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP). 
(v) Gas Pricing Reforms. 
30 
 
(vi) National Seismic Programme. 
(vii) PSC Extension Policy for Pre-NELP Exploration Blocks 
(viii)      Policy Framework for Early Monetization of CBM Blocks. 
(ix) National Data Repository. 
Policy Framework for streamlining the working of PSCs. 
(x) Policy Framework for Exploration and Exploitation of 
Unconventional hydrocarbons under existing PSCs, CBM 
Contracts and Nomination  Fields. 
(xi) Policy Framework to promote and incentivize Enhanced  Recovery  
Methods for Oil and Gas. 
(xii)      Policy Reforms in Exploration and Licensing Policy for enhancing 
domestic exploration and production of oil and gas. 
Imported Gas (RLNG) was supplied to gas based power plants with various 
incentives as per CCEA approval dated 25.3.2015 for FY 2015-16 and FY 
2016-17. It helped in reviving Stranded Power Plants.  It has also helped in 
improving utilization of LNG terminals and gas pipeline infrastructures, 
besides improving power availability in the country.  Various incentives 
provided in the scheme includes custom duty waiver on imported LNG, 
waiver of various state taxes, reduction in pipeline tariffs, reduction in Re-
gasification charges, reduction in Marketing Margin and support from Power 
Sector Development Fund (PSDF) etc. 
 RLNG gas is under Open General Licence which is sold on mutually 
agreed terms between buyers and sellers on market based mechanism.  Power 
plants can source RLNG as per their needs. 
 Korea Western Power Company Limited (KOWEPO) in January, 
2012 made investment a gas based power plant located in Raigad District 
Maharashtra which is owned and operated by Pioneer Gas Power Limited 
(PGPL).  Central Electricity Authority (CEA), in March, 2011 had already 
issued advisory to caution all prospective developers that their respective 
application for the allocation of gas would only be taken up once additional 
gas availability is known.  Further, in March 2012, CEA again issued an 
advisory explicitly stating that no additional gas is likely to be available till 
2015-16, and advised developers not to plan projects based on domestic gas 
at least till such time.  On the contrary, KOWEPO continued to make 
investment in said power plant based on its own due diligence.  The plant has 
not been allotted any domestic gas due to limited availability of domestic gas.  
As an alternate, the foreign investor has been suggested to explore the 
options to procure the gas from available market based gas sources (imported 

31 
 
RLNG domestic gas sources having marketing and pricing freedom) for 
operation of power plant. 
 Government of India has constituted a High Level Empowered 
Committee to address the issue of stressed Thermal power Plants under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary Recommendations of the committee have 
been processed by the Ministry of Power. 
 [Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas , O.M. No. L-16013/04/2018-GP-l, 
Dated: 13/06/2019] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee note that in order to improve utilization of gas based 
capacity in the country, the Government came out with E-Bid RLNG scheme 
in 2015 for importing spot Re-gasified liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG) for the 
stranded gas based power plants.  The Scheme provided financial support 
from PSDF (Power System Development Fund).  The Scheme also included 
exemptions from applicable taxes and levies/ duties.  However, the Scheme 
was discontinued in 2017 as many States such as Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, 
etc. refused to sign PPAs with gas based plants and exemptions/waivers 
required were not extended by the States of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh and Jharkhand. It is beyond comprehension that why the States did 
not cooperate, when the scheme was introduced after consultation with the 
States concerned. The Committee observe that the other reason, given by the 
Ministry, for discontinuation of the Scheme is that any additional generation 
from gas based plants would have reduced the demand from the coal based 
thermal plants. The Committee feel that the natural gas is cleaner fuel, so the 
Ministry may consider giving it due priority over coal. 
As the electricity demand is expected to pick up and the Committee 
have been assured of significant jump in the production of domestic gas in 
the near future, so there is a need to hand hold these stranded gas based 
power plants for next 2-3 years. The Committee, therefore, recommend that: 
(i) The Government should come up with a scheme like E-Bid RLNG 
Scheme to support these stranded plants in the intervening period with 
necessary exemptions, waivers and desired modifications. 
(ii) The financial support/subsidies required for the scheme may be 
sourced from Power System Development Fund/National Clean 
32 
 
Energy Fund/Budgetary Grants.  The Ministry of Power should pursue 
the same with the Ministry of Finance. 
(iii) The power so produced under the scheme may be used for bundling 
with other low cost power as has been done by NTPC earlier. 
(iv) RLNG may be pooled with the domestic gas through an aggregator 
such as GAIL, so as to achieve a reasonable price. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) A draft proposal based on the recommendations of HLEC was 
discussed in 2nd GoM meeting held on 25.02.2019, wherein the proposal was 
deferred for further examination as the issue involves large financial 
implications. Under the proposal a subsidy of around Rs. 3.30/kWh was 
estimated for generation from LNG, and for an incremental of around 61 BUs 
at 42% PLF would entail subsidy of around 19000 crore/annum. The above 
amount of subsidy is required considering the sale of power at Rs. 3.75/kWh, 
and the subsidy would vary with the rate of sale of power. 
(ii) The funds in the PSDF are already tied up and further as 
informed by Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance vide O.M. dtd. 27.02.2019, 
Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, provides that 
coal cess, along with some other cess, along with some other cess would 
constitute GST Compensation Fund and the same would be utilized to 
compensate the states for 5 years to Compensate the potential losses on 
account of GST implementation. 
[Ministry of Power  , O.M. No. 13/9/2018-Th-I, Dated: 24/04/2019] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE                           
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
–Nil– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                        RAJIV RANJAN SINGH Alias LALAN SINGH, 
18 March, 2021   Chairperson, 
 27 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)                            Standing Committee on  Energy. 
 
  
34 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON  
18th MARCH, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘2’,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION,  
NEW DELHI 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1535 hours    
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  —-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
3.  Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
4.  Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
5.  Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
6.  Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
7.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
9.  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
10.  Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
11.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
12.  Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 

35 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri R.C. Tiwari                     —     Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan      —     Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   —    Additional Director 
 2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up the 
following ten draft Reports for consideration and adoption:— 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An Appraisal’; 
(ii) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Power 
Sector’; 
(iii) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised Framework for 
Resolution of Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity 
Sector’; 
(iv) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas based 
Power Plants'; 
(v) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’; and 
(vi) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy; 
(vii) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
Power; 
(viii) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report (17th Lok 
36 
 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy’. 
(ix) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
Power. 
(x) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement of 175 
Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted 
the aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The 
Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned 
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current 
Budget Session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT  ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
 IN THE FORTY-SECOND REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:  
 
11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7 and 9   
 
Total:  05 
Percentage: 45.46 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies: 
Sl. No. 8 and 11 
 
Total:  02 
Percentage: 18.18 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 5, and 10 
 
Total:  04 
Percentage: 36.36% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
 Percentage:00 
 