 23
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
ENERGY
(2021-2022)
SEVENTEENTH   LOK   SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22)
of the Ministry of Power]
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2022/Phalguna, 1943 (Saka)


TWENTY STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)  MINISTRY OF POWER  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20   Presented to Lok Sabha onLaid in Rajya Sabha on      LOK SABHA SECRETARIATMarch  
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT  STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY(2021-2022)  (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) MINISTRY OF POWER Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventhha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of PowerPresented to Lok Sabha on 22.03.2022 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.03.2022 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  NEW DELHI  March, 2022/Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY Seventh Report ) of the Ministry of Power.] 

ii 
 
C. O. E.  NO. 347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in        
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……………………………………………….............. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………………………………… (v) 
CHAPTER I Report ………………………………………………………………………………… 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………….............................................. 5 
CHAPTER III Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply………………………………………………….. 20 
CHAPTER IV Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………….................................... 
 
21 
CHAPTER V Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the 
Government is still awaited…………………………............................................. 22 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Energy   (2021-22) 
held on 15th March, 2022……………………………………………………….. 23 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy……………………...................... 
 
25 
  

ii 
 
  

iii 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2021-2022) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
 3. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
 4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
 5. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
 6. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
 7. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
 8. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal ^ 
 9. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
 10. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
 11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
 12. Shri Velusamy P. 
 13. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
 14. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil@ 
 15. Shri Jai Prakash 
 16. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
 17. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
 18. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar  
 19. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 21. Vacant # 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
 23. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 

iv 
 24. Shri Rajendra Gehlot* 
 25. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
 26. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
 27. Shri S. Selvaganabathy* 
 28. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 30. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 31. Vacant $ 
 
                                  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.12.2021 vice Smt. Sajda Ahmed.  
@ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.02.2022 vice Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik.  
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11.11.2021. 
$ Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 02.12.2021. 
  

v 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Third Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of the Ministry of Power. 
2. The Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
8th March, 2021 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government   to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 18th January, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 15th 
March, 2022. 
4. An Analysis on the action-taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; 
15 March, 2022  
24 Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS LALAN SINGH,                 
Chairperson,  
             Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
  

vi 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Power.  
2. The Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha on 8th 
March, 2021 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 17 
Observations/Recommendations. 
3. Action-taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report were received on 18th January, 2022. These have been categorized as 
follows:— 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17  
Total-17 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply: 
- Nil -  
Total-00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the Government has 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
- Nil -  
 Total-00 
 Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the Government is 
still awaited: 
-Nil -  
Total-00 
Chapter-V 
4. The Committee observe that the Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Power’ was presented to Lok Sabha on 
8th March, 2021 and was laid on the same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The Ministry 
of Power was required to submit the action taken reply on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report within a period of 3 months i.e. 
by 7th June, 2021. The Committee, however, find that the Ministry have submitted the 
requisite action taken reply on 18th January, 2021 after a long delay of more than                          
7 months. Since the examination of Demands for Grants by the Committee is an annual 
exercise, extensive delay in furnishing of action taken reply tends to defeat the purpose, 
as the Committee have to examine the successive Demands of the Ministry for the next 
year also and present a Report thereon in a time-bound manner. The Committee, 
therefore, deprecate such delays in submission of action taken replies by the Ministry. 
The Committee, while expressing their strong displeasure expect the Ministry to be more 
vigilant in timely submission of replies to the Committee. They desire that necessary 
instructions in this regard be issued to all concerned in the Ministry for strict compliance. 
The Committee further desire that action taken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  

2 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
Smart Grid 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that for Smart Grids, an allocation of ₹40 crore only has been 
made for 2021-22. For the fiscal 2020-21 also, it was ₹40 crore, which was revised 
downward to ₹20 crore. However, Actual Expenditures for 2019-2020, 2018-19, 
2017-18 have been as low as ₹6.10 crore, ₹7.13 crore, and ₹3.07 crore respectively. 
The Committee are, therefore, not happy with the financial performance under this 
head. Keeping in view the importance of this scheme, the Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that optimum fund utilization for Smart Grids must be ensured 
by the Ministry to enable timely completion of this project.” 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:— 
“NSGM funds utilization is linked to the milestones achievement by the project 
implementing utilities. The fact of the matter is that since March, 2020, the pandemic 
Covid-19 and the resultant lockdown imposed by the Govt. had also an effect on the 
implementation of the projects by the implementing utilities. As there are delays 
seen in the field implementation which in turn delays the claims of the utilities 
thereby resulting in low expenditure. However, all sincere efforts are being put in for 
implementation of projects in faster pace and optimum fund utilization through 
regular reviews at NSGM and at MoP.” 
8. The Committee since the beginning of the Smart Grid initiative have been 
emphasizing the need for its expeditious implementation considering its benefits for the 
Power System in the country. The Ministry have assigned COVID-19 pandemic and the 
resultant lockdown as the reason for slow implementation of the Scheme. Nonetheless, 
the Committee would like the Ministry to keep making sincere efforts to expedite this 
important Scheme and try to make up for lost time. The Committee may be informed about 
the initiatives taken and the outcome thereof.  
 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
Smart Meters 
 9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that that Smart Meters have various advantages over the 
conventional electricity meters. Smart meters can record energy usage in near real 
time/15-minute intervals (configurable) and transmit data to the utilities constantly. 
Most importantly, smart meters enable two-way communication with the utility and 
the home/business and facilitate online energy audit etc. Smart meters can also help 
consumers monitor and regulate their consumption so they can save money on 
power bills. Due to these advantages, the Committee have been supportive of 
installation of Smart Meters all over the country expeditiously. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Ministry is also endeavoring to complete Smart Metering in 
the next three years with a window that it can be extended by two years for State-
specific reasons to be decided by the State Regulatory Commission. The Committee 
believe that Smart Metering would not only increase the billing collection of 
DISCOMs but also empower the end consumers to manage their spending on 
electricity. It seems to be a ‘Win-Win’ situation for both the parties. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take Smart Metering drive in a                  
time-bound mission mode as done in case of village electrification and providing 
electricity connection to households. 


3 
The Committee are however surprised to note that for Smart Metering, no fund has 
been allocated for the financial year 2021-22. In the last financial year, there was a 
token allocation of ₹10 lakh only. The Committee, desire that the work related to 
Smart Metering should be taken more seriously and expedited, and sufficient funds 
be allocated for the same to enable this consumer-friendly scheme to really take off.” 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:— 
"NPMU is actively pursuing the implementation of smart metering in smart grid projects 
sanctioned under NSGM. For FY 2021-22, Rs.40 Cr. was allotted. The expenditure is 
linked to claims by the implementing utilities. The Smart Metering on prepaid model is 
being taken up in Reform Linked Distribution Scheme which is under the active 
consideration of this Ministry. The proposed “Revamped Reforms Based and Results 
Linked Distribution Sector Scheme” envisages elimination of human interface in 
metering, billing and collection to reduce AT&C losses, by introducing an end-to-end 
technological solution of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), covering the 
distribution system – consumers, feeders and distribution transformers. It will facilitate 
installing of smart prepaid meters for consumers and communicable meters for DTs & 
Feeders to be integrated with AMI system. Under the proposed scheme approx. 25 
Crore Smart meters are expected to be installed with 10 crore prepaid smart meters 
proposed to be installed by December,2023. There is further emphasis on such 
installation in PPP mode (DBFOOT), involving private participation, which will not only 
create investment opportunities for private sector but also provide fiscal space for 
DISCOMS to undertake large investments." 
11. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have proposed ‘Revamped 
Reforms Based and Results Linked Distribution Sector Scheme’, which envisages 
elimination of human interface in metering, billing and collection to reduce Aggregated 
Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses by introducing an end-to-end technological 
solution of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). Under the proposed scheme approx. 
25 crore Smart meters with 10 crore prepaid smart meters are proposed to be installed by 
December, 2023. The Committee expect the Ministry to finalize the scheme at the earliest 
and ensure that the targets in this regard are achieved within the stipulated timeline.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note with concern the reply of the Ministry in regard to the actual 
reason for the incident of disconnection of 1.5 lakh home connections with smart 
meters during August 2020 in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee was informed during 
evidence that the Energy Efficiency Services Limited had investigated this incident 
and the disconnection was being done from HES (Head End System) and it has 
been moved to the MDM which is better practice. It was further stated that so far, 
they have not come to any conclusion relating to cyber security aspect or of any 
sabotage and EESL has been asked to take corrective actions. Since the country 
has decided to go ahead with the Smart Grid and Smart Metering technologies in a 
big way, the Committee are of the view that such issues could wreak havoc in the 
energy sector, if we are not prepared with a foolproof plan to timely avert them. As 
the Committee believe that the matter of cyber security of the Power System is very 
critical, they would recommend that the Ministry must take this issue more seriously 
and formulate effective and adequate safeguards in this regard.” 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:— 
“The Bulk disconnection incident of 12th Aug 2020 has interrupted the smart meter 
installation; Primary cause being attributed is ‘Execution of command on all groups 
in place of target group’ and command generated from HES (Head End System) 
instead of MDMS (Meter data Management System). Security audit of UP AMI 
system is being conducted through STQC and final report is awaited. EESL is 
carrying out UAT for the system. It may be noted that clauses related to cyber 

4 
security and data privacy (clauses 3.7 and  3.8) have been adequately incorporated 
in the Standard Bidding Documents for Appointment of AMI Service Provider 
(AMISP) on OPEX model duly approved by HMoSP (I/C) in January 2021 which is 
available at https://www.nsgm.gov.in/sites/default/files/AMISP-Contract-January-
2021.pdf." 
14. With regard to the incident of disconnection of 1.5 lakh home connections with 
smart meters during August 2020 in Uttar Pradesh, the Ministry have stated that Security 
audit of Uttar Pradesh Advance Metering Infrastructure(AMI) system is being conducted 
through Standardization Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) and the final report is 
awaited. It is a matter of concern for the Committee that even after a lapse of one and half 
year, the investigation in this regard is yet to be concluded. The Committee have time and 
again been cautioning the Ministry about the potential cyber attack threat for the Smart 
Metering System. Since the Government has planned to go for Smart Metering system in a 
big way, the Committee, therefore, desire that after completion of the security audit of 
Uttar Pradesh Advanced Metering Infrastructure system in the shortest possible time and 
based on the outcome the cyber security related provisions are thoroughly reviewed and 
a foolproof mechanism is evolved and put in place to avert such incidents in future.  
 
National Electricity Policy 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under:— 
“The Committee note that the present National Electricity Policy was adopted in the 
year 2005. It aims at achieving the objectives such as access to electricity and 
availability for all households, power - demand to be fully met, per capita availability 
of electricity to be increased to over 1000, etc. The Committee observe that as 
most of the enunciated objectives of the National Electricity Policy, 2005 have 
already been achieved, it no more reflects the aspirations, challenges and 
dynamics of the fast-changing electricity sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
feel that there is a need for the formulation of a new National Electricity Policy. 
During his deposition, the Secretary, Ministry of Power agreed to the proposal and 
apprised the Committee that the Ministry is considering amendments to this policy. 
However, the Committee would like to recommend that instead of making 
piecemeal amendments in the present National Electricity Policy, an altogether new 
Policy be freshly formulated according to the requirements of the changing power 
sector scenario, so that it can serve as a beacon light for the power sector as a 
whole and lay a coherent trajectory for its future growth and development.” 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:— 
“An Expert Committee has been constituted by Ministry of Power for preparing draft 
National Electricity Policy 2021 on 12.4.2021. Interactions with all stakeholders 
including States representative were held in the month of May, 2021/June 2021 to 
prepare and recommend National Electricity Policy, 2021. Comments received from 
various stakeholders on draft NEP, 2021 circulated on 27.04.2021, are under 
examination. Keeping in mind future growth and development of Power Sector as a 
whole, Expert Committee is working on making amendments in the present NEP. 
  Expert Committee is expected to submit the draft NEP, 2021 by 12th August, 
2021." 
17. The Committee are happy to note that the Government has constituted an 
Expert Committee for preparing a draft National Electricity Policy. In Committee’s view the 
said Expert Committee would have submitted their Report to the Ministry by this time. The 
Committee desire that the new National Electricity Policy should be finalized expeditiously 
after completion of the due process in a time-bound manner and the Committee be 
informed accordingly.  
  

5 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocation 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Power have been allocated ₹15,322 crore though 
they had projected a demand of ₹30,155 crore. The scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Power for the previous years has revealed that the Ministry has constantly been 
allocated funds less than 50% of their original demands. The Ministry had posted a demand of 
₹33,366 crore in 2020-21 and got only ₹15,874 crore. Similarly, in 2019-20 and 2018-19, the 
Ministry had projected budgetary requirements of ₹32,001 crore and ₹36,843 crore but had been 
allocated only ₹15,874 crore and ₹15,046 crore respectively. The Committee also find that the 
track record of the Ministry of Power as far as utilization of funds is concerned in the previous 
three years viz. 2019-20, 2018-19 and 2017-18 has been satisfactory as whatever fund had been 
allocated, the Ministry was able to fully utilize it. For the fiscal 2020-21, the Ministry have 
assigned Nationwide Lockdown from April 2020 in wake of COVID-19 pandemic as a reason for 
the slow pace of utilization of fund. In the considered view of the Committee, the past 
performance of the Ministry of Power merits enhancement of their budgetary provisions as their 
programmes are vital for the development of Power Sector which will not only lead to significant 
improvement in the reliable supply of electricity and its access to all but also result in financial 
saving for the Government in the long run. The Committee, are therefore, inclined to recommend 
that the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Power may be suitably enhanced, if so warranted, 
so that the important programmes of the Ministry are implemented in a timely manner. Keeping in 
view the fact that the two flagship schemes of the Ministry of Power namely, IPDS and DDUGJY 
are nearing their expiry in about a year’s time, it is necessary that the Ministry of Power should 
first strive to utilize the allocated funds at the earliest so that they have sufficient justification to 
post additional demands at the stage of Revise Estimates, which needless to emphasize should 
be underpinned by a coherent and time-bound schematic plan. The Committee also believe that 
it’s time for the Ministry to now come out with a clear cut road map and a coherent strategy for 
the power sector as a whole, factoring the global energy scenario.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 Ministry of Power express its sincere thanks to the Hon’ble committee for considering the 
submission regarding utilization of funds against the BE/RE allocation in the last three years i.e 
FY 2017-18, FY 2018-19 and FY 2019-20. Again, the MOP would like to express its gratitude to 
the Hon’ble Committee for the recommendation for enhancement of budget allocation for Power 
sector. The recommendation made by the Hon’ble Committee will be placed before the Ministry 
of Finance at the time of Pre-Budget Discussion for finalization of Revised Estimates (2021-22) 
and Budget Estimates (2022-23). 
Regarding IPDS and DDUGJY Schemes, all efforts will be made by the Ministry of Power 
to ensure utilization of the allocated funds during the year 2021-22 through frequent monitoring 
and review of the implementation of the schemes, so that additional demands may be sought at 
the stage of Revised Estimates. 
Section 3(4) of Electricity Act, 2003 stipulates that, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 
shall prepare a National Electricity Plan (NEP) in accordance with the National Electricity Policy 
and notify such plan once in five years. 
National Electricity Plan is a clear cut roadmap document for Electricity sector of the 
country and gives signals to the developers for going ahead with future investments in electricity 
generation, transmission and other industries like Cement, Steel, Mining, etc. Based on the 

6 
Generation Planning, detailed road map for transmission network planning in the country is 
carried out. 
National Electricity Plan give the detailed roadmap for Generation and Transmission 
capacity expansion requirements for next 10 years keeping in view the electricity demand 
projections as per Electric Power Survey of Central Electricity Authority. 
National Electricity Plan also estimates the requirement of key inputs like Cement, Steel 
and other materials), manufacturing facilities assessments, infrastructure requirements for 
transportation of fuel, gas pipelines network, port development, railway infrastructure and also 
human resource requirement to meet the projected capacity addition. It also highlights the fuel 
requirement and its availability to meet the projected energy generation and its environmental 
impact (especially CO2 emissions). It provides indication of financial resources required for future 
NEP Plan period for capacity addition. This helps in modifying framing sectoral limits in Banking 
system and special dispensation on Limits for REC and PFC. 
While formulating NEP, the latest global advancements in generation and transmission 
technologies along with their cost projection are considered. In addition, the global commitments 
towards mitigating climate change are also considered while planning for generation technology 
mix for future years considering gestation period and meeting load requirement with adequate 
reserves capacity to have reliable power supply. 
The National Electricity Plan is finalized after detailed consultation with all the 
stakeholders in the power sector. 
As mandated by the Act and the Policy, CEA has prepared the third National Electricity 
Plan for the period 2017-22 & Perspective Plan for the period 2022-27 wherein clear cut 
roadmap for Generation and Transmission capacity expansion has been covered keeping in 
view the electricity demand projections as per 19th Electric Power Survey. While projecting the 
future electricity demand, various demand side management measures planned for future 
years by various agencies are considered. The latest NEP also covers detailed generation 
capacity addition requirement and transmission capacity addition requirements, retirement plan 
of old plants and renovation and modernization of old plant etc. 
The generation capacity addition planning in the third National Electricity Plan has been 
carried out considering the Government of India’s target to achieve 175 GW of Installed 
Capacity from Renewable Energy Sources (RES) by the year 2021-22. The added challenge of 
Grid Integration as Renewable Energy specially Wind and Solar is intermittent were also 
studied in detail and measures to overcome these challenges are highlighted. In view of high 
Renewable penetration in the National Grid, Issues like ramping requirement, Minimum 
Technical load for Thermal power plants, flexibility of thermal generation etc., been efficiently 
addressed in National Electricity Plan. 
The NEP Volume I (Generation), Volume II (Transmission) are available on CEA website 
www.cea.nic.in . 
New National Electricity Plan covering generation and transmission detailed plan for the 
period 2022-27 and perspective plan for the period 2027-32 is under preparation. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee note that apart from BE of ₹15,322 crore for 2021-22, there is a provision 
for raising Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) to the tune of ₹9,300 crore specifically for DDUGJY 
(₹3,250 crore) and IPDS Scheme (₹6,050 crore), which is to be authorized by the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee feel that as the provision of EBR would help in meeting the financial 
requirements of these two important schemes to a great extent, authorization may be obtained at 
the earliest. The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Power should make diligent and 
vigorous efforts to fully utilize the proposed EBR. 
 

7 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Finance has in principal decided to not allow to raise EBR, but to provide 
required resources in supplementary against BE of Rs. 5300(for IPDS) & Rs. 3600(for DDUGJY). 
Note: if required, proposal for extra requirement in the above two flagship schemes may please 
be submitted during next supplementary. 
 [Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 
 The Committee note that budgetary provision for the year 2020-21 was ₹4,500 crore while 
the actual utilization was only ₹931 crore (upto 31.01.2021). During the period, an additional 
amount to the tune of ₹2,000 crore was also raised through EBR and utilized. The Committee do 
understand that due to the nationwide lockdown, the fund utilization could not be of a level as 
approved in the BE. Nonetheless, the Committee is also aware that DDUGJY scheme is 
available till fiscal 2021-22 only. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that all the works 
envisaged under the scheme should be completed before the end of fiscal 2021-22 by making up 
for the lost time during the COVID–19 pandemic. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should pro-actively try not only to fully utilize the allocated funds but also to further 
accelerate the pace of implementation of the scheme, so that additional funds at the stage of RE, 
if required, can be demanded by them with ample justification.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The details of BE, RE and the actual expenditure for the year 2020-21 in respect of 
DDUGJY is given below:— 
(Rs. in crore) 
BE RE Actual expenditure up to 31.03.2021 2020-21 2020-21 
4500.00 2000.00 4484.77 (GBS:1984.77 Cr & EBR: 2500 Cr)  
  
The progress of the DDUGJY is reviewed regularly by the Ministry. Issues including 
COVID–19 pandemic related are regularly taken up with the concerned Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries Energy/Power of the States/UTs highlighting specific details 
advising them to promptly resolve the issues hampering the progress to ensure timely completion 
of works. Keeping in view, the DDUGJY scheme is in the sunset year and is available till financial 
year 2021-22, the Ministry has directed to all the concerned States to ensure early completion of 
sanctioned works and all possible help is extended to States for timely and effective 
implementation of the scheme including extensions of time line where required, permitting inter-
se allocation of funds between inter-projects etc.  
 [Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee note that apart from rural electrification, there are two other components 
of DDUGJY namely, separation of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders and Strengthening and 
augmentation of sub-transmission & distribution infrastructure. When the Committee asked for 
cumulative as well as yearly targets for these two components, they were surprised to find out 
that no cumulative, as well as yearly targets, have been assigned for them. However, the 
Committee were informed that the Government of India is impressing upon States for completion 

8 
of all the components of DDUGJY, including separation of agriculture and non-agriculture 
feeders, strengthening and augmentation of sub-transmission & distribution infrastructure before 
the scheduled time. The Committee find it difficult to comprehend as to how the Ministry have 
been fixing annual budgetary provisions and monitoring the scheme in the absence of any 
physical targets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make an 
objective and fair assessment of the quantum of work that still needs to be done under the 
scheme. The Committee also desire that all the envisaged works under the scheme should be 
completed before its sunset in fiscal 2021-22. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under DDUGJY, the sanctioned projects including all the components are targeted for 
completion before its sunset in fiscal 2021-22. The performance of all the sanctioned projects 
and its components are reviewed regularly by the Ministry and all possible help is extended to 
States for timely and effective implementation of the scheme.  
Most of the works sanctioned under DDUGJY — New projects have already been 
completed and the overall progress in the country is 94% as on 28.02.2021. The achievement 
under separation of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders, strengthening and augmentation of 
sub-transmission &distribution infrastructure have generally been satisfactory considering a large 
focus towards expeditious completion of village and household electrification. 
The progress in some of the States is slow due to reasons beyond control of the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) viz. delay in getting forest & railway clearances, land acquisition 
for sub-stations, Right of Way (RoW) issues, law & order issues, difficult terrain, restriction norms 
due to COVID-19 pandemic, harsh weather conditions, Assembly Elections, large-scale floods 
etc. Keeping in view the important aspects of each of the components of the scheme, the 
Ministry has requested all the concerned States to ensure early completion of sanctioned works 
before its sunset in fiscal 2021-22. 
 [Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) 
 The Committee note that Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) is a central 
sector scheme which inter alia envisages to strengthen sub-transmission and distribution 
networks in the urban areas, metering of distribution transformers/feeders/consumers in the 
urban areas and establishment of Real Time-Data Acquisition System (RT-DAS). The Committee 
observe that the work being undertaken would help in the reduction of AT&C losses in the 
country which are still high as compared to other countries. The Committee have been apprised 
that the Government is aiming to bring down AT&C losses to the level of 15%. The Committee 
also note that AT&C loss of one per cent amounts to approximately ₹6,959 crore. AT&C loss in 
the country was as high as 22.03% in FY 2018-19 which accounted for overall monetary value of 
AT&C losses in the power sector to the tune of ₹1,53,307 crore. The Committee feel that these 
figures are unsustainably high and necessitate the need to bring down AT&C losses urgently. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that structured efforts should be made to reduce AT&C 
losses even below the level of 15% to match international thresholds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IPDS scheme was launched by Government of India to supplement the resources of 
State Power DISCOMS/Power Departments by way of extending financial assistance against 
capital expenditure to address the gaps in Sub transmission & Distribution network, metering and 
IT enablement in urban areas. The aim of the scheme is to provide quality and reliable power 
supply in the urban areas. The main components of IPDS are (i) Strengthening of sub-
transmission and distribution networks in the urban areas; (ii) Metering of distribution 

9 
transformers/feeders/consumers in the urban areas and (iii) IT enablement of distribution sector 
and strengthening of distribution network being undertaken under R-APDRP. 
Out of the 547 circles sanctioned under IPDS, the sub-transmission and distribution 
system strengthening projects have already been declared complete in 497 circles. As for the 
other IPDS projects viz. IT phase-II, ERP, RT-DAS, Smart Metering and GIS substations, the 
works are under different stages of implementation in various DISCOMS. The overall impact of 
IPDS in terms of reduction of AT&C losses shall be observed/visible upon completion of the 
projects and effective utilization of different projects being implemented under IPDS for reduction 
of losses etc. by the State Power DISCOMS. 
The Central Government, on 30.6.21, approved the Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme- A Reforms-based and Results-linked Scheme with an outlay of Rs.3,03,758 core and a 
Gross Budgetary Support of Rs.97,631 crore form Government of India over a period of five 
years from 2021-22 to FY 2025-26. The Scheme seeks to improve the operational efficiencies 
and financial sustainability of all DISCOMs/Power Departments excluding Private Sector 
DISCOMs by providing conditional financial assistance to DISCOMs for strengthening of supply 
infrastructure based on meeting pre-qualifying criteria as well as upon achievement of basic 
minimum benchmarks by the DISCOM evaluated on the basis of agreed evaluation framework 
tied to financial improvements. The Scheme aims to reduce the AT&C losses to pan-India levels 
of 12-15% and ACS-ARR gap to zero by 2024-25. 
2. The Office Memorandum of Reforms-based and Results-linked Scheme, Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme has been issued on 20-07-2021 and 1st Monitoring Committee 
Meeting of the scheme was held on 23-07-2021 under the chairmanship of Secretary (Power) for 
finalization of guidelines of the scheme. The Guidelines of the Scheme has also been issued on 
27.7.21 
 [Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that a provision of ₹5,300 crore which is equal to the previous year's 
BE, has been made for IPDS for the year 2021-22. The Committee further note that the fund 
allocation during the last five years under the scheme has been hovering around ₹5,500 crore. 
Since the sunset timeline of IPDS is fiscal 2021-22, the Committee hope that the Ministry will 
keep a constant watch over flow of expenditure and progress of the works so that the budgetary 
allocation does not constrain completion of all pending works under this scheme within the 
stipulated time and, if required, the Ministry may also request for additional allocation of funds at 
RE stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power had proposed a budgetary allocation of Rs. 11337 crore at the time of 
BE against which an allocation of Rs. 5300 crore only has been allocated under IPDS for the year 
2021-22. Considering the sunset timeline of fiscal 2021-22, the estimated budget requirement 
(including funds required for conversion of loan into grant under R-APDRP) for FY 2021-22 is 
estimated to be around Rs. 11,337 Cr. Based on the progress and utilization of funds during the 
Financial Year 2021-22 and also keeping in view the sunset date of the scheme viz. 31.03.2022, 
the additional funds, if any, would be requisitioned at RE stage.  
 
Expenditure Plan under IPDS for FY 2021-22: 
                                                                                              (Amount in crore) 
Scheme BE Q1 - Actuals Q2 Q3 Q4  
IPDS 11337 400 836 2385 1679  

10 
As on 31.11.2021, against the budget allocation of Rs. 5300 Cr. under IPDS, funds 
amounting to Rs. 1593.72 Cr. have been released by MoP. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Grants for creation of Capital Assets 
 The Committee observe that under the head “Grants for creation of Capital Assets”, 
₹2,980.50 crore were allocated under Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and 
₹2,640.00 crore under Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) for the financial year 
2020-21. However, the expenditure upto 27.01.2021 had been ₹102.23 crore and ₹1,440.87 
crore respectively under the scheme which is substantially less than the allocations made for the 
year and in all likelihood huge unspent balances will be registered under this head by the close of 
the financial year. Taking into account the fact that capital assets are fundamental requirements 
for infrastructure development and also such assets give long term base for further growth of the 
economy, the Committee would recommend that the Ministry should streamline implementation 
at ground level and execute their projects in a time-bound manner with close monitoring so that 
the allocated funds on such important head are not left unutilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under IPDS, the entire budget (RE) allocated under the head “Grants for creation of 
Capital Assets” has been utilized for the FY 2020-21 and is as detailed below: 
 (Amount in Rs. Cr.) 
Budget Head BE 2020-21  RE 2020-21 Actual Utilization in FY 2020-21  upto 31.03.2021 
 Grants for creation of Capital Assets 2640 2360 2360 
  
As per the RE 2020-21 head “Grants for creation of Capital Assets”, Rs.1108 crore was 
allocated under Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and the same has been 
released by Ministry. This amount has been fully utilized as on 31st March, 2021. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
Allocation of funds for Tribal Area Sub-plan and Special Component Plan for Scheduled 
Castes 
 The Committee observe that for the financial year 2020-21, allocations for Tribal Area 
Sub-plan and Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes under the Deen Dayal Upadhyay 
Gram Jyoti Yojana had been ₹387.00 crore and ₹747.00 crore. Similarly, under the Integrated 
Power Development Scheme, ₹400.00 crore under Tribal Area Sub-plan and ₹750.00 crore 
under Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes had been allocated. In addition, ₹140.00 
crore and ₹70.00 crore were allocated as loan under Special Component Plan for Scheduled 
Castes and Tribal Area Sub-plan for the financial year 2020-21. The analysis of the allocation of 
funds thus reveals that the aggregate allocation for SC and ST component under both the above 
schemes comes to ₹2,494.00 crore which is about 15.71% of the total budgetary allocation of 
₹1,5874.82 crore of the Ministry of Power for the financial year 2020-21. The Committee are 
however concerned to note that the aggregate expenditure upto 27.01.2021 on all the above 
schemes under SC and ST components had been only ₹1,044.01 crore. The Committee feel that 
allocations under SC and ST components are made with a view to provide electricity to the SC 

11 
and ST communities in a mission mode so that the underprivileged sections of the society are 
provided with basic facilities to enable them to uplift their life standard and therefore, the 
Committee are of the view that not only full utilization of the allocated funds under these 
components need to be ensured but at the same time, it is also to be closely monitored that the 
intended objectives of such allocations of funds have been achieved. The Committee would 
therefore recommend the Ministry to have effective monitoring by way of collection of data from 
the field formations and respective Departments to undertake the cost-benefit analysis of the 
scheme and also to find out as to whether the objectives of such allocations have been achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under IPDS, Rs. 4000 Cr. had been provided under RE as against the BE of Rs. 5,300 
Cr. The entire budget (RE) allocated under the head “Tribal Area sub-plan and Special 
Component Plan for Scheduled Castes” has been utilized under IPDS for the FY 2020-21 as 
detailed below:— 
         (Amount in Rs. Cr.) 
Budget Head BE 2020-21 RE 2020-21 Actual Utilization in FY 2020-21  
upto 31.03.2021 
Special Component Plan for Scheduled  
Castes – IPDS Grant 
750 450 450 
Tribal Area sub-plan – IPDS Grant 400 150 150 
Special Component Plan for Scheduled  
Castes – R-APDRP Loan 
140 45 45 
Tribal Area sub-plan – R-APDRP Loan 70 15 15 
Total 1360 660 660 
 
IPDS/R-APDRP schemes are mainly focused on strengthening of sub-transmission and 
distribution network of urban areas/IT implementation and have Universal coverage across 
Urban Power Distribution sector. The projects are being sanctioned by the IPDS Monitoring 
Committee of MoP as per scheme Guidelines. 
Further, MoP is releasing funds under SCSP/TSP component of IPDS/R-APDRP budget 
to beneficiary State Power Utilities based on percentage of State’s SC/ST population (as per 
Census Data of 2011 for IPDS and 2001 for R-APDRP) as indirect proportionate 
utilization towards SCSP/TSP components. As such, identification and cost benefit analysis of 
individual beneficiaries of scheme may not be feasible under IPDS/R-APDRP. 
During the financial year 2020-21, allocations for Tribal Area Sub-plan and Special 
Component Plan for Scheduled Castes under the Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana was 
Rs.227.00 crore (11% of the total budgetary allocation) and Rs.403.00 crore (20% of the total 
budgetary allocation) respectively, and the same has been released by Ministry. These funds 
have been fully utilized as on 31st March, 2021. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
 The Committee note that our country is committed to an ambitious Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) of reducing emission intensity by 33-35% in 2030 against the levels of year 
2005. The Committee also note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) is the nodal central 
statutory body to assist the Government in implementing the provisions of the Electricity 
Conservation Act. The Committee further note that there have been electrical energy savings of 

12 
147 Billion Units and a total cost savings worth ₹94,523 crores approximately, which is equivalent 
to the reduction in CO2 emission of around 161 Million Tonnes due to the Energy Efficiency 
Scheme/Programmes being run by the BEE. The Committee is also aware that the BEE have 
been assigned the task of implementing ‘Go-electric’ campaign – an initiative which promotes the 
usage of electricity to decrease our dependency on the imported fuel. 
 The Committee note that the BEE has been allocated ₹117 crore for 2021-22 which is 
slightly more than their previous year’s allocation of ₹100 crore. Considering the importance of 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation programmes, the Committee have been emphasizing the 
need for expansion and intensification of energy efficiency programmes. For better utilization of 
budgeted funds for energy efficiency, the Committee would recommend the following: 
(i) With increased budgetary allocation, BEE should augment its managerial and operational 
capacity to fully utilize the funds as they have not been able to fully utilize the allocated 
funds in the past. 
(ii) The Ministry should provide all the necessary assistance to the BEE especially in 
persuading States to have a separate and exclusive State Designated Agency (SDA) for 
addressing the issues related to Energy Efficiency Financing and Energy Conservation 
Schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 (i) BEE could utilize the outlay allocated and it was sufficient to carry out activities. Funds are 
released by MoP on the basis of demand raised by BEE. BEE utilizes the funds as per 
activities planned. All efforts are made by BEE to utilize the funds for planned activities.  
Moreover, BEE could achieve all set targets as proposed during the last five years. 
Hence, there is no shortfall observed. 
At present the Budget provisions are adequate as the investment in energy efficiency 
projects are done by beneficiaries and the role of Ministry/BEE is to facilitate policies and 
capacity building activities. Enhancement in budgetary provisions for BEE, will further 
enable large scale implementation of energy efficiency programmes in the country. 
Over a period of time, the activities of BEE have increased exponentially in comparison to 
the sanctioned manpower. With the sanctioned strength of 17 at beginning of 
establishment, BEE is at present is functioning with sanctioned strength of 29 and finding 
it difficult to meet the expectation at various fronts.   
The absence of organized structure with regular technical manpower has also led to 
adversely impacting the growth of organization and its delivery mechanism.  
To address the present issuer and to contribute in meeting India’s commitment to global 
community, it is very much essential that BEE augments its managerial and operational 
capacity and develop sustainable organization structure in line with similar national and 
international organizations. Under the guidance of Ministry, BEE has prepared a detailed 
proposal in this regard and the same is under consideration with Ministry. 
 (ii) The Ministry of Power (MoP), Government of India has time and again persuaded the 
State Governments/UT Administrations to establish Standalone SDA that would work 
exclusively towards Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation. The Hon’ble Minister of 
State (I/C) for Power and New & Renewable Energy vide letter dated 27th August, 2018 
had written to all State Governments requesting for establishment of Standalone SDA in 
their State.  
This was followed by DG, BEE’s letter dated 28th November, 2018 to State Principal 
Secretaries. Recently on direction of Hon’ble Minister of State (I/C) for Power and New & 
Renewable Energy, a model organizational structure for Standalone SDA has been 
drafted. MoP is in process of forwarding it to all State Governments for its adoption. 
 [Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 

13 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) 
 The Committee note that a budgetary provision of ₹180 crore has been made for Central 
Power Research Institute (CPRI) for 2021-22. The Committee also note that for 2020-21 and 
2019-20 there were provisions of ₹200 crore for each year. The Committee note that budgetary 
utilizations for 2020-21 and 2019-20 were ₹178 crore and ₹30 crore respectively. The Committee 
are aware of the compelling need for augmentation and intensification of Research and 
Development work specially related to Energy Storage, Integration of Renewable Energy into the 
Grid, Solar PV system, Cyber Security of the Power Sector, Waste to Energy, etc. which can 
make the Power Sector more efficient and less dependent on import. In view of this, the 
Committee strongly feel that there is a need to augment the R&D activities in the power sector in 
the country. However, the Committee also find that the performance of CPRI during the last five 
years, in regard to utilization of allocated funds, has been lacklustre. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that every effort should be made to expand their base of Research and Development 
so that allocated funds are optimally utilized and the country gets the advantage of the latest 
technological developments in the energy sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The provision of Rs. 200 crore in BE 2020-21 for CPRI had to be reduced to Rs.80 crore 
in RE state as the procurement planned during 2020-21 could not materialize since the 
prospective bidders did not participate due to the pandemic (COVID-19). However, the entire 
outlay of Rs.80 crore was released to CPRI in 2020-21. 
 The budgetary estimate of CPRI is arrived at by taking into consideration the annual 
action plan including procurement that can be completed during the year, the balance payments 
to be made to the vendors, payments for establishing LC (Letter of Credit), and Funds required 
for R&D projects. In the financial year 2021-22, a provision of Rs 180 Cr (Rs.155 crores for 
creation of Capital Assets and Rs.25 crores for R&D Schemes) has been kept for CPRI in the 
BE. The Rs 155 Cr budget provision for capital asset creation for R&D Infrastructure includes 
Augmentation of existing High Power Short Circuit test facilities, Establishment of New Unit at 
Nashik and Establishment of Smart Grid Research Laboratory. 
 In respect of R&D, CPRI has been receiving novel research proposals from various 
academic Institutes across India like IIT-Kharagpur, IIT-Delhi, IIT-Madras etc. on frontier areas of 
research such as Cyber Security, Renewable Energy, Energy Storage, Waste to energy, Grid 
Technologies and other areas covering Generation, Transmission & Distribution in the Power 
Sector. Around 175 research proposals with an outlay of Rs 71.89 crore has already been 
received by CPRI which are to be put up for evaluation of Technical Committees. To support the 
approved projects a budget of Rs 25.00 crore has been proposed for the R&D schemes. 
 As suggested by the Committee, every efforts are being made to expand their base of 
Research and Development so that allocated funds are optimally utilized and the power sector 
gets advantage of the latest technological developments. This would also help the manufacturers 
in quality product development and in turn will help the utilities to procure quality product ensuring 
24*7 Power Supply for All. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
 The Committee note that the performance of NPTI in regard to utilization of allocated 
funds for the year 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 has been satisfactory in as much as they were 
able to fully utilize the funds. However, their performance during the last two years i.e. 2019-20 
and 2020-21 has not been up to the mark. In 2019-20 they could utilize only ₹28 crore against 
the provision of ₹69 crore, whereas, in 2020-21 their utilization so far is nil, with the budgetary 

14 
provision at ₹82 crore. They further note that for 2021-22, NPTI has been allocated a reduced 
amount of ₹70 crore.  
 Despite the increased need for training in the Power Sector due to various reforms, rapid 
technological advancements and creation of large infrastructure, the Committee are surprised to 
note the decreasing trend of budgetary utilization by NPTI, especially in recent years. The 
Committee, during the examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the 
preceding two years, have been emphasizing the need for augmentation of training facilities and 
increase in budgetary provisions in this regard. However, the Committee feel that NPTI must first 
strive to fully utilize the allocated funds purposefully so that training needs of power sector do not 
suffer on this count.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The grants support from Government of India to NPTI is restricted to contribution towards 
Pension Fund and Support for creation of Capital assets/Training Infrastructure. During the last 
two years, allocation of budget to NPTI has decreased due to the reasons given below. 
Some training courses of NPTI has been discontinued in phased manner considering the 
less participation by the trainees and demand of the market. This has resulted in less budget 
utilisation. 
A lot of PSUs and other private organizations have started their own training institutes, 
resulting in less no of participants for training course in NPTI. Expenditure on these accounts has 
accordingly been less. 
Spread of covid-19 pandemic had impacted the training activities of NPTI very badly and 
most of the training activities were halted/cancelled due to restrictions imposed by the 
Government. This has resulted in less expenditure by the organization. 
 The matter for utilization of plan funds has been deliberated in 43rd meeting of Standing 
Committee of NPTI held in March, 2021. The Standing Committee of NPTI has directed NPTI to: 
 Establish a modern, state of art Training Centre on Cyber Security of global standards 
with hands on/Simulation facilities for trainees at NPTI, Faridabad. It will facilitate hands 
on training in cyber security for deployment of concerned Technicians/Officials to 
SLDC/RLDC and in other sensitive domains in the Power Sector, and 
 Establish training facilities for New and Renewable Energy, 
SPF/Solar/Wind/Biomass/Biogas etc. in grid connected mode. 
 In addition to above, management of NPTI has been advised to review their training 
programmes as per the requirement of the market, add new courses/training programmes in their 
curriculum, to constitute an advisory board for each institute to guide/advise for new 
course/change in course as per requirement of the stakeholders in their respective catchment 
areas and to do SWOT analysis to find the cause of the weak performance. 
 The above initiatives are expected to result in better performance of the Institute and the 
Ministry will support it by way of outlays on creation of Capital assets/Training Infrastructure. 
 Further, as suggested by the Committee, all efforts are being made to fully utilize the 
allocated funds purposefully in the year 2021-22 so that training needs of power sector do not 
suffer on this count. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
Smart Grid 
 The Committee note that for Smart Grids, an allocation of ₹40 crore only has been made 
for 2021-22. For the fiscal 2020-21 also, it was ₹40 crore, which was revised downward to              
₹20 crore. However, Actual Expenditures for 2019-2020, 2018-19, 2017-18 have been as low as 

15 
₹6.10 crore, ₹7.13 crore, and ₹3.07 crore respectively. The Committee are, therefore, not happy 
with the financial performance under this head. Keeping in view the importance of this scheme, 
the Committee would, therefore, recommend that optimum fund utilization for Smart Grids must 
be ensured by the Ministry to enable timely completion of this project. 
Reply of the Government 
 NSGM funds utilization is linked to the milestones achievement by the project 
implementing utilities. The fact of the matter is that since March, 2020, the pandemic Covid-19 
and the resultant lockdown imposed by the Govt. had also an effect on the implementation of the 
projects by the implementing utilities. As there are delays seen in the field implementation which 
in turn delays the claims of the utilities thereby resulting in low expenditure. However, all sincere 
efforts are being put in for implementation of projects in faster pace and optimum fund utilization 
through regular reviews at NSGM and at MoP. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
Smart Meters 
 The Committee note that that Smart Meters have various advantages over the 
conventional electricity meters. Smart meters can record energy usage in near real time/15-
minute intervals (configurable) and transmit data to the utilities constantly. Most importantly, 
smart meters enable two-way communication with the utility and the home/business and facilitate 
online energy audit etc. Smart meters can also help consumers monitor and regulate their 
consumption so they can save money on power bills. Due to these advantages, the Committee 
have been supportive of installation of Smart Meters all over the country expeditiously. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Ministry is also endeavoring to complete Smart Metering in 
the next three years with a window that it can be extended by two years for State-specific 
reasons to be decided by the State Regulatory Commission. The Committee believe that Smart 
Metering would not only increase the billing collection of DISCOMs but also empower the end 
consumers to manage their spending on electricity. It seems to be a ‘Win-Win’ situation for both 
the parties.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take Smart Metering 
drive in a time-bound mission mode as done in case of village electrification and providing 
electricity connection to households.  
 
 The Committee are however surprised to note that for Smart Metering, no fund has been 
allocated for the financial year 2021-22. In the last financial year, there was a token allocation of 
₹10 lakh only. The Committee, desire that the work related to Smart Metering should be taken 
more seriously and expedited, and sufficient funds be allocated for the same to enable this 
consumer–friendly scheme to really take off. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 NPMU is actively pursuing the implementation of smart metering in smart grid projects 
sanctioned under NSGM. For FY 2021-22, Rs.40 Cr. was allotted. The expenditure is linked to 
claims by the implementing utilities. The Smart Metering on prepaid model is being taken up in 
Reform Linked Distribution Scheme which is under the active consideration of this Ministry. The 
proposed “Revamped Reforms Based and Results Linked Distribution Sector Scheme” envisages 
elimination of human interface in metering, billing and collection to reduce AT&C losses, by 
introducing an end-to-end technological solution of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), 
covering the distribution system – consumers, feeders and distribution transformers. It will 
facilitate installing of smart prepaid meters for consumers and communicable meters for DTs & 
Feeders to be integrated with AMI system. Under the proposed scheme approx. 25 Crore Smart 

16 
meters are expected to be installed with 10 crore prepaid smart meters proposed to be installed 
by December, 2023. There is further emphasis on such installation in PPP mode (DBFOOT), 
involving private participation, which will not only create investment opportunities for private 
sector but also provide fiscal space for DISCOMS to undertake large investments. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)  
 The Committee note with concern the reply of the Ministry in regard to the actual reason 
for the incident of disconnection of 1.5 lakh home connections with smart meters during August 
2020 in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee was informed during evidence that the Energy Efficiency 
Services Limited had investigated this incident and the disconnection was being done from HES 
(Head End System) and it has been moved to the MDM which is better practice. It was further 
stated that so far, they have not come to any conclusion relating to cyber security aspect or of 
any sabotage and EESL has been asked to take corrective actions. Since the country has 
decided to go ahead with the Smart Grid and Smart Metering technologies in a big way, the 
Committee are of the view that such issues could wreak havoc in the energy sector, if we are not 
prepared with a foolproof plan to timely avert them. As the Committee believe that the matter of 
cyber security of the Power System is very critical, they would recommend that the Ministry must 
take this issue more seriously and formulate effective and adequate safeguards in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Bulk disconnection incident of 12th Aug 2020 has interrupted the smart meter 
installation; Primary cause being attributed is “Execution of command on all groups in place of 
target group’ and command generated from HES (Head End System) instead of MDMS (Meter 
data Management System). Security audit of UP AMI system is being conducted through STQC 
and final report is awaited. EESL is carrying out UAT for the system. It may be noted that clauses 
related to cyber security and data privacy (clauses 3.7 and 3.8) have been adequately 
incorporated in the Standard Bidding Documents for Appointment of AMI Service Provider 
(AMISP) on OPEX model duly approved by HMoSP (I/C) in January 2021 which is available 
at https://www.nsgm.gov.in/sites/default/files/AMISP-Contract-January-2021.pdf. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)  
National Electricity Policy 
 The Committee note that the present National Electricity Policy was adopted in the year 
2005. It aims at achieving the objectives such as access to electricity and availability for all 
households, power - demand to be fully met, per capita availability of electricity to be increased to 
over 1000, etc. The Committee observe that as most of the enunciated objectives of the National 
Electricity Policy, 2005 have already been achieved, it no more reflects the aspirations, 
challenges and dynamics of the fast-changing electricity sector. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly feel that there is a need for the formulation of a new National Electricity Policy. During 
his deposition, the Secretary, Ministry of Power agreed to the proposal and apprised the 
Committee that the Ministry is considering amendments to this policy. However, the Committee 
would like to recommend that instead of making piecemeal amendments in the present National 
Electricity Policy, an altogether new Policy be freshly formulated according to the requirements of 

17 
the changing power sector scenario, so that it can serve as a beacon light for the power sector as 
a whole and lay a coherent trajectory for its future growth and development.  
Reply of the Government 
 An Expert Committee has been constituted by Ministry of Power for preparing draft 
National Electricity Policy 2021 on 12.4.2021. Interactions with all stakeholders including States 
representative were held in the month of May, 2021/June 2021 to prepare and recommend 
National Electricity Policy, 2021. Comments received from various stakeholders on draft NEP, 
2021 circulated on 27.04.2021, are under examination. Keeping in mind future growth and 
development of Power Sector as a whole, Expert Committee is working on making amendments 
in the present NEP. Expert Committee is expected to submit the draft NEP, 2021 by 12th August, 
2021.  
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 ) 
Electricity Amendment Bill 
 The Committee note that the Government is intending for reduction in national Average 
Cost of Supply (ACS)-Average Revenue Realized (ARR) gap to zero by 2024-25. The Committee 
have been apprised that to provide a choice to the consumer for selection of power supply 
company by promoting competition and to deal with other issues, draft Electricity Amendment Bill 
2021 is under finalization and will be sent for Cabinet approval. The Committee welcomes the 
endeavour of the Government, and are of the belief that it is a step in the right direction. 
However, they desire that diligent efforts be made to bridge ACS-ARR gap by bringing greater 
efficiency in the system and significantly reducing AT&C losses so that the need to raise tariff 
does not arise in the usual course. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill 2021 has the provision of introducing competition in the 
distribution business and allows multiple distribution companies to supply electricity to consumers 
in the same area of supply. Consumers will have the choice to choose the supplier of electricity. 
Salient features of the proposed amendment are as under:– 
- Multiple distribution companies allowed to operate in same area of supply  
- Choice to Consumer to choose any distribution company 
- Distribution companies can use either its own distribution system or that of another 
company: Non-discriminatory open access to be provided.  
- SERC to set ceiling tariffs for each category – DISCOMS free to sell power below the 
ceiling tariff. This will enable innovations in consumer service  
- Registration with the Commission for supplying electricity  
- Obligation to supply: for all registered companies in the area of supply. 
 Other areas of amendments include strengthening of regulatory commission and the 
APTEL, penalty for non-fulfillment of Renewable purchase obligation for promotion of Renewable 
energy etc. 
 The draft Cabinet Note on Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was circulated to eight 
Ministries/Departments for the Inter-Ministerial Consultation on 10.03.2021.  Based on the 
comments received from concerned Ministries/Departments, the draft Electricity (Amendment) 
Bill, 2021 has been modified and sent to M/o Law & Justice (Legislative Department) for vetting. 

18 
 After obtaining approval of the Union Cabinet the draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 
is planned to be introduced in the next session of Parliament. 
Steps proposed for reduction AT&C Losses through amendment in Tariff Policy:  
(i) In most areas Distribution systems are monopolies — there is no competition, which 
is the tool which normally incentivize increase in efficiencies. It is therefore the responsibility of 
the Regulatory framework to ensure that the burden of inefficiencies of the service provider is 
not passed on to the consumers. In order to ensure that the burden of inefficiencies of the 
Distribution Licensees is not passed on to the consumers the State Commission shall lay down 
a trajectory of AT&C loss reduction, and AT&C loss exceeding the given trajectory shall not be 
passed on in tariff.  
The target for AT&C losses and the period to achieve should be decided, keeping in mind 
the present levels of AT&C losses and the technical losses. The technical losses may be 
estimated on the basis of the characteristics of the distribution system including the ratio of 
length of high tension to low tension wires, the proportion of energy supplied at high and extra 
high voltage, the intensity of electricity consumption, etc. 
Where AT&C losses being passed on in tariff is 20% or more, the trajectory should be 
such that it is brought down to 15% in a maximum of five years. Where AT&C losses being 
passed on in tariff is less than 20% but more than 15%, the trajectory should be such that it is 
brought down to 15% in not more than three years. Further, AT&C losses shall be brought down 
to a level of 10% within five years of the reference date for achieving 15% AT&C losses. State 
Commission may provide suitable incentives to achieve AT&C losses below 10%.  
Amendment proposed in Tariff Policy regarding average cost of supply: 
(ii) No consumer should be asked to pay more than 20% above the cost of supply 
approved at as above. For achieving the objective that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of 
supply of electricity, the Appropriate Commission will notify a roadmap such that tariffs are 
brought within ±20% of the average cost of supply. The road map would have intermediate 
milestones, based on the approach of a gradual reduction in cross subsidy. This roadmap shall 
be notified within one year of coming into force of this policy. 
The State Governments can give subsidy to the extent they consider appropriate as per 
the provisions of section 65 of the Act. Direct subsidy is a better way to support the weaker 
sections of consumers than the mechanism of cross-subsidizing the tariff across the board. As a 
substitute of cross subsidies, the State Government has the option of raising resources through 
mechanism of electricity duty and giving direct subsidies to only needy consumers. This is a 
better way of targeting subsidies effectively.  
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee further desire that while amending the Electricity Act to provide choice to 
the consumer for selection of power Supply Company by promoting competition, the 
apprehensions and the issues flagged by the Committee in this regard in their 4th Report(16th 
Lok Sabha) on Electricity Amendment Bill, 2014, maybe addressed and taken into consideration. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 19.12.2014. 
The Bill was subsequently referred to the Standing Committee on Energy for examination and 
report. The Committee had submitted its report on 7.5.2015.  The stakeholders consultation was 
carried out on the revised draft proposed amendment to the Electricity Act, 2003. During the 
process deliberation/consultation at various levels was also carried out to finalize the Bill.   
However, Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 got lapsed due to dissolution of 16th Lok Sabha. 

19 
Budget announcements 2021-22 - Following announcement has been made in the Union 
Budget 2021-22 on 01.02.2021 for giving choice to the electricity consumers:— 
“The distribution companies across the country are monopolies, either government or 
private.  There is a need to provide choice to consumers by promoting competition.  A 
framework will be put in place to give consumers alternatives to choose from among 
more than one Distribution Company.” 
Pursuant to the Budget announcements, series of consultations were held with various 
stakeholders including State Governments, Electricity Regulators and Industry players. The 
proposed reform was also discussed in the Consultative Committee meeting held on 3.3.2021 
wherein Hon’ble Members of Parliament welcomed the proposal. 
 Accordingly, draft Cabinet Note on Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was circulated to 
eight Ministries/Departments for the Inter-Ministerial Consultation on 10.03.2021. Based on the 
comments received from concerned Ministries/Departments, the draft Electricity (Amendment) 
Bill, 2021 has been modified and sent to M/o Law & Justice (Legislative Department) for vetting. 
After obtaining approval of the Union Cabinet the draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 
is planned to be introduced in the monsoon session of Parliament. 
 The proposal for separation of carriage and content envisaged under Electricity 
(Amendment) Bill 2014 has been dropped as Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 got lapsed due 
to dissolution of 16th Lok Sabha. 
[Ministry of Power, OM No. F.No.10/1/2021 (Part-I), Dated: 18/01/2022] 
  

20 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
—NIL— 
  

21 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—NIL— 
  

22 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—NIL— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI  
15 March, 2022  
24 Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS LALAN SINGH,
Chairperson,
Standing Committee on Energy. 
  

23 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2021-22) HELD ON 15th MARCH, 2022 IN COMMITTEE                
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1030 hours to 1100 hours. 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh – Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
3. Shri Velusamy P. 
4. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
6. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
7. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
8. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
10. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
11. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
12. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Additional Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about the 
agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports:— 
 (i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the 
6th Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy’. 

24 
(ii)    Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the 
7th Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
the Ministry of Power’. 
(iii)  Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Power’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the 
aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to 
both Houses of the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

25 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE                    
SEVENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF                                    
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 17 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 
 Total: 17 
 Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: 
- Nil -  
 Total: 00 
 Percentage: 00% 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the Government has not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
- Nil - 
 Total: 00 
 Percentage: 00% 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited: 
- Nil - 
Total: 00 
 Percentage: 00% 
 