 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
  
  
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Review of Power Tariff Policy – 
need for uniformity in tariff structure across the country]    
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-23) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 32 
 

ii 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Review of Power Tariff Policy – need for uniformity 
in tariff structure across the country] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
C.O.E. NO. 361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022  By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by ______________________ 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2022-23) v 
 Introduction vi 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
13 
Chapter III Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
30 
Chapter IV Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
31 
Chapter V Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which final reply 
of the Government is still awaited 
33 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on                            
15th December, 2022 
34 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -
Sixth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2022-23) 
MEMBERS 
 
                                                                        LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal -  Chairperson 
  
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary* 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri P. Velusamy 
                                                                   RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
25. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
26. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
27. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
28. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
31. Vacant 
                                                                         SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer 
   
_________________________________________ 
*   Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th November, 2022. 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Thirty-Second Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth Rep ort (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – need for 
uniformity in tariff structure across the country’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Power. 
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the 
Lok Sabha on 2 nd August, 2022 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
Replies of the Government  to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 25th October, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 15th December, 2022. 
4. An Analysis on the action -taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth Report of the Committee is 
given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi  
16th December, 2022  
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka) 
Jagdambika Pal,                                            
Chairperson,  
             Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the                
Twenty-Sixth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘ Review of Power Tariff 
Policy – need for uniformity in tariff structure across the country’.  
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 2nd August, 202 2 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report 
contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report were received on 25th October, 2022. These have 
been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, 11 and 12             
Total - 11 
                         Chapter-II 
                                                          
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
- Nil   -          Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of w hich the reply  of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
     Serial No. 10     Total–01                                                                                             
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the 
Government is still awaited:  
- Nil -  
                                 Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that action t aken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Rationalization of Tariff 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that Electricity in India is under the concurrent list of the 
Constitution at entry number 38 in the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India and is administered both by the Central and the State 
Governments. The Electricity Act, 2003 is currently the legislation governing the 
Indian Electricity Sector. The Electricity Act, 2003 provides the Central 
Government to publish the National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy, for the 
development of the power system based on optimal utilization of resources. The 
Tariff Policy is meant to provide guidance to Regulators in tariff fixation. The 
Committee have an intention to make the power tariff not only affordable for 
each and every citizen of the country but also make the sy stem of power tariff 
simple, transparent and accountable.  
The Committee observe that the cost of supply of electricity to the consumer 
primarily consists of generation, transmission and distribution costs. The 
Committee also note that there is a great variation in generation cost as well as 
the installation cost of power plants depending on their source, fuel, location, 
etc. DISCOMS have made long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with 
multiple power generators at various rates (fixed as well as variable cost) as per 
their demand and regulation obligations suc h as Renewable Purchase 
Obligation (RPO). Therefore, the power procurement cost by the DISCOMS 
varies greatly. Further, due to inherent considerations of distance, direction and 
quantum, in the present mechanism for transmission of electricity i.e. Point o f 
Connection (PoC) charges vary for different injection/ drawal points. Thereon, 
O&M Expenses, AT&C losses and other charges are added to the power 
procurement cost to arrive at the Average Cost of Supply (ACoS) of any DISCOM. 
The Committee are also appris ed that at the distribution level, since electricity 
is a concurrent subject, States have the right to decide the tariff across the 
categories of consumers, keeping in view the socio -economic conditions of their 
consumers  
and the State Government policies . The States with a view to provide lower 
power tariff to marginalized/ poor consumers use cross -subsidy as a tool. Also, 
many States have created a large number of consumer tariff categories/slabs, in 
some cases, the number is as high as 93. 
The Committee , therefore, cannot but conclude that the present power tariff 
structure being very complex and varied, as such there is a great need for 
rationalization of various key components of power tariff. The Committee also 

3 
 
understand that having a uniform tariff across the country at present or in one 
go would be very difficult. However, the Committee are of the opinion that the 
Ministry should take concrete steps in the direction of rationalization of tariff 
structure. Keeping in view that the subject is under th e concurrent list of the 
Constitution, the Central Government should undertake comprehensive 
discussions with the State Governments to address their concerns in this regard 
so that this desired goal is achieved at some point without pitfalls.” 
 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“The tariff determination is done by the Appropriate Commission as per the 
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Tariff Policy. Section 62(3) of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the  Appropriate Commission shall not, while 
determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference to any consumer 
of electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load factor, 
power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity duri ng any specified 
period or the time at which the supply is required or the geographical position 
of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose for which the supply is 
required. Accordingly, the retail tariffs are determined by the State 
Commissions.  
Section 61(g) of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate 
Commission shall be guided by the objective that the tariff progressively reflects 
the efficient and prudent cost of supply of electricity. The State Governments 
can give subsidy to the extent they consider appropriate as per the provisions of 
section 65 of the Act which inter -alia requires State Governments to 
compensate Discoms for the same.  
Government is promoting competition through Power Exchanges. The uniform 
tariff is discovered on the Power Exchanges for a specific time block of the day. 
Accordingly, to this extent, for the power procured by the distribution utilities 
from Power Exchanges the price of electricity remains uniform, except in case of 
market splitting. The proposed  Market Based Economic Despatch (MBED) 
mechanism is a step towards a uniform price throughout the country. The 
implementation of phase -1 of MBED is under process by CERC. 
The need for simplification and rationalization of tariff structure has been 
recognized by the Government. In order to simplify the tariff structure, 
following is proposed in the revised draft Tariff Policy, which is presently under 
the consideration of the Government:  
a) The price of electricity should be based on cost of supply of 
electricity which primarily depends on voltage of supply, connected 
load and energy consumed.  
b) No individual category/subcategory shall be prescribed for 
temporary supply. Such supply may be provided at fixed multiple of 
cost of supply for that category.  
c) The fixed charge component in the tariff should progressively reflect 
the actual share of fixed cost in the revenue requirement of Distribution 
licensees.  
d) In order to achieve the si mplified categorization, the process of 
merging of existing categories/ sub -categories and slabs shall be 
carried out progressively.  

4 
 
e) In addition, a separate category for EV charging stations, may be 
created, if required.  
The committee report on the ra tionalisation of tariff had also been shared with 
all the States. As per the Act, the State Commission is mandated to rationalise 
the tariff. The Forum of Regulators is also required to bring in the consensus 
among the State Commissions. 
 
 
8. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Power has seriously 
recognized the need for simplification and rationalization of tariff structure  and 
in order to simplify the tariff structure, there are several proposals in the revised 
draft Tariff Policy, which is presently under the consideration of the Government.  
Moreover, the Committee Report on the rationalisation of tariff had also been 
shared with all the States.  The Committee also believe that the role of the Forum 
of Regulators is crucial in bringing the consensus among the State Commissions in 
this regard. The Committee expect that the Ministry , inter alia, would also utilize 
the platform of the Forum of Regulators for this purpose  and a revised Tariff 
Policy will be finalized soon with consensus.   
 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2003 specifies the duties of 
DISCOMS by which they are obligated to fulfil the electricity requirements and 
demands of consumers. The Committee also concur with the view that 
maintaining the sanctity of contracts is one of the main pillars which attracts the 
confidence of both buyer and seller and is fundamental to bring investment into 
the sector. Re -negotiation of PPAs unless mutually decided by the contracting 
parties is not desirable as it sends adverse signa ls to future investment. The 
Committee further note that approximately 90% of the electricity demand of the 
DISCOMS are met through long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs). PPAs 
are entered into between the generating companies and the load -serving 
entities. The PPAs are commercial in nature and mutually agreed by the parties 
and are binding on them. The Committee are also aware that the major chunk of 
any DISCOM’s cost is the power purchase cost and there are States/DISCOMS 
which have made PPAs at very high rates from the current market price and this 
situation is putting a lot of pressure on their financial performance. In 
Committee’s views if the same is rationalized it would immensely help in 
making power tariff affordable for the end consumers. Moreo ver, for having a 
uniform power tariff across the country, the States will have to end the long -
term PPAs with the power generating companies. The Committee, therefore, 

5 
 
desire that in case both the parties agree, there should be a provision of 
review/renegotiation of the PPAs. Further, the Committee also desire that 
gradually as and when the PPAs expire, they can be pooled. The Central 
Government should examine this matter and if required, provide all possible 
assistance to the stakeholders so that instead of a zero -sum game it becomes a 
win-win situation for the concerned parties.” 
 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“Ministry of Power has already issued advisory to the State Governments 
conveying that in view of the settled position of law, it is evident that once a 
binding contract has been entered, neither party can resile from the same nor 
the Hon’ble Court can alte r any of the terms of the contract that has been 
mutually agreed inter se parties. Further, it was also advised that the 
Appropriate Commission should strictly adhere to and ensure compliance of the 
above settled principles to ensure sanctity of concluded contracts/ PPAs, which, 
essentially, is the foundation for ensuring the growth of Indian electricity sector.  
It may be mentioned that any contract generally has provision for its 
amendment subject to mutual agreement. With the objective of improving 
financial health of distribution licensees and better utilisation of generation 
resources in the country, Guidelines were issued by Ministry of Power, in March, 
2021, giving option to the states to exit from the PPA from Central Generating 
Stations, on the comp letion of the period of the PPA. The generators have been 
allowed to sell this power in market. These guidelines will ease financial burden 
on Distribution Company by obviating obligation of payment of fixed charges, 
even without utilising the capacity and  will increase availability of power in 
market, ensuring optimum utilisation of generation capacity. This step is in line 
with transition towards shorter terms of PPAs and it will usher a new era in 
development of power market.  
Further, a scheme for pooli ng of power from the generating stations completing 
25 years is under consideration in the Ministry of Power. The proposed scheme 
would benefit the Discoms in terms of reduction of fixed cost liability and at the 
same time will facilitate optimum utilisati on of power plants and availability of 
more power in the grid to meet the demand. The amendment in Model Power 
Purchase Agreement is under consideration of the Ministry of Power, wherein, 
long term tenure would be reduced from 25 years to 12 -15 years. Furt her, 
DISCOMs should also endeavour to have a judicious mix of long, medium and 
short term contracts depending on its requirement.  
Government of India have taken the following steps to reduce the cost of power 
generation and resultant reduction in cost of electricity to consumers:  
(i) The Government in May, 2016 allowed flexibility in utilization of domestic 
coal by State/Central Gencos amongst their generating stations to reduce the 
cost of power generation by allocating more coal to their most efficient plants as 
well as by saving in transportation cost. The States may also transfer their 
linkage coal to IPPs selected through bidding process and take equivalent 
power.  
(ii) Rationalization of linkage sources of State/Central Gencos and IPPs with a 
view to optimize transportation cost has been allowed.  
(iii) The Government has introduced the SHAKTI (Scheme for Harnessing and 
Allocating Koyala (Coal) Transparently in India) -2017 Scheme to provide coal 

6 
 
linkages to the power plants which do not have linkage, thus helping the 
generators to get cheaper coal and thereby reduction in cost of generation.  
(iv) A Merit Order Despatch System has been put in place for Inter State 
Generating Stations under which electricity from more efficient/lower cost 
plant are despatched first.” 
11. The Committee observe that as desired by them the need of pooling of 
power has been felt and a scheme for pooling of power from the generating 
stations completing 25 years is under consideration in the Ministry of Power. 
Simultaneously, the amendment in Model Power Purchase Agreement is also 
under consideration of the Ministry of Power, wherein, long term tenure would be 
reduced from 25 years to 12-15 years. The Committee believe that these are steps 
in the right direction , as it would be nefit the Discoms in terms of reduction of 
their fixed cost liability and , at the same time , will facilitate the optimum 
utilisation of power plants and the availability of more power in the grid to meet 
demand. The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to expeditiously finalize 
the proposal s in this regard  keeping in view the needs and demands of the 
Generators and the Discoms. 
 
 
Power Exchanges 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.5) 
 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee observe that the Power Exchanges in the country harbinger the 
possibility of having a uniform tariff across the country. The Committee are also 
of the opinion that for ushering a new era of competi tion and rationalization of 
power tariff of power generation of various sources, an efficient, neutral and 
transparent system of power exchanges would be required. However, at the 
same time, the Committee also find that at present the power procured throug h 
power exchanges is less than 5% of the total electricity generated in the country 
which fulfill the power demand of DISCOMS in short term. The Committee also 
concur with the view that the price of electricity being traded is not cheaper 
than the average power purchase cost, all the time. Many times, distress bid is 
put by generating stations so as to keep the plant running at a technical 
minimum, therefore, the rate therein may not be the true indicator. Also, it is 
usually observed that other than monsoo n and lean demand period, the rate in 
the Power Exchanges increases due to the increase in overall buy volumes. 
Moreover, the power exchange prices are determined at the Regional Periphery 
and hence, do not reflect the cost of transmission.  
During the course of detailed discussion, the Committee have found that most of 
the stakeholders are not averse to the idea of price discovery through Power 

7 
 
Exchanges in a fair manner. The Committee also observe that since most of the 
power demands of DISCOMS are tied w ith long term PPAs, there is little scope 
for further growth in the trading volumes of Power Exchanges. However, in 
future, power exchanges may play a bigger role once the utilities are liberated 
from the commitment of long term PPAs. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should ensure that the Power Exchange system in the 
country develops in a manner that encourages competition in the market 
leading to an increase in the overall efficiency of the power system. They also 
desire that there should be an adequate number of Power Exchanges to rule out 
any monopoly in this regard. Also, stringent regulation needs to be made and 
strictly enforced to avoid any gaming or malpractice in power exchanges, which 
would be detrimental to consumer interest.” 
 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides for development of Power 
Market. The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) evolved an 
enabling framework for operation of power exchanges through its Power 
Market Regulations. Earlier, there were two power exchanges in the country 
namely IEX (Indian Energy Exchange) and PXIL (Power Exchange of India 
Limited). With a view to promoting competition in the Power Market CERC 
through its Order dated 12.05.2021 granted registration to the third power 
exchange of India namely, Hindustan Power Exchange Limited (HPX). HPX has 
commenced the operations w.e.f 06.07.2022. The Power Exchanges operating as 
on date include IEX, PXIL and HPX. The Power Market Regulations, 2021 have 
made elaborate provisions to ensure  that the Power Exchanges operate in a fair 
and transparent manner.  
The buyers and sellers choose a particular power exchange platform based on 
their requirements with products available on Term -Ahead Market, Day -Ahead 
Market and Real -Time Market segments . Market oversight is required to 
maintain the market integrity and credibility and to ensure that the market is 
fair and efficient. The Central Commission has always accorded importance to 
transparency in functioning of the Power Exchanges. It has been en shrined in 
the Power Market Regulations that a Power Exchange shall function with the 
objective to ensure fair, neutral, efficient and robust price discovery. The Power 
Exchanges are required to comply with the provisions of the Regulations and 
their statu s of compliance is monitored regularly. The Market Monitoring Cell 
(MMC)of the Central Commission has been monitoring the market operations 
including in the power exchanges at regular intervals, through its monthly & 
annual market monitoring reports.  
Since power exchanges work under oversight of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) and majority of volume under various category of products 
available on power exchanges is cleared through double side bidding, number of 
power exchanges working is n ot an area of concern. In fact, in its market 
regulations, CERC has covered possibility of coupling of power exchanges so 
that one price is discovered in all the power exchanges.  
New products like G -DAM and G -TAM have been launched in Power Exchanges 
to d eepen the green market and to provide competitive price signals, besides 

8 
 
offering an opportunity to the market participants to trade in green energy, in 
the most transparent, flexible, competitive, and efficient manner.  
The steps like implementation of Market Based Economic Despatch (MBED) and 
the proposed schemes of pooling of power after completion of 25 years of 
Generating Stations would facilitate the enhanced transaction through power 
exchanges.  
A committee has been constituted under Secretary (Power) with the objective to 
prepare a roadmap for power market development in the country.” 
 
 
14. The Committee are happy to note that Hindustan Power Exchange Limited 
(HPX), the third power exchange of India, has commenced operations w.e.f 
06.07.2022. The Ministry have further stated that new products like G -DAM and 
G-TAM have been launched in Power Exchanges to deepen the green market and 
to provide competitive price signals, besides offering an opportunity to the 
market partic ipants to trade in green ener gy in the most transparent, flexible, 
competitive, and efficient manner.  Also, a committee has been constituted under 
the Secretary (Power) to prepare a roadmap for power market development in 
the country.  Nonetheless, the Committee would like to emphasize  that, while 
preparing the roadmap, it should be ensured that  the system of Power Exchanges 
evolves in such a manner that it facilitate s the optimum utilization of resources in 
the power system fairly and transparently . For healthy competition and the 
desired growth of the sector, the interests of all the players need to be protected.  
 
Pooling of Power 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that the country has a total generation installed capacity 
to the tune of 3,88,848 MW, whereas, the average peak demand hovers around 
1,70,000 MW. The Plant Load Factor in respect of coal and lignite based power 
plants was 53.37% during the year 2020 -21. Such power plants under State 
Sector had a PLF of 44.68% during the same period. This shows the extent of the 
underutilization of those power plants. Some DISCOMS have raised the issue 
that since Solar is the daytime power and have a ‘mus t run’ status; they have to 
surrender some of the power of the conventional generators to accommodate 
renewable power. This attracts payment of fixed charges on DISCOMS. The 
Committee also note that the RPO trajectory which is being laid down by the 
Regulatory Commission is not being adhered to by the distribution companies. 
Moreover, the Committee are aware that the cost of installation as well as 
power generation, vary greatly from plant to plant and source to source. The 

9 
 
Committee are also aware that Ren ewable Energy which is intermittent, needs 
balancing power from other sources for the stability of the Grid and a need for 
bundling of power is thus being felt for the firm supply of power. Some sources 
of power such as Hydropower have a higher initial cos t and are also difficult to 
develop; however, once they are commissioned and fully depreciated, they are 
an excellent source of clean and cheap energy.  
The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that there should be an ideal mix of 
power basket not only  to get clean, reliable and affordable power but also to 
optimize the generation resources. In Committee’s view there is a need to 
develop a mechanism to ensure that the power sector develops in a desired 
manner having an ideal mix of power generation from  various sources, and also 
the resources are utilized optimally. It is also desirable that there should be 
some strategic planning to reap gains in the long run. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Government should constitute an Expert Committee to examine 
as to how the pooling of power at the Central level could be done and 
incentivized to ensure an ideal mix of energy and provide electricity to all the 
States and UTs at an uniform rate.  
The Committee note that ‘Merit Order Dispatch’ of electricity  by the load 
dispatch centres through ‘Security Constrained Economic Dispatch’ so far has 
indicated optimization of the generation across the country thereby reducing 
the production cost. The Committee also note that to help reduce electricity cost 
for con sumers, the Central Government is planning for the implementation of 
‘Market-Based Economic Despatch’ (MBED) from 01.04.2022 on a limited scale. 
The Committee understand that this would ensure a single price in a given time 
slot for all buyers in that time  slot and would be a step forward toward One 
Nation - One Tariff. The Committee hope that MBED will certainly ensure that 
the cheapest resources across the country are dispatched to meet the overall 
system demand and facilitate annual savings and desire th at if this mechanism 
proves effective, it should be made more encompassing by including all other 
power generating companies and be implemented in a phased manner. Further, 
the Committee also desire that to maximize the gains from such a mechanism 
the fuel  allocation should be streamlined on the basis of plant efficiency and 
optimum utilization of pit head plants.” 
 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Resource Adequacy (RA) framework is needed to ensure inter -alia optimum 
and least cost power procurement. Resource adequacy is aimed at ensuring 
availability of adequate resources to reliably meet the projected demand in 
compliance with specified reliability standards for serving the load with 
optimum generation mix. Given the  current focus on integration of 
environmentally benign technologies, the RA framework is also required to take 
into account the need, inter alia, for flexible resources, storage systems for 
energy shift and demand response measures for managing the interm ittency 
and variability of renewable energy sources. Central Electricity Authority is 
preparing Resource Adequacy Guidelines for the country.  
CERC has published the draft amendment Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) 
which also provides Resource Adequacy Planning.  
Central Electricity Authority has carried out “Optimal generation capacity mix 
studies for the year 2029 -30”. The objective of the study is to find out the least 

10 
 
cost optimal power generation capacity mix, which may be required to meet the 
peak electricity demand by the year 2029-30.  
According to section 3(4) of the Electricity Act, 2003, Central Electricity 
Authority has been mandated to prepare a National Electr icity Plan (NEP) in 
accordance with the National Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in five 
years. As mandated by the Act and the Policy, CEA has prepared the fourth draft 
National Electricity Plan covering review of capacity addition during 2017 -22, 
short term detailed plan for the period 2022 -27 & perspective Plan for the 
period 2027-32.  
With the objective of Redesigning of present market mechanism for lowering 
the cost of power purchase to Consumers, Framework for Implementation of 
Phase1 of M arket Based Economic Despatch (MBED) wherein mandatory 
participation by Central Generating Stations and voluntary participation by 
other generators, has been envisaged. The Phase -1 of MBED is under 
implementation by CERC.  
The pilot on Security Constrained  Economic Despatch (SCED) has been 
extended by CERC until further orders vide its order dated 31st March 2022. 
Operation of SCED at national level has resulted in reduction of generation cost 
to the tune of₹ 2255 crore from its inception in April 2019 till July 2022.” 
 
 
17. It is a matter of satisfaction for the Committee that  the operation of 
Security Constrained Economic Despatch (SCED) at national level has resulted in 
reduction of generation cost to the tune of  Rs. 2,255 crore from its inception in 
April 2019 till July 2022 . The Committee also appreciate the fact that the Central 
Electricity Authority is preparing Resource Adequacy Guidelines for the country 
to ensure inter -alia optimum an d least cost power procurement. Although 
generation is a de -licenced activity, the Committee are of the view that the 
optimum utilization of generation resources would not only make the power 
system robust and efficient but also help in making power affordable  for the end 
consumers. As desired by the Committee, to ensure that the cheapest resources 
across the country are dispatched to meet the overall system demand and 
facilitate annual savings, Phase -I of Market Based Economic Despatch (MBED) is 
under implementation by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission ( CERC) 
wherein there is mandatory participation by Central Generating Stations and 
voluntary by other generators and the Committee hope that the Committee would 
be apprised about the efforts, the outcome and future planning in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Feeder Separation 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended/observed as under: 
“The Committee note that the Feeder Separation is one of the important works 
to supplement the goal for providing 24x7 uninterrupted power supply and in 
improving the AT&C loss in the DISCOMS /Power Departments. The Committee 
are aware that under Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), there 
is a component for separation of agriculture and non -agriculture feeders. The 
feeder separation involves the separation of predominantly existing mixed 
category feeders (which supply electricity to all types of c onsumers including 
agriculture consumers) into agriculture and non-agriculture feeders.  
In regard to the status of feeder separation in the country, the Ministry of Power 
have stated that there are about 1,64,057 Rural feeders in the country. And out 
of these, a total of 62,193 Feeder (37.91%) are under Agriculture category. They 
have also stated that 4,697 Feeders have been separated under the ongoing 
DDUGJY scheme as on 31.12.2021. These agriculture feeders are the separated 
feeders with predominantly a griculture consumers. There are balance of 166 
feeders under DDUGJY as on 31.12.2021 which are under reconciliation. They 
have further stated that the separation of Feeders is a dynamic process to be 
carried out by States/DISCOMS. The Committee find that t he separation of 
feeders will facilitate DISCOMS to supply electricity to the agriculture sector 
without interrupting quality and reliable power to domestic consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the view that this system would benefit consumers 
as well as DISCOMS, as the agriculture sector may get power at a supportive rate 
and the State Governments/DISCOMS may rationalize their power procurement 
cost by resorting to Demand Side Management (DSM). The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to p roactively engage with the States to 
assess the quantum of work that needs to be undertaken under feeder 
separation by doing Cost -Benefit Analysis, encouraging them to execute it 
expeditiously and complete the process within a fixed timeline.” 
 
19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Government of India launched Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) in December, 2014 for various rural electrification works including 
separation of agriculture and non -agriculture feede rs, strengthening and 
augmentation of sub -transmission & distribution infrastructure, metering at 
distribution transformers/feeders/consumers and electrification of villages 
across the country. Works including feeder Segregation works covering 1,12, 
754.67(CKm) have been completed and the scheme has been closed as on 
31.03.2022. 
Further, under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS), agriculture 
feeders segregation works covering 208,522 (Ckms) have already been 
sanctioned. More Feeder Segregation works shall be sanctioned as and when the 
States and their DISCOMs pose their DPRs to the Ministry of Power. All the 
agriculture feeders are proposed to be metered using communicable smart 
feeder meters in accordance with the Scheme guidelines. ln this respect, it is 
also mentioned that under RDSS, convergence with the KUSUM scheme is also 

12 
 
envisaged wherein the agricultural feeders, once segregated, shall also be 
solarised, which would help in reducing the subsidy burden of the States on 
electricity used for Agriculture.” 
 
20. The Committee while recognizing the benefits of feeder separation, had 
specifically recommended the Government to proactively engage with the States 
to assess the quantum of work that needs to be undertaken. The Ministry , in their 
reply, have stated that feeder segre gation works covering 2,08,522 km have 
already been sanctioned . However, the ir reply is silent about any assessment of 
the remaining work pertaining to feeder separation or even any attempt being 
made in this regard . The Commi ttee are of the view that in the absence of 
assessed quantum of work to be undertaken, its expeditious and time bound 
execution would be very difficult. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation. The Committee believe the Ministry would provide the related 
data, at least in approximation, by discussing the same with the concerned States, 
at the time of furnishing the final replies in this regard.  
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  1) 
 
The Committee note that Electricity in India is under the concurrent list of the 
Constitution at entry number 38 in the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India and is administered both by the Central and the State 
Governments. The Electricity Act, 2003 is currently the legislation governing the Indian 
Electricity Sector. The Electricity Act, 2003 provides the Central Government to publish 
the National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy, for the development o f the power 
system based on optimal utilization of resources. The Tariff Policy is meant to provide 
guidance to Regulators in tariff fixation. The Committee have an intention to make the 
power tariff not only affordable for each and every citizen of the co untry but also make 
the system of power tariff simple, transparent and accountable. 
 
The Committee observe that the cost of supply of electricity to the consumer primarily 
consists of generation, transmission and distribution costs. The Committee also note  
that there is a great variation in generation cost as well as the installation cost of power 
plants depending on their source, fuel, location, etc. DISCOMS have made long term 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with multiple power generators at various rate s 
(fixed as well as variable cost) as per their demand and regulation obligations such as 
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO). Therefore, the power procurement cost by the 
DISCOMS varies greatly. Further, due to inherent considerations of distance, directi on 
and quantum, in the present mechanism for transmission of electricity i.e. Point of 
Connection (PoC) charges vary for different injection/ drawal points. Thereon, O&M 
Expenses, AT&C losses and other charges are added to the power procurement cost to 
arrive at the Average Cost of Supply (ACoS) of any DISCOM. The Committee are also 
apprised that at the distribution level, since electricity is a concurrent subject, States 
have the right to decide the tariff across the categories of consumers, keeping in vie w 
the socio-economic conditions of their consumers 
and the State Government policies. The States with a view to provide lower power tariff 
to marginalized/ poor consumers use cross -subsidy as a tool. Also, many States have 
created a large number of consume r tariff categories/slabs, in some cases, the number 
is as high as 93. 
 
The Committee, therefore, cannot but conclude that the present power tariff structure 
being very complex and varied, as such there is a great need for rationalization of 
various key co mponents of power tariff. The Committee also understand that having a 
uniform tariff across the country at present or in one go would be very difficult. 
However, the Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should take concrete steps 
in the direction  of rationalization of tariff structure. Keeping in view that the subject is 
under the concurrent list of the Constitution, the Central Government should undertake 
comprehensive discussions with the State Governments to address their concerns in 
this regard so that this desired goal is achieved at some point without pitfalls. 
 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The tariff determination is done by the Appropriate Commission as per the  
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Tariff Policy. Section 62(3) of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate Commission shall not, while  
determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference to any consumer of  
electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load factor, power factor,  
voltage, total consumption of electricity during any specified period or the time at which 
the supply is required or the geographical position of any area, the nature of supply  and 
the purpose for which the supply is required. Accordingly, the retail tariffs are 
determined by the State Commissions. 
Section 61(g) of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate  
Commission shall be guided by the objective that the tariff progressively reflects the  
efficient and prudent cost of supply of electricity. Th e State Governments can give  
subsidy to the extent they consider appropriate as per the provisions of section 65 of 
the Act which inter -alia requires State Governments to compensate Discoms for the 
same. 
Government is promoting competition through Power Ex changes. The uniform tariff is 
discovered on the Power Exchanges for a specific time block of the day. Accordingly, to 
this extent, for the power procured by the distribution utilities from Power Exchanges 
the price of electricity remains uniform, except in case of market splitting. The proposed 
Market Based Economic Despatch (MBED) mechanism is a step towards a uniform price 
throughout the country. The implementation of phase -1 of MBED is under process by 
CERC. 
The need for simplification and rationalizat ion of tariff structure has been recognized 
by the Government. In order to simplify the tariff structure, following is proposed in the 
revised draft Tariff Policy, which is presently under the consideration of the 
Government: 
a) The price of electricity shoul d be based on cost of supply of electricity which 
primarily depends on voltage of supply, connected load and energy 
consumed.   
b) No individual category/subcategory shall be prescribed for temporary 
supply. Such supply may be provided at fixed multiple of co st of supply for 
that category. 
c) The fixed charge component in the tariff should progressively reflect the 
actual share of fixed cost in the revenue requirement of Distribution 
licensees. 
d) In order to achieve the simplified categorization, the process of mer ging of 
existing categories/ sub -categories and slabs shall be carried out 
progressively. 
e) In addition, a separate category for EV charging stations, may be created, if 
required.  
The committee report on the rationalisation of tariff had also been shared with all 
the States. As per the Act, the State Commission is mandated to rationalise the tariff. 
The Forum of Regulators is also required to bring in the consensus among the State 
Commissions.  
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

15 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  2) 
 
The Committee note that the focus of the Tariff Policy 2016 is on 4 Es: Electricity for all, 
Efficiency to ensure affordable tariffs, Environment for a sustainable future, Ease of 
doing business to attract investments and to ensure financial viability. The Committee 
find that the goal of ‘Electricity for all’ has been  successfully achieved. In regard to 
Efficiency to ensure affordable tariffs, the Committee are of the view that in this context 
much more is needed to be done. The Country has a total installed capacity of 3,88,848 
MW, whereas the peak demand so far has b een about 2,00,000 MW. The PLF of Coal & 
Lignite based power plants in the country during the year was 53.37%. The under -
utilization of such power plants leads to the payment of fixed cost by the DISCOMS 
which is ultimately passed on to the end consumers. The Aggregate Technical and 
Commercial (AT&C) losses in the country is still about 21% which needs to be brought 
down in a time -bound manner and the benefit accrued thereon should be passed on to 
the consumers in the form of lower tariff. 
The Committee als o hope that on the front of ‘Environment for a sustainable future’, 
there have been sincere efforts by the Central Government by focusing on installation of 
more and more renewable energy and committing a target of 500 GW by the year 2030. 
However, it is also a fact that the coal-based thermal power is the mainstay of the power 
sector in the country and will remain so at least during the present decade. As there is 
no dearth of indigenous coal in the country, the Committee are of the view that the 
endeavour of the Government should be maximum utilization of coal -based thermal 
plants in the country by restricting their emission by various interventions including 
the use of carbon capture technology. Also, the source and supply of coal to these power 
plants needs further rationalization to bring down the generation cost. The Committee 
are of the view that much has been done by the Government for ‘Ease of doing business’ 
to attract investments and to ensure financial viability, nonetheless, the issue of 
financial viability in the distribution sector still persists. The total loss of distribution 
utilities for the year 2019 -20 stands at Rs. 74,914 crore. Their revenue gap without the 
UDAY grant and Regulatory Income was Rs. 0.60/kWh during the year 2018-19. 
In vie w of the foregoing, the Government should suitably amend the present Tariff 
Policy not only to enable it to cater to the needs of the changed scenario but also to 
achieve its unaccomplished goals particularly in connection with the efficiency to 
ensure affordable tariff, rationalization to bring down the generation cost and financial 
viability in the distribution sector. 
Reply of the Government 
Tariff Policy 2016 already provides that barring some exception future procurement of 
power and transmission servi ce is to be done through competitive bidding. This 
automatically bring in efficiency and leads to reduction in tariff.  Ministry of Power has 
also framed Electricity (Late Payment Surcharge and Related Matters) Rules, 2022 and 
Electricity (Timely Recovery of Costs due to Change in Law) Rules, 2021 which will also 
help in ensuring financial viability of generating and transmission companies. In so far 
as distribution sector is concerned, Government had launched UDAY for the Financial 
Turnaround of Power Distribution Companies.   
Government has announced Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) in July 2021 
with the objective of improving the quality and reliability of power supply to consumers 
through a financially sustainable and operationally efficient Di stribution Sector in the 

16 
 
country.  The scheme aims to reduce the AT&C losses to pan -India levels of 12-15% and 
ACS-ARR gap to zero by 2024-25. 
Tariff Policy is proposed to be revised which would inter-alia have following objectives: 
(1) Promote competition , efficiency in operations and improvement in quality of 
supply;  
(2) Ensure financial viability of the sector and attract investments;  
(3) Promote generation of electricity from renewable sources as a green activity; 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  3) 
The Committee note that as per Tariff Policy, Two-Part Tariff Structure comprising fixed 
and variable charges has been adopted for power procured under medium and long 
term contracts by DISCOMS from Generating Stations. The fixed charges are reflective of 
capital investments and are paid based on the availability of the power station. The 
variable charges are the cost of fuel used for the generation of electricity. The 
Committee observe that various States have been raising the issue that they have to pay 
a big amount as a fixed cost in the event of non -utilization of power stations. Also, they 
have raised the issue that 15.5% of Return on Equity is too high and does not match the 
present low interest regime. The Committee also note that at the distribution tariff level 
the fixed cost component is not being recovered fully. The Committee do understand 
that the principal objective of the tariff policy is to essentially attract adequate 
investments in the power sector by providing an appropriate return on investment; 
nonetheless, they also believe that it should also not be aloof to the changed scenario. 
The Committee understand that in regard to the fixed charge component of the power 
plant, there is no escape from it, however, they desire that the Government should 
earnestly explore avenues and come out with solutions to reduce its burden on 
DISCOMS, including ensuring optimum utilization of the generation resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The tariff determination is done by the Appropriate Commission as per the provisions of 
the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Tariff Policy. Section 61(g) of the Electricity Act, 2003 
provides that the Appropriate Commission shall be guided by the objective that the tariff 
progressively reflects the efficient and prudent cost of supply of electricity. 
The Central Commission has introduced the pilot of Security Constrained Economic 
Despatch (SCED) with a view to ensuring optimization of generation resource at national 
level. The prime driver behind the pilot is to explore the scope of optimization and 
therefore the possibility of minimizing the system cost without major structural changes 
in the existing system. The pilot optimises the injection from generating  resources with 
the objective of minimization of production cost, after the beneficiaries submit their last 
revision i.e. seven to eight blocks before the actual dispatch of power. The optimisation 
of generation has been achieved by creating a merit order by dispatching cheaper 
generating station after duly factoring in technical constraints such as technical 
minimum, maximum generation, ramping constraints, transmission constraints etc. 
Thus, optimisation at national level is achieved by increasing the low er variable cost 
pithead generation while reducing the higher variable cost generation participating it the 
pilot. Around 50 generating stations have been participating in the pilot having 120 

17 
 
generating units and capacity of around 53, 000 MW in the count ry. Till now more than 
three years of implementation of the Pilot have shown that the pilot has facilitated the 
ease of generator’s operations. Since its inception in April 2019, SCED has resulted in 
reduction of variable cost of generation by more than ₹ 2000 crore. 
The fact that at distribution level, fixed costs component is not b eing reflected in retail 
tariff has been recognized.  
To reduce burden of discoms, government is actively considering measures to increase 
volumes in competitive markets. Furthe r, the scheme of bundling RE power with 
conventional generation will also lead to reduction in revenue outgo of discoms due to 
sharing of benefits. RoE for tariff determination is under the jurisdiction of Appropriate 
Commissions. However, in order to make  the project viable, developers in the hydro 
sector are willing to accept less Return on Equity on case to case basis. Fixed charges 
liability of the DISCOMs arise out of contractual obligations under PPA which need to be 
honoured. However, DISCOMs may und ertake optimal resource adequacy planning so 
that they are not burdened with excess capacity charges. 
With the objective of improving financial health of distribution licensees and better 
utilisation of generation resources in the country, Guidelines were issued by Ministry of 
Power, in March, 2021, giving option to the states to exit from the PPA from Central 
Generating Stations, on the completion of the period of the PPA. The generators have 
been allowed to sell this power in market. These guidelines will  ease financial burden on 
Distribution Company by obviating obligation of payment of fixed charges, even without 
utilising the capacity and will increase availability of power in market, ensuring optimum 
utilisation of generation capacity. This step is in line with transition towards shorter 
terms of PPAs and it will usher a new era in development of power market.   
Further, the Central Government has approved  a “Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme - A Reforms based and Results linked Scheme” with the objec tive of improving 
the quality and reliability of power supply to consumers through a financially 
sustainable and operationally efficient distribution Sector. The Scheme aims to reduce 
the AT&C losses to pan -India levels of 12 -15% and Average Cost of Supply  (ACS) - 
Average Revenue Realised (ARR) gap  to zero by 2024 -25. The Scheme has an outlay of 
Rs.3,03, 758 crore. Under the scheme, eligible DISCOMs would be provided conditional 
financial support for up gradation of the Distribution Infrastructure and Smart Metering 
Systems for the network as well as prepaid smart metering systems for consumers 
linked to initiation of reforms and achievement of results. A DISCOM which is making 
losses will not be able to access funds under this Scheme unless it draws up a pl an to 
reduce the losses, lists out the steps it will take to reduce such losses and the timelines 
thereof and get their State Government’s approval on it, and file the same with the 
Central Government. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2003 specifies the duties of DISCOMS by 
which they are obligated to fulfil the electricity requirements and demands of consumers. 
The Committee also concur with the view that maintaining the sanctity of contract s is one 
of the main pillars which attracts the confidence of both buyer and seller and is 
fundamental to bring investment into the sector. Re -negotiation of PPAs unless mutually 
decided by the contracting parties is not desirable as it sends adverse signa ls to future 
investment. The Committee further note that approximately 90% of the electricity 
demand of the DISCOMS are met through long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs). 

18 
 
PPAs are entered into between the generating companies and the load -serving enti ties. 
The PPAs are commercial in nature and mutually agreed by the parties and are binding on 
them. The Committee are also aware that the major chunk of any DISCOM’s cost is the 
power purchase cost and there are States/DISCOMS which have made PPAs at very high 
rates from the current market price and this situation is putting a lot of pressure on their 
financial performance. In Committee’s views if the same is rationalized it would 
immensely help in making power tariff affordable for the end consumers. Moreo ver, for 
having a uniform power tariff across the country, the States will have to end the long-term 
PPAs with the power generating companies. The Committee, therefore, desire that in case 
both the parties agree, there should be a provision of review/reneg otiation of the PPAs. 
Further, the Committee also desire that gradually as and when the PPAs expire, they can 
be pooled. The Central Government should examine this matter and if required, provide 
all possible assistance to the stakeholders so that instead of a zero-sum game it becomes a 
win-win situation for the concerned parties. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power has already issued advisory to the State Governments  conveying  that 
in view of the settled position of law, it is evident that once a binding contract has been 
entered, neither party can resile from the same nor the Hon’ble Court can alter any of the 
terms of the contract that has been mutually agreed inter se parties. Further, it was also 
advised that the Appropriate Commission should s trictly adhere to and ensure 
compliance of the above settled principles to ensure sanctity of concluded contracts/ 
PPAs, which, essentially, is the foundation for ensuring the growth of Indian electricity 
sector. 
It may be mentioned that any contract gener ally has provision for its amendment subject 
to mutual agreement. With the objective of improving financial health of distribution 
licensees and better utilisation of generation resources in the country, Guidelines were 
issued by Ministry of Power, in Marc h, 2021, giving option to the states to exit from the 
PPA from Central Generating Stations, on the completion of the period of the PPA. The 
generators have been allowed to sell this power in market. These guidelines will ease 
financial burden on Distributi on Company by obviating obligation of payment of fixed 
charges, even without utilising the capacity and will increase availability of power in 
market, ensuring optimum utilisation of generation capacity. This step is in line with 
transition towards shorter  terms of PPAs and it will usher a new era in development of 
power market. 
Further, a scheme for pooling of power from the generating stations completing 25 years 
is under consideration in the Ministry of Power. The proposed scheme would benefit the 
Discoms in terms of reduction of fixed cost liability and at the same time will facilitate 
optimum utilisation of power plants and availability of more power in the grid to meet the 
demand. The amendment in Model Power Purchase Agreement is under consideration o f 
the Ministry of Power, wherein, long term tenure would be reduced from 25 years to 12 -
15 years. Further, DISCOMs should also endeavour to have a judicious mix of long, 
medium and short term contracts depending on its requirement. 
Government of India have  taken the following steps to reduce the cost of power 
generation and resultant reduction in cost of electricity to consumers: 
(i) The Government in May, 2016 allowed flexibility in utilization of domestic coal by 
State/Central Gencos amongst their generat ing stations to reduce the cost of power 
generation by allocating more coal to their most efficient plants as well as by saving in 

19 
 
transportation cost. The States may also transfer their linkage coal to IPPs selected 
through bidding process and take equivalent power. 
(ii) Rationalization of linkage sources of State/Central Gencos and IPPs with a view to 
optimize transportation cost has been allowed. 
(iii) The Government has introduced the SHAKTI (Scheme for Harnessing and Allocating 
Koyala (Coal) Transparently in India)-2017 Scheme to provide coal linkages to the power 
plants which do not have linkage, thus helping the generators to get cheaper coal and 
thereby reduction in cost of generation. 
(iv) A Merit Order Despatch System has been put in place for Inte r State Generating 
Stations under which electricity from more efficient/lower cost plant are despatched first. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Power Exchanges  
The Committee observe that the Power Exchanges in the country harbinger the possibility 
of having a uniform tariff across the country. The Committee are also of the opinion that 
for ushering a new era of  competition and rationalization of power tariff of power 
generation of various sources, an efficient, neutral and transparent system of power 
exchanges would be required. However, at the same time, the Committee also find that at 
present the power procure d through power exchanges is less than 5% of the total 
electricity generated in the country which fulfill the power demand of DISCOMS in short 
term. The Committee also concur with the view that the price of electricity being traded is 
not cheaper than the average power purchase cost, all the time. Many times, distress bid 
is put by generating stations so as to keep the plant running at a technical minimum, 
therefore, the rate therein may not be the true indicator. Also, it is usually observed that 
other than monsoon and lean demand period, the rate in the Power Exchanges increases 
due to the increase in overall buy volumes. Moreover, the power exchange prices are 
determined at the Regional Periphery and hence, do not reflect the cost of transmission. 
During the course of detailed discussion, the Committee have found that most of the 
stakeholders are not averse to the idea of price discovery through Power Exchanges in a 
fair manner. The Committee also observe that since most of the power demands of 
DISCOMS are  tied with long term PPAs, there is little scope for further growth in the 
trading volumes of Power Exchanges. However, in future, power exchanges may play a 
bigger role once the utilities are liberated from the commitment of long term PPAs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should ensure that the Power 
Exchange system in the country develops in a manner that encourages competition in the 
market leading to an increase in the overall efficiency of the power system. They also 
desire that  there should be an adequate number of Power Exchanges to rule out any 
monopoly in this regard. Also, stringent regulation needs to be made and strictly enforced 
to avoid any gaming or malpractice in power exchanges, which would be d etrimental to 
consumer interest. 
Reply of the Government 
Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides for development of Power Market. The 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) evolved an enabling framework for 

20 
 
operation of power exchanges through its Power Market Regulations. Earlier, there were 
two power exchanges in the country namely IEX (Indian Energy Exchange) and PXIL 
(Power Exchange of India Limited). With a view to promoting competition in the Power 
Market CERC  through its Order dated 12.05.2021 granted registration to the third power 
exchange of India namely, Hindustan Power Exchange Limited (HPX). HPX has commenced 
the operations w.e.f 06.07.2022. The Power Exchanges operating as on date include IEX, 
PXIL and HPX. The Power Market Regulations, 2021 have made elaborate provisions to 
ensure that the Power Exchanges operate in a fair and transparent manner. 
The buyers and sellers choose a particular power exchange platform based on their 
requirements with products available on Term -Ahead Market, Day -Ahead Market and 
Real-Time Market segments. Market oversight is required to maintain the market integrity 
and credibility and to ensure that the market is fair and efficient. The Central Commission 
has always accorded importance to transparency in functioning of the Power Exchanges. It 
has been enshrined in the Power Market Regulations that a Power Exchange shall function 
with the objective to ensure fair, neutral, efficient and robust price discovery. The Power 
Exchanges are required to comply with the provisions of the Regulations and their status 
of compliance is monitored regularly. The Market Monitoring Cell (MMC)of the Central 
Commission has been monitoring the market operations including in the power exchan ges 
at regular intervals, through its monthly & annual market monitoring reports. 
Since power exchanges work under oversight of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) and majority of volume under various category of products available 
on power ex changes is cleared through double side bidding, number of power exchanges 
working is not an area of concern. In fact, in its market regulations, CERC has covered 
possibility of coupling of power exchanges so that one price is discovered in all the power 
exchanges. 
New products like G -DAM and G -TAM have been launched in Power Exchanges to deepen 
the green market and to provide competitive price signals, besides offering an opportunity 
to the market participants to trade in green energy, in the most transpare nt, flexible, 
competitive, and efficient manner. 
The steps like implementation of Market Based Economic Despatch (MBED) and the 
proposed schemes of pooling of power after completion of 25 years of Generating Stations 
would facilitate the enhanced transaction through power exchanges.  
 
A committee has been constituted under Secretary (Power) with the objective to prepare a 
roadmap for power market development in the country.  
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  6) 
 
Pooling of Electricity at Central Level 
The Committee note that the country has a total generation installed capacity to the tune 
of 3,88,848 MW, whereas, the average peak demand hovers around 1,70,000 MW. The 
Plant Load Factor in respect of coal and lignite based power plants was 53.37% during 
the year 2020 -21. Such power plants under State Sector had a PLF of 44.68% during the 
same period. This shows the extent of the underutilization of those power plants. Some 
DISCOMS have raised the issue that since Solar is the daytime power and have a ‘mus t 

21 
 
run’ status; they have to surrender some of the power of the conventional generators to 
accommodate renewable power. This attracts payment of fixed charges on DISCOMS. The 
Committee also note that the RPO trajectory which is being laid down by the Regula tory 
Commission is not being adhered to by the distribution companies. Moreover, the 
Committee are aware that the cost of installation as well as power generation, vary 
greatly from plant to plant and source to source. The Committee are also aware that 
Renewable Energy which is intermittent, needs balancing power from other sources for 
the stability of the Grid and a need for bundling of power is thus being felt for the firm 
supply of power. Some sources of power such as Hydropower have a higher initial cos t 
and are also difficult to develop; however, once they are commissioned and fully 
depreciated, they are an excellent source of clean and cheap energy. 
 
The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that there should be an ideal mix of power 
basket not only  to get clean, reliable and affordable power but also to optimize the 
generation resources. In Committee’s view there is a need to develop a mechanism to 
ensure that the power sector develops in a desired manner having an ideal mix of power 
generation from various sources, and also the resources are utilized optimally. It is also 
desirable that there should be some strategic planning to reap gains in the long run. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should constitute an Expert Committee 
to examine as to how the pooling of power at the Central level could be done and 
incentivized to ensure an ideal mix of energy and provide electricity to all the States and 
UTs at an uniform rate. 
 
The Committee note that ‘Merit Order Dispatch’ of electricity  by the load dispatch centres 
through ‘Security Constrained Economic Dispatch’ so far has indicated optimization of the 
generation across the country thereby reducing the production cost. The Committee also 
note that to help reduce electricity cost for con sumers, the Central Government is 
planning for the implementation of ‘Market -Based Economic Despatch’ (MBED) from 
01.04.2022 on a limited scale. The Committee understand that this would ensure a single 
price in a given time slot for all buyers in that time  slot and would be a step forward 
toward One Nation - One Tariff. The Committee hope that MBED will certainly ensure that 
the cheapest resources across the country are dispatched to meet the overall system 
demand and facilitate annual savings and desire th at if this mechanism proves effective, it 
should be made more encompassing by including all other power generating companies 
and be implemented in a phased manner. Further, the Committee also desire that to 
maximize the gains from such a mechanism the fuel  allocation should be streamlined on 
the basis of plant efficiency and optimum utilization of pit head plants. 
Reply of the Government 
Resource Adequacy (RA) framework is needed to ensure inter -alia optimum and least 
cost power procurement.   Resource adequacy is aimed at ensuring availability of 
adequate resources to reliably meet the projected demand in compliance with specified 
reliability standards for serving the load with optimum generation mix. Given the current 
focus on integration of environmen tally benign technologies, the RA framework is also 
required to take into account the need, inter alia, for flexible resources, storage systems 
for energy shift and demand response measures for managing the intermittency and 
variability of renewable energy  sources. Central Electricity Authority is preparing 
Resource Adequacy Guidelines for the country. 
CERC has published the draft amendment Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) which also 
provides Resource Adequacy Planning.  
Central Electricity Authority has  carried out “Optimal generation capacity mix studies for 
the year 2029 -30”. The objective of the study is to find out the least cost optimal power 

22 
 
generation capacity mix, which may be required to meet the peak electricity demand by 
the year 2029-30.  
According to section 3(4) of the Electricity Act, 2003, Central Electricity Authority has 
been mandated to prepare a National Electricity Plan (NEP) in accordance with the 
National Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in five years. As mandated by the  Act 
and the Policy, CEA has prepared the fourth draft National Electricity Plan covering 
review of capacity addition during 2017-22, short term detailed plan for the period 2022 -
27 & perspective Plan for the period 2027-32.  
 
With the objective of Redesigning of present market mechanism for lowering the cost of 
power purchase to Consumers, Framework for Implementation of Phase1 of Market 
Based Economic Despatch (MBED) wherein mandatory participation by Central 
Generating Stations and voluntary participation by other generators, has been envisaged. 
The Phase-1 of MBED is under implementation by CERC 
The pilot on Security Constrained Economic Despatch (SCED) has been extended by CERC 
until further orders vide its order dated 31st March 2022. Operation of SCED at national 
level has resulted in reduction of generation cost to the tune of₹ 2255 crore from its 
inception in April 2019 till July 2022. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  7) 
 
Point of Connection (PoC) Charges 
The Committee note that the yearly transmission charges are calculated based on CERC 
Tariff regulations or are based on discovered price through competitive bidding. The 
yearly transmission charges are to be recovered from users of Inter -State Transmission 
System (ISTS) based on a sharing mechanism, which is currently the Point of Connection 
(PoC) mechanism. Due to inherent  considerations of distance/ direction and quantum, 
these PoC charges vary for different injection/ drawal points. Many States have pointed 
out the need to rationalize the PoC mechanism as it lacks transparency. The Committee are 
in agreement with the view  that the characteristic of transmission pricing is that the 
transmission charges have to be recovered in full. The sharing of these charges will change 
within the set of payees depending upon the mechanism used for computation. Hence, any 
decrease of char ges for one payee will definitely lead to an increase of charges for other 
payees. This makes it difficult to satisfy all the stakeholders. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government/ CERC should form an Expert 
Committee to examine this issue. T he Committee also recommend that for better and 
optimum utilization of the transmission system and realization of the dream of ‘One -
Nation One-Grid’ in its true spirit, the feasibility of having a uniform transmission charges 
based only on the usage in terms of MW may be explored by consulting the stakeholders. 
 
 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Sharing of inter -State transmission charges and loses is governed by the regulations 
framed by the CERC in this regard, from time to time.  Central Commission constituted a 
taskforce on 10.7.2017 under Chairmanship of Shri A.S. Bakshi (the then Member, CERC) 
to review the framework of Point of Connection (POC) Charges. The terms of Reference 
(ToR) were inter -alia to critically examine the efficacy of the existin g POC mechanism, 
deficiency in the existing mechanism, if any, and in the light of issues and concerns of 
various stakeholders suggest modifications required in the existing mechanism. The Task 
Force submitted its report to the Commission in March 2019. Th e taskforce suggested two 
options for transmission pricing viz (a) modifications in the present PoC method and (b) 
Uniform charges method. 
The Commission constituted a Committee under Shri I.S. Jha, Member, CERC in May 2019 
to formulate draft regulations k eeping in view the Bakshi Committee Report and future 
power scenario. The Committee submitted its Report to the Commission in August 2019 
along with the proposed draft regulations. Taking into consideration the Bakshi 
Committee Report and the Jha Committee Report, the Central Commission, after due public 
stakeholder consultations, notified the revised Sharing of Inter State Transmission Charges 
and Losses Regulations on 01.07.2020 which came into effect from 01.11.2020.  
CERC (Sharing of inter -State transmi ssion charges and losses) Regulations 2020 (‘2020 
Sharing Regulations’) have been notified on 4.5.2020 and, brought into effect from 
1.11.2020. The 2020 Sharing Regulations were finalized after a detailed deliberation with 
stakeholders by way of participat ion in Committee formed by CERC, conducting of 
workshops for all distribution licensees, transmission licensees, generating stations, 
traders etc. during January 2020, inviting comments from stakeholders on draft 
Regulations and Public hearing held on 29.1 .2020. As per the notified regulations, 
Transmission charges for DICs shall have the following components: 
a. National Component (NC); Elements covered under National component shall be shared 
by All India drawee DICs and injecting DICs with untied LTA in proportion to their 
quantum of LTA plus MTOA and untied LTA respectively. 
b. Regional Component (RC): Elements covered under Regional component shall be shared 
by Regional drawee DICs and injecting DICs with untied LTA in proportion to their 
quantum of LTA plus MTOA and untied LTA respectively. 
Transformer Component (TC): This shall comprise of YTC of ICTs planned for drawal of 
power by concerned State and shall be shared by the drawee DICs located in concerned 
State in proportion to LTA+MTOA. 
c. AC System Component (ACC): This component shall comprise remaining YTC of the 
Transmission system except covered above. This is further divided into two components. 
i. Usage Based Component (AC-UBC): This shall correspond to part of YTC to be shared on 
respective usage of Transmission lines by DICs 
ii. Balance Component (AC-BC): This shall comprise of balance YTC from ACC after AC-UBC 
has been determined and shall be shared by drawee DICs and injecting DICs in the ration 
of their LTA +MTOA and Untied LTA respectively. 
 The Commission has also notified CERC (Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(Connectivity and General Network Access to the inter -State Transmission System) 
Regulations, 2022 (‘GNA Regulations’) on 7.6.2022. With this Regulation, 2020 Sharing 
Regulations have been proposed to be amended to charge transmission charges based on 
such GNA. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
 

24 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  8) 
Cross-Subsidy 
The Committee note that the Tariff Policy provides that for achieving the objective that 
the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity, the Appropriate 
Commission would notify a roadmap such that tariffs are brought within ±20% of the 
average cost of supply. The road map would also ha ve intermediate milestones, based on 
the approach of a gradual reduction in cross subsidy. The response of the State 
Governments in regard to the restriction of cross -subsidy to plus -minus 20% of the 
Average Cost of Supply, has been positive and most of th em have emphasized the need to 
have a cost-reflective tariff. In view of this, the Committee recommend that there is a need 
not only for restriction of cross -subsidy within a band but also for bringing more 
transparency in this matter for the improvement o f the financial health of the DISCOMS. 
The Committee also desire that the possibility of adoption of a system may be examined, 
wherein the base tariff is the ‘Average Cost of Supply’ for all the categories, thereafter, 
plus-minus 20% is applied as the case  may be for simplicity and transparency in tariff 
determination. Alternatively, the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) of subsidy in the account 
of the beneficiary may also be examined to make the system of cross -subsidy more 
focused and effective. 
Reply of the Government 
The Electricity Act, 2003 provides that cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced in 
the manner as may be specified by the State Commission. The Tariff Policy, 2016 stipulates 
that, for achieving the objective that the tariff progressively  reflects the cost of supply of 
electricity, the Appropriate Commission would notify a roadmap such that tariffs are 
brought within ±20% of the average cost of supply. The road map would also have 
intermediate milestones, based on the approach of a gradual  reduction in cross subsidy. 
One fallout of the cross -subsidies is that it increases tariff for industries and affects their 
global competitiveness. 
As an alternative, Tariff Policy, 2016 recognizes that direct subsidy is a better way to 
support the poorer  categories of consumers than the mechanism of cross subsidizing the 
tariff across the board.  
Amendment in the Electricity Rules is proposed to make a provision that the surcharge, 
determined by the State Commission under sub -section (1) (a) of Section 86  of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 shall not exceed 20% of the Average Cost of Supply. 
Further, the proposed revised Tariff Policy, presently under consideration of the 
Government provides that the Appropriate Commission shall determine the tariff without 
taking into account any subsidy components. Any subsidy to be given to any category of 
consumers shall be given by way of Direct Benefit Transfer directly into the bank account 
of the consumer or their consumer account with the Distribution Licensee to be refle cted 
in the electricity bill of the consumer. 
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  9) 
 
Rationalization of Tariff Categories 
The Committee find that over the years, the tariff structure across the States has become 
very complex and the consumer tariff categories are unduly large in numbers. In this 
regard, it is often argued that the high complexity of tariffs for each segregate d category 

25 
 
prevents consumers from fully responding to tariffs due to the high cost of processing the 
price information. Further, the basis for making such classifications has not been uniform 
across the country. The Committee further note that the Ministr y of Power had also 
constituted a Committee to suggest measures for “Simplification of consumer categories 
and rationalization of Tariff Structure”. The Committee in its report had recommended 
streamlining the consumers broadly into five major categories, i.e. domestic, agriculture, 
commercial, industrial and institutional. Under these broad categories, it was proposed to 
sub-categorize the consumers on the basis of voltage. The domestic category may have 
within itself three subcategories i.e. cross -subsidizing, cross-subsidized and cross -subsidy 
neutral. Further, this category may have a lifeline category and efforts should be made to 
gradually phase out un -metered, rural and urban categories. For agriculture consumers, 
consolidation of sub -categories may b e made into agriculture and agriculture allied 
categories and efforts should be made to dis -incentivize unmetered consumption. For 
industry category, a separate “Supported” category may be created to facilitate a select 
group of industries. 
 
The Committee are of the view that rationalization of tariff structure across the country 
would not only make the process of tariff determination simpler but would also bring 
more transparency and accountability, as only the targeted and deserving group would get 
the needed benefits. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that the said proposal for 
rationalization of tariff structure may become part of the Tariff Policy and the States be 
persuaded to implement this earnestly. The Committee also desire that the Cent ral 
Government should provide assistance to the States which may find it difficult to 
implement this due to some practical reasons.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The tariff determination is done by the Appropriate Commission as per the provisions of 
the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Tariff Policy. Section 62(3) of the Electricity Act, 2003 
provides that the Appropriate Commission shall not, while determining the tariff under 
this Act, show undue preference to any consumer of electricity but may differenti ate 
according to the consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage, total consumption of 
electricity during any specified period or the time at which the supply is required or the 
geographical position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose for which the 
supply is required. Accordingly, the retail tariffs are determined by the State Commissions. 
Section 61(g) of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate Commission shall 
be guided by the objective that the tariff progressively reflec ts the efficient and prudent 
cost of supply of electricity. The State Governments can give subsidy to the extent they 
consider appropriate as per the provisions of section 65 of the Act which inter -alia 
requires State Governments to compensate Discoms for the same. 
Government is promoting competition through Power Exchanges. The uniform tariff is 
discovered on the Power Exchanges for a specific time block of the day. Accordingly, to this 
extent, for the power procured by the distribution utilities from Powe r Exchanges the 
price of electricity remains uniform, except in case of market splitting. 
The need for simplification and rationalization of tariff structure has been recognized by 
the Government. In order to simplify the tariff structure, following is pro posed in the 
revised draft Tariff Policy, which is presently under the consideration of the Government: 
a) The price of electricity should be based on cost of supply of electricity which 
primarily depends on voltage of supply, connected load and energy consumed.   

26 
 
b) No individual category/subcategory shall be prescribed for temporary supply. Such 
supply may be provided at fixed multiple of cost of supply for that category. 
c) The fixed charge component in the tariff should progressively reflect the actual 
share of fixed cost in the revenue requirement of Distribution licensees. 
d) In order to achieve the simplified categorization, the process of merging of existing 
categories/ sub-categories and slabs shall be carried out progressively. 
e) In addition, a separate category  for EV charging stations, may be created, if 
required.  
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  11) 
Reduction of AT&C losses 
The Committee note that for the year 2018 -19, the ACoS and ARR were Rs. 6.15/kWh and 
Rs. 5.55/kWh respectively with a gap of Rs. 0.60 kWh (9.75% of ACoS) without UDAY 
Grant and Regulatory Income. The Committee further note that the AT&C losses for the 
said period stood at 21.74%. Had the AT&C losses reduced even by half, the DISCOMS 
would have become financially viable. The Committee are aware that the Central 
Government has also been making efforts to reduce the AT&C losses for years, with little 
success as it is still at the level of about 21% and in some States it is as high as 60%. The 
Committee are aware that distribution of electricity is in the domain of States so their 
determination and active participation to bring down AT&C losses are equally impor tant. 
The Committee in the past had examined the subject on AT&C losses in -depth and found 
that there are majorly commercial losses and pilferages with a little share of technical 
losses. The Committee had also learnt that the reduction of AT&C losses is a lso an 
administrative issue and depends greatly on managerial interventions of the 
States/DISCOMS. The Central Government have been doing their bit by the 
implementation of RPDRP, A -RPDRP, IPDS and UDAY schemes. However, Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquis ition (SCADA) as provided under IPDS, enables the DISCOMS to 
know where the problem is and what to do. But ultimately, DISCOMS will have to take 
managerial action to address that issue.  
In the view of the Committee, there is a dire need to reduce the AT&C  losses swiftly by 
taking stricter measures, as it would not only reduce the burden on the exchequer but also 
benefit the honest consumers in the form of reduced power bills. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Central Government should persuade the State Governments and 
provide them all the possible assistance in reducing AT&C losses in a time -bound manner. 
The Committee also desire that the success stories in regard to the reduction of AT&C 
losses worth emulating should be propagated and the informa tion related to the 
performance of DISCOMS also needs to be publicized in layman’s terms so that the public 
also becomes aware of it. 
Reply of the Government 
The reasons for high AT& C losses are mainly managerial deficiencies. The losses are 
primarily because of poor billing and collection efficiencies; non -payment of electricity 
dues by State Government departments; non -payment/short payment by the State 
Government against the subsidies announced by them.  
Government of India has taken several steps in the past through interventions of 
Government Schemes such as Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and 

27 
 
Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) to reduce AT&C losses which i s one of the 
major reasons for financial losses. The interventions under these schemes include feeder 
segregation, Information technology (IT)/Operational Technology (OT) measures such as 
SCADA, DMS, ERP and remote monitoring of feeder. Further, the Centra l Government has 
undertaken following initiatives to assist the power distribution companies to reduce their 
losses:  
(i)         Govt. of India announced a Liquidity infusion scheme tied to credible action plan 
by States for the reduction of AT&C losses a nd ACS - ARR gap. Under the Scheme State 
Governments are required to give undertaking to liquidate the payments due to DISCOMs 
on account of electricity dues of Government departments/attached offices, and also to 
install smart prepaid meters in Government  departments/attached offices etc. The State 
Governments are also required to give undertaking to clear the dues of subsidies and to 
put in place a system such that the bills for subsidies are raised by DISCOMs and paid 
upfront every quarter, notify subsid y of State Government per unit of consumption for 
each consumer category. 
  
(ii)        Government of India has provided additional borrowing permissions to the extent 
of 0.05% of the State GSDP each linked to reduction of AT&C losses and ACS -ARR gap for 
the year FY 2020-21.  
(iii)       Further, the Central Government has approved  a “Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme - A Reforms based and Results linked Scheme” with the objective of improving 
the quality and reliability of power supply to consumers throu gh a financially sustainable 
and operationally efficient distribution Sector. The Scheme aims to reduce the AT&C 
losses to pan-India levels of 12-15% and Average Cost of Supply (ACS) - Average Revenue 
Realised (ARR) gap  to zero by 2024 -25. The Scheme has a n outlay of Rs.3,03, 758 crore.  
Under the scheme, eligible DISCOMs would be provided conditional financial support for 
up gradation of the Distribution Infrastructure and Smart Metering Systems for the 
network as well as prepaid smart metering systems for consumers linked to initiation of 
reforms and achievement of results. A DISCOM which is making losses will not be able to 
access funds under this Scheme unless it draws up a plan to reduce the losses, lists out 
the steps it will take to reduce such losses and the timelines thereof and get their State 
Government’s approval on it, and file the same with the Central Government. 
Prepaid smart metering is one of the critical interventions envisaged under RDSS. This 
important intervention has provisioned an outla y of Rs 1,50,000 Cr with Gross Budgetary 
Support of Rs 23,000 Cr and 25 crore prepaid consumer smart meters are targeted to be 
installed during the scheme period..  Further, installation of prepaid smart meters along 
with system metering at DT level as wel l as Feeder level would facilitate Discoms to 
measure accurate measurement of energy flows at all levels with any human interface. 
Proper and accurate energy accounting is the key to identification of theft pockets and 
high loss areas; thereby facilitating  Discoms to reduce AT&C losses as per already 
agreed/committed trajectories with GoI under RDSS. So far, Smart metering projects to 
tune of Rs 1,15,493.79 Cr have been sanctioned under RDSS, which covers installation of 

28 
 
17,34,39,869 prepaid Smart meters, 4 9,02,755 numbers of DT meters and 1,68,085 
numbers of Feeder meters across 23 States/ UTs. 
Ministry of Power vide letter dated 26.02.2021 has requested all the States to prepare a 
road map for shifting over to smart pre -payment meters/ pre -payment meters. Also 
Ministry of Power notified timelines for the replacement of existing meters with smart 
meters on 17.08.2021. 
Furthermore, leveraging advanced technologies have also been provisioned under RDSS. 
With this advanced technologies such as Artificial Intell igence, Machine Learning and 
Block chain Technology to analyze data generated through IT/OT devices to enable the 
DISCOMs to take informed decisions on loss reduction, demand forecasting, asset 
management, Time of Day (ToD) tariff, Renewable Energy (RE) In tegration and for other 
predictive analysis.  
 With the above measures, going forward, AT&C loss will be reduced along the 
improvement in operational efficiencies and financial sustainability of Discoms; thereby 
providing quality, reliable and affordable power to all consumers across the country. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  12) 
The Committee find that the task of providing universal access to electricity has been 
successfully achieved. Now, the aim is to provide ‘24x7 power to all’, a joint initiative of 
the Government of India and the States/UTs. The Committee are of the view that to 
achieve the target, the financial viability of DISCOMS is of utmost importance. 
Simultaneously, it is of  paramount importance that the honest consumers should get 
quality, reliable and uninterrupted power supply at reasonable rates. The Committee are 
also of the belief that the Distribution Sector needs to be made more transparent, 
responsive and accountable . The Central Government should examine the matter as to 
how we can gradually move to cost reflective tariff without increasing the burden on the 
common man. The Committee desire that the audit system for DISCOMS needs to be 
improved and strengthened for b etter transparency. Simultaneously, interventions such 
as ‘Time of Day’ (TOD) tariff should be deployed as an important ‘Demand Side 
Management’ (DSM) measure to incentivize consumers to shift a portion of their load 
from peak times to off -peak times, ther eby improving the system load factor by reducing 
the demand on the system during peak period. This can be thus implemented by the 
DISCOMS to reduce their expenses and for better utilization of generation resources. 
Reply of the Government 
The tariff determ ination is done by the Appropriate Commission as per the  
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Tariff Policy. Section 62(3) of the  
Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate Commission shall not, while  
determining the tariff under this A ct, show undue preference to any consumer of  
electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load factor, power factor,  
voltage, total consumption of electricity during any specified period or the time at which  
the supply is required or the g eographical position of any area, the nature of supply and  
the purpose for which the supply is required. Accordingly, the retail tariffs are  
determined by the State Commissions. 
Section 61(g) of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Appropriate  
Commission shall be guided by the objective that the tariff progressively reflects the  

29 
 
efficient and prudent cost of supply of electricity. The State Governments can give  
subsidy to the extent they consider appropriate as per the provisions of section 65 of the  
Act which inter-alia requires State Governments to compensate Discoms for the same. 
The emphasis of government on bring cross subsidies within ±20% of average cost of 
supply together with enhancing efficiencies in distribution sector is aimed at having co st 
reflective tariff without enhancing burden on common man. This needs to be implemented 
by State Governments and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions. 
The Tariff Policy 2016 lays emphasis on two -part tariffs featuring separate fixed and 
variable char ges and time differentiated tariff. Also Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2022 
seeks to amend section 61 of the principal Act to ensure cost reflective tariff, which is 
important for financial viability of the Power Sector. 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) n otified a regulation to Conduct Energy Audit in 
DISCOMs on 7th October, 2021. As per this notification, all DISCOMs are mandated to 
conduct periodic energy accounting, annual energy audit, creation of a centralized energy 
accounting and audit cell with ade quately qualified personnel. Energy accounting and a 
consequent annual energy audit would help to identify areas of high loss and pilferage, and 
thereafter focus efforts to take corrective action. 
In Tariff Policy 2016 it is mandated that metering should b e compatible with ABT 
requirements, which would also facilitate implementation of Time of Day (ToD) tariffs. In 
the proposed Revised Tariff Policy, there is a provision that Time differentiated (Time of 
Day) tariff shall be introduced on priority for large  consumers (say, consumers with 
demand exceeding 1 MW) within three years and subsequently for all consumers. This 
would also help in flattening the peak and implementing various energy conservation 
measures. 
 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY: 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION: 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  10) 
Agriculture Feeder Separation 
The Committee note that the Feeder Separation is one of the important works to 
supplement the goal for providing 24x7 uninterrupted power su pply and in improving 
the AT&C loss in the DISCOMS /Power Departments. The Committee are aware that 
under Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), there is a component for 
separation of agriculture and non -agriculture feeders. The feeder separation involves 
the separation of predominantly existing mixed category feeders (which supply 
electricity to all types of consumers including agriculture consumers) into agriculture 
and non-agriculture feeders. 
In regard to the status of feeder separation in the country, the Ministry of Power have 
stated that there are about 1,64,057 Rural feeders in the country. And out of these, a 
total of 62,193 Feeder (37.91%) are under Agriculture category. They have also stated 
that 4,697 Feeders have been separated under th e ongoing DDUGJY scheme as on 
31.12.2021. These agriculture feeders are the separated feeders with predominantly 
agriculture consumers. There are balance of 166 feeders under DDUGJY as on 
31.12.2021 which are under reconciliation. They have further stated that the 
separation of Feeders is a dynamic process to be carried out by States/DISCOMS. The 
Committee find that the separation of feeders will facilitate DISCOMS to supply 
electricity to the agriculture sector without interrupting quality and reliable pow er to 
domestic consumers. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that this system would 
benefit consumers as well as DISCOMS, as the agriculture sector may get power at a 
supportive rate and the State Governments/DISCOMS may rationalize their power 
procurement cost by resorting to Demand Side Management (DSM). The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to proactively engage with the States to assess 
the quantum of work that needs to be undertaken under feeder separation by doing 
Cost-Benefit Analysis, encouraging them to execute it expeditiously and complete the 
process within a fixed timeline. 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India launched Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) in 
December, 2014 for various rural electrification works including separation of 
agriculture and non -agriculture feeders, strengthening and augmentation of sub -
transmission & distribution infrastructure, metering at distribution 
transformers/feeders/consumers and electrification of villages across the coun try. 
Works including feeder Segregation works covering 1,12, 754.67(CKm) have been 
completed and the scheme has been closed as on 31.03.2022. 
Further, under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS), agriculture feeders 
segregation works covering 208,522 (Ckms) have already been sanctioned. More 
Feeder Segregation works shall be sanctioned as and when the States and their 
DISCOMs pose their DPRs to the Ministry of Power. All the agriculture feeders are 
proposed to be metered using communicable smart feeder  meters in accordance with 
the Scheme guidelines. ln this respect, it is also mentioned that under RDSS, 
convergence with the KUSUM scheme is also envisaged wherein the agricultural 

32 
 
feeders, once segregated, shall also be solarised, which would help in red ucing the 
subsidy burden of the States on electricity used for Agriculture. 
 
 [Ministry of Power, O.M. No. F.No. 27/01/2022-R &R  dated 25/10/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED: 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  
16th December, 2022  
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka) 
Jagdambika Pal,                                            
Chairperson,  
             Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2022-23) HELD ON 15th DECEMBER, 2022 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
  
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs. 
PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
6. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
8. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
9. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy  
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh  
11. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
12. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
14. Shri. P. Velusamy  
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
16. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
17. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
                                                              SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayana  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 

35 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the agenda of the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
(ii) Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – need 
for uniformity in tariff structure across the country’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted the 
aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The 
Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above -mentioned 
Reports and present the same to both Houses of the Parliament. 
4. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
5. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
The verbatim proceedings of the Sitting have been kept for record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X – not related to this Report  

36 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations     12 
           
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
 accepted by the Government: 
 
 Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, 11 and 12 
 
 Total:          11 
 Percentage         91.7% 
 
(iii) Observation/ Recommendation which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
- Nil   -   
 Total:          00 
 Percentage         00% 
 
(iv) Observation/ Recommendation in respect of which the 
 reply of the Government has not been accepted by the 
 Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Sl. No. 10 
 Total:          01 
 Percentage         8.3% 
 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which  
 final reply of the Government is still awaited: 
- Nil   -  
  
Total:          00 
 Percentage         00% 
 
 
 