STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
 (2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
12
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Forty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha)
on ‘Hydro Power’]
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2021/Phalguna,1942 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales Counter, Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."

 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydro 
Power’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2021 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
COE NO. 327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2020 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by               
Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 

(i) 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) ………………... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………… (v) 
CHAPTER I Report  ……………………………………… 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government … 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies …………….... 
 
36 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration ....................................... 
 
 
37 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited…………………………….... 
 
38 
 A PPENDICES  
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
held on 18th March, 2021 ……………...... 
 
39 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha)           
of the Standing Committee on              
Energy ……….......................................... 
 
 
 
42 
  
(ii) 
  

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21)  
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed   
3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla   
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
6. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
7. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
8. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam  
9. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav  
10. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
11. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
12. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
13. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
14. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
15. Smt. Anupriya Patel   
15. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
16. Shri Jai Prakash 
17. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod ^ 
18.  Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
21. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
(iv) 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant * 
31. Vacant # 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                    — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan    — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  — Additional Director 
4. Smt. L.N. Haokip                  — Deputy Secretary  
5. Shri Subhash Chand            — Assistant Committee 
Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
  

(v) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twelfth Report on the action-taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject ‘Hydro 
Power’. 
2. The Forty-Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
4th January, 2019 and was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 
the same day. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in this Report were received on 10th 
May, 2020. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
at their sitting held on 18th March, 2021. 
4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Third Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations 
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters in the body of the Report 
 
NEW DELHI; Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  alias 
 Lalan Singh, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
18 March, 2021 
27 Phalguna, 1942 
(Saka) 
 
(vi) 
  

1 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals 
with Action taken by the Ministry of Power on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Forty-Third 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2018-19) on the 
subject ‘Hydro Power’. 
2. The Forty-Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha 
on 4th January, 2019 and was laid on the Table of the                       
Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained                              
16 Recommendations/Observations. 
3. Action-taken notes in respect of all the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 
16. 
Total -15 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
– Nil – 
Total - 00 
Chapter- III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 8. 
Total - 01 
 Chapter - IV 
2 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
final replies of the Government are still awaited:  
– Nil – 
Total - 00 
Chapter- V 
4. The Committee observe that the 43rd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on “Hydro Power” pertaining to the Ministry of Power 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2019 and was 
laid on same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha and the Ministry 
was required to submit the action-taken reply on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Report 
within a period of 3 months i.e. by 3rd April, 2019.  The 
Committee however observe that the Ministry has submitted 
the requisite action-taken reply on 10th May, 2020 after a delay 
of 13 months.  The Committee deplore the abnormal delay on 
the part of the Ministry in submission of action-taken replies 
to the Committee. The Committee while expressing their 
displeasure advised the Ministry to be extra cautious and 
vigilant in timely submission of the replies to the Committee.  
The Committee also desire that necessary instructions be 
issued to all concerned in the Ministry to strictly adhere to the 
time line for responding to the Committee in future. 
5. The Committee further desire that the Action-taken 
statement on the observations/recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
6. The Committee had noted as under:– 
“The Committee note that as per the present policy, hydro 
power plants upto 25 MW capacities are considered as 

3 
renewable energy sources and are under the purview of 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, whereas, 
hydro power plants having capacities more than 25 MW are 
considered conventional energy source and are dealt with 
by the Ministry of power. The Committee, during the 
examination of the subject found no logic behind 
segregation of hydro power into renewable energy and 
conventional energy on the basis of its capacity. It had 
been learnt that hydro power is a clean and green source 
of energy and as compared to conventional thermal power 
source, have negligible carbon foot prints. The Committee 
note that the Green House Gas Emissions from Hydro 
Power is 4-10 gram CO2/kWh which is even lesser than 
that from Solar Power i.e. 38 Gram CO2/kWh. In case of 
coal based thermal power it is 957 Gram CO2/kWh. 
Even, the Ministry of Power, in regard to such segregations 
of hydro power on the basis of its capacity have stated that 
all hydro projects are traditionally renewable in nature. 
Since Hydro Power projects up to the capacity of 25 MW 
stands allocated in Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE) (Initially Ministry of Energy, later bifurcated to 
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, which was 
finally renamed as MNRE in 2006), only these are 
categorized as renewable energy source. Thus, the 
categorization was on the basis of allocation of work and 
not on the renewable nature of source. In regard to 
declaring all hydro as renewable, they have stated that one 
of the measures formulated by Ministry of Power in the 
proposal for “Revival of Hydro Power Sector” include 
declaring all hydro projects as renewable irrespective of 
their size and capacity. The proposal is presently under 
advanced stage of inter-ministerial consultations. During 
the examination of the subject, the Committee found that 
4 
declaration of all types of hydro as renewable energy 
source is the common and long standing demand of the 
State Governments/Project Developers. The Committee 
also find this demand genuine and logical, therefore, they 
strongly recommend that all type of hydro power should be 
categorized as renewable source of energy as soon as 
possible. The proposal in this regard which is under                          
inter-ministerial consultations should be expeditiously 
finalized.” 
7. The Ministry of Power, in its Action-taken reply, has stated 
as under:– 
“Ministry has noted the suggestion of Hon'ble Committee. 
On 8th March, 2019, Government has approved certain 
measures including categorization of Large Hydro Projects 
as renewable energy.” 
8. The Committee had observed in their original Report 
that declaration of all types of hydro power projects as 
Renewable Energy sources is the common and long standing 
demand of the State Governments and the project developers 
and this demand was genuine and logical.  As had been 
informed to the Committee by the Ministry that one of the 
measures formulated by the Ministry of Power on “hydro 
power sector” included declaring of hydro projects as 
Renewable Energy source irrespective of their size and 
capacity and this proposal was under advance stage of                
Inter-ministerial consultations at that time.  From the reply 
now submitted by the Government in respect of the 
recommendation, the Committee observe that the Ministry has 
noted the suggestion and has informed that certain measures 
including categorization of large Hydro Projects as Renewable 
Energy have been approved by the Government on 08.03.2019. 
The Committee note that though the suggestion as given by 

5 
the Committee has been noted by the ministry but it does not 
elaborate further as to what precise action has been taken by 
the Ministry subsequently to implement the recommendation 
of the Committee. As had already been pointed out that the 
Hydro Power is a clean and green source of energy as 
compared to Conventional Power Sources and therefore there 
is no logic behind segregation of hydro power under 
Renewable and Conventional sources of energy on the basis 
of its capacity. The Committee are therefore of the strong view 
that such distinction need to be removed and entire hydro 
power irrespective of the size and capacity should be 
categorized as Renewable Source of Energy at the earliest.  
The Committee further desire that the ministry should 
complete all the procedural formalities in a time-bound 
manner and declare the hydro power as Renewable Energy for 
the larger interest of the Energy sector.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
9. The Committee had noted as under:– 
“The Committee note that a typical hydro station is financed 
based on the debt/equity ratio of 70:30. The 30% equity 
has to be managed by developers either from own 
resources or from public/private placement including IPO. 
The 70% loan can be taken from various sources like 
Scheduled Commercial Banks, Non-Banking Financial 
Institutions or issue of Bonds. The foreign loan is generally 
available from institution like World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) etc. and is generally availed by 
PSUs/CPSUs as Government of India’s Guarantee is 
required for this. The Committee further note that despite 
the long life hydro power projects, only short tenure loans 
are being sanctioned for them. Since the loan amount has 
to be repaid in the 10-12 years, it leads to significant 
6 
increase in tariff during the initial years. Moreover, due to 
uncertainties involved in development of hydro power 
projects, not many banks/ institutions are keen to finance 
these projects. The higher interest rate charged on the loan 
further aggravates the problem of higher tariff of hydro 
power. 
The Committee also note that considering the interest rate 
of 10% for a typical hydro project with a capital cost 
(including Interest During Construction IDC) of Rs. 10 
crore/MW, the first year tariff and levelised tariff works out 
to around Rs. 6.60kWh. & Rs. 6.00/kWh respectively. If 
interest rate reduces by 4% (either through subvention or 
by other means), the capital cost of the same project would 
be reduced to Rs. 9.2 crore/MW due to reduction in IDC 
component. With this, the first year and levelised tariff 
would come down to about Rs. 5.35/kWh and Rs. 
5.15/kWh respectively. Thus, cheaper financing is the 
major factor in enhancing the viability of hydro projects. 
The Committee also note that out of 16 stalled hydro power 
projects, 10 are stalled due to financial constraints. The 
Committee are of the view that long term loan at cheaper 
interest rate is the key to hydro power viability. The Ministry 
have stated that recently, Government financial institutions 
like Power Finance Cooperation (REC) have started to 
provide financing of loan for tenure more than 20 years. It 
has been further stated that the Ministry is engaging with 
Bankers and Financial Institutions to make low cost funding 
available for Hydro developers. The Committee welcome 
this step as they have long been pressing for it. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the long tenure finances 
at cheaper rate should be provided to all the hydro power 
projects. The Government should also make efforts to get 

7 
grants/ assistance/ loan at cheaper rates for hydro power 
projects from international agencies”. 
10. The Ministry of Power, in its Action-taken reply, has stated 
as under:– 
“The Government is continuing with its efforts for long-term 
low interest financing instruments in order to improve 
economic viability of the hydro projects. With efforts from 
the Ministry, REC and PFC have already agreed to provide 
loans for a period upto 80% of the project life of 40 years 
i.e. loans are now available for upto 32 years. To 
encourage other banks/ financial institutions also for 
providing long term loans, meetings were held under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) on 10.01.2019 and also 
under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power (I/C) 
on 17.02.2020 with leading Bankers. The Bankers agreed 
to consider to provide loans for longer tenure i.e. 18 years 
and with repayment matching with the cash flow of the 
developer.  Further, the CPSUs have also been asked to 
explore the possibility of obtaining long term loans from 
global financial institutions as World Bank, ADB, JICA etc. 
to bring down the tariff.” 
11. The Committee note that the Government is continuing 
with its efforts for long-term low interest financing 
instruments in order to improve economic viability of the 
hydro projects and REC and PFC have agreed to provide 
loans for a period upto 80% of the project life of 40 years i.e. 
loans are now available for upto 32 years. The Committee are 
also informed that other banks/financial institutions have also 
been encouraged to provide long-term loans which the 
Bankers agreed to consider to provide loans for longer tenure 
i.e. 18 years and with repayment matching with the cash flow 
of the developer. The Committee also note that the CPSUs 
8 
have been asked to explore the possibility of obtaining               
long-term loans from global financial institutions as World 
Bank, ADB, JICA etc. to bring down the tariff. While 
acknowledging the initiatives of the Ministry for making effort 
to get loan at cheaper rates for hydro power projects from 
financial institutions, the Committee would like to be apprised 
of the actual progress made in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
12. The Committee had noted as under:– 
“The Committee note that some States have levied water 
cess for each cubic meter of water which is being used by 
the hydro power plants. However, the Committee find no 
sound rationale behind this as there is no consumptive use 
of water by a hydro power plant. Water just passes through 
the turbines and goes to the river again. The Committee 
found that imposition of water cess is not fair considering 
the provision of 12% of free power to the respective States 
from the hydro power projects. Since, the levying of water 
cess further burden the already stressed sector, the 
Committee are of the firm view that there is a need for 
relook in this matter by the States who have levied it. The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry would also 
persuade the Sates not to levy any water cess on hydro 
power projects.” 
13. The Ministry of power, in its reply, has stated as under:– 
“Presently, only the Govt. of J&K levies the Water cess on 
hydro projects. In this connection, Ministry, vide its letter 
dated 24.11.2017 has taken up the matter with 
Government of J&K to withdraw the imposition of Water 
cess. Jammu and Kashmir has agreed to relax Water            
cess for the initial 10 years in three projects viz. PakalDul 

9 
(1000 MW), Kiru (624 MW) and Ratle (850 MW) to bring 
down tariff in the initial years.” 
14. The Committee had desired the Ministry to persuade 
the States not to levy water cess on hydropower projects. The 
Ministry in its reply has stated that only the Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir has levied the water cess on hydro 
projects and the Ministry had taken up the matter on 
24.11.2017 with the Government of J&K to withdraw the 
imposition of water cess. The Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir is stated to have agreed to relax water cess for the 
initial 10 years in 03 projects viz. PakalDul (1000 MW), Kiru 
(624 MW) and Ratle (850 MW) to bring down tariff in the initial 
years. The Committee appreciate the positive results achieved 
due to efforts made by the Ministry. The Committee however 
observe that the recommendation of the Committee was for 
persuading the States not to levy any water cess on Hydro 
power projects but the relaxation given by J&K Government is 
not only for a limited period of 10 years but also it is only for 
03 specific projects. The Committee therefore, reiterate that 
the Ministry should persuade the States not to levy any water 
cess on hydro projects and would like them to continue its 
efforts to get this water cess permanently removed for all 
projects. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
development in the matter.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
15. The Committee had noted as under:– 
“The Committee note that certain misconceptions seem to 
have been associated with the development of all hydro 
projects in general and large hydro projects in particular. 
These mainly relate to their perceived adverse impact on 
environment, forests and wildlife, large submergence of 
10 
private and forest land and consequently large 
displacement of population and Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement issues involved etc. which have hindered 
development of hydro sector in general. The Ministry have 
enumerated various steps to address the issues related to 
development of hydro power projects, their impact on 
environment and provisions for the benefits of the affected 
people. The Committee, however, feel that there is still a 
need for spreading awareness regarding benefits of hydro 
power and to remove misconceptions related to hydro 
power. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government apart from launching campaigns and 
dissemination relevant information in this regard at various 
public platforms, should also invariably involve the 
respective local representatives/ Members of Parliament for 
this purpose. The Committee believe that their involvement 
will not only be helpful in this endeavour but also in 
resolution of many other local issues.” 
16. The Ministry of power, in its reply, has stated as under: – 
“The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee that public awareness 
campaigns including dissemination of relevant information 
by involving local representatives/ Members of Parliament 
could further help in resolving the local issues. 
Further it is also informed that 40 local people from around 
proposed sites in Arunachal Pradesh were taken on a tour 
to NHPC’s commissioned power stations in Feb-March 
2020. The objective of the programme was to enable the 
participants understand the benefits of hydropower 
development to the entire region. Similar programmes are 

11 
planned on a larger scale in the future for better 
sensitisation to local public regarding benefits of 
hydropower projects. 
In this regard, Subansiri Lower project (2000 MW), which 
was stalled since December 2011 due to local agitation 
against the project and thereafter due to NGT case, has  
re-started in October 2019 with co-operation of local 
representatives.  The successful re-start of the work at 
Subansiri Lower project will pave the way for more projects 
in Arunachal Pradesh to take off.” 
17. The Committee had recommended that in order to 
remove certain misconceptions associated with the hydro 
power projects, there was a need for spreading awareness 
about the benefits of the hydro power and for this purpose, 
the government should launch campaigns at various public 
platforms and also to involve the local representatives/ 
Members of Parliament.  The Committee are happy to note 
from the reply submitted by the Ministry that 40 local people 
from around proposed site in Arunachal Pradesh were taken 
on a tour to NHPC’s commissioner power stations in 
February-March, 2020.  Further, the Subansiri Lower Project 
which was stalled since December 2011 due to local agitation 
against the project and thereafter due to NGT case, has          
re-started in October 2019 with co-operation of local 
representatives and the successful restart of the work  to 
resolve local issues in the construction of hydro power 
projects.  The Ministry has also informed the Committee that 
the successful restart of the work at Subansiri Lower Project 
will pave the way for more projects in Arunachal Pradesh to 
take off. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the 
12 
Ministry to implement the recommendation of the Committee 
in the right perspective.  The Committee are however of the 
opinion that in addition to the local representatives, the 
Member of Parliament representing the area should also be 
associated in such campaigns which will definitely bring 
fruitful results at faster speed.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry will continue with such awareness campaigns                 
in future also.  

13 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
The committee note that as per the present policy, hydro power 
plants upto 25 MW capacities are considered as renewable energy 
sources and are under the purview of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy, whereas, hydro power plants having capacities 
more than 25 MW are considered conventional energy source and 
are dealt with by the Ministry of power. The Committee, during the 
examination of the subject found no logic behind segregation of 
hydro power into renewable energy and conventional energy on 
the basis of its capacity. It had been learnt that hydro power is a 
clean and green source of energy and as compared to 
conventional thermal power source, have negligible carbon foot 
prints. The Committee note that the Green House Gas Emissions 
from Hydro Power is 4-10 gram CO2/kWh which is even lesser 
than that from Solar Power i.e. 38 Gram CO2/kWh. In case of coal 
based thermal power it is 957 Gram CO2/kWh. 
Even, the Ministry of Power, in regard to such segregations of 
hydro power on the basis of its capacity have stated that all hydro 
projects are traditionally renewable in nature. Since Hydro Power 
projects up to the capacity of 25 MW stands allocated in Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) (Initially Ministry of Energy, 
later bifurcated to Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, 
which was finally renamed as MNRE in 2006), only these are 
categorized as renewable energy source. Thus, the categorization 
was on the basis of allocation of work and not on the renewable 
nature of source. In regard to declaring all hydro as renewable, 
they have stated that one of the measures formulated by Ministry 
of Power in the proposal for “Revival of Hydro Power Sector” 
14 
include declaring all hydro projects as renewable irrespective of 
their size and capacity. The proposal is presently under advanced 
stage of inter-ministerial consultations. During the examination of 
the subject, the Committee found that declaration of all types of 
hydro as renewable energy source is the common and long 
standing demand of the State Governments/Project Developers. 
The Committee also find this demand genuine and logical, 
therefore, they strongly recommend that all type of hydro power 
should be categorized as renewable source of energy as soon as 
possible. The proposal in this regard which is under inter-
ministerial consultations should be expeditiously finalized. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has noted the suggestion of Hon'ble Committee. 
On 8th March, 2019, Government has approved certain measures 
including categorization of Large Hydro Projects as renewable 
energy. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Clearances Issues 
The Committee observe that land acquisition for hydro power 
projects are becoming difficult day by day. During the examination 
of the subject the Committee found that the process of land 
acquisition is time consuming and fraught with many uncertainties. 
The Ministry have also stated that the land acquisition is a 
persistent issue involved in the implementation of hydro projects. 
Acquisition of land for various locations of the project such as Dam, 
Head Race Tunnel (HRT), Power House, Switch yard, etc. delay 

15 
the commencement/ progress of works. The Ministry have stated 
that to streamline the process Right to Fair Compensation Act, 
2013 has been notified by the Government of India in 27.09.2013 
which have more participation of local people in terms of Land 
Acquisition and Rehabilitation & Resettlement. 
The Ministry have also enumerated various benefits which are 
provided under Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) to all 
affected and displaced families in addition to compensation. It is 
learnt that the real problem lies in the execution of land acquisition 
and implementation of Resettlement & Rehabilitation schemes for 
which district Administration is responsible. The Committee find 
that the District Administrators are entrusted with plethora of work, 
therefore, they have limited time. Further, owing to complexity of 
the matter, often there are cases of delays and unresolved issues 
in the land acquisition and Resettlement & Rehabilitation process. 
The Committee during their study visits and discussions with 
the representatives of the various State Governments have 
realised that District Administration plays a key role in resolution of 
issues related to land acquisition and R&R. Without cooperation of 
District Administration, it is difficult for the projects to meet their 
timeline. The Committee note that there are several cases of time 
overrun in case of hydro power projects, which have resulted in 
massive cost escalation. The Committee, therefore, expect that the 
District Administration, wherever, the hydro power projects/ 
potential lies, will actively participate and do the needful to expedite 
the matter of land acquisition and R&R process related to hydro 
power projects to provide fair deal for the affected people as well 
as to fast tract the hydro power projects. The Committee also 
recommend that the Central Government, the State Government(s) 
16 
and the Developer of the Projects should coordinate and cooperate 
with the District Administration in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Committee 
for better co-ordination between District Administration, Centre, 
State Government & Developer. Ministry reviews progress of all 
projects during quarterly progress review meeting held for each 
CPSU and takes up issues with respective District 
administration/State Government, wherever required. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 
10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
The Committee note that three types of clearances are 
mandatory from three different wings of ministry of Environment 
and Forest (MoEF) i.e. environmental clearance from Expert 
Appraisal Committee (EAC), Forest Clearances from Forest 
Advisory Committee (FAC) & Wildlife Clearances form National 
Board of Wildlife (NBWL). This makes the whole process very 
cumbersome which otherwise would be easier and less time 
consuming. The Committee are of the view that there is a need to 
strike a balance between the development and the environment as 
both are important for the country. The Committee definitely want 
that hydro power projects be developed only after due 
consideration and assessing their impact on environment and 
ecological system. However, at the same time they are of the 
opinion that during such consideration the ‘net effect’ of hydro 
power projects to the environment should be taken into account.           
It has been proven that net effect of hydro projects have always 
been positive for the surroundings in terms of ground water 
recharge, flourishing of flora and fauna, flood mitigation, availability 
of water for various purposes, etc. 

17 
Also, more power from hydro projects means less dependence 
on fossil fuel based power plants which emit pollutants to the 
environment. The Committee have highlighted in the preceding 
para that hydro power have lesser CO2 emission as compared to 
other sources of power projects and should not be seen as just any 
other development projects. The committee recommends that 
hydro power projects should be seen in a broader perspective and 
a considered view may be taken while granting various clearances. 
The Committee also feels that there is urgent need to integrate and 
fast track the process of various clearances granted by the ministry 
of Environment and Forest. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has noted the recommendations of the 
Committee. Ministry closely monitors the process of EC and FC 
and wherever required, takes up the matter with MoEF&CC for 
ensuring expeditious clearances. Further, FRA issues requiring 
State Government intervention are taken up by the Ministry with 
the State Administration.  
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
The Committee find there are environmental issues related to 
hydro power projects that often lead to litigation. The committee 
are also aware that there are delays in disposal of such cases that 
lead to time and cost overrun in hydro power projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that for the purpose of better 
coordination amongst the various Ministries and harmonization of 
their incongruous views, there should be a special cell which will 
also monitor and expedite the matters pending in the Supreme 
Court and National Green Tribunal (NGT). 
 
18 
Reply of the Government 
The Hydro Division of Ministry of Power closely monitors all the 
Court Cases and NGT Cases related to hydropower projects. 
Wherever there is involvement of more than one Ministry, a 
common view is formed in mutual consultations with all the 
concerned. Recently, the NGT case in respect of Subansiri Lower 
project (2000 MW) was resolved by active co-ordination with 
MoEF&CC. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
The Committee note that during last few years, river basin 
studies have been got carried out by MoEF for the major river 
basins in Arunachal Pradesh and Chenab basin in Himachal 
Pradesh, etc. The Committee with a view to avoid issues related to 
ecology and environmental-flow issue as faced in some states, 
recommend that the Hydro Power Projects should be identified and 
planned on the basis of River Basin Studies instead of developing 
them in isolation. The Committee are of the belief that this will not 
only help in preserving ecological system of the river but also 
maximize the power generation from theses power plants. Further, 
the decision for setting up of large dam based hydro projects or 
Run of River projects may be made by taking a holistic view of the 
respective river Basins. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are noted. In 
this connection, it is also submitted that MoEF& CC has carried out 
Cumulative Impact and Carrying Capacity Study, briefly known 
as River Basin Studies for each basin separately taking the holistic 
view of environment and ecological surroundings of the area. 

19 
Based on these studies carried, some of the hydro projects have 
been proposed to be dropped while some others have been 
proposed to be modified. Further, hydro power potential available 
in the country is also presently under review by CEA through 
WAPCOS Ltd. wherein there is association of representative from 
MoEF&CC. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Financial Issues 
The Committee note that a typical hydro station is financed 
based on the debt/equity ratio of 70:30. The 30% equity has to be 
managed by developers either from own resources or from 
public/private placement including IPO. The 70% loan can be taken 
from various sources like Scheduled Commercial Banks, Non-
Banking Financial Institutions or issue of Bonds. The foreign loan is 
generally available from institution like World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) etc. and is generally availed by 
PSUs/CPSUs as Government of India’s Guarantee is required for 
this. The Committee further note that despite the long life hydro 
power projects, only short tenure loans are being sanctioned for 
them. Since the loan amount has to be repaid in the 10-12 years,  
it leads to significant increase in tariff during the initial years. 
Moreover, due to uncertainties involved in development of hydro 
power projects, not many banks/ institutions are keen to finance 
these projects. The higher interest rate charged on the loan further 
aggravates the problem of higher tariff of hydro power. 
The Committee also note that considering the interest rate of 
10% for a typical hydro project with a capital cost (including Interest 
During Construction IDC) of Rs 10 crore/MW, the first year tariff 
20 
and levelised tariff works out to around Rs. 6.60kWh. &               
Rs. 6.00/kWh respectively. If interest rate reduces by 4% (either 
through subvention or by other means), the capital cost of the 
same project would be reduced to Rs. 9.2 crore/MW due to 
reduction in IDC component. With this, the first year and levelised 
tariff would come down to about Rs. 5.35/kWh and Rs. 5.15/kWh 
respectively. Thus, cheaper financing is the major factor in 
enhancing the viability of hydro projects. The committee also notes 
that out of 16 stalled hydro power projects, 10 are stalled due to 
financial constraints. The Committee are of the view that long term 
loan at cheaper interest rate is the key to hydro power viability. The 
Ministry have stated that recently, Government financial institutions 
like Power Finance Cooperation (REC) have started to provide 
financing of loan for tenure more than 20 years. It has been further 
stated that the Ministry is engaging with Bankers and Financial 
Institutions to make low cost funding available for Hydro 
developers. The Committee welcome this step as they have long 
been pressing for it. The committee, therefore, desire that the long 
tenure finances at cheaper rate should be provided to all the hydro 
power projects. The Government should also make efforts to get 
grants/ assistance/ loan at cheaper rates for hydro power projects 
from international agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is continuing with its efforts for long-term low 
interest financing instruments in order to improve economic viability 
of the hydro projects. With efforts from the Ministry, REC and PFC 
have already agreed to provide loans for a period upto 80% of the 
project life of 40 years i.e. loans are now available for upto           
32 years. To encourage other banks/ financial institutions also for 
providing long term loans, meetings were held under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) on 10.01.2019 and also under 

21 
the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power (I/C) on 17.02.2020 
with leading Bankers. The Bankers agreed to consider to provide 
loans for longer tenure i.e. 18 years and with repayment matching 
with the cash flow of the developer. Further, the CPSUs have also 
been asked to explore the possibility of obtaining long term loans 
from global financial institutions as World Bank, ADB, JICA etc to 
bring down the tariff. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Hydro Power Purchase Obligation 
The Committee find that hydro power projects are quite difficult 
to develop having long gestation period with many uncertainties 
and added disadvantages of higher initial cost. The committee note 
that due to higher power tariff, the developers find it difficult to sign 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPA). The Committee understand 
the necessity of having adequate amount of hydro power in the 
power system and, therefore, they are of the view Hydro Power 
should also be promoted on the line Solar Power by making a 
provision for Hydro Power Purchase Obligation (HPO). The 
Committee are of the belief that doing so will give much needed 
impetus to the development of hydro power sector and encourage 
the states endowed with hydro power potential to harness it. 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s recommendation for having a Hydropower 
Purchase Obligation (HPO) has already been approved by Union 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 07.03.2019. As per the approval, 
HPO will be notified as a separate entity within Non-Solar 
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO). The HPO shall cover all 
LHPs commissioned after 08.03.2019 as well as the untied 
capacity (i.e. without PPA) of projects commissioned before 
22 
08.03.2019. This HPO will be within the existing Non-Solar RPO 
after increasing the percentage assigned for it so that existing  
Non-Solar RPO for other renewable sources remain unaffected by 
the introduction of HPO. The trajectory of HPO targets till the year 
2030 is being notified by Ministry of Power with an aim to add 
30000 MW of hydropower by the year 2030 and annual targets are 
based on the projected capacity addition plans in hydro power 
sector. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Central Public Sector Undertakings 
The Committee note that the present total installed capacity of 
hydro power is 45,400 MW. The share of Private Sector in that is 
3,394 MW which is only 7.5%, whereas, they are the leader in 
thermal power sector with the share of 39%. The Committee, 
during the examination of the subject, learnt that many private 
players who have been allocated hydro power projects are finding 
it difficult to construct/complete the project due to various reasons 
including lack of expertise and financial constraints. The 
Committee find that due to present power sector scenario and 
constraints in Funding of projects the sentiments of the Private 
Sector in hydro power is low. Even the Secretary (Power) has 
acknowledged that lenders are not willing to lend long term loan to 
private people. In regard to taking up projects of private players 
which are stuck, the Secretary has stated that all the Central Public 
Sector Undertakings are willing to take up work and are also willing 
to enter joint venture model with the State Governments. The 
committee are aware that the Central PSUs have the required 
infrastructure, manpower, expertise and also have vast experience 
in the field of development of hydro projects. Moreover, there is no 
problem in mobilization of required fund by them. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that the states should involve Central PSUs 
in harnessing hydro power and give preference in allocation of the 

23 
projects which are yet to be allocated. The committee also desire 
that Central PSUs would make all possible efforts to acquire the 
abandoned/ stressed/ stuck hydro power projects. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, it is informed that Himachal Pradesh has 
recently allocated 11 hydropower projects of 3357 MW to 3 CPSUs 
viz. NHPC, SJVN and NTPC. 
Similarly, GoJ&K has allotted PakalDul (1000 MW), Kiru               
(624 MW) and Kwar(500 MW) to CVPPL, a Joint Venture lead by 
NHPC, GoJ&K and PTC. Further, Ratle HE Project (850 MW), 
earlier allotted to M/s GVK, has now been entrusted by GoJ&K to 
the Joint Venture of NHPC and JKSPDC for implementation with 
NHPC being lead partner. 
Two hydro projects under construction in Sikkim viz. Teesta VI 
(500 MW) and Rangit IV (120 MW), initially allotted to private 
companies have also been taken over by NHPC after successful 
bidding in NCLT. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, 
 Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Creation of enabling infrastructure 
The committee find that hydro power potentials are site specific 
and mostly lies in far-flung and remote areas. The access to these 
sites and their development, in the absence of any connecting road 
and enabling infrastructure, is as issue. In these conditions 
developers face much difficulty in developing these projects. The 
developer not only have the responsibility to develop enabling 
infrastructure like roads, bridges, etc. for the construction of power 
projects but also have to bear the expenditure that leads to 
increase in project cost and power tariff. The committee, therefore 
feel that there is need to separate the work and cost of creation of 
enabling infrastructure and development of actual hydro power 
project. As the enabling infrastructure so created also helps in 
24 
overall development of the State, the committee, therefore, 
recommend that the State Government with the help of Central 
Government should take the responsibility to create enabling 
infrastructure needed for construction of hydro power projects. The 
scheme ‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana’ of the Central 
Government could be utilized by the State Government in regard to 
construction of road by prioritizing the areas wherever hydro power 
projects are proposed. In addition to utilization of schemes like 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, the Central Government 
should also explore the other available sources like Central Road 
Fund for the purpose of developing infrastructure in and around the 
proposed hydro power projects. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to overcome the difficulty in developing infrastructure 
around hydropower projects, the Union Cabinet, in its meeting held 
on 07.03.2019, approved the provision for budgetary support for 
enabling infrastructures i.e. roads and bridges for hydro projects. 
This support shall be applicable for projects starting construction 
after 08.03.2019. This budgetary support would be provided after 
appraisal / approval of each project by PIB / CCEA / competent 
authority as per the extant rules / due process. The limit of this 
grant for such roads and bridges would be as follows:- 
a. Rs. 1.5 Crore per MW for projects upto 200 MW 
b. Rs. 1.0 Crore per MW for projects above 200 MW. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Local Area Development Fund (LADF) 
The Committee note that there is provision of Local Area 
Development Fund (LADF) in the State. 2% of the cost of power of 
the hydro power project goes to this fund. The Central and the 

25 
State Government contribute 1% each to it. It is the responsibility of 
the State Government to ensure that this fund is utilized for the 
benefits of the people who are affected by the hydro power 
projects. It is expected from the State to formulate guidelines and 
set up Committee to ensure proper utilization of this fund. 
However, the Committee have been apprised that in case of some 
of the States this money (2% of the cost of power) goes into the 
State Government’s consolidated fund, and there is no guideline 
and Committee in place to ensure that the money is utilized for the 
intended purpose. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to 
take up this issue with the States at appropriate level to ensure 
early compliance by these States. The Committee also expect the 
respective State Government to put in place the required 
machinery and take necessary measures to ensure timely and 
proper utilization of the fund. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Involvement of People Representatives/ Members of 
Parliament 
The Committee note that certain misconceptions seem to have 
been associated with the development of all hydro projects in 
general and large hydro projects in particular. These mainly relate 
to their perceived adverse impact on environment, forests and 
wildlife, large submergence of private and forest land and 
consequently large displacement of population and Rehabilitation 
& Resettlement issues involved etc. which have hindered 
development of hydro sector in general. The Ministry have 
26 
enumerated various steps to address the issues related to 
development of hydro power projects, their impact on environment 
and provisions for the benefits of the affected people. The 
committee, however, feel that there is still a need for spreading 
awareness regarding benefits of hydro power and to remove 
misconceptions related to hydro power. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government apart from launching campaigns 
and dissemination relevant information in this regard at various 
public platforms, should also invariably involve the respective local 
representatives/ Members of Parliament for this purpose. The 
Committee believe that their involvement will not only be helpful in 
this endeavour but also in resolution of many other local issues. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Standing Committee that public awareness campaigns including 
dissemination of relevant information by involving local 
representatives/ Members of Parliaments could further help in 
resolving the local issues. 
Further it is also informed that 40 local people from around 
proposed sites in Arunachal Pradesh, were taken on a tour to 
NHPC’s commissioned power stations in Feb-March 2020. The 
objective of the programme was to enable the participants 
understand the benefits of hydropower development to the entire 
region. Similar programmes are planned on a larger scale in the 
future for better sensitisation to local public regarding benefits of 
hydropower projects. 
In this regard, Subansiri Lower project (2000 MW), which was 
stalled since December 2011 due to local agitation against the 
project and thereafter due to NGT case, has re-started in October 
2019 with co-operation of local representatives. The successful            

27 
re-start of the work at Subansiri Lower project will pave the way for 
more projects in Arunachal Pradesh to take off. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Arunachal Pradesh 
The Committee note that the State of Arunachal Pradesh is 
well endowed with hydro power potential. The States, as per 
reassessment study carried out in 1987, has hydro power capacity 
of 50,064 MW. Against this huge potential, the actual utilization is 
only 515 MW. The committee during the examination of the subject 
found that many projects have been allocated and are at various 
stages of development. However, due to various reasons most of 
them have been stalled. 
While explaining the reasons for tardy development of hydro 
power in the state, the Secretary Power has stated that is hardly 
any development because a large number of projects were 
awarded in 2008 and 2009 at a certain premium these are MoU-
based projects. He has further stated that since water is a State 
subject, the State has to allot a hydro power project for 
development. The Central Government/PSUs cannot take initiative 
on their own to develop the hydro power projects unless they are 
allocated to them by States. He has also emphasized that there is 
a need to start doing surveys and investigations of the potential 
sites. As surveys and investigations involve expenditure, therefore, 
financial support of the Government of India is needed in this 
28 
regard. After, the survey and investigation, such sites could be 
developed by anybody even by the States. 
The committee also note that there are projects in Arunachal 
Pradesh which have been allocated to developers but due to 
various reasons they are finding it difficult to develop those 
projects. The Committee further note that there is a clause in the 
Memorandum of Understanding under which the State Government 
has the exclusive right to re-allot such project to any other 
developer in case of inordinate delays. 
The committee, therefore, recommend that the Central 
Government may persuade and provide all the possible assistance 
to the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh enabling them to 
take various measures necessary to expeditiously develop hydro 
power projects in the state. The committee also expect the State 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh to take initiatives and cooperate 
with the Central Government in this regard. The Committee also 
recommend that the projects which have been stuck due to inability 
of the developers should be reallocated to Public Sector 
Undertakings which have required expertise of the field. 
Reply of the Government 
A number of projects have been entrusted to CPSUs for 
development including Dibang (2880 MW), Tawang I (600 MW), 
Tawang II (800 MW) and Teesta IV (520 MW) etc. With constant 
and close monitoring by the Ministry, Government of Arunachal 
Pradesh has assessed the status of allotted projects. GoAP has 
terminated  27 hydropower Projects (inc 16 LHPs) allotted to 
private sector with little or no progress after due process. From 
these terminated projects, CPSUs have been asked to identify 
projects of their interest for implementation. 

29 
In addition to these 27 terminated projects, 8 projects (7 LHPs) 
are undergoing termination process after final show cause notice 
and 55 projects (43 LHPs) have been issued final show cause 
notice before processing for termination process. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Uttarakhand 
Based on the River Basin Studies carried out, certain 
environmental flows have been recommended to be released in 
the downstream stretch of the river during different seasons to 
maintain the river eco-system and bio-diversity including flora, 
fauna & aquatic life. The committee have been informed that 
broadly the environmental flows are decided to maintain minimum 
depth as well as minimum width of river during different seasons 
for sustenance of the aquatic life besides the existence of flora and 
fauna. The quantum of environmental Flaw (E-Flow) release 
recommended in these Basin Study Reports varies from project to 
project. 
The committee found that the most affected State by the order 
of Environmental Flow is Uttarakhand. During the discussion on the 
subject the representative of the State has stated that they are 
ready to maintain an Environmental Flow of 15%, as per previous 
order of Ministry of Water Resources which was also based in the 
opinion of as expert body. It has also been stated that the recent 
order to enhance the limit of E-Flow from 15% to 20-30% will result 
in a loss of about Rs. 120 crores per annum with the existing 
potential; and it does not include the potential which need to be 
developed. Further it has also been stated that the enhancement in 
E-Flow would make the tariff higher approximately by Rs. 1.25, 
which would make Power purchase Agreements absolutely 
30 
unviable. When the committee sought the views of the Ministry in 
this regard, it has been stated that they are definitely with 
Uttarakhand and they have been trying to resolve this issue at the 
highest level. The Ministries of Power and Environment have been 
agreeing, however, the Ministry of Water Resources have different 
view. 
In view of the above the committee feel that the issue of E-Flow 
should be resolved amicably by the Ministries/agencies concerned 
so that a consensus in this regard can be arrived at. The 
committee are also of the view that the concept of Environmental 
Flow is a good measure to preserve ecological system and aqua 
life of the river. However, the committee at the same time feel that 
changing the E-Flow criterion retrospectively would cause hardship 
for the hydro power developers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the matter of E-Flow should be resolved as early 
as possible. The Committee also recommend that in case the 
enhanced limit of E-Flow sustains, the Government should explore 
the avenue to provide require assistance to the affected projects 
including measures like Viability Gap Funding so that they remain 
viable even after reducing their capacity. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestion of the Hon committee has been noted. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No.15) 
Eastern/NE Regions/Bihar 
The committee are aware that almost every year most of the 
States of Eastern and North-Eastern Region have to face the fury 
of huge floods that not only result in loss of lives and damage to 
property but also takes a heavy toll on the exchequer of the 

31 
Government in the form of flood relief measures. Bihar is one such 
State. The Committee during their study visit to Bhakra Dam have 
realized importance and utility of such multi-purpose projects in 
flood control apart from generation of electricity at an incredibly low 
cost. 
The committee note that as per the reassessment study of 
hydro potential completed by CEA in 1987, no storage site has 
been identified within Bihar for construction of storage based hydro 
scheme. The Ministry have, however, stated that SaptaKosi High 
Dam Multipurpose project (3300MW) and sun Kosi Storage cum 
diversion Scheme has been proposed to be constructed within 
Nepal at Barakshetra close to Bihar which would have flood 
management component. It has been further stated that based on 
the feasibility report for the project prepared by India in 1981, the 
project would afford irrigation and flood control benefits in Bihar 
apart from 15,730 MU of Power generation. In addition, 
development of Inland Waterways through Kosi and Ganga rivers 
is another important component of the project. DPR for the project 
is presently under preparation by a Joint Project Office, established 
at Birat Nagar for carrying out detailed investigations/ field works 
and of DPR which is likely to be completed by September, 2019. 
The committee are of the view that this project would serve the 
needs of both the countries, therefore, it needs to be developed 
without further loss of time. The committee also expect that sincere 
efforts would be made in this regard at the highest level. The 
committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure that the 
work of DPR is completed within the stipulated timeline so that the 
project is developed at the earliest. The committee also desire that 
the Government should strive to seek the cooperation of 
neighbouring countries like Nepal, Bhutan and other SAARC 
countries for harnessing the natural resources with a view to 
32 
optimally utilize the available hydro potential for the mutual 
benefits. 
Reply of the Government 
India is already engaged in cooperation with neighbouring 
countries like Nepal and Bhutan. Various projects are being 
developed in these countries with support and co-operation of India 
to optimally utilize the available hydro potential in these countries 
on a mutually beneficial basis. 
The ongoing cooperation between India and Bhutan in the 
hydro-power sector is covered under the 2006 bilateral agreement 
for cooperation and its Protocol signed in 2009. 04 hydro-electric 
projects (HEPs) totaling 2136 MW are already operational in 
Bhutan and are supplying the surplus electricity to India. The 720 
MW Mangdechhu HEP was commissioned in August 2019. Two 
HEPs namely, 1200 MW Punatsangchhu-I, 1020 MW 
Punatsangchhu-II under Inter-Governmental mode and 
Kholongchhu HEP (600 MWs) under JV mode are under 
implementation. As part of GoI’s commitment to joint development 
of 10000 MW hydro-power in Bhutan, both sides have identified a 
number of other projects in the sector. 
As for Nepal, 4 projects of 51.1 MW were built in Nepal with 
Indian assistance. Arun-III project (900 MW) is under 
implementation by a Indian CPSU, namely, SJVN Ltd. Further, 
NHPC Ltd. and THDC Ltd sent a team to Nepal to study the Hydro 
Power Potential in Nepal and explore the potential of setting up 
Hydro Power Projects there. 
Further, Pancheshwar multipurpose project (5040 MW) is 
under planning stage. As regards the DPR of SaptaKosi High Dam 
Multipurpose project (3300MW) and Sun Kosi Storage cum 

33 
diversion Scheme, these are being prepared by Joint Project Office 
(JPO), established at Birat Nagar. During 15th meeting of Joint 
Team of Experts (JTE) held in July, 2017, wherein it was decided 
to prepare the DPR of the project by September, 2019. However, it 
has been noted during the meeting of Joint Committee on Water 
resources in Jan. 2019 that expected progress has not been 
achieved due to resistance from local people. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
(Recommendation No.16) 
Himachal Pradesh 
The committee note that against the harnessable potential of 
23,500 MW, Himachal Pradesh have already developed the 
capacity to the tune of 10,547 MW. Whereas, 1,885 MW capacity is 
under construction, 9,136 MW capacity is under the stage of 
clearance/investigation and rest which is only 1,364 MW is left of 
allocation. The committee find the success of Himachal Pradesh in 
development of hydro power sector very encouraging and feel that 
it shall be emulated by other states endowed with hydro power 
potential. The committee, during their study visit was apprised by 
the representatives of the state Government of Himachal Pradesh 
of the various enabling measures and proactive steps taken by the 
State Government that have made them successful in this 
endeavour. Since, the hydro power projects have high initial cost 
and long gestation period, therefore, they have deferred the 12% 
free power share from the power project which was to come in the 
first 12 years. It shall now be recovered in next 28 years at uniform 
percentage rate. Another very important thing which the State 
Government of Himachal Pradesh has recently done is that all the 
34 
power generated by the hydro power projects up to 25 megawatts, 
will mandatorily be purchased by the Himachal Pradesh State 
Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL). Moreover, they have reduced 
the premium for setting up hydro power projects to Rs. 1,00,000 
per megawatt and also giving the Government’s land only at Rs. 1 
with a view to reduce the overall project cost. Apart from these, 
they are not levying any water cess. The committee found that due 
to keen and friendly approach of the State Government of 
Himachal Pradesh towards development of hydro power, they are 
having surplus power and earning addition revenue by exporting it. 
The committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
encourage other State having hydro power potential to emulate 
Himachal Model as this will not only help the nation to optimally 
harness the hydro power potential in the country but also bring 
prosperity to these States. 
Reply of the Government 
During the Power Ministers' Conference held in Narmada Tent 
City in October 2019, all hydro-rich states were encouraged to 
emulate the measures approved by Govt. of Himachal Pradesh to 
promote hydropower. The measures of Himachal Pradesh includes 
deferment of 12% free power, providing Govt. land at almost free 
rate, not levying of water cess etc with an objective to bring down  
the tariff to an affordable rate. With these measures, GoHP signed 
MoUs for 11 hydropower projects of 3357 MW with 3 CPSUs viz. 
NHPC, SJVN and NTPC. 
GoJ&K have also come forward and waived water cess for the 
first 10 years in PakalDul (1000 MW), Ratle (850 MW) and Kiru 
(624 MW). GoJ&K has also agreed to defer/ stagger free power for 
PakalDul (1000 MW) and Ratle (850 MW) projects. 

35 
Further measures like HPO, tariff rationalisation, budgetary 
support for enabling infrastructure/ flood moderation etc. Have 
been approved by the Union Cabinet in March 2019. This would 
promote hydropower development in the country and help in 
adding 30000 MW of hydropower by the year 2030. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II,  
Dated: 10.05.2020] 
 
  
36 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–Nil– 
 
 
 
  

37 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH  
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Water Cess 
The Committee note that some of the States have levied water 
cess for each cubic meter of water which is used by the hydro 
power plants. However, the Committee find no sound rationale 
behind this as there is no consumptive use of water by a hydro 
power plant. Water just passes through the turbines and goes to 
the river again. The Committee found that imposition of water cess 
is not fair considering the provision of 12% of free power to the 
respective States from the hydro power projects. Since, the levying 
of water cess further burden the already stressed sector, the 
Committee are of the firm view that there is a need for relook in this 
matter by the States who have levied it. The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry would also persuade the Sates not to levy any 
water cess on hydro power projects. 
Reply of the Government 
Presently, only the Government of J & K levies the Water cess 
on hydro projects. In this connection, Ministry, vide its letter dated 
24.11.2017 has taken up the matter with Government of J & K to 
withdraw the imposition of Water cess. Jammu and Kashmir has 
agreed to relax Water cess for the initial 10 years in three projects 
viz. PakalDul (1000 MW), Kiru (624 MW) and Ratle (850 MW) to 
bring down tariff in the initial years. 
[Ministry of Power, File No.15-8/14/2018-H-II, Dated: 10.05.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)  
38 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
–Nil– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh   
alias Lalan Singh, 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
18 March, 2021 
27 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
  

39 
APPENDIX  I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON 18th MARCH, 
2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘2’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1535 hrs. 
 PRESENT 
 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh  –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
4. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
5. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
6. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
7. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
8. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
10. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
11. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
12. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
13. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari  – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan – Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh 
Arora 
– Additional 
Director 
40 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
apprised about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took 
up the following ten draft Reports for consideration and adoption:– 
(a) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 28th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Solar Mission-An Appraisal’; 
(b) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 37th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on Stressed/Non-performing Assets in Power Sector’; 
(c) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 40th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Impact of RBI's Revised Framework for Resolution of 
Stressed Assets on NPAs in the Electricity Sector’; 
(d) Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 42nd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Stressed/Non-Performing Assets in Gas based 
Power Plants'; 
(e) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 43rd Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Hydro Power’; and 
(f) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy; 
(g) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
Power; 

41 
(h) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 3rd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy’. 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
Power. 
(j) Report on the subject ‘Action Plan for achievement of 175 
Gigawatt (GW) Renewable Energy Target’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the 
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/ modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget 
Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
42 
APPENDIX  II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
 IN THE FORTY-THIRD REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF 
 THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   
     16 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl.Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16. 
Total: 15 
Percentage  93.75% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Total: 00 
Percentage   0% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. No. 8  
Total: 01 
Percentage   6.25% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Total: 00 
Percentage   0% 