MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
     [Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in Twenty-Fourth Report
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]
THIRTY-THIRD  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2023/Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)
“All Parliamentary Publication including DRSC Reports are available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception,
Parliament House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat
and Publications Division Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and  their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323). Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above.”
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
2022-2023
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)33


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in  
Twenty-Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the 
 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
COE No. 362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001.  
 

 
(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE (2022-2023)……………………………………………………. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………………………………. (v) 
CHAPTER     I Report…………………………………………………………………………… 01 
CHAPTER     II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………. 08 
CHAPTER    III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………………… 17 
CHAPTER   IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration ……………………………………………………………… 18 
CHAPTER    V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited …………………………………………………. 20 
ANNEXURE 
           Subsidies and Incentives being provided as Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) for installation of major renewable energy programmes …………… 21 
 
APPENDICES 
          I. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 13th March, 
2023……………………………………………………………………………… 23 
         II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy …………………… 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
(2022-23) 
 
        Shri Jagdambika Pal —— Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
  3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
  4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary* 
  5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
  6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
  7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
  8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
  9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri P. Velusamy 
                                                           
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th November, 2022 

 
(iv) 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
24. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
28. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
29. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
                   SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                            — Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan             — Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora           — Additional Director 
4. Ms. Deepika                                   — Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 16th December, 2022. 

 
(v) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Third Report on action-taken 
by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy. 
2. The Twenty-Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22nd March, 2022 and 
was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government to the 
observations/recommendations contained in this Report were received on 29th June, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 13th 
March, 2023. 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL, 
13 March, 2023                                                                                Chairperson, 
22 Phalguna,1944 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  I 
REPORT  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- taken by the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy on observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2021-22) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) 
of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
2. The Twenty-Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22nd March, 2022 and was 
laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 13 
Recommendations/Observations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13                                    Total - 11 
                         Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies: 
      Nil                                   Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. 1 and 6                                                             Total– 02 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final replies of the Government are 
still awaited:  
       Nil                                                              Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation No. 1 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is the nodal Ministry of the Government of 
India for all matters relating to renewable energy resources. The Committee note that an 

 
2 
 
administrative entity for promotion of renewable energy came into existence in 1981 as a 
Commission which was converted into a Department in 1982 and this department 
became the Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources in 1992. It is astonishing to 
note that a Ministry, which has been in existence for thirty years, has no power to 
formulate and issue its guidelines because implementation of the Electricity Act is 
responsibility of the Ministry of Power. It is true that grid connected electricity should be 
under a single administrative entity in order to have a holistic picture. However, keeping 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy as responsible only for generation of 
renewable power without looking at transmission and distribution gives a fragmented 
picture. Moreover, India has been a flag-bearer for extensive adoption of renewable 
energy and it has committed itself to increase its non-fossil energy capacity to 500 GW by 
2030 and achieve the target of Net Zero by 2070. Keeping in view India’s long term 
commitments regarding renewable energy and also to create synergy in the electricity 
sector, the Committee recommend that there should be an overhauling of the central 
administrative entities dealing with electricity with creation of a set up which can bring 
generation from all sources along with transmission and distribution under a single 
administrative Ministry for administrative convenience and also to harmonize the policy 
making for all matters relating to this sector. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
should take initiatives in this direction and apprise the Committee about the outcome.” 
7. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has stated as under: 
“Secretary, MNRE vide D.O. letter No.8/4/2020-EFM dated 16.3.2020 had written to 
Cabinet Secretary, requesting that the Sectorial areas assigned to MNRE under the 
Allocation of Business Rules 1961 may be amended. The modification requested interalia 
included following the: 
(i) All matters relating to development and deployment including formulation and 
implementation of policies, programmers, schemes and regulations of various new 
and renewable energy sources [Solar; Wind; Biomass(except liquid Bio fuel); Waste 
to Energy; Ocean Energy including Tidal Energy and Wave Energy; Geothermal 
Energy; and Hydro Power projects of and below 25 MW capacity]; 
(ii) Research and development in new and renewable Energy sector; 
(iii) Formulation and implementation of policy and programmers relating to manufacturing 
in new and renewable energy sector; 
(iv) International cooperation in the area of new and renewable energy. 
The proposal was examined by the Cabinet Secretariat and vide letter D.O. 
No.1/21/4/2020-Cab. dated 18.05.2020 it was advised to have further inter-ministerial 
consultation with the stakeholder Ministries /Departments including NITI Aayog, 
Departments of Atomic Energy etc. An internal committee chaired by Additional 
Secretary, MNRE has been formed to review the matter. A detailed proposal will once 
again be submitted to Cabinet Secretariat for consideration.” 
8. The Committee had recommended that there should be an overhauling of the 
central administrative entities dealing with electricity in order to bring generation from all 
sources along with transmission and distribution under a single administrative Ministry 
for administrative convenience and also to harmonize the policy making for all matters 
relating to the power sector. The Ministry in its reply has stated that it requested the 
Cabinet Secretariat for amendment in sectoral areas assigned to the Ministry under the 

 
3 
 
Allocation of Business Rules 1961 and the Cabinet Secretariat in turn, advised to have 
further inter-ministerial consultation with the stakeholder Ministries/Departments 
including NITI Aayog, Department of Atomic Energy etc. The Ministry has further 
submitted that an internal committee chaired by Additional Secretary has been formed to 
review the matter. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy may apprise the Committee 
about the outcome of the initiatives taken in this direction. 
Recommendation No. 5 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that against the overall target of 40 GW to be achieved by the end of 
this year, 5.87 GW of rooftop solar projects have been installed in the Country, that is an 
achievement of less than even 15% of the target. The Committee are concerned with the 
weak performance of the Ministry in solar roof-top programme and believe that given the 
performance of the Ministry in this Sector till date, the solar roof-top target for installation 
of 40 GW cannot be achieved by the end of 2022 with such tardy pace of progress. It has 
been observed that the roof-top systems are not proving to be attractive for the consumers 
due to non-availability of information at the grass root level, lack of awareness about this 
scheme amongst the masses, time consuming and complicated procedures for setting it 
up, delays in disbursement of subsidy, etc. The Committee thus recommend that: 
(i) The Ministry should explore the possibility of introducing Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
for subsidy disbursement directly to the consumer so as to make the process 
transparent, simpler and faster. 
(ii) The Ministry should widely advertise the incentives being provided by the Government 
for solar roof-top power system in all vernacular print and electronic media so as to 
spread awareness among the masses. 
(iii) One-stop-Solution Centers should be put in place in all the Districts of the Country to 
provide assistance/services/information to the customers and facilitate them in getting 
solar roof top system installed in a hassle free manner.” 
10. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“In order to increase the awareness among the consumers willing to install rooftop solar, 
Ministry has engaged PSUs under Ministry of Power and MNRE to undertake extensive 
awareness campaign all over the country. These PSUs have been allocated different 
States/ UTs wherein they have to carry out awareness activities including installation of 
hoardings, posters, distribution of leaflets, brochures, arranging street plays 
(Nukkadnatak), radio jingles, short videos in electronic media and also awareness 
through social media. These will be in addition to the awareness activities already being 
undertaken by States/UTs.  
Further, to make the process transparent, simpler and faster for installation of rooftop 
solar by consumers under subsidy scheme of MNRE, Ministry has simplified its 
processes.  A National Portal is being created where a residential consumer who is 
interested to install rooftop solar can apply online and after getting the technical feasibility 
approval from concerned DISCOM, the consumer can install rooftop solar plant, choosing 
the quality of components (solar modules/inverters/structure) as per his requirement 
provided that minimum specifications of MNRE are fulfilled. A residential consumer can 
also have the solar rooftop system installed by any registered vendor of choice. On 

 
4 
 
installation of the plant the consumer will upload details on the Portal. The concerned 
DISCOM will then install the net-meter and submit an inspection report about the 
installation on the National Portal. On receiving successful installation and inspection 
report from DISCOM, the subsidy will be directly credited into the bank account of the 
consumer. 
The National Portal will serve as one stop solution for the residential consumers who are 
willing to install rooftop solar and all related information will be provided to these 
consumers on the National Portal.” 
11. The Committee had expressed their concern about the weak performance of the 
Ministry in solar roof-top programme and observed that the roof-top systems have not 
been proving to be attractive for the consumers due to non-availability of information at 
the grass root level, lack of awareness about this scheme amongst the masses, time 
consuming and complicated procedures for setting it up, delays in disbursement of 
subsidy, etc.  
 The Ministry in its reply has stated that in order to increase the awareness among 
the consumers, it has engaged PSUs to undertake extensive awareness campaign all over 
the Country and these PSUs have been allocated different States/UTs wherein they have 
to carry out awareness activities. The Ministry has further submitted that to make the 
process transparent, simpler and faster, a National Portal is being created which will 
serve as one stop solution for the residential consumers who are willing to install rooftop 
solar. 
 The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in order to alleviate the 
problems faced by consumers in the process of getting the solar roof-top installed. 
However, the Ministry should furnish the details regarding specific activities undertaken 
by each PSU for awareness campaign and the impact thereof in the direction of achieving 
the targets in this regard. Further, the Committee should also be apprised about the 
current status of National Portal. 
Recommendation No. 6 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the off-grid and decentralized solar application programme has 
been discontinued by the Ministry w.e.f. 31st March, 2021. The programme was initiated 
with a focus on areas where grid power has not reached or is not reliable; backward and 
remote areas in North Eastern States; Left-Wing Extremism (LWE) affected districts, etc. 
While the objectives of the programme were laudable, the Committee are disappointed to 
observe that the programme has been discontinued without achievement of the 
envisaged targets. The Ministry has submitted that the guidelines of the scheme were 
issued in August 2018 and its implementation got delayed due to imposition of model 
code of conduct for General Elections, 2019 and lockdown on account of COVID-19. It is 
clear from the reasons given by the Ministry that the programme could not get its full run 
since its initiation. Similarly, AJAY Scheme was closed due to discontinuation of MPLAD 
Scheme by the Government in the year 2020 but the same has not been restarted 
despite restoration of MPLAD Scheme in November, 2021.Keeping in view the fact that 
off-grid and decentralized solar applications have the capability to enhance energy 
access of the people living in backward and remote areas, the Committee recommend 
that off-grid and decentralized solar application programme and AJAY Scheme should be 

 
5 
 
restarted. The Ministry should also evaluate these programmes and incorporate the 
feedbacks received from the stakeholders for better implementation at the ground level.” 
13. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Ministry had been implementing different schemes under off-grid solar sector. These 
include Atal Jyoti Yojna for providing solar street lights using part funding from MPLAD; 
off-grid and decentralized solar PV application programme phase-III for providing solar 
street lights, solar study lamps and solar power packs; and scheme on concentrated solar 
thermal technologies. All these schemes have been closed prior to 01.04.2021. With the 
restoration of MPLAD fund and also ease in the Covid-19 pandemic situation, Ministry 
has prepared a comprehensive scheme for promotion of off-grid solar PV/ thermal 
applications covering all the off-grid applications covered under previous schemes 
mentioned above and also DRE livelihood applications. A draft EFC note has been 
prepared and is in the process of approval.  Ministry has conducted third party evaluation 
of its off-grid schemes and the recommendations of the evaluation have been suitably 
incorporated in the proposed scheme.” 
14. In response to the recommendation of the Committee that off-grid and 
decentralized solar application programme and AJAY Scheme should be restarted, the 
Ministry has submitted that it has prepared a comprehensive scheme for promotion of  
off-grid solar PV/thermal applications and a draft Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
note has also been prepared which is in the process of approval.  The Ministry has further 
stated that a third party evaluation of its off-grid schemes has been conducted and the 
recommendations of the evaluation have been suitably incorporated in the proposed 
scheme. 
 The Committee observe that off-grid Solar Schemes like Atal Jyoti Yojna; off-grid 
and decentralized solar PV application programme for providing solar street lights, solar 
study lamps and solar power packs and scheme on concentrated solar thermal 
technologies, which have the capability to enhance energy access of the people living in 
backward and remote areas were closed prior to 1st April, 2021. Although, the Ministry 
has prepared a comprehensive scheme for promotion of off-grid solar PV/thermal 
applications covering all the off-grid applications covered under previous schemes along 
with DRE livelihood applications, but the same is in the process of approval. 
 The Committee, therefore reiterate their recommendation and desire that the new 
comprehensive scheme comprises all the components of off-grid and decentralized solar 
application programme and AJAY Scheme and the approval of the new scheme is done on 
priority. The Committee should also be apprised about the details related to 
recommendations of third party evaluation of the concerned previous programmes. 
Recommendation No. 7 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that PM-KUSUM Scheme aims to add a solar capacity of 30.80 GW 
by end of the year 2022 with central financial support of Rs. 34,000 crore. The Committee 
observe that against the target of 10,000 MW of grid connected solar power plants under 
Component A, only 27.75 MW could be installed. Under component B, against the target 
of 20 lakh stand alone solar pumps, only 78,940 pumps have been installed. Under 
component C, against the target of 15 lakh grid-connected solar agriculture pumps, only 

 
6 
 
1026 pumps have been solarized. The Committee are extremely disappointed with the 
dismal performance of the Ministry under this scheme. It is observed that farmers have 
been facing issues in getting finance from the Banks for small solar plants and most of 
the states are not able to provide their share of the subsidy under the Scheme.  
The Ministry furnished that it has introduced feeder level solarization and been pursuing 
to arrange fund through Agriculture Infrastructure Fund. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has made efforts to redress the issues which have been adversely impacting the 
implementation of the scheme. In order to address the problem of non-availability of funds 
and further ease the financial burden of the farmers, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should allow payment of farmers’ share of funds through MPLAD Scheme.  
The Ministry should also coordinate and hold consultations with the State Governments 
and actively encourage them to participate in the Scheme.” 
16. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“To facilitate financing the farmers for installation of small solar power plants under 
Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme, the Ministry is pursuing with the banks/ financial 
institutions as also with the Department of Financial Services under the Ministry of 
Finance. As a result a number of banks have issued guidelines/ products for financing 
PM-KUSUM and Rooftop Solar. These guidelines/ products have been uploaded on the 
Ministry's website for information of the general public. To facilitate speedy process of 
loan application of farmers under Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme, a web page has 
been created in the PM-KUSUM Portal wherein a farmer can file his application for loan 
and this application is then forwarded to the respective bank for further action. 
Under Component B and C, for individual pumps Ministry is providing 30% as the CFA, at 
least, 30% from State/ UTs and balance is the farmer's share. On the issue of providing 
farmers share under Component-B and C, as the scheme guidelines are silent, MNRE 
has requested Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), being the 
nodal Ministry for MPLAD Fund, to clarify whether the farmer's contribution under  
PM-KUSUM Scheme Component-B and C can be provided from MPLAD Fund based on 
the recommendations of the concern MP. On receipt of clarification from MoSPI, the  
PM-KUSUM Guidelines will be modified accordingly. 
Ministry is regularly reviewing the progress of PM-KUSUM Scheme with the respective 
Implementing Agencies of different components in the States/ UTs where scheme is 
under implementation as also with vendors and based on the feedback received the 
implementation guidelines have been amended as and when required.” 
17. Regarding PM-KUSUM Scheme, the Committee had raised the issue of farmers not 
been able to get finance from Banks for small solar plants. In its action-taken reply, the 
Ministry has stated about the initiatives taken by it to facilitate financing for the farmers as 
a result of which a number of banks have issued guidelines/products for financing  
PM-KUSUM and Rooftop Solar which have been uploaded on the Ministry's website for 
information of the general public. The Ministry has further stated that in order to facilitate 
speedy process of loan applications of farmers under Component-A of PM-KUSUM 
Scheme, a web page has been created in the PM-KUSUM Portal wherein a farmer can file 
his application for loan and this application is then forwarded to the respective bank for 
further action. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard 
and hope that the Committee would be apprised about the impact of these initiatives in 
improving the status of implementation of the scheme.  

 
7 
 
In response to the recommendation of the Committee that the Ministry should allow 
payment of farmers’ share of funds through MPLAD Scheme, the Ministry has furnished 
that it has requested Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) to 
clarify whether the farmer's contribution under PM-KUSUM Scheme Component-B and C 
can be provided from MPLAD Fund. The Ministry has further stated that on receipt of 
clarification from MoSPI, the PM-KUSUM Guidelines will be modified accordingly.  
The Committee should be apprised about the clarification from MoPSI and any 
subsequent modifications in the guidelines of the Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee note that the Ministry projected a budgetary requirement of Rs. 11449 crore 
for the financial year 2022-23 but only Rs. 6900.68 crore have actually been allocated which is 
an increase of about 20% over the Budget Estimates of the previous year. The Committee 
observe that about 73% budget of the Ministry is allocated for only two components i.e. Solar 
Power (Grid) and KUSUM Scheme. Further, about 20% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities and interest payment. Therefore, it is clear that the Ministry has been 
actively dealing with only two programmes i.e. grid connected solar including roof-tops and 
KUSUM Scheme. However, it has been furnished by the Ministry that most of the grid connected 
renewable energy projects in the Country are being implemented by the private sector 
developers without any central financial assistance. The past trends also reflect that the Ministry 
could not fully utilize its budgetary allocations during the previous years. It implies that the 
allocated funds are more than sufficient and the Ministry could not justify its demand during the 
process of allocation by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should focus on exhaustive utilization of the budgetary allocation during the coming 
financial year and then justify the need for allocation of more funds for its central sector schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry will focus on exhaustive 
utilization of Budgetary Allocation during 2022-23. It is true that most of the Grid Connected RE 
projects are being implemented by private sector through Tariff based Competitive Bidding. 
However, details of Central Financial Assistance currently being provided under the major 
programmes/schemes of the Ministry are given in Annexure-I. 
As informed earlier Central Sector Schemes such as Bio-mass, SHP, Biogas etc. are under 
process of approval hence funds are allocated for catering pending liabilities. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee note that Gross Budgetary Support to the Ministry has been substantially 
decreased at the time of Revised Estimates during the previous years. The allocation was 
reduced by about 26% for the financial year 2019-20 and about 38% for 2020-21. For the 
financial year 2021-22, although the data furnished by the Ministry shows an increase of  
Rs. 1928.80 crore at RE, but, it includes Rs. 1500 crore and Rs. 1000 crore provided by the 
Government of India as equity infusion in Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency and 
Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited respectively. Therefore, there is an actual reduction in 
the budgetary support for schemes/programmes of the Ministry at the time of Revised Estimates 
for 2021-22 as well. The Committee observe that the Ministry has not been able to fully utilize 
even the decreased allocations during the previous years. It could utilize only 91.53%, 86.24% 
and 61.75% of revised budgetary allocations during the financial years 2019-20, 2020-21 and 

 
9 
 
2021-22 (upto January, 2022) respectively. The Committee find it very strange that funds are  
un-spent in such an important and dynamic sector. Moreover, such a mismatch in the demand, 
allocation and actual utilization of funds clearly points towards poor financial planning by the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should streamline its budget 
formulation process so as to present a realistic and need- based estimation of funds required for 
various schemes and programmes and augment its administrative capacity for better utilization of 
allocated funds. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The Ministry will 
attempt to bring in more rigorous in the budget making process. During the year 2021-22 the 
expenditure was over 88% of RE. During the last three years i.e. 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 
there was a short fall in expenditure due to COVID, delay in projects due to renegotiation of 
PPAs & subsequent litigation and non-receipt of projects from North East Region States. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee note that a total renewable energy capacity of 105.85 GW has been 
installed in the Country as on 31st January, 2022 which is about 60% of the overall target of  
175 GW. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry has continuously failed to 
achieve its yearly physical targets. For the years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 against the 
renewable energy targets of 15,555 MW, 12,252 MW and 12,880 MW, the Ministry could achieve 
only 8,760.57 MW, 8,843.29 MW and 7,549.64 MW with shortfall of about 44%, 28% and 42% 
respectively. Similarly, during the year 2021-22, against the target of 19,635.90 MW,  
10,050.74 MW of renewable power could be installed upto January, 2022 which is only 51% of 
the given target. The Committee feel that because of continuous non-achievement of the 
assigned yearly physical targets, it is highly unlikely that the target of 175 GW can be achieved 
by the end of the year 2022. The performance of the Ministry does not seem to be in sync with 
our ambitious commitments and announcements made at various international for a regarding 
adoption of renewable energy. Against such gross under-achievement, the Ministry needs to 
significantly improve its target fulfillment in the financial year 2022-23. Keeping in view India’s 
commitment to increase its non-fossil based energy capacity to 500 GW by the year 2030, the 
Committee expect the Ministry to ramp up its pace and recommend the Ministry to closely assess 
and examine the factors responsible for non-achievement of targets and take corrective 
measures without any delay so that the physical targets set for the financial year 2022-23 are 
successfully achieved. The Ministry should also monitor the implementation of the projects and 
ensure adherence to the prescribed timeline for their commissioning. 
Reply of the Government 
A record high capacity addition of 14.08 GW of total Renewable Energy and 12.76 GW of 
solar energy has been achieved during the year 2021-22. A total of 159.95 GW of renewable 
energy capacity (including large hydro) has been cumulatively installed in the country as on 
31.05.2022. In addition, RE projects of 61.19 GW capacity are under various stages of 
implementation and 18.07 GW are under various stages of bidding. In order to ensure the timely 
execution of projects, MNRE is regularly monitoring the implementation of awarded RE power 

 
10 
 
projects. Further, necessary amendments and changes in policy/ guidelines are being carried out 
from time to time in consultation with stakeholders. 
There was delay in project completion in 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 due to COVID. 
Further, in April 2021, Hon’ble Supreme Court passed an order for undergrounding of 
transmission lines, for protecting the Great Indian Bustard in certain areas of Rajasthan and 
Gujarat. This has also adversely impacted RE projects in the two states in a major way, and has 
caused delays. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that against the overall target of 40 GW to be achieved by the end of 
this year, 5.87 GW of rooftop solar projects have been installed in the Country, that is an 
achievement of less than even 15% of the target. The Committee are concerned with the weak 
performance of the Ministry in solar roof-top programme and believe that given the performance 
of the Ministry in this Sector till date, the solar roof-top target for installation of 40 GW cannot be 
achieved by the end of 2022 with such tardy pace of progress. It has been observed that the 
roof-top systems are not proving to be attractive for the consumers due to non-availability of 
information at the grass root level, lack of awareness about this scheme amongst the masses, 
time consuming and complicated procedures for setting it up, delays in disbursement of subsidy, 
etc. The Committee thus recommend that: 
(i) The Ministry should explore the possibility of introducing Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
for subsidy disbursement directly to the consumer so as to make the process 
transparent, simpler and faster. 
(ii) The Ministry should widely advertise the incentives being provided by the Government 
for solar roof-top power system in all vernacular print and electronic media so as to 
spread awareness among the masses. 
(iii) One-stop-Solution Centers should be put in place in all the Districts of the Country to 
provide assistance/services/information to the customers and facilitate them in getting 
solar roof top system installed in a hassle free manner. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to increase the awareness among the consumers willing to install rooftop solar, 
Ministry has engaged PSUs under Ministry of Power and MNRE to undertake extensive 
awareness campaign all over the country. These PSUs have been allocated different States/ UTs 
wherein they have to carry out awareness activities including installation of hoardings, posters, 
distribution of leaflets, brochures, arranging street plays (Nukkadnatak), radio jingles, short 
videos in electronic media and also awareness through social media. These will be in addition to 
the awareness activities already being undertaken by States/ UTs.  
Further, to make the process transparent, simpler and faster for installation of rooftop solar 
by consumers under subsidy scheme of MNRE, Ministry has simplified its processes. A National 
Portal is being created where a residential consumer who is interested to install rooftop solar can 
apply online and after getting the technical feasibility approval from concerned DISCOM, the 
consumer can install rooftop solar plant, choosing the quality of components  
(solar modules/inverters/structure) as per his requirement provided that minimum specifications 

 
11 
 
of MNRE are fulfilled. A residential consumer can also have the solar rooftop system installed by 
any registered vendor of choice. On installation of the plant the consumer will upload details on 
the Portal. The concerned DISCOM will then install the net-meter and submit an inspection report 
about the installation on the National Portal. On receiving successful installation and inspection 
report from DISCOM, the subsidy will be directly credited into the bank account of the consumer. 
The National Portal will serve as one stop solution for the residential consumers who are 
willing to install rooftop solar and all related information will be provided to these consumers on 
the National Portal. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter  I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that PM-KUSUM Scheme aims to add a solar capacity of 30.80 GW by 
end of the year 2022 with central financial support of Rs. 34,000 crore. The Committee observe 
that against the target of 10,000 MW of grid connected solar power plants under Component A, 
only 27.75 MW could be installed. Under component B, against the target of 20 lakh stand alone 
solar pumps, only 78,940 pumps have been installed. Under component C, against the target of 
15 lakh grid-connected solar agriculture pumps, only 1026 pumps have been solarized.  
The Committee are extremely disappointed with the dismal performance of the Ministry under 
this scheme. It is observed that farmers have been facing issues in getting finance from the 
Banks for small solar plants and most of the states are not able to provide their share of the 
subsidy under the Scheme. The Ministry furnished that it has introduced feeder level solarization 
and been pursuing to arrange fund through Agriculture Infrastructure Fund. The Committee note 
that the Ministry has made efforts to redress the issues which have been adversely impacting the 
implementation of the scheme. In order to address the problem of non-availability of funds and 
further ease the financial burden of the farmers, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should allow payment of farmers’ share of funds through MPLAD Scheme. The Ministry should 
also coordinate and hold consultations with the State Governments and actively encourage them 
to participate in the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
To facilitate financing the farmers for installation of small solar power plants under 
Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme, the Ministry is pursuing with the banks/financial 
institutions as also with the Department of Financial Services under the Ministry of Finance. As a 
result a number of banks have issued guidelines/products for financing PM-KUSUM and Rooftop 
Solar. These guidelines/products have been uploaded on the Ministry's website for information of 
the general public. To facilitate speedy process of loan application of farmers under  
Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme, a web page has been created in the PM-KUSUM Portal 
wherein a farmer can file his application for loan and this application is then forwarded to the 
respective bank for further action. 
Under Component B and C, for individual pumps Ministry is providing 30% as the CFA, at 
least, 30% from State/UTs and balance is the farmer's share. On the issue of providing farmers 
share under Component-B and C, as the scheme guidelines are silent, MNRE has requested 

 
12 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), being the nodal Ministry for 
MPLAD Fund, to clarify whether the farmer's contribution under PM-KUSUM Scheme 
Component-B and C can be provided from MPLAD Fund based on the recommendations of the 
concern MP. On receipt of clarification from MoSPI, the PM-KUSUM Guidelines will be modified 
accordingly. 
Ministry is regularly reviewing the progress of PM-KUSUM Scheme with the respective 
Implementing Agencies of different components in the States/ UTs where scheme is under 
implementation as also with vendors and based on the feedback received the implementation 
guidelines have been amended as and when required. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter  I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note that the Bio Power Programme including Waste to Energy Programme 
and New National Bio-Gas and Organic Manure Programme (NNBOMP) have been discontinued 
by the Ministry. It is observed that the Ministry has not been able to achieve the targets for 
biomass power since 2019-20, however under waste to energy programme, physical targets 
have been achieved but the fund utilization was poor. Moreover, the physical and financial 
targets under NNBOMP also remain unachieved. The Ministry has furnished that a proposal 
under umbrella scheme of National Bioenergy Programme was submitted but the Ministry of 
Finance did not agree with the proposal. The Committee have been apprised that the Municipal 
Waste to Energy Sector seems to be picking up and the Ministry has received 27 proposals for 
converting municipal waste to energy. The Committee desire that the waste to energy 
programme should be continued as use of agricultural waste/ residue to produce energy has the 
added benefit of reducing stubble burning and thereby addressing the problem of air pollution. 
Similarly, Bio-Gas Plants not only meet the cooking fuel requirements of rural folks but also 
provide them organic bio-manure. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them the need for 
continuation of these programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
In the EFC meeting held on 22.09.2021, it had been recommended that the National 
Bioenergy Programme may be continued only to meet the already created liabilities and no new 
projects may be sanctioned under sub schemes of this programme. Subsequent to that, this 
Ministry has been continuously following up with Ministry of Finance for reconsideration of 
proposal for continuation of the National Bioenergy Programme beyond 31.03.2021 and upto  
FY 2025-26. In this connection, MNRE submitted a revised EFC proposal to Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) for continuation of the National Bioenergy Programme. The proposal was 
discussed in EFC meeting held under the chairmanship of Expenditure Secretary on 27.06.2022. 
The minutes of the meeting are awaited. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 

 
13 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note that the small hydro power programme was discontinued w.e.f.  
31st March, 2017 and since then, the budget allocations have been used to clear old liabilities 
only. The Ministry has apprised the Committee that the process for formulation of a new scheme 
for small hydro power has started and the scheme is likely to be in place soon. It is worth pointing 
out that the Ministry does not have a scheme for small hydro power for last five years and the 
same is still under process. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
critically review its performance under the previous small hydro power programme and formulate 
the new scheme in a time bound manner after ensuring that the factors which hindered the 
implementation of the earlier programme are properly addressed in the new scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
EFC in its meeting held on 04.05.2022 has appraised and recommended the 'Small Hydro 
Power Development Scheme for the period 2022-23 to 2025-26' with an outlay of Rs.3100 crores 
and overall capacity of 1000 MW through installation of new Small Hydro Power Projects. The 
Cabinet Note in this regard is under preparation. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee note that the Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) component of Green 
Energy Corridor (GEC) consisting of total length of 3200 ckm transmission lines and 17000 MVA 
substations has been completed, whereas the Intra-State component of GEC project which is 
being implemented by the State Transmission Utilities of the respective State has been delayed 
and given multiple extensions. The Committee observe that a total of 8468 ckm of transmission 
lines have been constructed out of the total target of 9700 ckm and a total of 15268 MVA 
substations have been charged out of total target of 22600 MVA as on 31st December, 2021.  
It implies that 1232 ckm of transmission lines have to be constructed and 7332 MVA of 
substation have to be charged in order to meet even the extended deadline of 30th June, 2022. 
The Committee are concerned about the much delayed implementation of the intra state 
component of GEC. Keeping in view the importance of the project for evacuation of power from 
renewable energy rich States, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter with the States concerned and get the Green Energy Corridor ready within the given time 
frame in order to avoid grid congestion and to facilitate evacuation of large scale renewable 
power capacity. 
Reply of the Government 
The Intra-State portion of GEC project has been delayed  due to various reasons such as 
Right of Way (RoW) issues, court cases, forest clearances, delay in issuing tenders because of 
delay in substation land acquisition, delay in award of works due to low bid turnout in various 
projects which resulted in retendering several times, etc. Ministry and CEA monitor the progress 
of the projects. A review meeting on Intra-State Green Corridor Phase-I under the chairmanship 
of Secretary, MNRE was held on 22nd March 2022 with the implementing agencies  
(State Transmission Utilities) of the implementing states and concerned Principal Secretaries. 

 
14 
 
The Ministry will make all efforts to persuade states to complete implementation of this scheme 
expeditiously. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note that the Ministry has not been able to fulfill its obligation regarding 
utilization of 10% of its annual budget for development of renewable energy in the North-Eastern 
Region. During the financial years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, against the Revised 
Estimates of Rs. 504.53 crore, Rs. 375 crore and Rs. 335 crore for North-East Region, 
expenditure of Rs. 122.41 crore, Rs. 128.09 crore and Rs. 107.41 crore have been incurred with 
huge unspent balance of 76%, 66% and 68% respectively. For 2021-22, against an RE of  
Rs. 499 crore, only Rs. 38.62 crore could be utilized upto 31st January 2022. It has been 
submitted that substantial shortfall in fund utilization was due to non-receipt of adequate 
proposals from the North-East States. It is observed that the north-eastern region has substantial 
potential for small hydro power; however, the small-hydro programme of the Ministry has been 
under consideration since April, 2017. Further, the north-eastern states are interested in off-grid 
and decentralized schemes of the Ministry, but, the schemes like Atal Jyoti Yojana (AJAY),  
off-grid and decentralized solar PV application programme, etc have been closed/discontinued 
by the Ministry. It is perplexing to note that on the one hand, the Ministry has been complaining 
about lack of proposals from North-Eastern States and on the other hand, the relevant schemes 
have either been under consideration for about five years or discontinued or closed down.  
The Committee, thus recommend that the Ministry should give proper consideration and due 
priority to the requirements of North-Eastern States while formulating the new 
schemes/programmes for off-grid/decentralized solar applications and small hydro power and 
fully utilize the funds allocated for development of renewable energy in this region. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry will make all out 
efforts for maximum utilization of earmarked North East Fund. An EFC Memorandum for 
continuation of 'Small Hydro Power Development Scheme for the period 2022-23 to 2025-26' 
was appraised and recommended by the EFC in its meeting held on 04.05.2022 with an outlay of 
Rs. 3100 crores and overall capacity of 1000 MW. The Cabinet Note in this regard is under 
preparation. 
The Atal Jyoti Yojana phase 2 was closed on 31st March 2020 as Government of India has 
suspended the MPLAD funds due to covid-19 pandemic. However, with the start of MPLAD 
funds, Ministry is formulating a comprehensive scheme including installation of solar street light 
with partial funding from MPLAD funds. Similarly, the off grid and decentralized Solar PV 
program Phase 3 was initially targeted up to 31st March 2020, however, considering the covid-19 
pandemic, the program was extended till 31st March 2021 for the NE region. The applications 
covered under Phase 3 included street lights, solar study lamps for school going children and 
solar power packs for public institutions. As stated above the Ministry is formulating a 
comprehensive off-grid renewable scheme covering solar street lights through partial funding 
from MPLAD funds, solar street lights with partial funding from state/beneficiary, distribution of 

 
15 
 
solar study lamps,  solar power packs for border areas, Solar water heating systems for hilly and 
snowbound areas, solar thermal applications for community cooking, etc. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for research and development in 
renewable energy for the years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2021-22 were drastically reduced at the 
time of Revised Estimates, while the financial year 2020-21 being the exception. In 2018-19,  
BE of Rs. 94 crore was reduced by about 54% to Rs. 43 crore; in 2019-20, BE of Rs. 60 crore 
was reduced by 75% to Rs. 15 crore and in 2021-22, BE of Rs 75 crore was reduced by about 
63% to Rs. 27.50 crore at RE stage. It is found that even the severely reduced allocation could 
not be fully utilized by the Ministry. In 2020-21, BE of Rs. 20 crore was increased to Rs. 49 crore 
at RE stage, but again, the Ministry could not fully utilize the allocation. The Committee feel that 
sufficient investment in research and development is a pre-requisite for sustained growth and the 
persisting inability of the Ministry to utilize the allocated funds shows its casual approach towards 
R&D in this sector. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should focus on 
maximum utilization of allocated funds so that research, design, demonstration and development 
in renewable energy sector do not suffer due to low utilization of sanctioned amount.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should collaborate with and provide funds to 
universities and specialized research institutions in order to support them for research in 
renewable energy. 
Reply of the Government 
Keeping in view the importance of Research, Design and Development in RE, the MNRE 
has revised the Renewable Energy-Research and Technology Development Programme  
(RE-RTD) on 09th December 2021 as per recommendations of a panel of experts under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Anil Kakodkar (Former Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission). This will 
ensure good projects for technology development and demonstration for large scale promotion of 
New and Renewable Energy in the country.RE-RTD Programme has been continued for a period 
2021-22 to 2025-26 at a total outlay of Rs. 228.00 crore. 
The Programme aims at scaling up R&D effort for Renewable Energy Research and 
Technology Development for promoting indigenous technology development and manufacturing 
for wide spread applications of new and renewable energy in efficient and cost effective manner 
across the country. The Programme will strengthen research and innovation capacity of the 
country leading to increase the share of renewables in the energy mix in the country. RE-RTD 
Pragramme has provisions for 100% financial support to Government/non-profit research 
organisations/academic institutions and 50-70% to industry/start-ups/entrepreneurs/private 
institutes.   
During FY 2020-21, BE of Rs. 20 crore was increased to Rs. 49 crore at RE stage.  
The actual expenditure was Rs. 36.57 crore. An amount of Rs. 12.43 crore could not be released 
due to some technical issues in operation in EAT module by the implementing organization. 
During 2021-22, the scheme was continued only on 9th December, 2021, hence BE was revised 
to Rs. 27.50 crore which has been fully utilized.    
The Ministry is taking all necessary steps, i.e., inviting proposals through country wide  
“Call for Proposals’, regular monitoring the progress and to ensure full utilization of the allocated 

 
16 
 
funds. All efforts will be made to spend the budgetary allocations.  The Ministry will also ensure a 
coordinated approach for successful collaboration among scientific & technical Institutes like IITs, 
NISE, NIWE, NIBE, & other R&D institutions and industry to achieve the goal of renewable 
energy technology development. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee note that the National Institute of Bio Energy is an autonomous institution 
under the Ministry which focuses on research & development in bio energy. The Ministry has 
submitted that the institution has not been able to achieve its physical targets due to acute 
shortage of manpower. This Committee had raised the issue of acute shortage of technical and 
scientific manpower at National Institute of Bio Energy in their Report. In September 2020, the 
Ministry, in its action taken replies, submitted that the recruitment was under process and it was 
expected to be completed soon. However, the Committee find that the shortage still persists 
which has obviously impacted the efficiency of the Institution. It has also come to the notice that 
the Institute does not have a regular Director General since atleast last 2 years. In view of the 
above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should complete the recruitment process of 
Director General as well as other technical and scientific positions at the earliest so that the 
Institution functions properly and is able to achieve its objectives. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry carried out interviews for various scientific posts at NIBE during February and 
March 2022 and selected 8 scientists under different positions. The joining letters are dispatched 
to the selected candidates, and it is expected that the new scientist would join in Q1 of FY 22-23. 
Further, after the approval of ACC, the regular Director General joined at the institute on 
25th May 2022. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
 
CHAPTER  III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH  
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is the nodal Ministry of the Government of India 
for all matters relating to renewable energy resources. The Committee note that an 
administrative entity for promotion of renewable energy came into existence in 1981 as a 
Commission which was converted into a Department in 1982 and this department became the 
Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources in 1992. It is astonishing to note that a Ministry, 
which has been in existence for thirty years, has no power to formulate and issue its guidelines 
because implementation of the Electricity Act is responsibility of the Ministry of Power. It is true 
that grid connected electricity should be under a single administrative entity in order to have a 
holistic picture. However, keeping the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy as responsible 
only for generation of renewable power without looking at transmission and distribution gives a 
fragmented picture. Moreover, India has been a flag-bearer for extensive adoption of renewable 
energy and it has committed itself to increase its non-fossil energy capacity to 500 GW by 2030 
and achieve the target of Net Zero by 2070. Keeping in view India’s long term commitments 
regarding renewable energy and also to create synergy in the electricity sector, the Committee 
recommend that there should be an overhauling of the central administrative entities dealing with 
electricity with creation of a set up which can bring generation from all sources along with 
transmission and distribution under a single administrative Ministry for administrative 
convenience and also to harmonize the policy making for all matters relating to this sector.  
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should take initiatives in this direction and apprise 
the Committee about the outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
Secretary, MNRE vide D.O. letter No.8/4/2020-EFM dated 16.3.2020 had written to Cabinet 
Secretary, requesting that the Sectorial areas assigned to MNRE under the Allocation of 
Business Rules 1961 may be amended. The modification requested inter-alia included the 
following: 
(i) All matters relating to development and deployment including formulation and 
implementation of policies, programmers, schemes and regulations of various new and 
renewable energy sources [Solar; Wind; Biomass(except liquid Bio fuel); Waste to 
Energy; Ocean Energy including Tidal Energy and Wave Energy; Geothermal Energy; 
and Hydro Power projects of and below 25 MW capacity]; 
(ii) Research and development in new and renewable Energy sector; 
(iii) Formulation and implementation of policy and programmers relating to manufacturing in 
new and renewable energy sector; 
(iv) International cooperation in the area of new and renewable energy. 
The proposal was examined by the Cabinet Secretariat and vide letter D.O. No.1/21/4/2020-
Cab. dated 18.05.2020 it was advised to have further inter-ministerial consultation with the 

 
19 
 
stakeholder Ministries /Departments including NITI Aayog, Departments of Atomic Energy etc. 
An internal committee chaired by Additional Secretary, MNRE has been formed to review the 
matter. A detailed proposal will once again be submitted to Cabinet Secretariat for consideration. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter  I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that the off-grid and decentralized solar application programme has 
been discontinued by the Ministry w.e.f. 31st March, 2021. The programme was initiated with a 
focus on areas where grid power has not reached or is not reliable; backward and remote areas in 
North Eastern States; Left-Wing Extremism (LWE) affected districts, etc. While the objectives of 
the programme were laudable, the Committee are disappointed to observe that the programme 
has been discontinued without achievement of the envisaged targets. The Ministry has submitted 
that the guidelines of the scheme were issued in August 2018 and its implementation got delayed 
due to imposition of model code of conduct for General Elections, 2019 and lockdown on account 
of COVID-19. It is clear from the reasons given by the Ministry that the programme could not get 
its full run since its initiation. Similarly, AJAY Scheme was closed due to discontinuation of 
MPLAD Scheme by the Government in the year 2020 but the same has not been restarted 
despite restoration of MPLAD Scheme in November, 2021.Keeping in view the fact that off-grid 
and decentralized solar applications have the capability to enhance energy access of the people 
living in backward and remote areas, the Committee recommend that off-grid and decentralized 
solar application programme and AJAY Scheme should be restarted. The Ministry should also 
evaluate these programmes and incorporate the feedbacks received from the stakeholders for 
better implementation at the ground level. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry had been implementing different schemes under off-grid solar sector. These include 
Atal Jyoti Yojna for providing solar street lights using part funding from MPLAD; off-grid and 
decentralised solar PV application programme phase-III for providing solar street lights, solar 
study lamps and solar power packs; and scheme on concentrated solar thermal technologies.  
All these schemes have been closed prior to 01.04.2021. With the restoration of MPLAD fund 
and also ease in the Covid-19 pandemic situation, Ministry has prepared a comprehensive 
scheme for promotion of off-grid solar PV/ thermal applications covering all the off-grid 
applications covered under previous schemes mentioned above and also DRE livelihood 
applications. A draft EFC note has been prepared and is in the process of approval.  Ministry has 
conducted third party evaluation of its off-grid schemes and the recommendations of the 
evaluation have been suitably incorporated in the proposed scheme. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/1/2022-P and C, Dated: 28/06/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter  I of the Report) 
 

 
20 
 
 
CHAPTER  V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL, 
13 March, 2023                                                                                Chairperson, 
22 Phalguna,1944 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
21 
 
 
ANNEXURE   
 
SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES BEING PROVIDED AS CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE (CFA) 
FOR INSTALLATION OF MAJOR RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAMMES 
 
GRID-INTERACTIVE RENEWABLE POWER PROGRAMMES 
Solar Power Projects 
(a)    Grid Connected Rooftop 
Solar PV Power Projects 
1.  For Residential Sector 
 Central Financial Assistance (CFA) up to 40% for capacity 
up to 3 kWp 
 CFA up to 20% for capacity beyond 3 kWp and up to 10 
kWp 
 CFA up to 20%  for GHS/RWA capacity up to 500 kWp 
(limited to 10 kWp per house and total upto 500 kWp) 
2.  For Discoms 
 Incentives up to 10% of project cost depending upon 
achievements in capacity addition above baseline. 
(b)  Grid connected Solar PV 
Power Projects by 
Government producers 
under CPSU scheme 
Phase II (Government 
Producers Scheme) 
VGF support up to Rs 55 lakhs per MW to the CPSUs/Govt. 
Organizations entities selected through competitive bidding 
process. 
(c)   Solar Park Scheme 
 
Upto 25 lakh per Solar park for preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPRs). 
20 Lakh per MW or 30% of the project cost whichever is lower. 
(d)   PM-KUSUM scheme Procurement Based Incentive (PBI) to the DISCOMs @ 40 
paise/kWh or Rs.6.60 lakhs/MW/year, whichever is lower, for 
buying solar power under this scheme. The PBI will be given to the 
DISCOMs for a period of five years from the Commercial Operation 
Date of the plant. Therefore, the total PBI that shall be payable to 
DISCOMs will be Rs. 33 Lakh per MW. 
CFA of 30% of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, whichever is 
lower, of the stand-alone solar Agriculture pump will be provided. 
However, in North Eastern States including Sikkim, hilly states of 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and UTs of J&K, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep and A&N Islands, CFA of 50% of the benchmark cost 
or the tender cost, whichever is lower, of the stand-alone solar 
pump will be provided. 

 
22 
 
GRID-INTERACTIVE RENEWABLE POWER PROGRAMMES 
CFA of 30% of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, whichever is 
lower, of the solar PV component will be provided.  However, in 
North Eastern States including Sikkim, hilly states of Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand and UTs of J&K, Ladakh, Lakshadweep 
and A&N Islands, CFA of 50% of the benchmark cost or the tender 
cost, whichever is lower, of the solar PV component will be 
provided. 
(e) Green Energy Corridor 
Scheme 
 
GEC Phase-I: CFA of 40 % of DPR cost or awarded cost whichever 
is lower. 
Total CFA approved by CCEA is Rs. 4056.67 crore. 
GEC Phase-II: CFA of 33 % of DPR cost or awarded cost 
whichever is lower. 
Total CFA approved by CCEA is Rs. 3970.34 crore. 
 
  

 
23 
 
 
 
APPENDIX   I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 (2022-2023) HELD ON 13TH MARCH, 2023 
The Committee sat from 1015 hours to 1100 hours in Committee Room ‘D’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
1.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
2.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
3.  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
4.  Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
5.  Shri Kishan Kapoor 
6.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
7.  Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
8.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi (in the Chair) 
9.  Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
                                                               Rajya Sabha 
10.  Shri Gulam Ali 
11.  Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
12.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
13.  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
14.  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
15.  Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
16.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 

 
24 
 
                SECRETARIAT 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai                                  —             Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan                  —       Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                —     Additional Director 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
2. Since the Hon’ble Chairperson could not attend the Sitting, Shri Shivkumar 
Chanabasappa Udasi, a Member of the Committee chaired the sitting in accordance with Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. At the outset, the acting Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about 
the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the 
following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the 
24th Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy’. 
(ii)    Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy’. 
(iii) Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power’. 
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the draft 
Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on recommendations contained in 24th Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’ and draft Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power’ 
without any amendment/modification. The draft Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy’ was adopted with minor modifications/amendments.  
The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and 
present the same to both Houses of the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
25 
 
 
APPENDIX  II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION-TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT  
(17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  13  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 
 
Total:  11  
Percentage:  84.62 %  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 00  
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 1 and 6 
 
Total:  02  
Percentage: 15.38 %  
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil  
Percentage: 00  
 