 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
REVIEW OF POWER TARIFF POLICY 
- NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN  
TARIFF STRUCTURE ACROSS THE COUNTRY 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
26 
 

 
ii 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
REVIEW OF POWER TARIFF POLICY 
-NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN  
TARIFF STRUCTURE ACROSS THE COUNTRY 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.08.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.08.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  July, 2022 /Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 


 
iii 
 
COE NO. 352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: ................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 110 001. 
 
 
 
 

 
iv 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE NO. 
Composition of the Committee (2019-20)……………………………….. v 
Composition of the Committee (2020-21)……………………………….. vi 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22)……………………………….. vii 
List of Abbreviations……………………………………………………………… ix 
Introduction………………………………………………………………………… xi 
 PART I  
 REPORT  
I. Introductory 1 
II. Power Tariff Structure 3 
A. Provisions related to Power Tariff 3 
B. Concept of Uniform Tariff 6 
III. Need for Uniformity in Tariff Structure – Issues 12 
A. A. Cost of Power Purchase – fixed and variable 12 
B. B. Renegotiation of Power Purchase Agreements  14 
C. C. Power Exchanges 18 
D. D. Pooling of Electricity at Central Level 22 
E. E. Point of Connection Charges in Transmission Sector  29 
F. F. Reduction in Cross subsidy  33 
G. Rationalization of Tariff Categories 39 
 PART II  
 OBERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 44 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the Sitting held on 06th November, 2019 55 
II. Minutes of the Sitting held on 06th January, 2020 (1100 hrs onwards) 58 
III. Minutes of the Sitting held on 06th January, 2020 (1430 hrs onwards) 62 
IV. Minutes of the Sitting held on 16th January, 2020  66 
V. Minutes of the Sitting held on 3rd September, 2020 69 
VI. Minutes of the Sitting held on 10th August, 2021 72 
VII. Minutes of the Sitting held on 1st December, 2021 (1400 hrs onwards) 76 
VIII. Minutes of the Sitting held on 1st December, 2021 (1500 hrs onwards) 79 
IX. Minutes of the Sitting held on 26th July, 2022 82 

 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2019-20) 
 
        MEMBERS 
              LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh -Chairperson 
2 Smt. Sajda Ahmed 
3 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
4 Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
5 Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
6 Dr. A. Chellakumar 
7 Shri Harish Dwivedi 
8 Shri S. Gnanathiraviam  
9 Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
10 Shri Kishan Kapoor 
11 Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
12 Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
13 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
14 Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
15 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel  
16 Smt. Anupriya Patel 
17 Shri Jai Prakash 
18 Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
19 Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
20 Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
21 Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
23 Shri Javed Ali Khan 
24 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar ^ 
25 Dr. C.P. Thakur 
26 Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan* 
27 Shri Muzibulla Khan* 
28 Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala* 
29 Shri Nabam Rebia* 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi* 
31 Shri K.T.S. Tulsi* 
___________________________________________________________ 
^ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.02.2020 vice Shri Vijay Goel, resigned from 
membership of the Committee w.e.f. 21.11.2019. 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020 against the existing two vacant posts since 
constitution of the Committee and vacancies arisen due to retirement from Rajya Sa bha in 
respect of Shri S. Muthukaruppan on 02.04.2020, Smt. Viplove Thakur on 09.04.2020 and Shri 
B.K. Hariprasad and Dr. Prabhakar Kore on 25.06.2020.  
 
 
 

 
vi 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
(2020-21) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed   
3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla   
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam   
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav   
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod ^ 
16. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
17. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
18. Shri P. Velusamy 
19. Shri Akhilesh Yadav   
20. Vacant@ 
21. Vacant@ 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri Jugalsinh Mathurji Lokhandwala 
27. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
29. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
30. Vacant * 
31. Vacant # 
 
 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
@ Vacant vice Km. Shobha Karandlaje and Smt Anupriya Patel inducted in Union Council of Ministers 
w.e.f. 07.07.2021 
* Vacant vice Shri Javed Ali Khan retired from Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2020 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
 

 
vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY  
(2021-22) 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh -  Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
6. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
7. Dr. A. Chella Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal ^ 
9. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
10. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
12. Shri Velusamy P. 
13. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
14. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil@ 
15. Shri Jai Prakash 
16. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
17. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
18. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar  
19. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
20. Vacant** 
21. Vacant  #   
                                           Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot *  
24. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
25. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy * 

 
viii 
 
27. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
28. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
29. Vacant$  
30. Vacant & 
31. Vacant^^ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
^ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.12.2021 vice Smt. Sajda Ahmed.  
@ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.02.2022 vice Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik.  
** Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from 
membership of the Lok Sabha on 22.03.2022. 
# Vacant since constitution of the Committee. 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11.11.2021. 
$ Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala resigned from the membership of the Committee on 02.12.2021. 
& Shri T.K.S. Elangovan ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from 
the Rajya Sabha on 29.06.2022. 
^^ Shri Sanjay Seth ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from the 
Rajya Sabha on 04.07.2022. 
 
 

 
ix 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
AC Alternating Current 
ACoS Average Cost of Supply 
APP Association of Power Producers 
APPC Average Power Procurement  Cost 
AT&C Aggregate Technical and Commercial 
BPTA Bulk Power Transmission Agreements 
CEA Central Electricity Authority 
CERC Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  
CGS Central Generating Station 
CPSU Central Public Sector Undertaking 
CTU Central Transmission Utility  
DAM Day Ahead Market 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DIC Designated Inter State Transmission System Customer 
DISCOM Distribution Company 
EA Electricity Act 
FAC Fuel Adjustment Charge 
FCA Fuel Cost Adjustment  
FoR Forum of Regulators 
FY Financial Year 
GCV Gross Calorific Value 
GENCO Generation Company 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GW Giga Watt 
HVDC High Voltage Direct Current 
ISTS Inter State Transmission System  
JERC Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission 
kV Kilo Volt 
kW Killo Watt 
kWh Kilowatt Hour 
LV Low Voltage 
MBED Market Based Economic Despatch 
MCP Market Clearing Price 
MNRE  The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
MOD Merit Order Despatch  
MoP The Ministry of Power  
MU Million Unit 
MW Mega Watt 
MYT Multi Year Tariff 
NTP National Tariff Policy 
O&M Operation and Maintenance  
OTC Over the Counter 
PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
PLF Plant Load Factor 
PoC Point of Connection 

 
x 
 
PPA Power Purchase Agreement 
RE Renewable Energy  
RLDC Regional Load Despatch Centre 
RoE Return on Equity  
RPO Renewable Purchase Obligation 
SCED Security Constrained Economic Dispatch 
SERC State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
SLDC State Load Despatch Centre 
TAM Term Ahead Market 
UDAY Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
xi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this  
Twenty-Sixth Report on the subject ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – Need for 
uniformity across the Country’. 
2. The Committee had a briefing on the subject by the representatives of 
the Ministry of Power on 06 th November, 2019. D uring the discussion, the 
Committee felt the need to examine various stakeholders relating to the subject. 
The Committee, therefore, held a series of discussions on the subject . On                   
06th January, 2020, the Committee held a discussion with the representatives of 
the State Regulatory Commissions  (SERCs). On the same day, in post noon 
session, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the State 
Governments. To know the views of the Independent Power Producers on the 
subject, the C ommittee held a discussion with the representatives of the 
Association of Power Producers (APPs) on 16th January, 2020 . On                             
3rd September, 202 0, the Committee called the representatives of the Power 
Generating Central Power Sector Undertakings (PSUs)  for discussion. On 10 th 
August, 2021, the Committee held a discussion with the representatives of the 
DISCOMS/ State Governments.   
3. Finally, the Committee took the concluding evidence of the 
representatives of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA)  on 1 st December, 2021. On the same day, 
the Committee also took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy and the Ministry of Power. The Com mittee wish to 
express their thanks to the representatives of the above -mentioned 
organizations for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
information desired by the Committee in connection with the issues relating to 
the subject.  
4. The Report  was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 26th July, 2022. 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
6. For f acility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II 
of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
26th July, 2022 
Sravana 4, 1944 (Saka) 
 Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh,  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
  

 
1 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 Electricity in India is under the concurrent list of the constitution at entry 
number 38 in the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India and is 
administered both by the Central and the State Governments. The Electricity Act, 
2003 is currently the legislation governing the Indian Electricity Sector. Section 3(3) 
of the Electri city Act, 2003 provides that " the Central Government may, from time to 
time, in consultation with the State Governments and the Authority, review or revise 
the National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy". 
 
1.2  In compliance with the above provisions, the Tariff Policy was notified by the 
Central Government under Section 3 of the Electricity Act, 2003 on 6 th January, 
2006. The objective of the Policy was, inter alia, to ensure availability of electricity to 
consumers at reasonable and competitive rates, ensure financial viability of the 
sector, and attract investments and to promote transparency, consistency and 
predictability in regulatory approaches across jurisdictions. 
 
1.3 As an evolving reform process, the prov isions of Tariff Policy have been 
amended from time to time based on the experience gained and technological 
advancements made in the electricity sector. The Policy was first amended on 31 st 
March, 2008 to align it with the Hydro Power Policy 2008. The Pol icy was further 
amended on 20 th January, 2011 for fixing a minimum percentage of total 
consumption of electricity by Distribution utilities from solar energy in accordance 
with the National Solar Mission. It was again amended on 08 th July 2011 to grant 
further exemption to hydro projects and certain tr ansmission projects from tariff -
based competitive bidding. 
 
1.4 Based on the recommendations of the Working Group on Power for 12 th Five 
Year Plan constituted by the erstwhile Planning Commission under the Chairma nship 
of Secretary (Power) and suggestions received from various divisions of Ministry of 
Power and stakeholders, revision of the Tariff Policy was again initiated. After 
extensive consultation with stakeholders on the proposed amendments to the Tariff 
Policy, the proposal of the Ministry of Power for amendments in the Tariff Policy was 
approved by Union Cabinet on 20 th January, 2016 and the Resolution on Tariff Policy 
was notified in the Gazette of India on 28th January, 2016. 
 
1.5 The focus of the Tariff Poli cy 2016 is on 4 Es: Electricity for all, Efficiency to 
ensure affordable tariffs, Environment for a sustainable future, Ease of doing 
business to attract investments and to ensure financial viability. Clause 1.3 of Tariff 
Policy, 2016 provides that it is e qually necessary to ensure availability of electricity to 
different categories of consumers at reasonable rates for achieving the objectives of 
rapid economic development of the country and improvement in the living standards 
of the people.  
 
1.6 The Ministry of Power has stated that over the years, the tariff structure across 
the States has become very complex and the consumer tariff categories are 

 
2 
 
observably large in numbers. In this regard, it is often argued that the high complexity 
of tariffs for each segregated category prevents consumers from fully responding to 
tariffs due to the high cost of processing the price information. Further, the basis for 
making such classifications has not been uniform across the country. Therefore, a 
need is felt  to not only simplify and rationalize the tariff structure but also make it 
harmonious across all States. Simplification of tariffs is expected to improve 
transparency in setting tariffs and may well yield benefits including enhanced 
consumption, collection efficiency, along with bringing in governance benefits.  
 
1.7 The Economic Survey (2015 -16) has suggested a model on “Progressivity of 
Tariff”, which broadly advocates for rationalizing the sub -categories / slabs to a small 
number within the domestic consumer category. The model also suggested to make 
domestic consumer category self -reliant by effectively ma naging the requirement of 
cross-subsidy of a few sub-categories within the category itself. 
 
1.8 In regard to the bottlenecks that are hampering the ac hievement of the goals 
of Tariff Policy, the Ministry of Power have enumerated the followings: 
(i) Tariff policy is only the guiding principles for the Appropriate Regulatory 
Commission. 
(ii) The stipulation that retail tariff for any class of consumer should be 
within the band of +/- 20% of the cost of the supply is not being adhered 
to.  As a result, certain class es of consumers like commercial 
consumers and industrial consumers are paying a much higher tariff, 
which is making them non -competitive. 
(iii) Delay in timely cost recovery to electricity generators. 
(iv) Various interpretations of the provisions of the Electricity Act and Tariff 
Policy are observed in the orders of various regulatory commissions. 
(v) Some States are providin g free power to certain categories  of 
consumers, viz. agricultural consumers which is not a good practice and 
this also affects the ground water levels in the country because of 
excess pumping.   
(vi) One of the tenets of the tariff policy is open access which ensures 
competition into the sector.  In mo st of the States , open access is not 
really the possibility  for consumers since the Regulatory Commission 
have stipulated very high open excess charges. 
(vii) Even today, most of our agricultural consumers and in some cases, 
certain domestic consumers remain un -metered and they are being 
billed on a normative basis. The absence of meters affects the revenue 
collection of the utility. 
(viii) The trajectory for the reduction in AT&C losses is not being adhered to 
by the distribution companies which lead to loss of revenue.  In many 
distribution companies, consumers have not been indexed and 
thereafter, it is difficult to identify the high loss areas.  
(ix) The RPO trajectory which is bei ng laid down by the Regulatory 
Commission are not being adhered to by the distribution companies. 
 
  

 
3 
 
II. Power Tariff Structure 
 
A. Provisions related to Power Tariff 
2.1 The Electricity Act, 2003 provides the Central Government to publish the 
National Electricity Policy and tariff policy, for the development of the power system 
based on optimal utilization of resources. The Tariff Policy is meant to provide 
guidance to Regulators in tariff fixation. This is borne out by specific provisions 
contained in Sections 61(i), 79(4) and 86(4) of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
 
2.2 The Tariff Policy provides only the broad contours of tariff principles which act 
as guiding principles to the Appropriate Regulatory Commission. However, the 
Appropriate Commission while consi dering the guiding principles a s outlined in the 
Tariff Policy  goes into details of technical and financial parameters for tariff 
determination. 
 
2.3 Tariff functions of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) under 
Section 79(1) include: 
● To regulate tariff of generating companies owned or controlled by the 
Central Government  
● To regulate tariff of generating companies other than those owned or 
controlled by the Central Government specified in clause (a), if such 
generating companies enter into or otherwise have a composite scheme 
for generation and sale of electricity in more than one State  
● To determine tariff of inter-State transmission of electricity  
 
2.4 Tariff functions of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) under 
Section 86(1) include: 
● Determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of 
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the State 
● Regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution 
licensees including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the 
generating companies or licensees or from other sources through 
agreements for purchase of power for distribution and supply within the 
State 
 
2.5 The primary methods of tariff determination and the multi-year tariff (MYT) 
principles are provided under Section 61, 62 and Section 63 which includes regulated 
tariff under Section 62 and tariff determined through competitive bidding under 
Section 63. 
 
2.6 Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides Appro priate Commission for 
determination of multi -year tariff principles, safeguarding of consumer’s interest and 
at the same time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner. The 
provisions also mandate that the tariff progressively reflects th e cost of supply of 
electricity.  
 

 
4 
 
2.7 Section 62(3) of the Electricity Act, 2003, provides that Appropriate 
Commission shall not, while determining the tariff under this Act, show undue 
preference to any consumer of electricity but may differentiate according  to the 
consumer’s load factor, power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity during 
any specified period or the time at which the supply is required or the geographical 
position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose for which the sup ply is 
required. 
 
2.8 Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 62, the Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such 
tariff has been determined through transparent process of bidding in accorda nce with 
the guidelines issued by the Central Government. 
 
2.9 Accordingly, the Commissions in accordance with the provisions in Section 64 
(1) of the Electricity Act 2003 issue tariff Orders. The said section provides that “ An 
application for determination of tariff under Section 62 shall be made by a generating 
company or licensee in such manner and accompanied by such fee, as may be 
determined by regulations”. 
 
2.10 Hence, Section 79 and Section 86 read with Section 61, 62, 63 and 64 of the 
Act, empower the Appro priate Regulatory Commission to determine and adopt tariff 
for generation, transmission and distribution, as the case may be.  
 
2.11 CERC, as mandated above has promulgated the MYT principles through a 
process of stakeholder consultation. The tariff petitions a re scrutinized in the light of 
the operational and financial parameters laid down in the MYT Regulations. 
 
2.12 Financial parameters include: 
● capital cost,  
● interest on loan capital,  
● depreciation,  
● interest on working capital,  
● O&M expenses,  
● return on investment,  
● landed fuel cost,  
● transportation costs,  
● losses,  
● GCV of primary fuel,  
● cost of secondary fuel oil consumption,  
● cost of consumables etc.  
 
2.13 Operational parameters include: 
● Annual plant availability factor,  
● annual plant load factor,  
● gross station heat rate,  
● secondary fuel oil consumption,  
● auxiliary energy consumption,  
● annual transmission system availability factor etc. 
 
2.14 CERC MYT Regulations also provide for truing up exercise in respect of: 

 
5 
 
● Capital expenditure including additional Capex incurred upto the end of 
the control period including on account of Force Majeure and Change in 
Law after prudence check. 
● interim truing up after completion of 2 years of control period if the annual 
fixed cos t increases by more than 20% over the annual fixed cost as 
determined by Commission for respective years. 
 
2.15 Section 65 (Provision of subsidy by State Government) provides that If the 
State Government requires the grant of any subsidy to any consumer or class of 
consumers in the tariff determined by the State Commission under section 62, the 
State Government shall, notwithstanding any direction which may be given under 
section 108, pay, in advance and in such manner as may be specified, the amount to 
compensate the person affected by the grant of subsidy in the manner the State 
Commission may direct, as a condition for the licence or any other person concerned 
to implement the subsidy provided for by the State Government: Provided that no 
such direction of the State Government shall be operative if the payment is not made 
in accordance with the provisions contained in this section and the tariff fixed by 
State Commission shall be applicable from the date of issue of orders by the 
Commission in this regard 
 
2.16 As per the Report of the Forum of Regulators (FoR) on “Analysis of Factors 
Impacting Retail Tariff and Measures to Address Them”, the following are the 
components of Average Cost of Supply for any State/DISCOM: 
 
 
  


 
6 
 
B. Concept of Uniform Tariff 
 
2.17 Though CERC fixed different tariff rates for different generating stations 
depending on their capital cost, base fuel price, GCV, efficiency norms, station heat 
rate, secondary oil consumption, PLF, varying  financial and operational costs, the 
technology o f the plant, vintage of the plant etc, such tariff is uniform for all those 
distribution companies who have a share / PPA with the said generating company. 
 
2.18 Further, a uniform tariff is also discovered on the Power Exchanges for a 
specific time block of th e day under the short -term trading where a uniform market 
clearing price is discovered for all buyers and sellers who are cleared. Accordingly, to 
the extent of short-term power procured by the distribution utilities for a specific time -
block of the day, the price of electricity remains uniform, except in the case of market 
splitting. 
 
2.19 Another method of tariff rationalisation has been by way of ‘Merit Order 
Dispatch’ of electricity by the load dispatch centres. CERC issued an Order for pilot 
operation of ‘Security Constrained Economic Dispatch ’ with the scope covering 
optimization after the unit commitment has taken place at a day -ahead level. The 
optimization model dispatches the cheapest available generator to its full declared 
capacity followed by the ne xt higher variable cost generator (honouring the technical 
minimum and Declared Capability constraints besides ramp rates, network 
congestion etc.) and so on till the entire requisitio n is met. The results so far have  
indicated optimization of the generati on across the country thereby reducing the 
production cost. 
 
2.20 The Ministry of Power has also held consultations with the stakeholders and 
has finalised the construct for  the introduction of Market Based Economic Despatch 
(MBED). CERC has been requested to p ut in place the regulatory framework so that 
it can be implemented from 01.04.2022. This would ensure a single price in a given 
time slot for all buyers in that time slot and would be a step forward toward one 
nation one tariff. 
 
2.21 The Committee sought the opinion of various stakeholder s on various issues 
related to the subject by sending a ‘Discussion Paper’ to them. On the issue of 
having a uniform tariff across the country, the Committee has asked whether it is a 
viable exercise or impracticable propositi on due to difficulties inherent in it and also 
whether the difficulties are insurmountable. In response to that the Association of 
Power Producers (APP) have stated their view as under: 
“A. Uniform tariff at the generator level:  A uniform tariff for procurement 
of power by the DISCOMS is certainly possible and would be a welcome 
step as long as it is discovered through an open and transparent market 
mechanism based on supply and demand bids on a given day. This is 
possible by pooling power at the national level and adopting Merit Order 
Dispatch (dispatch of least cost power first) at the national level. Presently, 
the distribution utilities prepare their schedule from their portfolio of 
contracts to meet the expected demand. This process is not cost effective 
as many low cost power plant s outside the state domain may remain 
unscheduled as the DISCOMS can only schedule plants with whom they 
have entitlements/contracts. A National Pool as conceptualized by CERC 

 
7 
 
in its discussion paper on Market Based Economic Dispatch aims to help 
distribution utilities to save their power procurement costs by ensuring that 
that the most economical set of generating stations are despatched first, 
irrespective of contracts. Given that most bilateral contracts are long term, 
with pre-specified variable charges  during the tenure of the contract, the 
Discussion Paper lays down an elaborate pricing, clearing and settlement 
mechanism. The market based system expects DISCOMS to cede the 
State specific procurement of power and dispatch functions to a 
centralized mark et mechanism. The system as envisaged will no doubt 
result in lowering the procurement cost but it may remain sub -optimal if 
requisite policy changes are not made in the other sub segments of 
generation – fuel and transportation, which constitute a major c omponent 
of generation cost (cost of coal itself constitutes about 60 -70% of 
generation cost). Therefore, to maximize the benefits of centralized pool, it 
is imperative that the fuel allocation too is streamlined to ensure that fuel is 
allocated on the bas is of plant efficiency, i.e on 'least energy cost basis'. 
To this end, the link between coal supply and PPA needs to be broken and 
the present discriminatory coal allocation framework would need revisiting. 
Likely Difficulties with this Proposition: Poolin g and centralized dispatch of 
power at a national level amounts to a complete overhaul of the present 
power market system and though it is a desirable change, there are many 
important issues which need to be considered and addressed 
appropriately in order to make an effective transition. Some of the 
important issues to be considered are:  
• Legal and jurisdictional issues  - The Electricity Act, 2003 carves out 
specific domains for the Central Commission and the State Commissions, 
in due cognizance of electr icity being in the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution of India. The authority to regulate various aspects of electricity 
business is clearly demarcated in the statute and there is no overlap area 
in the statute for exercise of such authority by the regula tory bodies. 
Therefore, the EA 2003 may need to be modified. Some examples of 
disconnect between the present Act provisions and a proposed pooling 
mechanism are outlined as follows:  
❖ Distribution businesses are under the jurisdiction of the State 
Commissions and are cognizant of State -specific issues. The powers of 
regulating their electricity purchase is also fully under the jurisdiction of the 
State Commissions, through operation of various sections of the Electricity 
Act, 2003 inter alia through Sections 86(1)(a) and 86(1)(b). In the absence 
of such specific powers granted to the Central Commission by the mother 
Act, the necessary legal authority for mandating power purchase through a 
specific route by distribution licensees appears to be absent.  
❖ Sections 28(3)(a) and 33(2)(a) mandates RLDCs and SLDCs for 
optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity within Region and within 
State respectively. Proposed pooling mechanism would take away this 
statutory function (optimum scheduling) of statutory bodies (RL DC & 
SLDC) and give the responsibility to some proposed ‘Market Operator’. 
This is not permissible under the present legal frame work.  
• Any such pooling should include all generation capacities, including 
those of the Centre and States. The pooling mecha nism cannot remain 
voluntary – it should be mandatory for all generators to participate, without 

 
8 
 
which the inefficiencies inbuilt in the present scheduling and dispatch 
mechanism will continue to remain.  
• Fixed cost payments arising out of existing contr acts must continue to be 
honored by the procurers with whom the contracts have been signed. • 
Such pooling must take into account that RE should continue to have a 
must run status.  
• Transmission bottlenecks may affect the efficient discovery of a 
centralized market clearing price. A pooling mechanism would require 
extensive changes to the present transmission planning and congestion 
management processes. • Merit order based solely o n variable cost may 
not give correct results and incremental costs of transmission charges and 
losses should also be considered.  
• BPTA (Bulk Power Transmission Agreements) signed by PPA holders 
may have to be re -looked at and flexibility introduced for t ransmission 
payment based on usage.   
• As power is a concurrent subject, it would need to be ensured that 
pooling should not lead to pancaking of costs by adding regional costs to 
the state level costs.  
• Capacities embedded in State systems may be a nat ural disadvantage 
as compared to those on inter-state transmission systems.  
• The discovery of a national pooled Market Clearing Price may not be 
beneficial for all States. Such a price may be more than the average cost 
of power procurement for some State s at present. For example, if we 
consider CERC’s order dated 07.05.2019 which calculated the Average 
Power Purchase Cost from non -RE sources as Rs 3.6/kwh at a national 
average level, however 19 States have their average cost of non -RE 
power lower than thi s average. Essentially, a transition to the pooling 
mechanism would be similar to the transition to the GST mechanism, 
where State Governments gave up their individual indirect taxation powers 
to create a common market for goods and services in the country . This 
would require extensive consultations and discourse between the Centre 
and States in order to bring about consensus and agreement.  
• Various existing Regulations and codes (Indian Electricity Grid Code, 
State Grid codes, etc) would need to be modified.  
• In order to incentivize the construction of new generation capacity when 
required, the construct of a separate Capacity Market will have to be 
considered. This is important to avoid supply side constraints in the future. 
At the same time, centralized Resource Adequacy Planning will have to be 
strengthened significantly to include visibility of State and Regional 
resource optimization.  
Therefore, while supporting the concept of a variable cost based national 
pooled market, we suggest that an Expert Group may be constituted, 
comprising of power sector experts and representatives of Ministry of 
Power, Regulators, CEA, Distribution utilities, Generators, power 
exchanges, traders etc, to discuss and flesh out the difficulties and 
concerns associated with  associated legal/jurisdiction, financial, 
operational and settlement issues.  

 
9 
 
B. Uniform tariff at the retail level : Uniform consumer tariff though 
desirable by some, is difficult to achieve. Historically, power is a 
concurrent subject and the states have  exercised their legislative powers 
to determine both the principles of tariffs and tariffs for their consumers 
based on (1) consumer mix; (2) ability to pay subsidy; (3) regulatory 
assets; (4) different generation mix of their own states/ procurement mix;  
(5) different voltage levels and losses etc. However, if uniform tariff must 
happen, then the same may be implemented gradually in a step -wise 
manner and over a period of, say, 10 years as elaborated below:  
1. Load -wise and voltage -wise categorization of  consumers across the 
country – in response to a MOP proposal on tariff rationalization we had 
suggested tariff categories as 0-5 kW, 5-10 kW, 10-25 kW, 25-100 kW and 
>100 kW.  
2. The aim to determine each load wise category tariff and to restrict to 
within +/- 20% of ACoS for that voltage level should be adhered to strictly. 
This has been proposed in EA amendments.  
3. The simplification of tariff categories and rationalization of retail tariff 
should also factor in promoting demand -based and time -of-day b ased 
tariffs electricity as demand during a day is not constant.  
4. Along with the above simplification and rationalization of retail tariff, it is 
also required to ensure complete FAC recovery and the mechanism to 
recover it across all categories.  
Further, the factual position at present is that there is significant differential 
between the States in terms of domestic retail power tariff.  
Aiming for a uniform retail electricity tariff would imply that the tariff would 
lie somewhere in the middle of this  range, further implying that this would 
result in significant increase in tariff level for some States and on the other 
hand, decrease in tariff levels for other States. Therefore, all States would 
not have similar incentive to work towards such a proposa l, and extensive 
discussions and deliberations with the States would be required.” 
 
2.22 During the Sitting on the subject, on the issue of uniformity in tariff, the 
Director and Group CEO of BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, Delhi stated as under: 
“State regulator may be empowered to determine the distribution cost for 
the State so that there would be uniformity in a graded approach. Initially, 
the power purchase cost could be uniform and then, at a later stage when 
all the T & D losses of various States are brought to a reasonable level, for 
example, less than 15 per cent, then the distribution cost can also be put 
in a uniform structure.” 
 
2.23 In regard to the concept of Uniform Tariff, the view s of some of the States are 
as under: 
Andhra Pradesh:  
Each and every state  and DISCOM has unique cost structure in the 
Country. Power purchase costs account for 85% in the entire cost portfolio of a 

 
10 
 
Distribution Companies depending on sources and nature of power 
procurement.  
Keeping in view of the varied diversity of States, disposition of Generation 
resources in the States, welfare measures implemented in the States, discretion 
to the States available under section 65 of the Electricity Act -2003 to extend 
tariff subsidy to different category of consumers, it is impractical to  maintain 
uniform retail supply tariffs in the Country. 
However, these difficulties can be addressed at Union Government level in 
advance through conversations or other means in developing the policy itself. 
Delhi: 
The concept of uniform or pooled tariff is a welcome step. However, the 
success of this proposition would be subject to protection of interest of 
consumers, Distribution Companies and Generating companies and 
overcoming the challenges associated with it, without any hike in retail tariff. 
Gujarat: 
It is submitted that considering the complexity of issues being diverse 
nature of power purchase cost, distribution and operational efficiencies, cost 
parameters etc. across the Country, it would be difficult to adopt the principle of 
uniform tariff across the country.  
Further, the idea of uniform tariff across the Country would be against the 
principle of encouraging efficiency, economic use of resources, good 
performance and optimum investment, recovery of cost of electricity in a 
reasonable manner, and the principle rewarding efficiency in performance. The 
idea of uniform tariff across the Country would require cross subsidization 
wherein certain efficient States would be cross subsidizing the other States.  
Haryana: 
Issues like tariff determination h ave become cumbersome due to 
involvement of multiple stakeholders and uncertainty in the pricing of power. 
However, instead of uniform tariff, broader guidelines for determination of tariff 
as deemed appropriate may be fine -tuned in the National Tariff Pol icy (NTP) so 
the process of tariff determination may be rationalized further across the 
country. Further, the uniform tariff or near uniform tariff across the country can 
be possible in a gradual manner. 
The cost of power which contributes 80% part in the tariff determination 
and needs to be rationalized and once parity is achieved, it will be possible to 
have near uniform tariff payable by the electricity consumers at three voltage 
levels. 
Karnataka: 
The utilities have entered into long term PPAs’ of varyi ng power purchase 
cost. Until the PPAs’ are modified to have a uniform power purchase cost 
across the Country, uniform tariff may not be a viable proposition.  
Madhya Pradesh: 
Uniform tariff across the country is a difficult proposition. However, the 
Tariffs across the country can be simplified and rationalized into some broad 
categories mainly based on their load pattern and voltage levels. 

 
11 
 
Odisha: 
There should be uniformity on the power purchase cost of the DISCOMS 
to bring a uniform Retails Supply Tariff (RST) across the country. 
Rajasthan: 
The concept of uniform tariff can be achieved by reallocating the power 
purchase costs in a manner that the difference in other cost aspects on account 
of consumer mix loss levels cost structures of the distribution li censees are 
factored in. One of the suggested methodologies which may be adopted is 
Differential Bulk Supply Tariff (DBST), as present in states like Gujarat and 
Odisha. 
Telangana: 
Uniform tariff across the country is a difficult proposition given differin g 
cost structures and revenue centers for different DISCOMS. 
However, tariffs can be simplified and rationalized across the country. 
 
 
  

 
12 
 
III. NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN TARIFF STRUCTURE – ISSUES 
 
A. Cost of Power Purchase – fixed and variable 
 
3.1 As per  Tariff Policy, Two -Part tariff Structure comprising fixed and variable 
charges has been adopted for power procured under medium and long term 
contracts by DISCOMS from Generating Stations. The fixed charges are reflective of 
capital investments and are paid based on the availability of the Power Station . The 
variable charges are the cost of fuel used for the generation of electricity. At the 
generation level, the fixed and variable charges are function of input cost, and are 
specific to the geographical site, power generation equipment and fuel. 
 
3.2 The Ministry of Power has stated that Section 61(e) of the Electricity Act, 2003 
mandates determining principles rewarding efficiency in performance. In view of this, 
the tariffs of generating stations vary  owing to efficiency in operation besides other 
parameters. For consumers also, apart from certain special category of consumers 
(mainly Agriculture or Bel ow Poverty Line consumers), two -part tariff structure 
comprising fixed and energy charges is in place. 
 
3.3 In regard to the issue of fixed and variable charges of electricity by the Power 
Plants, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) have stated as under: 
 
“Regulated tariff of a generating station depends upon various operational 
and financial param eters, which include capital cost, return on equity, 
interest on loan capital, depreciation, interest on working capital, operation 
& maintenance expenses, landed fuel cost of primary fuel (including 
transportation costs and losses), GCV of the primary fue l, cost of 
secondary fuel oil consumption, cost of limestone or any other reagent, as 
applicable etc.   The operational parameters which affect the tariff of a 
generating station include, annual plant availability factor, annual plant 
load factor, gross sta tion heat rate, secondary fuel oil consumption, 
auxiliary energy consumption etc.  
Section 61(e) of the Electricity Act, 2003 mandates determining principles 
rewarding efficiency in performance. Accordingly, the tariff regulations 
notified by the Central Commission incentivize efficient operation of the 
generation stations.  In view of this, tariff of generating stations vary owing 
to efficiency in operation besides other parameters. The Commission 
determines tariff under Section 62 of the Electricity Act,  2003 for each 
generating station separately.” 
 
3.4 In regard to inadequate fixed cost recovery from corresponding demand tariff, 
the Ministry of Power, during the Sitting on the Committee on 06.11 .2019 have 
furnished the following information: 
 

 
13 
 
 
 
3.5 When the Committee asked for the views of the Association of Power 
Producers (APP) on the issue of fixed and variable charges of a Power Plant, the 
following information was furnished: 
 
“Variable charges for generating plants depend on several factors such  as 
the type of fuel, source of fuel, transportation and handling charges for the 
fuel etc. These factors can be very different for each plant. Fixed cost for a 
generating plant also depends on many factors which are unique to the 
particular plant – technology, cost of land, financing cost, operational costs 
etc.  
As these factors are inherently unique to a plant, trying to introduce 
uniformity in the variable and fixed charges for a plant is an impractical 
proposition.  
Even for a national pooling mechanis m (for power procurement at the 
Discom level), the mechanism would involve the generators placing their 
bids on their variable/marginal cost of generation while fixed cost would be 
paid separately based on availability as per the current practice.  
Trying to implement uniformity in fixed costs would mean either raising 
some costs to match that of the others or lowering costs to match the 
lowest common denominator. This would be detrimental to the interests of 
the consumer and generator respectively. The var ious Commissions, 
while determining tariffs for stations under their jurisdictions, have set out 
norms which balance out efficiency and cost recovery concerns of the 
various generators. These norms based on factors like vintage and 
technology are not unifo rm. It would indeed be very difficult to have 
uniform tariffs when the operating parameters and technologies and the 
norms themselves are not uniform.”  
 
3.6 During the Sitting on the subject, the representative of a DISCOM raised the 
issue of high rate of Ret urn on Equity (RoE) i.e. 15.5% for the power plants for which 
the DISCOMS have to pay this amount in one form of fixed charges. Therefore, 
demanded that the same should be reduced to match present low interest rate 
regime. In response, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
 
“The matter may be considered by the CERC after completion of due 
process of consultation and make suitable revision in the tariff 
regulations. RoE needs to be kept aligned with prevailing interest rates. 


 
14 
 
 
3.7 In regard to the element of variable and fixed charges within the tariff, the 
views of some of the States are as follows: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
A policy should be evolved where power purchase costs are determined 
only through competition by multiple buyers and sellers. An agency should be 
set up to induce competition in the consumer business and prevent monopoly. 
Karnataka: 
● In a two part tariff system, the fixed cost is introduced to recover the 
investment made by the generator and the variable cost is introduced to recover 
the cost of the fuel. 
● The fixed cost is dependent on the amount of investment for the project. This 
cost should be factored in the tariff to facilitate debt servicing by the generator 
and should be spread throughout the life of the plant subject to the fixed annual 
PLF. The fixed cost should be reviewed and fixed every year based on PLF. 
● For fixing of variable cost, the cost of fuel for the farther located plants should 
be fixed lesser compared to the plants located nearby the coal mines. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
The fixed cost of a Utility needs to be recovered through the tariff for which 
a component of fixed charges has to be incorporated in retail tariff. 
Rajasthan: 
Pertaining to tariff determination of generating plants, the regulatory due 
diligence needs to be carried out to check whether only prudent fixed costs of 
running the plant are being recovered through fixed charges. For old and 
inefficient plants which have been backed down boxed up  (because of variable 
cost not falling under the Merit order of Dispatch), the fix ed charges should 
cover only the cost of repayment of outstanding loans, if any and no other cost 
should be allowed. 
Telangana: 
The elements of variable and fixed charges in the tariff such as load factor 
and power factor are based on the type of load and requirement of consumers. 
Thus, there should be fixed, and variable charges applied in tariff. The structure 
should be rationalized based on cost of service of each category.  The tariff 
shall be designed in such a way that the fixed cost incurred shall be  recovered 
entirely in the form of fixed charges and the extent of variable cost to be 
recovered in the form of energy charges. Besides this, going for 
oversimplification would result in non-uniform bearing of charges by consumers. 
 
B. Renegotiation of Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
3.8 Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are entered into between the ge nerating 
companies and the load -serving entities. The PPAs are commercial in nature and 
mutually agreed by the parties and are binding on them. 
 

 
15 
 
3.9 Electricity Act, 2003 specifies the duties of DISCOMS where they are 
obligated to fulfill the requirements and demands of consumers. Electricity generation 
was made de-licensed activity in the Electricity Act 2003. Competition was introduced 
in power procu rement by DISCOMS. This competition is for power procurement 
done/ to be done for long term, medium term or short term power requirements. 
Power Exchanges came into existence in the last decade and provided a platform 
where competitive power can be procure d by DISCOMS on day-ahead basis to meet 
short term requirements of power. Hence the structure of the sector is like having:  
i) Long Term PPAs ( 7 years and above) – to have certainty in quantum 
and price over long term and power stations are build based o n it and either full 
or major share of power is contracted  
ii) Medium Term PPAs (more than 1 year upto 5 year) - to have 
certainty in price and quantum over medium term, it reduces the risk of both 
parties in case of volatile fuel market. Some part of pow er from Power Stations 
is generally offered under this.  
iii) Short term PPAs (1 day to 365 Days ) - To meet the short term 
requirements of power. The prices in short term are reflective of the market 
position (excess/shortage, demand or supply). Generally power is being sold at 
marginal energy price (during low demand) or market condition. The share of 
long term PPA is around 89% of the total power purchase across country.  
 
3.10 However, the Ministry of Power have stated that there is a need to deepen the 
short term electricity market including exchanges so that volatility in electricity prices 
can be controlled. 
 
3.11 Regarding the issue of renegotiation of Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs), 
the Committee in their ‘Discussion Paper’ had observed that most of the electricity 
being supplied is tied up between generators and purchasers, i.e., DISCOMS on the 
long-term PPA basis.  This situation is a factor that deters us from any thinking in the 
direction of uniform tariff. Therefore, they had asked whether already entered PPA 
can be renegotiated again among the contracting parties and what would be the  
legal, financial and contractual implications of such negotiations.  
 
3.12 In regard to the re-negotiation of the present PPAs, the Ministry of Power have 
stated that maintaining the sanctity of contracts is one of the main pillars which 
attracts the confidence of both buyer and seller and is fundamental to bring 
investment into the sector. Re -negotiation of PPAs unless mutually decided by the 
contracting parties is not desirable as it sends adverse signal s to future investment. 
Re-negotiating PPAs may have significant and cascading negative consequence s for 
investments under a monophony regime. However, if at the national level, a fair and 
transparent mechanism is developed for transferring existing PPAs that protects both 
investor and consumer interest, it could become the new benchmark.  
 
3.13 In regard to the issue of renegotiation of present Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs), the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) have stated as under: 
“ A discussion paper has been prepared by the staff of the Commission on 
“Market Based Economic Dispatch of Electricity: Re -designing of Day -
Ahead Market (DAM) in India”.   The paper has proposed centralized 
dispatch of generation on day -ahead basis, based on merit order. 

 
16 
 
Comments from the stakeholders on the d iscussion paper have been 
received and the same is currently under consideration of the 
Commission.” 
 
3.14 The Association of Power Producer s (APP) has furnished their views on the 
issue of renegotiation of present Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) as under: 
“Renegotiating PPAs would cause major upheaval in the sector. Some of 
the major implications would be as follows:  
State Governments have entered into PPAs for procurement of power for 
their states as per powers vested in them by the Constitution (Schedule VII 
which is also a part of the Basic Structure of the Constitution) and the 
Electricity Act, 2003. Renegotiation of PPAs will disturb the policy certainty 
with respect to the nature of the contract as well as the sanctity of the 
contracts  
Apart from pol icy certainty, sanctity of contracts is important. A 
government, based on a policy change, annulling a contract impacts the 
country’s image badly, no matter how much we improve our ‘ease of doing 
business’ ranking. India ranks 163rd in enforcing contracts out of 190 
countries as per the World Bank Doing Business 2020 report press 
release. Companies commit their resources based on the plan and 
assessments made while entering into the contract. A government contract 
is a public contract in which larger intere sts are involved. This would lead 
to both the governments and the companies, both in the public and in the 
private space, expending wastefully huge resources on court litigations, 
which are likely to be long drawn out and may lead to derailment of growth 
of the sector.  
This move would be particularly detrimental for existing RE PPAs. State 
governments would find an excuse to reopen the RE PPAs, particularly of 
older vintage when RE plants with high tariffs to reflect higher costs were 
set up.” 
 
3.15 In regard to the issue of renegotiation of Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs), 
the view of some of the States are as follows: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
As it is leant from various judgments rendered by various judicial fora, we 
cannot back out from the long term PPAs unless the re are valid & tenable 
defaults under law by either party. Almost above 90% of power procurement is 
tied up through Long Term PPAs including that from Renewable Energy 
Sources. 
It is seen that a large number of pit head power plants are stranded whereas 
coal plants far away from mines are being operated. This involves huge coal 
transportation costs and generation of green house gases. The country will 
benefit if a policy is brought where it is mandated that no pit head coal plant 
shall ever remain stranded. For a capacity of about 350 GW, India does not use 
more than 175 GW at any point of time. This shows that a large number of 
power plants have to be kept shut down continuously till the countries peak 
demand reaches say 300 GW at least. 

 
17 
 
There should be a p ooling of all the wind/solar across the country by a central 
agency in order to stabilize the variable energy. The stabilized Variable 
Renewable Energy may be re -allotted to the contributing states on pro - rata 
basis. Balance may be sold in market and the unsold energy may be given back 
to the states on real time basis. 
There should be provision for review of agreements periodically with 
mutual understanding. 
Delhi: 
Further, instead of new PPAs, it would be in national interest to reallocate 
surplus PPAs to  other needy States instead of constructing new Power Plants  
especially when a large numbers of existing Power Plants are idle.  This will 
optimally utilize the stranded assets in the sector. 
Gujarat: 
Any negotiation or renegotiation of already signed cont racts will be 
detrimental to the States who have taken adequate steps and acted due 
diligently for maintaining power supply at reasonable rate.  
Haryana: 
This (re -negotiation of PPAs) also introduces an element of regulatory 
uncertainty in the sector and a dversely affects the lending agencies. Further, 
Electricity is a concurrent subject and States may not find it appropriate to give 
away their operational advantage by socializing cheaper PPAs. 
Karnataka: 
The generators may not agree for reduction of power purchase cost even 
after negotiation. The generator has to recover the investment made by him for 
the project with a profit. The legal implications of PPAs’ have to be considered 
and if necessary, a legislation may be required. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
This is high  time for enabling a legal framework for renegotiation among 
the contracted parties so as to protect the interest of Generators as well as of 
DISCOMS in respect of Power Purchase Agreements. The legal framework 
should be such that it ensures optimal utiliz ation of Generating Station and at 
the same time reduces fixed cost burden of DISCOMS.   
Odisha: 
There is no such ‘Exit Clause’ or ‘Renegotiation Provision’ in the existing 
PPAs between the Generators and the DISCOMS. When both Generators and 
the DISCOMS are contractually obligated to honor the PPAs, Exit from such 
PPAs and Re-negotiation is not possible as per the existing arrangements.  
Hence, the Rationalization of Generation Tariff can be further simplified 
and can be made reasonable only by bringing in transparency and Cost -
Effective Tariff Regulations by the Central and State Commissions with proper 
Truing-up Exercise on each component of Tariff based on Audited Accounts 
including Energy Audit & Cost Audit of all the Utilities. 
As per present Regulat ions 70% of total Capital Investment, baring salvage 
value, is recovered by the Generator in form of Depreciation in the first 12 
years. Therefore, a provision for re -negotiation of PPAs after 12 years should 

 
18 
 
be introduced in line with Regulation -18 of CER C (Grant of connectivity, long -
term access and medium -term open access in inter -State transmission and 
related matters) Regulations, 2009. 
Rajasthan: 
From buyer (DISCOM) perspective, long term PPA ensures availability of 
power for a long period at a pre -decided tariff to meet the projected demand 
while for a Power Producer, it ensures a secure revenue stream from the 
generating station for meeting the financial obligations. Hence renegotiating 
such contractual instrument will adversely impact the long-term arrangements of 
both the parties. 
However, it is to be noted that the DISCOMS, in today’s muted demand 
scenario, are saddled with the fixed cost burden of the stranded capacity. This 
is resulting in significant crunch on the already stressed financial posi tion of the 
DISCOMS. 
Tamil Nadu: 
The term of the PPAs shall be reduced to five years, with a provision to 
extend / negotiate at the end of the term.   
Telangana: 
There is no clause in the PPAs for renegotiation. DISCOMS have burden 
of fixed cost under PPA. 
Uttar Pradesh: 
Such a measure (re -negotiation of PPAs) is likely to be viewed by the 
Private Sector investors with negative view and it may have adverse impact on 
future investments in Indian Power Sector. However, such a measure will help 
financially distressed DISCOMS to reduce their costs, optimize power purchase 
cost and benefit the consumers in short to medium term. 
 
C. Power Exchanges  
 
3.16 The procurement of power by DISCOMS can be done using long -term, 
medium-term and short -term power purchase contracts as per their power purchase 
portfolios. The long-term contracts are entered through Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) for duration of up to 25 years. The long -term contracts are essentially 
capacity plus energy c ontracts and ensure availability of capacity for the duration of 
long-term. The total price of power procured under this route includes fixed and 
energy costs. The long term contracts constitute approximately 90% while the 
remaining is met through Medium Term and Short Term contracts.  
 
3.17 Below is the pie -chart showing share of market segments in Total Electricity 
Generation during the year 2019-20.  
 

 
19 
 
 
(Source: CERC's Report on ‘Short-term Power Market in India, 2019-20’) 
 
3.18 The Committee in their ‘Discussion Paper’ on the subject had observed that 
the tariff of electricity, being traded at the power exchanges, is significantly 
reasonable as compared with other mode of supplies.  The rate at which it is being 
done logically raises the question as to the cost of generation and supply of electricity 
through other modes. Simply because a structured system has been at work does 
not mean that competition cannot usher in.   
 
3.19 In response to the issue of Power Exchanges, the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (CERC) have stated as under: 
 
a. “The long-term contracts are essentially capacity+energy contracts and 
ensure availability of capacity for the duration of long -term. The total 
price of power procured under this route includes fixed and energy 
costs. 
b. However, the power procured through power exchanges is less than 
5% of the total electricity generated in the country.   These transactions 
are essentially energy contracts and DISCOMS get power only if their 
bids get cleare d in the power exchange market.  Therefore, guaranteed 
availability of power under this route is uncertain. 
c. Accordingly, difference in price of power under long -term and short -
term routes lies due to the fundamental differences in long -term and 
short-term contract structures, quantum of power transacted as well as 
the degree of certainty of availability of power.  
d. However, to encourage efficiency in short-run dispatch of electricity and 
to increase the depth of market, a discussion paper has been prepared 
by the staff of the Commission on “Market Based Economic Dispatch of 
Electricity: Re -designing of Day -Ahead Market (DAM) in 
India”. Comments from the stakeholders on the discussion paper have 
been received and the same are currently under consideration of th e 
Commission.” 
 
3.20 In regard to Power Exchanges, the Asso ciation of Power Producers (APP ) 
have submitted their views as under: 


 
20 
 
“A comparison of APPC and average price traded at Power Exchanges for 
last few years is as follows: 
Year Price of Electricity transacted through 
Power Exchanges (DAM+TAM) (/kWh) 
Average Power 
Purchase Cost 
(APPC) 
2014-15 3.50  
2015-16 2.72 3.40 
2016-17 2.50 3.40 
2017-18 3.45 3.48 
2018-19 4.26 3.53 
   
The following points may be noted:  
1. It may be noted that the power exchange price of electricity in FY18 was 
similar to the APPC while in FY 19 it was actually higher. Therefore, it 
would be wrong to state that the power being traded at the exchange is 
always cheaper.  
2. Power exchange p rice is a function of demand and supply on day 
ahead basis. Hence, the prices being discovered on power exchange are 
for deliveries the very next day and hence, reflect the short -term nature of 
such price discovery. The power contracts through other modes have a 
longer tenor and hence, must factor in additional cost towards 
uncertainties like risk of disruption of fuel supplies & transmission and 
associated inflation during the term of the contract thus increasing the cost 
of power.  
3. The power exchange p rices are determined at the Regional Periphery 
and hence, do not reflect the cost of transmission [~ INR 0.60 - 1.00 per 
kWh] of such power to the distribution utility. The power contracts through 
other modes of supplies are typically delivery contracts an d hence, factor 
the cost of transmission.  
4. Most of the power being traded in exchange usually belongs to untied 
capacities from plants which have some portions of their capacities tied 
up. Such plants, in order to reap efficiency benefits, are likely to  quote 
tariffs marginally above their variable costs on the exchanges so that their 
plant level utilization goes up. Such prices, therefore, may not be truly 
reflective of actual cost of generation and may not obtain for the generator 
a reasonable return to ensure long term sustained operations.” 
 
3.21 In regard to power exchanges, the view of some of the States are as under: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
Even after operationalization of Exchange for quite some time, the 
percentage electricity traded in the exchanges is around 6% only. This requires 
to be enhanced and to reach to 1/10th level. The rates discovered in the 
exchange are also reasonable. DISCOMS are finding it difficult to transact with 
multiple exchanges operated by different entities. This situation also resembles 
transacting and Coordinating with Traders in a OTC platforms. If one Exchange 
is operational it would be advantageous to the utilities. 

 
21 
 
In order to increase the trading in exchange, the DISCOMS should be 
freed from the long term power purchase agreements. 
Delhi: 
In the current scenario, most of the electricity demand of DISCOMS is tied 
up in long term PPAs with GENCOs (usually 25 year s). Due to this the volume 
of electricity sold/purchased through market mechanisms is very limited.  
The electricity traded power is competitively price. The system is 
transparent and efficient.  However, many times, distress bid is put by 
generating stati ons so as to keep plant running at technical minimum. 
Competition in the sector will reduce the flab, help the consumers and therefore 
must be encouraged. 
Gujarat: 
It is usually observed that other than monsoon and lean demand period, 
rate in the Power Exc hanges increases due to increase in overall buy volumes. 
During calendar year 2018 & 2019, the average Round The Clock price in 
Power Exchange is Rs. 3.90/unit & Rs. 3.10/unit respectively whereas average 
price during peak period has remained at Rs. 4.74/u nit & Rs. 3.74/unit 
respectively. 
It is also to highlight that availability of power in Power Exchanges is 
limited i.e. about 5000-8000 MW as against State’s requirement of about 17000 
MW. Thus, the entire power demand cannot be meet through Power Exchange  
at prevailing tariff. Further, the availability of power in the power exchange is 
uncertain and is subject to availability of transmission corridor. DISCOMS which 
are under Universal Supply Obligation cannot rely solely on Power Exchanges 
by shutting down  local generation which is otherwise required as per Grid 
requirement. 
Karnataka: 
There should be separate portal for sale of RE power to give premium 
price to this category which it deserves. RPO deficit States should be required 
to purchase RE power from RPO surplus States. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
At present 80 -85% of power purchase is being done through bilateral 
agreements, there is little chances of any significant changes in trading 
quantum of power through exchanges. The power exchanges are expected to 
play greater roles once the Utilities are liberated from the existing long -term 
PPAs and concept of national pooling of power is implemented. 
Odisha: 
On the other hand the power exchanges may play a bigger role once the 
utilities are liberated from the commitment of long term PPAs. 
Puducherry: 
A discount on Trading of Power from exchanges cannot be a reliable 
option as the market rate are swinging alarmingly and may affect economics of 
Discom adversely. It can only be utilized for short term period and t herefore 
power purchase through Long Term PPA is the only reliable option. 
Punjab: 

 
22 
 
The Real Time Market of Power Exchanges commencing w.e.f. 1 st June, 
2020 shall fully exploit this trading platform for trading and settlements in real 
time. As such, trading through power exchanges should be promoted for 
exchange of power between buyers and sellers at reasonable rates and to cater 
surplus/deficit of the sellers/buyers on real time basis. 
Tamil Nadu: 
● Market coupling mechanism should be implemented to ensure uniform 
pricing among power exchanges. 
● By adopting market coupling mechanism whereby collected bids from all the 
Power Exchanges are matched, afte r taking into account all bid types, 
uniform market clearing price (MCP) can be discovered and market will be 
stable. Such mechanism will avoid ambiguity among sellers and buyers 
which may encourage the market participants for more dependence. 
● More number of power exchanges should be established to enhance the 
number of participants. 
 
D. Pooling of Electricity at Central Level 
 
3.22 Below is the All India Installed Capacity (MW) Region-wise as on 30.09.2021: 
 
 
(Source: Central Electricity Authority) 
 
3.23 The Plant Load Factor s (PLF) of Coal & Lignite based power plants in the 
country from 2009-10 to 2021-22 is as under: 
Year PLF Sector-wise PLF (%) 
% Central State Private 
2009-10 77.5 85.5 70.9 83.9 
2010-11 75.1 85.1 66.7 80.7 
2011-12 73.3 82.1 68.0 69.5 
2012-13 69.9 79.2 65.6 64.1 
2013-14 65.60 76.10 59.10 62.10 
2014-15 64.46 73.96 59.83 60.58 
2015-16 62.29 72.52 55.41 60.49 
2016-17 59.88 71.98 54.35 55.73 
2017-18 60.67 72.35 56.83 55.32 
2018-19 61.07 72.64 57.81 55.24 
2019-20 55.99 64.21 50.24 54.64 
2020-21 53.37 61.78 44.68 54.27 
2021-22* 57.51 68.65 50.57 54.32 
* Upto Oct. 2021 (Provisional), Source: Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 


 
23 
 
3.24 According to a study carried by Central Electricity Authority on Optimal Generation 
Capacity mix for 2029-30, the likely All India installed capacity in 2029-30 is as follows:  
 
Fuel Type Capacity in MW % mix 
Hydro 71,128 8.70 
Coal+ Lignite 2,66,911 32.66 
Gas 25,080 3.07 
Nuclear 18,980 2.32 
Renewable capacity 4,35,155 53.25 
Total Capacity 8,17,254 100.00 
 
3.25 A plot showing the variation in demand met with respect to time is known as the 
load curve. If this curve is plotted over a period of time for 24 hours, it is known as daily 
load curve. If it is plotted for a week, month or a year it is named as weekly, monthly and 
yearly load curve respectively. The load curve reflects the activity of a population of society 
with respect to electric  power consum ption over a given period of time. Below is the 
Typical All India Load Curve: 
 
 
(Source: Electricity Demand Pattern Analysis, Vol.-I, 2016 by POSOCO) 
 
3.26 Below is the evening peak hour demand (at 1900hrs) met during the month of 
October 2021: 


 
24 
 
 
(Source: Monthly Operation Report, October, 2021, POSOCO) 
 
3.27 The Committee in their ‘Discussion Paper’ on the subject raised the following 
issues regarding the need for pooling of Power at the central level:  
i) In what manner pooling of electricity will help in  the achievement of 
rationalization of tariff in making it uniform or near-uniform?   
ii) Whether it is a feasible and attractable proposition?   
iii) What will be its impact on the current system of electricit y generation and 
supply?    
iv) Whether pooling of electricity will also incentivize inefficiency?   
 
3.28 In response, the Ministry of Power have stated that the concept of pooling of 
power of various generating stations at  the national level, irrespective of their 
efficiency on operational and financial parameters may lead to cross -subsidization of 
the inefficient plants by the efficient plants. Further,  the pooling of electricity at 
national level, may also act as a disincenti ve to the plants operating efficiently on 
technical and financial parameters. The other issue of having a common uniform tariff 
for all plants is also inconsistent with varying fuel prices throughout the country. Even 
if fuel prices are uniform, the effici ency of plants would vary & a common uniform 
tariff for all plants would be detrimental to encouraging economy and efficiency. 
Currently, the distribution companies enter into PPAs with specific generating 
stations. As such, pooling of generation may resul t in higher tariff for those 
distribution companies who have entered into PPAs with low cost generating 
stations. 
 
3.29 In regard to the concept of pooling of power, the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) has furnished their views which are as under: 
 
“The concept of pooling of power of various generating stations at national level, 
irrespective of their efficiency on operational and financial parameters may lead to 
cross-subsidization of the inefficient plants by the efficient plants. Further, poo ling 
of electricity at national level, may also act as a disincentive to the plants 
operating efficiently on technical and financial parameters. Currently, the 
distribution companies enter into PPAs with specific generating stations. As such, 


 
25 
 
pooling of ge neration may result in higher tariff for those distribution companies 
who have entered into PPAs with low cost generating stations.” 
 
3.30 The views of the Association of Power Producers (APP ) on the issue of 
pooling of electricity at the central level are as under: 
“Pooling of electricity is already being done at the retail State level where 
the State DISCOMS pool all their sources of electricity – through self -
scheduled generation from their portfolio of long -term contracts, bilateral 
transactions, power exchanges or through trades. Retail electricity tariff for 
each State is then determined based on this pool.  
Having a uniform tariff for electricity at the retail level through pooling 
would be difficult to achieve owing to Legislative issues involved as each  
State has been given legislative power to determine tariffs for their 
consumers.  
However, pooling of electricity at the national level for power purchase 
made by DISCOMS, i.e, to discover a uniform tariff for procurement of 
power by the DISCOMS, is certa inly possible and would be a welcome 
step as long as it is discovered through an open and transparent market 
mechanism based on supply and demand bids on a given day. This is 
possible by pooling power at the national level and adopting Merit Order 
Dispatch (dispatch of least cost power first) at the national level. Such a 
mechanism would involve the generators placing their bids on their 
variable/marginal cost of generation while fixed cost would be paid 
separately based on availability as per the current practice. 
Presently, the distribution utilities prepare their schedule from their 
portfolio of contracts to meet the expected demand. This process is not 
cost effective as many low cost power plants outside the state domain may 
remain unscheduled as the DISCOMS can only schedule plants with 
whom they have entitlements/contracts. A National Pool as conceptualized 
by CERC in its discussion paper on Market Based Economic Dispatch 
aims to help distribution utilities to save their power procurement costs by 
ensuring that that the most economical set of generating stations are 
despatched first, irrespective of contracts.  
Given that most bilateral contracts are long term, with pre -specified 
variable charges during the tenure of the contract, the Discussion Paper 
lays down an elaborate pricing, clearing and settlement mechanism.  
The market based system expects DISCOMS to cede the State specific 
procurement of power and dispatch functions to a centralized market 
mechanism. The system as envisaged will no doubt result  in lowering the 
procurement cost but it may remain sub -optimal if requisite policy changes 
are not made in the other sub segments of generation – fuel and 
transportation, which constitute a major component of generation cost 
(cost of coal itself constitutes about 60-70% of generation cost).  
Therefore, to maximize the benefits of centralized pool, it is imperative that 
the fuel allocation too is streamlined to ensure that fuel is allocated on the 
basis of plant efficiency, i.e on 'least energy cost basis'.  To this end, the 
link between coal supply and PPA needs to be broken and the present 
discriminatory coal allocation framework would need revisiting. 

 
26 
 
Whether pooling of electricity will also incentivize inefficiency?  
To answer this, one would have to unde rstand what kind of a pooling 
mechanism is being envisaged. Would there be some kind of a weighted 
average national tariff based on source of generation (conventional/ non -
conventional)? Or would there be a national pool where the variable cost 
alone would  be bid (as proposed by CERC in their Discussion paper on 
Market Based Economic Despatch)? According to us, In the case of the 
former, there will not be any incentive to improve efficiency and to that 
extent, yes, it will incentivize inefficiency. In the l atter case, there would be 
an incentive to improve efficiency to enable and ensure dispatch.”  
 
3.31 During the evidence held on 1st December, 2021, the Committee pointed out 
that the States are getting electricity at different rates and asked why cannot it be 
made uniform, the Chairperson, CERC deposed before the Committee as under: 
“State source power or they have power from hundreds of these things. 
One thermal power station of NTPC of say 2000 MW supplies to five 
States. It is because  power is allocated from  each thermal generation 
station. Every thermal station is different. Even in the same station it is 
unit-wise different. So, you will have 30 or 40 or 100 
sources…..Transmission charges are there on that …..Then, losses are 
depending on the distance. So, t hese are the issues that are there. We 
need to address all these issues. Sometimes the Act will come in the way” 
 
3.32 The Secretary Power, during the Sitting of the Committee held on                             
1st December, 2021, also elaborated upon the issue as under: 
“State like Bihar, power is expensive as compared to other States. The 
most important reason is that Bihar  has seen the increasing demand only 
in the recent years that is for the last 10 - 15 years. So, their assets with 
which they have entered into PPA are comparatively young. Any power 
plant has to serve the debt repayment in the initial 12 -15 years. So, its 
cost is high. Whereas the States which have seen the increased demand 
many decades before like Maharashtra, their assets have depr eciated. 
Their fixed costs have come down. More recently, with the price 
escalation, the cost of the new asset is also high. Now, new coal -based 
power plant is costing around Rs. 9 -10 crore per megawatt whereas 
earlier it used to be Rs. 3 -4 crore per megaw att. The cost is going up 
because of the general price increase in the economy and also by 
increasingly stringent standards for emission control etc …..Our approach 
has to be that when PPAs expire, then that power goes to the market pool 
and then all the St ates procure from that pool, then prices will be similar. 
That is the approach going forward.” 
 
3.33 In regard to Pooling of Electricity , the Secretary, the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy deposed before the Committee during the evidence held on                     
1st December, 2021, as under: 

 
27 
 
“
 
3.34 On the same issue, the Chairman & Managing Director, NTPC submitted 
before the Committee as under: 
 
3.35 In regard to Pooling of Electricity, the views of some of the States are as 
under: 
Delhi: 
Pooling of electricity by way of annulment of existing PPAs and bringing all 
electricity generated on a common platform would lead to determination of a 
single pooled tariff- uniform tariff across country. 
However, the above mechanism will have a negative impact on States which  
already have access to low cost generation. In such a scenario, the Central 
Government may need to intervene and create a fund for providing 
compensation to such States, in-order to promote uniform tariff. 
Since a suitable average pooled price (combinatio n of both fixed and 
energy cost of all individual generators) would be determined on a day ahead 
basis, based on the energy demand/ requirement for the subsequent day and 
the cost of generation arranged in an order from cheapest available power to 
mostly costly power, therefore it will not incentivize efficiency.  
Gujarat: 
Gujarat have over the period planned for procurement from various 
sources even through competitive bidding process. In such instances, pooling of 
electricity at national level may lead to sharing of inefficiency by various Utilities 
amongst efficient Utilities.  
 


 
28 
 
Haryana: 
The formation of power pools may help in reducing operational costs, 
reserve requirement and reliability of system.  
The states with low cost of power purchase may not find it lucrative to 
enter into the pool. 
In the first phase, plants of  NTPC/CGS may be considered for pooling. 
Variation of interstate transmission charges in lieu of pooling also needs to be 
addressed. 
Karnataka: 
● Pooling of Electricity at National level may benefit consumers if it brings 
down the cost with increased reliability and quality of power. 
● This will help in utilizing the stranded generation capacity and also 
achievement of RPO obligations in non-renewable energy States. 
● With high penetration of RE and reduction in storage costs, thermal power 
may soon become  redundant to a great extent and coal plants may face 
retirement. The proposed uniform tariff policy should help this inevitable 
factor in mind. 
The State, Central and Private generators should be properly regulated to 
run the units at higher PLF. All the Renewable Energy and Solar power units 
have must-run status which affects merit order dispatch in strict compliance in 
letter and spirit. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
Pooling of electricity will surely optimize the stranded capacity of 
Generators and ensure better util ization of fuel thereby reducing the power 
purchase cost of DISCOMS. 
The States with shortage of Power shall definitely get significant benefits in 
terms of reduced power purchase cost. There must be some mechanism that 
the States gaining on such arrangeme nts should share the fixed cost of 
Generators also so that the States with surplus power may also get some relief 
on account of fixed cost payment. 
It is felt that with evolving market, national pooling will encourage 
efficiency. 
Odisha: 
If pooling is done, the States having low-cost electricity sources will cross -
subsidize the States, which are deficit in low -cost energy sources. Not only 
pooling of generation sources is required, but also transmission assets are also 
to be pooled to reach at a Uniform Tariff. 
Some transmission lines may not be adequate to evacuate those powers. 
It will require realignment of transmission line with huge investment and will 
ultimately be passed on to the consumers increasing their Tariff. 
Puducherry: 
Pooling of electricity i s feasible only in Renewable Energy area as it is 
scattered in nature and the Power Tariff can also be made uniform. 

 
29 
 
Punjab: 
For running the lowest cost plants at full first, will not only help to reduce 
overall cost of electricity but also rationalization  of tariff in making uniform and 
incentivize in efficiency. 
Rajasthan: 
The concept of power pooling may provide: 
a.   More reliable operations 
b.   Reduction in operational cost of plants  
c.   Optimization of the reserve capacity requirements 
d.   Reduction in cost of maintenance scheduling of power plants. 
Power pooling may have potential advantages on overall cost optimization 
and asset utilization of the existing power plants. Plants which were backed 
down for high variable cost could be utilized  through optimization of fuel cost 
and a central Merit Order Despatch (MoD). Hence, it may positively impact the 
electricity generation and supply businesses. 
 
E. Point of Connection (PoC) Charges in Transmission Sector 
 
3.36 National Electricity Policy, 2005 and Tariff policy, 2006 mandates transmission 
charge sharing mechanism to be sensitive to distance, direction and quantum of flow. 
Presently, for inter -state system, Point of Connection (PoC) mechanism has been 
introduced, which is sensitive to distance, d irection and quantum of flow. Po C 
mechanism is meant to recover yearly transmission charges for inter -State 
transmission licensees as approved by the Commission under Section 62 of the Act 
or adopted by the Commission under Section 63 of the Act.  
 
3.37 The Year ly transmission charges are calculated based on CERC Tariff 
regulations or are based on discovered price through competitive bidding. The yearly 
transmission charges are to be recovered from users of ISTS based on a sharing  
mechanism which is currently Po C mechanism. Due to inherent considerations of 
distance/ direction and quantum, these PoC charges vary for different injection/ 
drawal points. 
 
3.38 The Committee in their ‘Discussion Paper’ had observed that PoC Charges 
are variable and different from State to State and point to point. The doctrine of 
direction, distance and quantum seems inexplicable. This has also contributed 
greatly in tariff differentials.  And asked whether this system (PoC Charges) can be 
rationalized and replaced with a voltage-wise system and whether voltage -wise 
technical losses can be made uniform. 
 
3.39 In reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
“Over the years the stakeholders have sought review the PoC mechanism. 
Hence the present mechanism of transmission tariff through PoC charges 
mechanism is under review by MoP and CERC.” 
 
3.40 In regard to Point of Connection (PoC) charges, Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) have state as under: 

 
30 
 
“The total transmission charges are allocated to users of ISTS under 
following components: 
 PoC charge - POC is Point of Connection charge which indicates cost of 
transmission for a particular User (mainly generator or distribution 
company) in Rs./MW/month. The methodology of allocation of charges is 
based on load flow studies. 
HVDC Ch arge - The transmission charges for HVDC systems are 
allocated based on planning and are allocated to drawing regions for 
whom the HVDC was planned. They are calculated as Rs./MW/month. 
Reliability Support Charges - All users get reliability benefits which accrue 
to the ISTS customers by virtue of operating in an integrated grid. 10% of 
Yearly Transmission charges are allocated as Reliability support charges 
on all India ISTS customers. It is specified as Rs./MW/month. 
 As stated above, the PoC charge is determined through load flow studies 
and indicates the extent of utilisation of transmission system by the ISTS 
Customer. The allocation of charges on each State depends on 
generation within the State, its drawal from inter -State transmission 
system and th e distance from generating station from where it is drawing 
the power. The charges vary from quarter to quarter for each State 
depending on load and generation for the particular quarter. 
 The prevailing PoC Regulations were notified on 15th June 2010 and were 
effective from 1st July 2011. Over the years the stakeholders have sought 
review the POC mechanism. Recently, draft CERC (Sharing of inter -state 
transmission charges and losses) Regulations, 2019 have been published 
by CERC, wherein there is a proposa l of allocation of a portion of 
transmission charges based on distance, direction and quantum of flow 
and another portion on contracted long term access and Medium term 
Open Access basis. 
 The inter-State transmission system largely comprise of 765 kV lines, 400 
kV lines and 220 kV lines. These lines are utilised by users of 
transmission i.e. generating entities and drawing entities as a meshed 
network. Open Access is provided on the entire transmission system 
without any voltage -wise segregation. A generat ing station connected at 
220 kV and sending power to another State may be utilising 765kV system 
or 400 kV systems to transmit such power. Distribution companies also 
utilise the entire transmission network to draw power from various sources 
across the Cou ntry. Hence voltage -wise system may not be possible for 
sharing of charges of inter-state transmission system. 
Voltage wise Technical losses 
Indian power system consists of transmission system of various AC 
voltage levels such as 132 kV, 220 kV, 400 kV, 765 kV which is a meshed 
network. Losses in a transmission system are due to inherent resistance 
in the system. The losses are calculated as to tal injection into the grid 
minus total drawal from grid for each Electrical region viz Northern Region, 
Western region, Southern region, Eastern Region and North -Eastern 
region. These losses are not determined voltage -wise as explained in the 
point above and that voltage -wise segregation of transmission charges is 
not possible. Similarly voltage -wise segregation of losses is not possible 

 
31 
 
and rather it is not desirable to do so because the objective is to transmit 
power from one point to other point and vol tage level is decided based on 
techno-economic analysis. A State drawing power from various sources 
makes use of entire system and segregation of losses voltage -wise is not 
possible. CERC vide its draft CERC (Sharing of inter -state transmission 
charges and  losses) Regulations 2019 has proposed that single loss for 
inter-State transmission system should be determined on All India basis.” 
 
3.41 The Association of Power Producer s (APP) have expressed their views on the 
issue of PoC mechanism as under: 
“It may be no ted that characteristic of transmission pricing is that the 
transmission charges have to be recovered in full. The  sharing of these 
charges will change within the set of payees depending upon the 
mechanism used for computation. Hence, any decrease of charges for one 
payee will definitely lead to increase of charges for other payees. This 
makes it difficult to satisfy all the stakeholders. 
Moreover, Electricity generated by a generator reaches a drawee 
customer not through a single line but through the meshe d network of 
transmission lines. As the meshed network is set up for system reliability it 
is essential that the transmission charges are charged for the entire 
system and not only for the voltage of lines which are used.  
Further, the National Electricity  Plan and the National Tariff Policy 
mandates that the tariff mechanism should be sensitive to distance, 
direction and quantum of flow. As there is bound to be tariff differences in 
the pricing of various stakeholders it would be helpful if the components of 
the tariff are explicitly mentioned. This gives a clarity to the payee on 
which charges are borne on account of reliability of system and which 
charges are borne on account of usage of the system. CERC’s draft 
regulation on Sharing of Transmission Charg es and Losses, 2019 has 
broken down the transmission charges into four components, namely, 
National Component, Regional Component, Transformers Component and 
AC System Component. The AC system component is associated with the 
usage of the transmission line s and the other three are rationalized to the 
DICs identified in these components. 
As the technical losses in the transmission system are comparatively less 
than the distribution network, an all India Average Transmission losses for 
ISTS can be calculated for ease of calculation of transmission losses. The 
same is mentioned in the CERC draft regulations.  
Hence, POC charges, to a large extent – that for the AC component – 
shall be usage dependent and will not forge uniform tariff. According to us, 
this approach is rational. Costs should be recovered from the Designated 
Users depending on the level of usage.” 
 
3.42 In regard to the issue of Point of Connection (PoC) charges, the views of some of 
the States are as under: 
 
 

 
32 
 
Andhra Pradesh: 
In the meshed network of Indian Grid, an embedded generator with 
dedicated and adequate transmission capacity in interior SR may have to 
pay for addition of an element in Tripura or Amritsar. 
Electricity / current by its character will choose least resistant path hence 
the embedded generator power may take alternate path in spite of having 
dedicated own path. Due to this embedded generator customer has to 
bear dedicated line cost and alternate path cost. 
There is lack of transparency and no natural justice, in the existing 
methodology and hence it should be rationalized and replaced with 
voltage-wise system and technical losses can be made uniform. 
Delhi: 
It is felt that POCs like a black box, and the DICs are not given much 
information about the methods and the input data w hich is fed in the 
Webnet software. 
An alternative mechanism which is simple enough for the DICs to 
understand with complete sharing of input data must be explored for 
benefit of all the stakeholders. 
Presently, DISCOMS are forced to pay the transmission charges based on 
their Long term and medium term access for the transmission assets 
which are not being used by them but reserved by the CTU for them. 
Further, in regard of the distance sensitivity at present for example the 
2 states having same quantum of power drawl, from the same distance 
and voltage level of the transmission network, may end up paying different 
amounts due to the fact that the tariff of the lines used by one state may 
be higher or lower compare to other state. The voltage level wise tari ff 
needs to be pooled for uniformity of transmission charges.  
Haryana: 
The Cost of Transmission contributes significantly in the Annual 
Revenue Requirement of Distribution Licensee. Therefore, the cost of 
transmission has huge impact on the distribution and retail supply tariff.  
Rationalization of POC Charges will definitely results in bridging the gap 
of distribution and retail supply tariff across the country.  
Karnataka: 
● The transmission charges per MW of the Central Transmission Utility 
should be calculated by considering the total transmission MW capacity 
transmitted and the total cost of the asset investment. 
● In a One Nation – One Grid scenario, there should not be any PoC 
charges ideally. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
There is strong need of rationalization of PO C charges as it lacks in 
transparency. CERC has already proposed a regulation on sharing of 
Transmission Charges and Losses which is expected to simplify the 
regime of POC charges. Since the national grid is owned and operated by 

 
33 
 
PGCIL, voltage wise techni cal losses can be considered and made 
uniform (i.e. same losses for same voltage level). 
Odisha: 
POC Calculation Methodology through changes in existing Regulations 
can bring fairness and transparency in the determination of Transmission 
Charges for Users / Designated ISTS Customers (DICs).  
Punjab: 
The matter primarily comes under the purview of CERC (as far as the 
Inter-state Charges and losses are concerned) and State commission (as 
far as the Intra -state charges and losses are concerned).  The major 
component of POC charges applicable for Inter -state system is presently 
being determined by CERC based on projected utilization for the 
upcoming quarter (3 months) and in future, this utilization/usage based 
component is proposed to be determined on the basis  of actual utilization 
for past month. 
Rajasthan: 
The current POC mechanism needs an overhaul as it currently does not 
encourage efficiency in the transmission activity and does not address the 
various concerns, including that of the RE rich states bearing  the cost of 
transmission of electricity while not consuming the power transmitted using 
ISTS network itself. 
 
F. Reduction in Cross subsidy 
 
3.43 Cross-subsidies result in lower tariffs for marginalized/poor consumers while 
having higher tariffs for Industries/commercial establishments. Tariff Policy issued by 
the Government of India provides that the Appropriate Commission shall be guided by 
the objective that the tariff progressively reflects the efficient and prudent cost of supply 
of electricity. It further provides that the consumers below the poverty line who consume 
below a specified level, as prescribed in the National Electricity Policy may receive 
special support through cross -subsidy. Tariffs for such designated group of consumers 
will be at least 50% of the average cost of supply. For achieving the objective that the 
tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity, the Appr opriate Commission 
would notify a roadmap such that tariffs are brought within ±20% of the average cost of 
supply. The road map would also have intermediate milestones, based on the approach 
of a gradual reduction in cross-subsidy. 
 
3.44 Below is the informatio n on non -reflective tariffs in respect of various States as 
provided by the Ministry of Power during the Sitting of the Committee on 06.11.2019. 
 

 
34 
 
 
 
3.45 Below is the Consumer Category-wise Sale (MU) vis-à-vis Revenue from Sale of 
power including subsidy booked for FY 2019-20: 
 
 
(Source: Report on Performance of Power Utilities, 2019-20) 
 
 
3.46 Below is the Revenue Gap without UDAY grant and Regulatory Income: 
 


 
35 
 
 
(Source: Report on Performance of Power Utilities, 2019-20) 
 
3.47 Total Borrowings for distribution utilities since 2010-11 (Rs.crore): 
 
(Source: Report on Performance of Power Utilities, 2019-20) 
 
3.48 Billing Efficiency, Collection Efficiency and AT&C Loss: 
 
(Source: Report on Performance of Power Utilities, 2019-20) 
 
3.49 As per the ‘ Report on Performance of Power Uti lities, 2019 -20’ Tariff Subsidy 
billed by distribution utilities increased from Rs 1,10,989 crore in 2018 -19 to Rs 
1,19,921 crore in 2019 -20. As a percentage of total revenue, the tariff subsidy billed by 
the utilities increased from 15.99% in 2018 -19 to 1 6.45% in 2019 -20. However, Tariff 
subsidy released by State Governments as a percentage of tariff subsidy billed by 
distribution utilities increased from 89.21% in 2018-19 to 94.65% in 2019-20.  
 


 
36 
 
3.50 The Committee in their ‘Discussion Paper’ had observed that Cross subsidy of 
the various categories of electricity consumers is a reality of the day. It has encouraged 
tariff differentials of disproportionate nature. Therefore, had asked various stakeholde rs 
the manner in which this cross -subsidy can be handled so as to protect the interest of 
the subsidized section of consumers as well as the financial health of the Discom.  
 
3.51 In a written reply, the Ministry of Power have stated as under: 
“Higher cross subsidy levels affect cross subsidizing categories adversely. 
Commercial/Industrial category of consumers results in paying higher 
tariffs affecting their competitiveness. Cross Subsidy to subsidized 
consumers results in inefficient use of electricity beca use of lower tariffs. 
The issue of cross subsidy can be effectively dealt is Appropriate 
Commissions determine the tariff within +/ - 20% of cost of supply for all 
consumers. Direct subsidy can be provided by the Government, if it wants 
to provide support to any consumer or class of consumers.” 
 
3.52 In regard to the issue of cross -subsidy, the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) submitted their view as under: 
“The Forum of Regulators commissioned a study on “Roadmap for 
Reduction in Cross -Subsidy”. The key recommendations of the study as 
approved by the Forum include the following: 
a. There is also a need to move from average cost of supply to 
category-wise cost of supply to measure the cross subsidy coverage 
as mandated by the Electricity Act, 2003. 
b. In order to assess the true impact of cross subsidy erosion and to 
take remedial measures, the first step towards addressing the cross 
subsidy issue is to determine voltage -wise and/or category-wise cost 
of supply for all States. 
c. Going forward, it is suggest ed that greater transparency be  
introduced in the methodology for publishing cross subsidies.  The 
Universal Charge Model is suggested to implement winding down of 
cross subsidies and to make up for any shortfalls in revenue that it 
may impose upon the utilities. Such shortfalls may need to be funded 
by the Government.” 
 
3.53 In regard to the issue of cross -subsidy and tariff categories the Association of 
Power Producers (APP) submitted their views as under: 
“Current Scenario:  
Till now, cross subsidization in power sector has always been distorted in 
the sense that neither group is paying the correct price for power. As a 
result, there is a possibility that two consumers having same levels of 
consumption may have to pay two diff erent tariffs despite consuming the 
same amount of power. For eg., an agricultural consumer and a LV 
commercial consumer having same levels of consumption may end up 
paying different tariffs. This is because different categories are maintained 
by the Distribution Companies and different tariffs are approved by SERCs 
for such different categories. In the above example, agricultural consumer 
is the subsidized consumer i.e. its tariff is lower than the Average Cost of 

 
37 
 
Supply ("ACoS"), let's assume it to be cur rently at a tariff of 60% of ACoS, 
whereas, the LV commercial consumer is the subsiding consumer i.e. its 
tariff is higher than the Average Cost of Supply, let's assume it to be 
currently at a tariff of 120% of ACoS.  
Proposed Scenario:  
Subsequent to rati onalization of cross -subsidization, both these 
consumers would fall under the same category and hence the tariff for 
both these consumers would work out to be equal. In such case, there can 
be two outcomes:  
Outcome 1: to keep the tariffs of agricultural c onsumer at the existing 
levels, the tariffs of LV commercial consumer would also get reduced. In 
such a scenario, the consumption of subsidized category would increase 
in the total consumer mix of the Licensee. Accordingly, to meet the ARR of 
the Licensee, either the number of subsidizing consumers has to increase, 
or the tariffs of subsiding category has to increase. This implies that there 
would be further divergence of the tariffs of subsidizing categories from 
ACoS, which would not be in line with the N ational Tariff Policy and Draft 
Amendments proposed in Electricity Act.  
Outcome 2: the other option could be to increase the tariffs of this entire 
category of agricultural consumers and LV consumer category. In this 
case, there would be a sudden tariff s hock for such agricultural 
consumers, which might lead to issues like theft etc.  
Probable Solution:  
As mentioned above, in the event of tariff rationalization, it is expected that 
both such consumer categories would come to same tariff levels either 
subsidizing category or subsidized category. For our demonstration, let's 
assume that such consumer category is considered to have tariff @ 80% 
of ACoS.  
In such scenario, A solution could be that till certain no. of years (may be 
10 years) from now, the existing structure of tariff categories may continue 
to operate till the tariffs of such consumers are brought progressively 
towards the desired level of cross subsidy i.e. in such transition period, 
tariff for agricultural consumer may be brought from current levels of 60% 
of ACoS to 80% of ACoS and that of LV commercial consumer may be 
brought from 120% of ACoS to 80% of ACoS. This transition from current 
levels of cross subsidy to desired levels of cross subsidy is to be achieved 
for each existing category of  consumer in all states by SERCs under 
supervision of Govt. of India/respective SERCs. 
The proposal below may be considered:  
• The load categories may be adopted as 0 -5 kW, 5-10 kW, 10-25 kW, 25-
100 kW and >100 kW across the board.  
• The simplification o f tariff categories and rationalization of retail tariff 
should also factor in promoting demand -based and time -of-day based 
tariffs electricity as demand during a day is not constant.  
• Along with the above simplification and rationalization of retail tar iff, it is 
also required to ensure complete FAC recovery and the mechanism to 
recover it across all categories.”  

 
38 
 
 
3.54 In regard to the issue of cross -subsidy of the various categories of electricity 
consumers, the views of some of the States are as under: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
The Government shall adopt Cost -to-Serve approach while determining   
cost of supply for each category of consumers. The tariff should 
progressively reflect the cost of supply of electricity and also reduce and 
eliminate cross- subsidies within the period specified. 
Indian industry needs cheap power in order to compete internationally. 
Cross subsidy surcharge should be removed for any industry seeking to 
buy power from the market (short term or long term). They should not be 
charged anything more than the realistic transmission charges. 
The subsidised sectors are domestic, agriculture and partly industry. The 
state governments wanting to subsidise any category of consumers may 
be allowed to do so through Direct Benefit Transfer.  
A reduction in the gap can be done by lowering power theft which gets 
classified as power losses. 
Delhi: 
The amendments to Electricity Act 2003 (EA’03) and national Tariff Policy 
(NTP) suggest capping the cross subsidies to 20%.  
The need for reduction in cross subsid ies has been fully recognized, 
however, cross subsidy is also essential to meet the objectives of the Act. 
Gujarat: 
The electricity being a commodity, the retail tariff shall be cost reflective in 
nature. However, the reasonability of tariff to any categor y of consumer 
would be contingent to consumer demography, load profile, paying 
capacity, socio-economic situation and availability of generation resources 
with the State. Alternatively, the option may be explored for direct subsidy 
benefit transfer to the needy section of society by Government. 
Haryana: 
The Section 42(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003, initially provided that cross 
subsidy surcharge and cross subsidy shall be progressively reduced and 
eliminated.  
But subsequently, it was realized that it wou ld not be possible to eliminate 
cross subsidy. Accordingly, third proviso of section 42(2) was amended 
vide amendment in the Electricity Act dated 15.06.2007, to provide that 
such surcharge and cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced in the 
manner as may be specified by the Commission' 
As of now, efforts need to be made to reduce the cross subsidy to the 
extent possible and not to eliminate it. The Government may, however, 
provide in the NTP that the cross subsidy level in the consumer tariff 
should be further brought down to ±15% from the present level of ±20% in 
a time bound manner. 
Karnataka: 
● Cross subsidy can be handled by assigning a definite quantum of units 
to the subsidized category. Over and above the consumption of the 

 
39 
 
assigned units they sh ould be charged as per the average cost of 
supply. 
● The Direct Benefit Transfer of subsidy amount may be considered if all 
the subsidized category of consumers including agriculture are 
metered, which may have to be legislatively mandated to make the goal 
achievable. 
Mizoram: 
Reduction in cost of supply, reduction of losses (technical & commercial) & 
rationalized tariff structure may help reduce cross subsidy while protecting 
the interest of consumers as well as DISCOMS. 
Rajasthan: 
In order to make DISCOMS more efficient, as highlighted by Niti Aayog in 
the energy policy, DISCOMS should pay full market determined price to 
power procedures and receive the same from customers.  Subsequently, 
the consumer can be compensated through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). 
Tamil Nadu: 
The uniform tariff could not be implemented without abolishing cross 
subsidy which varies between different states and different categories of 
consumers. 
The National Tariff Policy prescribes that the cross subsidy should be 
restricted with + 20% of Average Cost of Supply. However, in states like 
Tamil Nadu, cross subsidy varies from up to 70% of Average Cost of 
Supply. 
However the Cross subsidy shall be eliminated in a phased manner 
without tariff shock to consumers. 
Telangana: 
Whichever con sumer categories are to be subsidized, should be given 
a direct transfer of subsidy while the consumers pay the electricity bill out 
of pockets. This would also result in responsible consumption thereby 
reducing the burden of cross subsidies on other consu mers. The gap 
arrived due to the provision of lower tariffs to the needy consumers shall 
be entirely borne by the Government. 
 
 
G. Rationalization of Tariff Categories 
 
3.55 Section 62(3) of the Electricity Act, 2003, provides that the Appropriate Commission 
shall not, while determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference to any 
consumer of electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer’s load factor, 
power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity during any specified period or  the 
time at which the supply is required or the geographical position of any area, the nature of 
supply and the purpose for which the supply is required. In the light of this provision, the 
SERCs/ JERCs create different categories of consumers for the purpose of tariff.  
 
3.56 Over the years, the tariff structure across the States has become very complex and 
the consumer tariff categories are observably large in numbers. In this regard, it is often 
argued that high complexity of tariffs for each segregated category prevents cons umers 
from fully responding to tariffs due to high cost of processing the price information. Further, 
the basis for making such classifications has not been uniform across the country.  

 
40 
 
 
3.57 The Ministry of Power during the Sitting of the Committee on 06.11.20 19 had 
furnished the tables given below that shows multiple categories and tariff slabs across 
states and inconsistency in categorization of consumers across the States respectively: 
 
 
 
 
3.58 In regard to the need for rationalization of tariff structure in the country, the Ministry 
of Power have stated as: 
“Therefore, a need was felt to not only simplify and rationalize the tariff 
structure but also make it harmonious across all States. Simplification of 
tariffs is exp ected to improve transparency in setting tariffs and may well 
yield benefits including enhanced consumption, collection efficiency, along 
with bringing in governance benefits. The Ministry of Power has also 
constituted a Committee to suggest measures for “ Simplification of 
consumer categories and rationalization of Tariff Structure”. The 
Committee in its report recommended streamlining the consumers broadly 


 
41 
 
into five major categories, i.e. domestic, agriculture, commercial, industrial 
and institutional. Und er these broad categories, it was proposed to sub -
categorize the consumers on the basis of voltage. The domestic category 
may have within itself three subcategories i.e. cross -subsidizing, cross -
subsidized and cross -subsidy neutral. Further, this category may have 
lifeline category and efforts should be made to gradually phase out un -
metered, rural and urban categories. For agriculture consumers, 
consolidation of sub -categories into agriculture and agriculture -allied 
categories and efforts should be made to  dis-incentivize unmetered 
consumption. For industry category, a separate “Supported” category may 
be created to facilitate a select group of industries.” 
 
3.59 The views of some of the States in regard to rationalization of various tariff 
categories are as under: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
There should only be five categories viz.  Domestic, Commercial, 
Industrial, Institutional and Agriculture, coinciding with the allowed land use 
classification done by urban development authorities or the land classification 
done by Government. This should be standardised across the country. If the 
Governments intend to subsidise any sub -category of consumers, such sub - 
categorisation should be done at the Government end for the purpose of 
passing on DBT but not by the DISCOMS. 
Madhya Pradesh: 
The categories should be minimized and may be only based on voltage 
level of supply. (Tariff Categories may be categorized as Single -phase LT, 
Three Phase LT, 220kV, 132 kV, 66kV, 33kV, 11kV etc.). Sub -categorization of 
consumer’s categories can be considered for LT voltage level for limited groups 
such as Domestic, Non Domestic, Agriculture, LT Industry, Public Utilities. 
Odisha: 
Economic Conditions of various categories of Consumers vary from state 
to state across the Nation due to variance in topography, climatic conditions and 
natural availability of re sources etc. Therefore, respective state Commissions, 
being better aware of the ground realities in the States should determine the 
methodology for the categorization of Tariff for the state. However, the number 
of slabs and categories need to be rationalized. 
Punjab: 
The present tariff structure is very complex having several categories in its 
tariff structure based on voltage level, connected load, tariff for small industrial, 
medium industrial and large industrial consumers, Non -Residential (NRS), 
Domestic (DS), Agriculture Power (AP), Power Intensive Unit (PIU), various 
types of rebates, several type of taxes, TOD Tariff, seasonal industries’ tariff, 
street lighting, BS, consumption slabs, surcharges, Open Access etc. This has 
fed to increase in complexity of Tariff, which has made it difficult for field staff to 
implement and consumers to understand, its collection and keeping a record of 
each type. The complexity of tariff has generated a lot of complaints by the 
consumers, disputes, court cases, thereby causing loss of revenue, requirement 
of expert staff and loss of time. Therefore, it needs to be simplified. 
 
 

 
42 
 
Telangana: 
This structure can be simplified and rationalized by reduction of slabs/sub -
categories.  
The categories should be minimized and may be only based on voltage 
level of supply. For such minimum categories of consumer, subsidy if any 
provided by the Government. (Tariff Categories may be categorized 
as LT, 11kV, 33kV, 132 kV,220kV, etc.) 
The decision to provide tariff incentive from improvi ng the consumer mix 
may be left to the SERC’s. 
 
Feeder Separation 
 
3.60 Electricity is a concurrent subject and the responsibility to provide 24x7 
uninterrupted power supply to all households/villages falls under the purview of respective 
State Governments / Power Utilities.  The Ministry of Power have stated that the Feeder 
Separation is one of the important work s to supplement the goal for providing 24x7 
uninterrupted power supply and in improving the AT&C loss in the DISCOMS /Power 
Departments. The feeder se paration involves the separation of predominantly existing 
mixed category feeders (which supply electricity to all type s of  consumers including 
agriculture consumers) into agriculture and non-agriculture feeders. 
 
3.61 The Ministry of Power have stated that a s reported by State/DISCOMS to CEA (as 
on Jun  2021), there are about 1,64,057 nos of Rural feeders in the country, and out of 
these a total of 62 ,193 nos of Feeder (37.91% of Rural Feeders) are under Agriculture 
category. 4697 nos. of Feeders separated under  ongoing DDUGJY scheme as on 
31.12.2021. These agriculture feeders are the separated feeders with predominantly 
agriculture consumers. There are balance 166 feeders under DDUGJY as on 31.12.2021 
which are under reconciliation. The separation of Feeders is dynamic process to be carried 
out by States/DISCOMS.  
 
3.62 The Ministry have further stated that t hese figures correspond to the States/UTs 
where the numbers of agriculture consumers are substantial in nature in terms of energy 
consumption. As per General review 2019 -20 data of CEA, there are 12 States, namely, 
Rajasthan, Telangana, Madhya Pradesh, Kar nataka, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, 
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat) which have more than 
10% of the total energy consumption in the Agriculture category in the State /UTs. There 
are four States  in which agriculture consum ption is between 2% to 5%. The agriculture 
consumption in the remaining States/UTs is less than 2% of the total energy consumption 
where feeder separation is not preferred but some States like Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, 
Odisha, Himachal and Assam etc. have carried out some feeder separation work. 
 
3.63 In regard to state -wise status of agriculture feeder separation in the country, the 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has furnished the following information: 
 
 

 
43 
 
State/UTs 
Total No of 
Rural Feeders 
As on June 
2021 
Total No. of 
Agriculture 
feeders 
Separation 
Achieved 
Under DDUGJY 
Balance 
Feeders yet to 
be segregated  
under 
DDUGJY  
Andaman & Nicobar   37 0 0 0 
Andhra Pradesh  9,926 467 0 0 
Arunachal Pradesh   283 0 0 0 
Assam   2,000 0 0 0 
Bihar  3,817 1,291 1,291 0 
Chhattisgarh   4,455 653 163 63 
UT of DNH and Daman & 
Diu  287 0 0 0 
Goa   200 0 0 0 
Gujarat  13,104 8,792 0 0 
Haryana  10,921 4,048 3 0 
Himachal Pradesh   2114 0 0 0 
J&K  1380 5 5 16 
Jharkhand  1619 159 159 3 
 Karnataka  10,600 5,114 399 0 
 Kerala  1486 0 0 0 
 Ladakh   49 0 0 0 
 Madhya Pradesh  18,545 8,077 38 0 
 Maharashtra  14,996 9,361 459 0 
Manipur   104 0 0 0 
Meghalaya   400 0 0 0 
Mizoram   239 0 0 0 
Nagaland   193 0 0 0 
Odisha  4,388 17 17 6 
Puducherry   61 0 0 0 
Punjab  8,139 6,129 55 15 
Rajasthan  25,436 15,045 841 0 
Sikkim   154 0 0 0 
Tamil Nadu   3,099 3 0 0 
Telangana  9,636 1,765 0 0 
Tripura   333 0 0 0 
UP  11,474 750 750 0 
Uttarakhand   1325 43 43 0 
 West Bengal  3,225 474 474 16 
Lakshadweep  32 0 0 0 
Chandigarh   0 0 0 0 
Grand total 1,64,057 62,193 4,697 119 
 
***** 
 

 
44 
 
PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.  The Committee note that Electricity in India is under the concurrent list of the 
Constitution at entry number 38 in the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India and is administered both by the Central and the State 
Governments. The Ele ctricity Act, 2003 is currently the legislation governing the 
Indian Electricity Sector. The Electricity Act, 2003 provides the Central 
Government to publish the National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy, for the 
development of the power system based o n optimal utilization of resources. The 
Tariff Policy is meant to provide guidance to Regulators in tariff fixation. The 
Committee have an intention to make the power tariff not only affordable for each 
and every citizen of the country but also make the system of power tariff  simple, 
transparent and accountable.  
The Committee observe that t he c ost of supply of electricity to the 
consumer primarily consists of generation, transmission and distribution cost s. 
The Committee also note that there is a great variation in generation cost as well 
as the installation cost of power plants depending on their source, fuel, location, 
etc.  DISCOMS have made long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with 
multiple power generators at various  rates (fixed as well as variable cost) as per 
their demand and regulation obligations such as Renewable Purchase Obligation 
(RPO). Therefore, the power procurement cost by the DISCOMS varies greatly.  
Further, due to inherent considerations of distance, d irection and quantum, in the 
present mechanism for transmission of electricity i.e. Point of Connection (PoC) 
charges vary for different injection/ drawal points. Thereon, O&M Expenses, 
AT&C losses and other charges are added to the power procurement cost to 
arrive at the Average Cost of Supply (ACoS) of any DISCOM. The Committee are 
also apprised that a t the distribution level, since electricity is a concurrent 
subject, States have the right to decide the tariff across the categories of 
consumers, keeping in view the socio-economic conditions of their consumers 
and the State Government policies. The States with a view to provide lower power 
tariff to margina lized/ poor consumers use cross -subsidy as a tool. Also, many 
States have created a large number of consumer tariff categories/slabs, in some 
cases, the number is as high as 93.  

 
45 
 
The Committee, therefore, can not but conclude that the present power tariff 
structure being very complex and varied , as such there is a great need for 
rationalization of various key components of power tariff. The Committee also 
understand that having a uniform tariff across the country at present or in one go 
would be very difficult. However, the Committee are of the opinion t hat the 
Ministry should take concrete steps  in the direction of rationalization of tariff 
structure. Keeping in view that the subject is under  the concurrent list of the 
Constitution, the Central Government should undertake  comprehensive 
discussions with the State Governments to address their concerns in this regard  
so that this desired goal is achieved at some point without pitfalls. 
 
2. The Committee note that the focus of the Tariff Policy 2016 is on 4 Es: 
Electricity for all, Efficien cy to ensure affordable tariffs, Environment for a 
sustainable future, Ease of doing business to attract investments and to ensure 
financial viability. The Committee find that the goal of ‘Ele ctricity for all’ has been 
successfully achieved. In regard to E fficiency to ensure affordable tariffs, the 
Committee are of the view that in this context much more is needed to be done. 
The Country has a total installed capacity of 3,88,848 MW, whereas, the peak 
demand so far has been about 2,00,000 MW. The PLF of Coa l & Lignite based 
power plants in the country during the year was 53.37%. The under -utilization of 
such power plants lead s to the payment of fixed cost by the DISCOMS which is 
ultimately passed on to t he end consumers. The Aggregate Technical  and 
Commercial (AT&C) losses in the country is still about 21 % which needs to be 
brought down in a time-bound manner and the benefit accrued thereon should be 
passed on to the consumers in the form of lower tariff.  
The Committee also hope that on the front of ‘Environment for a 
sustainable future’, there have been sincere efforts by the Central Government by 
focusing on installation of more and more renewable energy and committing a 
target of 500 GW by the year 2030. However, it is a lso a fact that th e coal-based 
thermal power is the mainstay of the power sector in the country and will remain 
so at least during the present decade. As there is no dearth of indigenous coal in 
the country, the Committee are of the view that the endevour of the Government 
should be maximum utilization of coal -based thermal plants in the country by 
restricting their emission by various interventions including the use of carbon 

 
46 
 
capture technology. Also, the source and supply of coal to these power plants 
needs further rationa lization to bring down the generation cost. The Committee 
are of the view that much has been done by the Government for ‘Ease of doing 
business’ to attract investments and to ensure financial viability, nonetheless, the 
issue of financial viability in the distribution sector still persists. The total loss of 
distribution utilities for the year 2019-20 stands at Rs. 74,914 crore. Their revenue 
gap without the UDAY grant and Regulatory Income was Rs. 0.60 /kWh during the 
year 2018-19.   
In view of the foregoing, the Government should suitably amend the 
present Tariff Policy not only to enable it to cater  to the need s of the changed 
scenario but also to ac hieve its unaccomplished goals particularly in connection 
with the efficiency to ensure affordable tariff, rationalization to bring down the 
generation cost and financial viability in the distribution sector.  
 
3. The Committee note  that as per Tariff Policy, Two -Part Tariff Structure 
comprising fixed and variable charges has been adopted for power procured 
under medium and long term contracts by DISCOMS from Generating Stations. 
The fixed charges are reflective of capital investments and are paid based on the 
availability of the power station. The variable charges are the cost of fuel used for 
the generation of electricity. The Committee observe that various States have 
been raising the issue that they have to pay a big amount as  a fixed cost in the 
event of non -utilization of power stations. Also, they have raised the issue that 
15.5% of Return on Equity is too high and does not match the present low -
interest regime. The Committee also note that at the distribution tariff level the  
fixed cost component is not being recovered fully. The Committee do understand 
that the principal objective of the tariff policy is to essentially attract adequate 
investments in the power sector by providing an appropriate return on 
investment; nonetheless, they also believe that it should also not be aloof to the 
changed scenario. The Committee understand that i n regard to the fixed charge 
component of the power plant , there is no escape from it , however, they desire  
that the Government should earnestly explore avenues and come out with 
solutions to reduce its burden on DISCOMS, including ensuring optimum 
utilization of the generation resources.   

 
47 
 
4. The Committee note that the Electricity Act,  2003 specifies the duties of 
DISCOMS by which  they are obligated to fulfill the electricity requirements and 
demands of consumers. The Committee also concur with the view that 
maintaining the sanctity of contracts is one of the main pillars which attracts the 
confidence of both buyer and seller and i s fundamental to bring investment into 
the sector. Re -negotiation of PPAs unless mutually decided by the contracting 
parties is not desirable as it sends adverse signals to future investment.  The 
Committee further note that approximately 90% of the electr icity demand of the 
DISCOMS are met through long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs). PPAs 
are entered into between the generating companies an d the load-serving entities. 
The PPAs are commercial in nature and mutually agreed by the parties and are 
binding on them. The Committee are also aware that the major chunk of any 
DISCOM’s cost is the power purchase cost and  there are States/DISCOMS which 
have made PPAs at very high rates from the current market price  and this  
situation is putting a lot of pressure on their financial performance.  In 
Committee’s views if the same is rationalized it would immensely help in making 
power tariff affordable for the end consumers. Moreover, for having a uniform 
power tariff across the country, the State s will have to end the long -term PPAs 
with the power generating companies. The Committee, therefore, desire that in 
case both the parties agree, there s hould be a provision of review/ renegotiation 
of the PPAs. Further, the Committee also desire that gradually as and when the 
PPAs expire, they can be pooled. T he Central Government should examine this 
matter and if required, provide all possible assistance to the stakeholders so that 
instead of a zero -sum game it becomes a win-win situation for the concerned  
parties.  
 
Power Exchanges 
 
5. The Committee observe that the Power Exchanges in the country harbinger 
the possibility of having a uniform tariff across the country. The Committee are 
also of the opinion that for ushering a new era of competition and rationalization 
of power tariff of power generation of various sources, an efficient, neutral and 
transparent system of power exchanges would be required. However, at the same 
time, the Committee also find that at pres ent the power procured through power 
exchanges is less than 5% of the total electricity generated in the country which 

 
48 
 
fulfill the power demand of DISCOMS in short term. The Committee also concur 
with the view that the price of electricity being traded is not cheaper than the 
average power purchase cost, all the time. Many times, distress bid is put by 
generating stations so as to keep the plant running at a technical minimum, 
therefore, the rate therein may not be the true indicator.  Also, it is usually 
observed that other than monsoon and lean demand period, the rate in the Power 
Exchanges increases due to the increase in overall buy volumes. Moreover, the 
power exchange prices are determined at the Re gional Periphery and hence, do 
not reflect the cost of transmission.  
 During the course of detailed discussion , the Committee have found that 
most of the stakeholders are not averse to the idea of price discovery through 
Power Exchanges in a fair manner. The Committee also observe that s ince most 
of the power demands of DISCOMS are tied with long term PPAs, there is little 
scope for further growth in the trading volumes of Power Exchanges. However, in 
future, power exchanges may play a bigger role once the  utilities are liberated 
from the commitment of long term PPAs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should ensure that the Power Exchange system in the 
country develops in a manner that encourage s competition in the market leading 
to an increase in the overall efficiency of the power system. They also desire that 
there should  be an adequate number of  Power E xchanges to rule out any 
monopoly in this regard. Also, stringent regulation needs to be made  and strictly 
enforced to avoid any gaming or malpractice in power exchanges , which would 
be detrimental to consumer interest.   
 
Pooling of Electricity at Central Level 
 
6. The Committee note that the country has a total generation installed capacity 
to the tune of 3,88,848 MW, whereas, the average peak demand hover s around 
1,70,000 MW. The Plant Load Factor in respect of coal and lignite based power 
plants was 53.37% during the year 2020-21. Such power plants under State Sector 
had a PLF of 44.68% during the same period. Thi s shows the extent of the under-
utilization of those power plants. Some DISCOMS have raised the issue that since 
Solar is the daytime power and have a ‘must run’ status; they have to surrender 
some of the power of the conventional generators to accommodate  renewable 
power. This attracts payment of fixed charges on DISCOMS. The Committee also 

 
49 
 
note that the RPO trajectory which is being laid down by the Regulatory 
Commission is not being adhered to by the distribution companies. Moreover, the 
Committee are aware that the cost of installation as well as power generation , 
vary greatly from plant to plant and source to source. The Committee are also 
aware that Renewable Energy which is intermittent , needs balancing power from 
other sources for the stability of the Grid and a need for bundling of power is thus 
being felt for the firm supply of power. Some sources of power such as 
Hydropower have a higher initial cost and are also difficult to develop; however, 
once they are commissioned and fully depreciated, th ey are an excellent source 
of clean and cheap energy.  
The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that there should be an ideal 
mix of power basket not only to get clean, reliable and affordable power but also 
to optimize the generation resources. In Committee’s view there is a need to 
develop a mechanism to ensure that the power sector develop s in a desired 
manner having an ideal mix of power generation from various sources, and also 
the resources are utilized optimally. It is also desirable that there should be some 
strategic planning to reap gains in the long run. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Government should constitute an Expert Committee to examine as to 
how the pooling of power at the Central level could be done and incentivized to 
ensure an ideal mix of energy and provide electricity to all the States and UTs at 
an uniform rate. 
The Committee note that ‘Merit Order Dispatch ’ of electricity by the load 
dispatch centres through ‘Security Constrained Economic Dispatch ’ so far has 
indicated optimization of the generation across the country thereby reducing the 
production cost. The Committee also note that to help reduce electricity cost for 
consumers, the Central Government is planning for the implementation  of 
‘Market-Based Economic Despatch ’ (MBED) from 01.04.2022  on a limited scale . 
The Committee understand that t his would ensure a single price in a given time 
slot for all buyers in that time slot and would be a step forward toward One Nation 
- One Tariff . The Committ ee hope that MBED will  certainly ensure that the 
cheapest resources across the country are dispatched to meet the overall system 
demand and facilitate annual savings and desire that if this mechanism proves 
effective, it should be made more encompassing by  including all o ther power 
generating companies and be implemented in a phased manner. Further, the 

 
50 
 
Committee also desire that to maximize the gains from such a mechanism the 
fuel allocation should be streamlined on the basis of plant efficiency and 
optimum utilization of pit head plants.   
 
Point of Connection (PoC) Charges 
 
7. The Committee note that the yearly transmission charges are calculated 
based on CERC Tariff regulations or are based on discovered price through 
competitive bidding. The yearly transmission charges are to be recovered from 
users of Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) based on a sharing mechanism , 
which is currently the Point of Connection (PoC) mechanism. Due to inherent 
considerations of distance/ direction and quantum, these PoC charges vary for 
different injection/ drawal points. Many States have pointed out the need to 
rationalize the PoC mechanism as it lacks transp arency. The Committee are in 
agreement with the view that the characteristic of transmission pricing is that the 
transmission charges have to be recovered in full. The sharing of these charges 
will change within the set of payees depending upon the mechani sm used for 
computation. Hence, any decrease of charges for one payee will definitely lead to 
an increase of charges for other payees. This makes it difficult to satisfy all the 
stakeholders. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government/  CERC should form an 
Expert Committee to examine this issue. The Committee also recommend that for 
better and optimum utilization of the transmission system and realization of the 
dream of ‘One-Nation One -Grid’ in it s true spirit, the feasibility of having a 
uniform transmission charges based only on the usage in terms of MW may be 
explored by consulting the stakeholders.   
 
Cross-subsidy  
 
8. The Committee note that the Tariff Policy provides that for achieving the 
objective that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity, the 
Appropriate Commission would notify a roadmap such that tariffs are brought 
within ±20% of the  average cost of supply. The road map would also have 
intermediate milestones, based on the approach of a gradual reduction in cross -
subsidy. The response of the State Government s in regard to the restriction of 
cross-subsidy to plus -minus 20% of the Average Cost of Supply, has  been 

 
51 
 
positive and most of them have emp hasized the need to have a cost -reflective 
tariff. In view of this , the Committee recommend that there is a need not only for 
restriction of cross -subsidy within a band but also for bringin g more 
transparency in this matter for the improvement of the financial health of the 
DISCOMS. The Committee also desire that the possibility of adoption of a system 
may be examined , wherein the base tariff is the ‘Average Cost of Supply’ for all 
the categories, thereafter, plus -minus 20% is applied as the case may be for 
simplicity and transparency in tariff determination. Alternatively, the Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) of subsidy in the account of the beneficiary may also be 
examined to make the system of cross-subsidy more focused and effective.    
 
Rationalization of Tariff Categories 
 
9. The Committee find that over the years, the tariff structure across the States 
has become very complex and the consumer tariff categories are unduly large in 
numbers. In this regard, it is often argued that  the high complexity of tariffs for 
each segregated category prevents consumers from fully responding to tariffs 
due to  the high cost of processing the price information. Further, the basis for 
making such classifications has not been uniform across the country.  The 
Committee further note that t he Ministry of Power had also constituted a 
Committee to suggest measures for “Simp lification of consumer categories and 
rationalization of Tariff Structure”. The Committee in its report had recommended 
streamlining the consumers broadly into five major categories, i.e. domestic, 
agriculture, commercial, industrial and institutional. Und er these broad 
categories, it was proposed to sub -categorize the consumers on the basis of 
voltage. The domestic category may have within itself three subcategories i.e. 
cross-subsidizing, cross -subsidized and cross -subsidy neutral.  Further, this 
category may have a lifeline category and efforts should be made to gradually 
phase out un -metered, rural and urban categories. For agriculture consumers, 
consolidation of sub -categories may be made into agriculture and agriculture -
allied categories and efforts sho uld be made to dis -incentivize unmetered 
consumption. For industry category, a separate “Supported” category may be 
created to facilitate a select group of industries. 
 The Committee are of the view that rationalization of tariff structure across 
the country would not only make the process of tariff determination simpler but 

 
52 
 
would also bring more transparency and  accountability, as only the target ed and 
deserving group would get the needed benefit s. The Committee, therefore, are of 
the opinion that the said proposal for rationalization of tariff structure may 
become part of the Tariff Policy and the States be persuaded to implement this 
earnestly. The Committee also desire that the Central Government should provide 
assistance to the States which may find it difficult to implement this due to some 
practical reasons.  
 
Agriculture Feeder Separation 
 
10. The Committee note that the Feeder Separation is one of the important work s 
to supplement the goal for providing 24x7 uninterrupted power supply and in 
improving the AT&C loss in the DISCOMS /Power Departments. The Committee 
are aware that under Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY), there is 
a component for separation of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders. The feeder 
separation involves the separation of predominantly existing mixed category 
feeders (which supply electricity to all type s of consumers including agriculture 
consumers) into agriculture and non-agriculture feeders.  
In regard to  the status of feeder separation in the country, t he Ministry of 
Power have stated that there are about 1,64,057 Rural feeders in the country. And 
out of these , a total of 62,193 Feeder (37.91%) are under Agriculture category. 
They have also stated that 4,697 Feeders have been separated under the ongoing 
DDUGJY scheme a s on 31.12.2021. These agriculture feeders are the separated 
feeders with predominantly agriculture consumers. There are balance of 166 
feeders under DDUGJY as on  31.12.2021 which are under reconciliation. They 
have further stated that t he separation of Feeders is  a dynamic process to be 
carried out by States/ DISCOMS. The Committee find that the separation of 
feeders will facilitate DISCOMS to supply electricity to  the agriculture sector 
without interrupting quality and reliable power to domestic consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the view that this system would benefit consumers 
as well as DISCOMS, as the agriculture sector may get power at a supportive rate 
and the State Governments/ DISCOMS may rationalize their power procurement 
cost by resorting to Demand Side Management (DSM). The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to proactively engage with the Stat es to assess the 
quantum of work that needs to be undertaken under feeder separation by doing 

 
53 
 
Cost-Benefit Analysis , encouraging them to execute it expeditiously  and 
complete the process within a fixed timeline.  
 
Reduction of AT&C losses 
 
11. The Committee note that for the year 2018 -19, the ACoS and ARR were Rs. 
6.15/kWh and Rs. 5.55/kWh respectively with a gap of Rs. 0.60 kWh  (9.75% of 
ACoS) without UDAY Grant and Regulatory Income . The Committee further note 
that the AT&C losses for  the said period stood at 21.74%. Had the AT&C losses 
reduced even by half, the DISCOMS would have become financially viable. The 
Committee are aware that the Central Government has also been making efforts 
to reduce the AT&C losses for years , with little success as it is still at the level 
of about 21% and in some States it is as high as 60%. The Committee are aware 
that distribution of electr icity is in the domain of State s so their determination 
and active participation to bring down AT&C losses are equally important. The 
Committee in the past had examine d the subject on AT&C losses in -depth and 
found that there are majorly commercial losses and pilferages with a little share 
of technical losses. The Committee had also learnt that the reduction of AT&C 
losses is also an administrative issue and depends greatly on managerial 
interventions of the States/DISCOMS. The Central Government have been doing 
their bit by the implementation of RPDRP, A -RPDRP, IPDS and UDAY scheme s. 
However, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisitio n (SCADA) as provided under 
IPDS, enables the DISCOMS to know where the problem is and what to do. But 
ultimately, DISCOMS will have to take managerial action to address that issue. 
In the view of the Committee , there is a dire need to reduce  the AT& C 
losses swiftly by taking stricter measures, as it would not only reduce the burden 
on the exchequer but also benefit the honest consumers in the form of reduced 
power bills. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Central Government should 
persuade the State Governments and provide them all the possible assistance in 
reducing AT&C losses in a time -bound manner. The Committee also  desire that 
the success stories in regard to  the reduction of AT&C losses worth emulating 
should be propagated  and the information related to the performance  of 
DISCOMS also needs to be publicized in layman’s term s so that the public also 
becomes aware of it.   
 

 
54 
 
12.  The Committee find that the task of  providing universal access to e lectricity 
has been successfully achieved. Now, the aim is to provide ‘24x7 power to all’, a 
joint initiative of the Government of India and the States/UTs . The Committee are 
of the view that to achieve the target, the financial viability of DISCOMS is of 
utmost importance. Simultaneously, it is of paramount importance that the 
honest consumers should get quality, reliable and uninterrupted power  supply at 
reasonable rates. The Committee are also of the belief that the Distribution Sector 
needs to be made more transparent, responsive and accountable. The Central 
Government should examine the matter as to how we can gradually move to cost-
reflective tariff without increasing the burden on the common man. The 
Committee desire t hat the a udit system for DISCOMS needs to be improved and 
strengthened for better transparency . Simultaneously, interventions such as 
‘Time of Day ’ (TOD) tariff should be deployed as an important ‘Demand Side 
Management’ (DSM) measure to  incentivize consumers to shift a portion of their 
load from peak times to off -peak times, thereby improving the system load factor 
by reducing the demand on the system during peak period . This  can be thus 
implemented by the DISCOMS to reduce their expenses and for better utilization 
of generation resources.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
26th July, 2022  
Sravana 4, 1944 (Saka) 
Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
  


 
55 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2019-20) HELD ON 6th NOVEMBER, 2019 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs.  
PRESENT 
MEMBER 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
1.  Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana   
2.  Shri Harish Dwivedi 
3.  Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
4.  Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
5.  Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
6.  Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
7.  Smt. Anupriya Patel   
8.  Shri Jai Prakash 
9.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
  
                               RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
11.  Shri Vijay Goel 
12.  Shri B. K. Hariprasad 
13.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
14.  Dr. C.P. Thakur 
15.  Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Pandey   - Director 
3. Smt. L. N. Haokip   - Deputy Secretary 
   
 
  

 
56 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
    
Ministry of Power 
 
   
PSUs/Autonomous Body/Statutory Body 
 
6.  Shri Prakash Mhaske Chairperson, CEA 
7.  Shri Somit Dasgupta Member (E&C), CEA 
8.  Shri S.K. Jha Secretary, CERC 
9.  Shri Gurdeep Singh CMD, NTPC 
10.  Shri K. Sreekant CMD, PGCIL 
11.  Shri Balraj Joshi CMD, NHPC 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda and 
focus area for the discussion and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Ministry of Power made a PowerPoint presentation on the subject. 
The Secretary, Ministry of Power, also briefly apprised the Committee about the subject 
matter i.e. ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – Need for uniformity in tariff structure across the 
Country’.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Power: 
i) Determination of power tariff – Provisions of Electricity Act, 2003, guiding 
rules and regulations for determination of tariff.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name D Designation 
1.  Shri Sanjeev Nandan Sahai Secretary 
2.  Shri S.K.G. Rahate Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri M.K. Narayan Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri V.K. Dewangan Joint Secretary 

 
57 
 
ii) Authorities responsible for determination of tariff – Central Regulatory 
Commission, State Regulatory Commissions, the mandate and the 
performance so far. 
iii) Power Tariff Policy – its formulation an d objective, Tariff Policy of 2006 and 
subsequent Amendments done in the year 2008, 2011, and 2016, salient 
features of Tariff Policy of 2016, need for change in Tariff Policy. 
iv) Need to simplify the process of tariff determination and make it more 
transparent and accountable.  
v) Present tariff structure/slabs in various States – need for reduction in 
number of categories/slabs and to bring uniformity in consumer categories 
across the Country.  
vi) Reasons for poor financial conditions of DISCOMS – high AT&C losses, 
poor infrastructure and their operational efficiencies, gap in Average Cost of 
Supply and Average Revenue Receipt, delayed/non -payment of dues by the 
Government agencies. 
vii) Need for Reforms – Segregation of Content and Carriage, technological up -
gradation of infrastructure, pre -payment/timely payment of dues by the 
Government and its Agencies, installation of Smart/Pre -Paid meters, 
creation of power pool at the Central level and need for Tripartite Power 
Purchase Agreements.  
 
5. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the Ministry replied to some of the questions. The Committee directed 
the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies to the queries which could not 
be responded to by them. 
 
6. During the discussion, the Committee felt the need to examine various 
stakeholders relating to the subject. Accordingly, they decided to call representatives of  
various State Governments/ State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
(SERCs)/Independent Power Producers (IPP) in the forthcoming sittings of the 
Committee.  
 
7. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
58 
 
APPENDIX  II 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  EIGHTH  SITTING  OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON 
ENERGY(2019-20)  HELD  ON 6TH JANUARY,  2020  IN MAIN COMMITTEE  ROOM, 
PARLIAMENT  HOUSE  ANNEXE,  NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1340 hrs. 
PRESENT 
MEMBER 
LOK  SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
2. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
4. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
6. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
7. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
8. Shri Jai Prakash 
9. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
10. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
     RAJYA  SABHA 
11. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
13. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
14. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
15. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.Shri R.C. Tiwari Joint Secretary 
2.Shri N.K. Pandey Director 
      
 
  

 
59 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
MINISTRY OF POWER 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Chief Engineer 
3 Shri Prakash Mhaske Chairperson, CEA 
4 Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma Member(E&C), CEA 
 
CENTRAL  ELECTRICTY  AUTHORITY 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Prakash Mhaske Chairperson, CEA 
2 Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma Member(E&C), CEA 
 
CENTRAL  ELECTRICITY  REGULATORY  COMMISSION 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri S.C. Shrivastava CE, CERC 
2 Dr. S.K. Chatterjee Chief, CERC 
3 Smt. Rashmi Samasekharan 
Nair 
Deputy Chief, CERC 
4 Shri Rajashekhar Advisor, CERC 
 
MINISTRY  OF  NEW & RENEWABLE  ENERGY 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1 Shri Anand Kumar Secretary 
2 Shri Bhanu Pratap Yadav Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Amitesh Kumar Sinha Joint Secretary 
4 Ms. Sutapa Majumdar Economic Advisor 
5 Dr. P.C. Maithani Scientist-G 
6 Dr. Pankaj Saxena Scientist-F 
 
STATE  ELECTRICITY  REGULATORY  COMMISSIONS  
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Sanjay Kumar Singh  Secretary, U.P. Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, Lucknow 
2 Mr. D. Radhakrishna Chairman, Tripura Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
3 Dr. B. Jayasankar Director (Finance &Tariff) Kerala State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
4 Mr. Shambhu Dayal Meena 
 
Chairman, Karnataka Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
5 Shri Ramesh Kr. Chaudhary Member, Bihar Electricity Regulatory Commission 
6 Mr. Anand Kumar Chairman, Gujarat Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
7 Shri Arun Kumar Sharma  
 
Member, Chhattisgarh State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission, Raipur 

 
60 
 
8 Shri Mukul Dhariwal Member Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
9 Shri Priyabrata Patnaik Secretary, Odisha Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
10 Shri Durgadas Goswami Member, West Bengal Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
11 Shri Tarun Kumar Mukherjee  Secretary, West Bengal Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
12 Shri Tapan Kumar Chakraborty Advisor(Engg) West Bengal Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
13 Shri Sanjay Kumar Singh  Secretary,  U.P. Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, Lucknow 
14 Shri D.P. Gairola 
 
Member (Law) &Chairman (I/c) 
Uttarakhand Electricity Regulatory Commission 
15 Shri Gaurav Sabharwal 
 
Assistant Director (Finance/Tariff) Uttarakhand 
Electricity Regulatory Commission 
16 Shri Ghanashyam Patil Director (Tariff) 
Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission 
17 Shri Pravas Kumar Singh Member (Legal) 
Jharkhand Electricity Regulatory Commission 
18 Er. Pradeep Chauhan  Joint Director (Tariff) Himachal Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory Commission, Shimla 
19 Sh. B.K. Dosi Secretary, Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, 
20 Sh. Himanshu khuarana Director (Tech) cum Addl. Secretary, 
Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission 
21 Sh. Pravindra Singh Chauhan 
 
Member, Haryana Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, Panchkula 
 
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them of the agenda and focus area for the discussion and the 
provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points with 
them: 
i) Determination of power tariff – Provisions of Electricity Act, 2003, guiding 
rules and regulations for determination of tariff.  
ii) Authorities responsible for determination of tariff – Central Regulatory 
Commission, State Regulatory Commissions, the mandate a nd the 
performance so far. 
iii) Need to simplify the process of tariff determination and make it more 
transparent and accountable.  

 
61 
 
iv) Present tariff structure/slabs in various States – need for reduction in 
number of categories/slabs and to bring uniform ity in consumer categories 
across the Country.  
v) Reasons for poor financial conditions of DISCOMS. 
vi) Concept of pooling of power at the national level – its pros and cons.  
vii) Need for Reforms in Power Distribution Sector.  
 
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the Ministries/State Electricity Regulatory Commissions replied to most 
of the questions. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish 
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by them. 
 
5. During the discussion, the Committee felt the need to hear the views of the 
Independent Power Producers (IPPs). Accordingly, they decided to call representatives of 
Independent Power Producers (IPP) in the forthcoming sitting of the Committee.  
 
6. X X X X X X X X X X X X  
 
7. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
62 
 
APPENDIX -III 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2019-20) HELD ON 6TH JANUARY, 2020  IN  MAIN  COMMITTEE  ROOM, 
PARLIAMENT  HOUSE  ANNEXE,  NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 PRESENT 
 
MEMBER 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
2. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
4. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
6. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
7. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
8. Shri Jai Prakash 
9. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy 
10. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
13. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
14. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
15. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Tiwari  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri N.K. Pandey  Director 
      
 
  

 
63 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
MINISTRY OF POWER 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Aniruddha Kumar Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Chief Engineer 
3 Shri Prakash Mhaske Chairperson, CEA 
4 Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma Member(E&C), CEA 
 
CENTRAL ELECTRICTY AUTHORITY 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Prakash Mhaske Chairperson, CEA 
2 Shri Sandesh Kumar Sharma Member(E&C), CEA 
 
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSION 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri S.C. Shrivastava CE, CERC 
2 Dr. S.K. Chatterjee Chief, CERC 
3 Smt. Rashmi Samasekharan 
Nair 
Deputy Chief, CERC 
4 Shri Rajashekhar Advisor, CERC 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW & RENEWABLE ENERGY 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Anand Kumar Secretary 
2 Shri Bhanu Pratap Yadav Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Amitesh Kumar Sinha Joint Secretary 
4 Ms. Sutapa Majumdar Economic Advisor 
5 Dr. P.C. Maithani Scientist-G 
6 Dr. Pankaj Saxena Scientist-F 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS  
S.No State Name/Designation 
1 Assam Shri Niraj Verma, Pr. Secretary (Power), Government of 
Assam 
2 Bihar Shri Arun Kumar Sinha, Director(Projects),Bihar State 
Power Generation Company Ltd 
2)Sri S.K.P Singh, Director(Projects),North Bihar Power 
Distribution Co. Ltd 
3 Chhattisgarh Shri G.C. Mukherjee, Director (Commercial &Regulatory 
Affairs) Chhattisgarh State Power Distribution Company 
Limited 
4 Delhi Ms. Padmini Singla, Secretary, Power GNCT of Delhi.  
5 Gujarat Shri K.P. Jangid, GM(Commerece), GUVNL 
6 Haryana Shri Mohammad Shayin, IAS, Secretary (Power) -cum-
MD/HVPNL 

 
64 
 
7 Mizoram Er. C. Lalramliana, Joint Secretary, Power & Electricity 
Department, Government of Mizoram 
8 Karnataka Shri Mahendra Jain, Additional Chief Secretary, Energy 
Department, Government of Karnataka 
9 Madhya Pradesh Shri Nitesh Vyas, Managing Director of MP Power 
Management Co. Ltd and Secretary, Energy, Government of 
MP 
10 Odisha Shri Bishnupada Sethy, Principal Secretary, Deptt. of 
Energy,Govt of Odisha 
11 Punjab Ms. Ravneet Kaur Additional Chief Secretary,Department of 
Power, Government of Punjab 
12 Tamil Nadu Shri K. Sundaravadhanam - Director/Finance, TANGEDCO 
(ii) Shri V.Kasi - Financial Controller,TANGEDCO 
13 Telangana Shri Cherukuri Srinivasa Rao, JMD (Finance, Commercial 
and HRD) Transmission Corporation of Telangana 
14 Uttar Pradesh Shri Arvind Kumar, IAS, Private Secretary Energy, UP  
&Chairman, UPPCL 
15 Chandigarh Shri Mukesh Anand, Special Secretary (Engineering) 
U.T., Chandigarh 
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and the State Governments to the sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda and focus area for the discussion and the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points with 
them: 
i) Determination of power tariff – Provisions of Electricity Act, 2003, guiding 
rules and regulations for determination of tariff.  
ii) Need to simplify the process of tariff determination and make it more 
transparent and accountable.  
iii) Present tariff str ucture/slabs in various States – need for reduction in 
number of categories/slabs and to bring uniformity in consumer categories 
across the Country.  
iv) Reasons for poor financial conditions of DISCOMS. 
v) Concept of pooling of power at the national level – its pros and cons.  
vi) Need for Reforms in Power Distribution Sector.  
 
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the Ministries/State Governments replied to most of the questions. The 
Committee directed the representatives of the Ministries/ State Governments to furnish 
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by them. 

 
65 
 
 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
66 
 
APPENDIX -IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2019-20) HELD ON 16TH JANUARY, 2020 IN COMMITTEE ROOM - 2, BLOCK -A, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTN.  BUILDING, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 PRESENT 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
3. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
4. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
6. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
7. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
8. Shri Jai Prakash 
9. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
10. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
 
          RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
12.   Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Pandey  Director 
      
 
  

 
67 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
MINISTRY /AUTHORITY/REGULATORS 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Sandeep Naik Director 
2 Shri P.D. Siwal Member (Thermal), CEA 
3 Shri Rajesh Kumar Director, CEA 
4 Smt. Rashmi Nair Deputy Chief, CERC 
5 Shri Raja Shekhar Advisor, CERC 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation Organization 
1 Shri Ashok Khurana Director General Association of Power 
Producers 
2 Shri Suren Jain M.D. Jaiprakash Power Venutres 
Ltd. 
3 Shri Ashis Basu Co-Chairman-
Association of 
Power Producers and 
CEO  
GMR Energy Ltd. 
 
4 Shri Ved Mani Tiwari CEO Sterlite Power 
5 Shri Kush CEO Essar Power MP Ltd. 
6 Shri Bharat Rohra MD &CEO Jindal Steel &Power Ltd. 
7 Shri Ajay Kapoor Chief Legal, 
Regulatory 
&Advocacy 
Tata Power Ltd. 
8 Shri Balaji Sivan Vice President GMR Energy Ltd. 
9 Shri Dinesh Batra Vice President Hindustan Power Projects Pvt. 
Ltd. 
10 Shri Mahesh Vipradas V.P.-Regulatory 
&Power Markets 
Sembcorp Energy India Ltd. 
11 Shri Abhishek 
Chatterjee 
Asst. D.G. Association of Power 
Producers 
  
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and the Independent Power 
Producers to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda and focus area 
for the discussion and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points with 
them: 
i) Determination of power tariff – Provisions of Electricity Act, 2003, guiding 
rules and regulations for determination of tariff.  

 
68 
 
ii) Need to simplify the process of tariff determination and make it more 
transparent and accountable.  
iii) Present tariff str ucture/slabs in various States – need for reduction in 
number of categories/slabs and to bring uniformity in consumer categories 
across the Country.  
iv) Generatation Capacity in the country – need to optimally utilized the 
capacity, investment made in the generation sector. 
v) Concept of pooling of power at the national level – its pros and cons.  
vi) Need for Reforms in Power Distribution/Generation Sector.  
 
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the Ministry/Independent Power Producers replied to most of the 
questions. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministries/ State 
Governments to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by 
them. 
 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
69 
 
APPENDIX -V 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  FIFTEENTH  SITTING  OF THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON  
ENERGY (2019-20) HELD ON 3rd SEPTEMBER, 2020 IN MAIN COMMITTEE  ROOM, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
 PRESENT 
 
MEMBER 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3. Shri Chandra Shekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Jai Prakash 
7. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
8. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
9. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
10. Shri N. Uttam Kumar Reddy  
11. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
     RAJYA  SABHA 
12. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
13. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
14. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
15. Shri Nabam Rebia 
16. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Tiwari    - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Sundar Prasad Das  - Director 
      
 
 
 
  

 
70 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
S.No. Name Designation 
       Power Generating Central Power Sector Undertakings  
1 Shri Gurdeep Singh CMD, NTPC & Chairman, DVC  
2 Shri D.V. Singh CMD, THDC 
3 Shri N. L. Sharma CMD, SJVNL 
4 Shri V. K. Singh CMD, NEEPCO 
5 Er. Harminder Singh Chug Member (Power), BBMB 
6 Shri Yamuna Kumar Chaubey Director, NHPC 
7 Shri Binod Kumar Rai Resident Director, DVC 
 
      Regulators/Authority /Others 
8 Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha Secretary, CERC 
9 Shri Ajay Talegaonkar Chief Engineer (F&CA) CEA 
10 Shri K. Sreekant CMD, PGCIL 
11 Shri KVS Baba CMD, POSOCO 
 
     Ministries 
12 Shri Vivek Kumar Dewangan Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power  
13 Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power  
14 Shri J.N. Swain CMD, SECI (MNRE) 
15 Shri Tarun Singh Scientist-D Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy 
 
 
2.   X X X X X X X X X X X X  
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, CERC, CEA, PowerGrid, 
POSOCO and Power Generating Central Public Sector Undertakings - NTPC, THDC, 
NHPC, SJVNL, NEE PCO, BBMB and DVC to the sitting of the Committee and apprised 
them of the agenda and focus area for the discussion and the provisions of Directions 
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points: 
i) Determination of power tariff – provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, Power 
Tariff Policy, 2016, guiding rules and regulations for determination of tariff.  
ii) Need for change in Power Tariff Policy, 2016 - to simplify the process of tariff 
determination and make it more transparent and accountable, promoting 
competition, efficiency, and optimization in utilization of  resources.   

 
71 
 
iii) Power Generation Capacity in the country –intermittency of renewable 
energy, Grid stability, importance of hydro power and need for expeditious 
development of Hydro Power Sector. 
iv) The concept of Pooling of Power at the Central level - its need, pros and 
cons, possible difficulti es in its implementation, fixed and variable cost of 
tariff, implications of renegotiation of long term Power Purchase 
Agreements. 
v) One Nation -One Grid - significance of this concept, Point of Connections 
(PoC) charges, role of Power Exchanges in bringin g uniformity in power 
tariff. 
 
5. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the Power Generating Central Public Sector Undertakings 
(CPSUs)/Ministries/Regulators replied to some of the questions.  The Committee directed 
to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be responded. The Committee also 
directed the representatives of Power Generating Central Public Sector Undertakings to 
send their views on the matter in writing on which it could not be responded.  
 
6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
72 
 
APPENDIX -VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2020-21) HELD ON 10th AUGUST, 2021 IN MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
MEMBER 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3. Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Sanjay Haribhay Jadhav 
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
6. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
8. Shri Jai Prakash 
9. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
10. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
12. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
13. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
 
             SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 
  

 
73 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
1.  Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Gorityala Veera 
Mahendar 
Member (E&C), CEA 
3.  Shri Ajay Talegaonkar Chief Engineer, CEA 
4.  Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha Secretary,  CERC 
5.  Shri S.K. Chatterjee Chief (RA), CERC 
6.  Shri KVS Baba Chairman & Managing Director, POSOCO 
7.  Shri S. S. Barpanda Director (MO), POSOCO 
8.  Shri K. Sreekant Chairman & Managing Director, PGCIL 
9.  Shri Sunil Agrawal Executive Director (CP), PGCIL 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
10.  Shri Amitesh Kumar Joint Secretary 
11.  Shri S.K. Mishra Director(PS), SECI 
STATE GOVERNMENTS 
12.  Shri N. Srikanth Energy Secretary,  
State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh 
13.  Shri A.K. Sinha Director (Technical), BSPGCL,  
State Govt. of Bihar 
14.  Shri Satya Gopal Addl. Chief Secretary (Power),  
State Govt. of Delhi 
15.  Ms. Mamta Verma Principal Secretary (EPD),  
State Govt. of Gujarat 
16.  Shri Dharmendra Pratap 
Yadav 
Principal Secretary, Energy Department, State 
Govt. of Tamil Nadu 
17.  Shri G. Kumar Naik Additional Chief Secretary to Energy Department, 
State Govt. of Karnataka 
DISCOMS 
18.  Shri H. Haranantha Rao Chairman & Managing Director, APSPDCL, 
Andhra Pradesh 
19.  Shri A.V.L.K. Jagannadha 
Sharma 
DyEE/APPCC, Andhra Pradesh 
20.  Shri G. Ramesh DyEE/RAC, APSPDCL, Andhra Pradesh 
21.  Shri G. Anjanappa AAO/RAC, APSPDCL, Andhra Pradesh 
22.  Shri Ashok Kumar Director (Operation), SBPDCL, Bihar 
23.  Sh. Amal Sinha Director & Group CEO, BSES Rajdhani Power 
Limited, Delhi 
24.  Sh. Rajeev Chowdhury Head Regulatory, BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, 
Delhi 
25.  Sh. Rajesh Bansal Chief Executive, BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, 
Delhi 
26.  Sh. Amarjeet Singh Chief Executive, BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, 
Delhi 
27.  Shri Dhimantkumar Vyas Managing Director, PGVCL, Gujarat 
28.  Shri K.P. Jangid General Manager (Commerce), GUVCL, Gujarat 
29.  Shri Jayavibhavaswamy Managing Director, CESCOM, Karnataka 

 
74 
 
30.  Shri V. Prakash General Manager (Commercial), CESCOM, 
Karnataka 
31.  Smt. Renuka General Manager (A&R), CESCOM, Karnataka 
32.  Shri Rachappaji Manager (A&R), CESCOM, Karnataka 
33.  Smt. Latha Deputy General Manager (RA-1), CESCOM, 
Karnataka  
34.  Dr. R.C. Chetan  Director (Finance), BESCOM, Karnataka  
35.  Shri H.C. Sreerame Gowda Director (Technical), BESCOM, Karnataka 
36.  Shri Rajesh Lakhoni Principal Secretary/CMD, TANGEDCO, Tamil 
Nadu 
37.  Shri S. Shanmugam Managing Director, TANTRANSCO, Tamil Nadu 
38.  Shri P. Muthiah Additional Director, TANGEDCO, 
 Tamil Nadu 
39.  Shri B. Rajeshwari  C.F.C., TANGEDCO, Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of 
the Ministry of Power, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, CERC, CEA, 
PowerGrid, POSOCO, State Governments and DISCOMS to the sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them of  the agenda and focus area for the discussion and the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points: 
i) Need for change in Power Tariff Policy - to s implify the process of tariff 
determination and make it more transparent and accountable, promoting 
competition, efficiency, and optimization in utilization of resources.   
ii) Need for optimum utilization of Power Generation Capacity in the country –
intermittency of renewable energy, Grid stability, importance of hydro, 
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO). 
iii) The concept of Pooling of Power at the Central level - its need, pros and 
cons, possible difficulties in its implementation, fixed and variable cos t of 
tariff, implications of renegotiation of long term Power Purchase 
Agreements, Regulation of Power Supply (First Amendment) Regulations, 
2021. 
iv) One Nation -One Grid - Point of Connections charges, Power Exchanges, 
impact of new regulation related to transmission charges, Market Based 
Economic Dispatch (MBED).   

 
75 
 
v) Financial health of DICOMS – categories and sub-categories of consumers, 
cross subsidy and Direct Benefit Transfer, outstanding dues, extension of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes to Private DISCOMS.    
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives of the DISCOMS replied to some of the questions. The Committee, 
therefore, directed the DISCOMS to furnish written replies to the queries which c ould not 
be responded. The Committee also directed the DISCOMS to send their views on the 
matter in writing.  
 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
76 
 
APPENDIX -VII 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2021-22) HELD ON 1st DECEMBER, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 
‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 PRESENT 
MEMBER 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed 
3. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
4. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
5. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
7. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
8. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
9. Shri Jai Prakash 
10. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
11. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
12. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
13. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
15. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
16. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 
 
             SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

 
77 
 
WITNESSES 
S.No. Name Designation/Organization 
1 Shri P.K. Pujari  Chairperson, CERC 
2 Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha Secretary, CERC 
3 Shri Dinesh Chandra Chairperson, CEA 
4 Shri G.V. Mahendar Member (E&C), CEA 
5 Shri Ajay Talegaonkar Chief Engineer (F&CA), CEA 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) and 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them 
of the agenda viz. evidence on the subject ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – need for 
uniformity in tariff structure across the country’, the focus area for the discussion 
and the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following points: 
i) Need for change in Power Tariff Policy – need to make the system of 
power tariff simple, transparent and accountable.   
ii) The concept of Pooling of Power at the Central level - its need, pros 
and cons, possible difficulties in its implementation, fixed and 
variable cost of tariff, bundling of power. 
iii) Power Purchase Agreements (PPA) – cost-plus and competitive 
method of power tariff determination, implication of relegation of 
PPAs, Return on Equity (RoE). 
iv) One Nation-One Grid - Point of Connections (PoC) charges. 
v) Power Exchanges – their role in the changed scenario, need for   
strengthening of market surveillance system.  
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the subject 
and the representatives of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) 
and Central Electricity Authority (CEA) replied to some of the questions. The 
Committee, therefore, directed them to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be responded.  
 

 
78 
 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on 
record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
79 
 
APPENDIX –VIII 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2021-22) HELD ON 1st DECEMBER, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 
‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
PRESENT 
MEMBER 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh- Chairperson 
2. Smt. Sajda Ahmed 
3. Shri Devendra Singh Bhole 
4. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
5. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
7. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
8. Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
9. Shri Jai Prakash 
10. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
11. Shri Gnanathiraviam S. 
12. Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
13. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
15. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
16. Shri Sanjay Seth 
             SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 
 

 
80 
 
WITNESSES 
No. Name Designation 
The Ministry of Power 
1 Sh. Alok Kumar Secretary 
2 Sh. S.K.G. Rahate Additional Secretary 
3 Sh. Ghanshyam Prasad Joint Secretary 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
4 Sh. Indu Shekhar Chaturvedi Secretary 
5 Sh. Dinesh Dayanad Jagdale Joint Secretary 
6 Sh. Dipesh Pherwani Scientist-C 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy to the Sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda viz. 
evidence on the subject ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy – need for uniformity in tariff 
structure across the country’, the focus area for the discussion and the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee inter-alia deliberated upon the following 
points: 
i) Need for change in Power Tariff Policy – need to make the system of 
power tariff simple, transparent and accountable.   
ii) The concept of Pooling of Power at the Central level - its need, pros 
and cons, possible difficulties in its implementation, fixed and 
variable cost of tariff, bundling of power. 
iii) Power Purchase Agreements (PPA) - cost plus and competitive 
method of power tariff determination, implication of relegation of 
PPAs, Return on Equity (RoE). 
iv) Cross-subsidy – need for restricting cross-subsidy within a band of + 
20% of Average Cost of Supply. 
v) One Nation-One Grid – Point of Connections (PoC) charges. 
vi) Power Exchanges – their role in the changed scenario. 
vii) Need to make power tariff affordable - supply of coal to power plants.     
 

 
81 
 
4. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the 
subject and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy replied to some of the questions. The Committee, 
therefore, directed them to furnish written replies to the queries which could not 
be responded.  
 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on 
record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
82 
 
APPENDIX -IX 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2021-22)  
HELD ON 26th JULY, 2022 IN HON’BLE CHAIRPERSON’S CHAMBER,  
ROOM NO. 111, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1615 hours 
PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh   -   Chairperson 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
2.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3.  Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
4.  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
5.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
6.  Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7.  Shri Velusamy P. 
8.  Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
9.  Shri Bellana Chandra Sekhar 
10.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
12.  Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
13.  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
14.  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
15.  Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
16.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora 
 
Additional Director 
 
 
  

 
83 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about  the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) Report on the subject ‘Review of Power Tariff Policy - Need for 
uniformity in tariff structure across the Country’. 
(ii) Report on the subject ‘Evaluation of Wind Energy in India’. 
(iii) Report on action -taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in Seventeenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘Action Plan for Achievement of 175 GW Renewable 
Energy Target’. 
(iv) Report on action -taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in Eighteenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Development of Coal Blocks allocated to Power Sector 
Companies’. 
(v) Report on action -taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in Nineteenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Delay in Execution/Completion of Power Projects by 
Power Sector Companies’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports, the Committee adopted 
the aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The 
Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above -mentioned 
Reports and present the same to both Houses of the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 