            MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]   NINTH REPORT      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI    July, 2025/ Shravan, 1947 (Saka)      
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 9 
 

2 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2025-26) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to the Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2025 
 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
July, 2025/ Shravan, 1947 (Saka) 


3 
 
C O E NO. 387  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
17 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
32 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
33 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
34 
ANNEXURE 
I Letter of the Hon’ble Minister of New and Renewable 
Energy addressed to the Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region, requesting him to 
urge the North-Eastern States to submit proposals under 
different schemes of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy. 
35 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 30th July, 2025 40 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy. 
42 
      

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson  
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
11. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
12. Shri Dulu Mahato 
13. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
14. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
26. Shri R. Dharmar  
27. Shri N.R. Elango 
28. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
29. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
30. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
31. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Madhumita Assistant Committee Officer 
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha on 14th June, 2025. He has been re-nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 24th July, 2025. 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2025 
and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in this Report 
were received on 9th May, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 30th July, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                    Shrirang Appa Barne 
30th July, 2025                                         Chairperson, 
Shravan 8, 1947 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Energy 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER –I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- 
taken by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on  
12th March, 2025 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
The Report contained 09 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 
                                                                                                  Total - 09 
                         Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil                              Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Nil                                                        Total - 00 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                                    Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 

8 
 
4. The Committee further desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or 
merit comments. 
 [ 
Recommendation No. 1 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Ministry had projected the 
budgetary requirement of Rs. 41,343.19 crore for the financial year 
2025-26 against which an amount of Rs. 26,549.38 crore has been 
allocated to the Ministry. This is a reduction of about 36% in the 
allocation vis-à-vis demand. The allocated amount of Rs. 26,549.38 
crore includes Rs. 21,349.38 crore as Budget Estimates and Rs. 5,200 
crore from Sovereign Green Fund. The Committee observe that about 
91.2% budget of the Ministry is allocated for only one component i.e. 
Solar Energy. Under Solar Energy component itself, about 82.5% of the 
budget is for implementation of only one Scheme i.e. PM Surya Ghar: 
Muft Bijli Yojana. About 2.1% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities related to Wind and Small Hydro projects. 
National Bioenergy Programme has been allocated about 1.2% of the 
budget. National Green Hydrogen Mission and Green Energy Corridor 
have been allocated a budget of about 2.3% each. The Support 
Programme which includes Renewable Energy related Research & 
Development has been allocated 0.3% of the budget. The remaining 
0.6% of the Budget has been allocated for Establishment Expenditure, 
Autonomous Bodies and other Capital expenditure. The Committee 
observe that the utilization has been about 86%, 88%, 82% and 83% in 
the years 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, respectively. For the 
year 2024-25, the utilization has been about 68% (till 15.02.2025). The 
two major reasons cited by the Ministry for under-utilization of 
budgetary allocations include two consecutive waves of COVID and non-
receipt of adequate proposals from the North-Eastern States. The 
Committee understand the difficulties faced by the Ministry in effective 
implementation of Schemes during COVID pandemic. With regard to 
poor utilization in North-Eastern areas, the Committee are of the view 

9 
 
that mere allocation of funds is not enough to develop renewable energy 
sector in this area. The Committee feel that North-East region has huge 
potential of renewable energy but the region’s difficult terrain, 
economic and technological backwardness as well as lack of skilled 
manpower discourage RE developers from setting projects there. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that regular stakeholder 
consultations, additional incentivization of renewable energy 
developers and allaying apprehensions of the local communities by 
closely working with them could create suitable conditions for setting 
up of renewable energy projects in the region.” 
 
7 . In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“During the year 2024-25, a total amount of Rs.14051.88 crore 
has been utilized which is 81.23% of the Revised Estimates of 
Rs.17,298.44 crore. As additional incentivization of renewable energy 
developer in North Eastern States, provision of higher CFA than the 
standard CFA has been made under PM Surya Ghar; Muft Bijli Yojana, 
PM KUSUM, Waste to Energy Programme and Biogas Programme.  
Further, during the various review meetings taken by the Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) also, MNRE has been 
requesting all the NER States to submit proposals under the different 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry.  Hon’ble Minister of New and 
Renewable Energy vide letter dated 30.12.2024 (copy attached as 
Annexure) has also requested the Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region to request the NER States to 
submit proposals under the different schemes of MNRE.  MNRE had 
organized Chintan Shivir in Bhubaneswar during November, 2024, 
wherein a special session on Renewable Energy Integration in NE 
States was also held.  During December 2024, Hon'ble Minister of New 
and Renewable Energy during his visit to Kolkata and Agartala in 
December, 2024 had reviewed the progress of various renewable 
energy schemes in the NER region.” 
 
8. The Committee note that there has been no improvement in the 
performance of the Ministry when it comes to utilization of its budgetary 
allocation. The Committee had earlier observed that utilization during 
the years 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 stood at 86%, 88%, 
82% and 83% respectively. As per information furnished by the 

10 
 
Ministry, the Committee note that during 2024-25, the utilization has 
been 81.23%, which is the lowest during the last five years. According to 
the Ministry, two consecutive waves of COVID and non-receipt of 
adequate proposals for Renewable Energy (RE) development in North-
Eastern States have been the major reasons for under-utilization of 
budgetary allocation during the last few years. The Committee are of the 
opinion that since last two years, COVID is no longer the major factor 
affecting the budget expenditure of the Government. With regard to low 
spending in the North-Eastern States, the Committee have been of the 
view that mere allocation of funds is not enough to develop RE in the 
region. The Ministry has furnished that, apart from the provision of 
higher Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for the North-Eastern States, it 
has been requesting these States/Ministry of Development of North-
Eastern Region (MDoNER) to submit proposals under its 
schemes/programmes, organizing shivirs and the Hon’ble Minister of 
New and Renewable Energy has also been making visits to review the 
progress of RE related schemes/programmes in the region. The 
Committee while acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry, would also 
like to place that the budget utilization figures of 2024-25 clearly 
demonstrate that the Ministry’s efforts to hasten RE development in the 
North-Eastern States have not proven sufficient. The Committee are of 
the opinion that the Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Development of North-Eastern Region for encouraging States in this 
region to prioritize RE development by ensuring timely submission of 
proposals for RE projects. The Committee feel that close monitoring of 
each scheme/programme of the Ministry from inception to final CFA 
disbursement should be ensured for timely intervention and quick 
resolution of the issues. Further, the Committee would also like to re-
emphasize their earlier recommendation that regular stakeholder 
consultation and allaying apprehensions of the local communities by 
closely working with them could create suitable conditions for setting up 
RE projects in the region. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 

11 
 
“The Committee note that the Phase-I of Intra-State GEC has been 
given multiple extensions, but still the work has not been completed. 
Last year, the Ministry stated that the target envisaged under the 
Scheme viz. 9,767 Circuit Kilometers (CKM) of transmission lines and 
22,689 Mega Volt-Amperes (MVA) transformation capacity of 
substations in eight States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and 
Tamil Nadu, would be completed by March, 2025. However, as per the 
information furnished by the Ministry in February, 2025; the Intra-
State GEC Phase-I has been further delayed as the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra have sought extension 
upto June, 2025. The reasons cited by the Ministry for the incessant 
delay under the Scheme include Right of Way (RoW) issues, delay in 
issuing tenders because of delay in substation land acquisition, delay in 
award of works, court cases, forest clearances, Great Indian Bustard 
(GIB) related clearance etc. Though, the Committee recognise Right of 
Way and land acquisition as major issues in laying of transmission lines 
and setting up of substations, they are also of the view that long delays 
should not become a regular feature in every transmission project. As 
transmission infrastructure is critical for timely evacuation of power 
from renewable energy projects, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
closely coordinate with State Governments as well as other 
stakeholders to resolve the issues being faced. The Committee also 
expect timely disbursement of compensation under RoW and land 
acquisition to prevent unnecessary delays under such Schemes. With 
regard to Phase-II of Intra-State GEC, the Committee note that it is 
scheduled to be completed by 2025-26. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to regularly monitor its progress to ensure its timely 
completion. For Inter-State Transmission project in Ladakh, the 
Committee note that PowerGrid has been made the nodal agency. Being 
the dominant player in transmission sector, the Committee expect 
PowerGrid to have the technological knowhow and manpower to 
execute this project within the given budget and timeline. The 
Committee also expect the Ministry to closely monitor this ambitious 
project for its timely completion.” 
 
10. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“The phase-I of Green Energy Corridor has been delayed in the 
four states namely Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat and 

12 
 
Maharashtra due to various reasons such as Right of Way (RoW) issues, 
delay in issuing tenders because of delay in substation land acquisition, 
delay in award of works due to low bid turnout in various projects 
which resulted in retendering several times, court cases including Great 
Indian Bustard (GIB) matter, forest clearances, etc. These States have 
been given extension up to 30 June, 2025. The Ministry is providing 
70% of the CFA as advance in order to avoid delay in disbursement for 
RoW compensation and land acquisition.  Further, Ministry has 
repeatedly impressed upon the States to expedite the completion of the 
projects under this phase. 
Phase-II of GEC scheme is scheduled to be completed by FY 2025-
26. Till March 2025, out of 91 packages, 72 have been tendered. Out of 
this, 52 have been awarded. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is closely monitoring 
the status of Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) projects for power 
evacuation and grid integration of 13 GW renewable energy along with 
a 12 GWh Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) in Ladakh, ensuring 
strict adherence to timelines. The bids for the HVDC terminal stations at 
Pang and Kaithal were invited on July 18, 2024, with bid submission 
extended nine times, due to no bids received under Domestic 
Competitive Bidding (DCB). Thereafter, Ministry of Power provided 
approval to switch from DCB to Global Competitive Bidding (GCB) on 
December 27, 2024 and retendering was done on January 21, 2025. 
Status of this project by March 2025, is as under: 
• Front End Engineering and Design (FEED-1) Studies have been 
completed. 
• Basic infrastructure establishment works started at Pang. 
• LIDAR Survey for 220kV Pang-Phyang transmission line corridor 
started. 
• Land (300 Acre) for Pang has been acquired and land for Kaithal 
HVDC Terminal Stations have been identified, and acquisition is under 
progress. 
• Pre-bid studies: Completion is expected by June, 2025 and award 
of HVDC Package is expected by August, 2025 
• NIT published for 220kV Transmission line on 30.08.2024 and 
award is expected by end of April, 2025 
• ±350 kV HVDC Line NIT is expected by April, 2025 and award by 
June, 2025 
• 400 kV AC Line Package NIT is expected by May, 2025 and Award 
by July, 2025” 

13 
 
11. The Committee have been highlighting the delays under Green 
Energy Corridor (GEC), particularly under Phase-I of the scheme, which 
has been given multiple extensions. The Ministry has furnished that the 
recent extension has been given up to 30th June, 2025 on the request of 
four States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat and 
Maharashtra. As the date of extension is over, the Committee would like 
to know whether any further extension has been given to the States 
concerned. The Committee had recommended for timely disbursement 
of compensation under Right of Way (RoW) and land acquisition to 
prevent unnecessary delays under GEC. Therefore, the Committee would 
like to appreciate the Ministry for providing 70% of the Central 
Financial Assistance (CFA) as advance to avoid delays on account of 
Right of Way (RoW) compensation and land acquisition. The Ministry 
has submitted that it is repeatedly impressing upon the States to 
expedite the completion of Phase-I of GEC. The Committee are of the 
view that apart from constant urging to States, the Ministry need to 
closely work with them to intervene and resolve issues timely to ensure 
that the implementation of transmission related projects move as per 
the planned schedule. With regard to the progress of Inter-State 
Transmission System (ISTS) projects for power evacuation and grid 
integration of 13 GW renewable energy along with a 12 GWh Battery 
Energy Storage System (BESS) in Ladakh, the Ministry has furnished that 
there has been poor participation from domestic as well as global 
vendors under bids for the development of High Voltage Direct Current 
(HVDC) terminal stations at Pang and Kaithal. The Committee note that 
under Global Competitive Bidding (GCB), retendering was done on 
January 21, 2025. The Committee would also like to know whether, as on 
date, any bid has been received for the development of HVDC terminal 
stations at the two places and would also like to be apprised of the 
current status of the situation. The Committee note that absence of any 
domestic bid points towards the lack of HVDC capabilities in the country 
and therefore, would like the Ministry to work closely with the Ministry 
of Power for developing domestic manufacturing capacity related to 
HVDC infrastructure. 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that for undertaking research and 
development (R&D) in Renewable Energy (RE) sector, the Ministry is 
implementing Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD) with a total budget of Rs. 228 
crore for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. For the year 2025-26, a 
budget of Rs. 46 crore has been allocated under the Scheme. The 
Committee note constant reduction in allocations at revised stage and 
even lesser utilization since the beginning of the Scheme, except during 
2022-23 when the budget was increased by Rs. 10 crore at revised 
stage. Even last year i.e. 2024-25, the allocation of Rs. 46 crore was 
reduced to Rs. 30 crore at revised stage, out of which Rs. 26.52 crore 
has been utilized till 15th February, 2025. The Committee are of the 
view that R&D in RE needs greater focus in coming years, particularly 
considering the fact that India is still largely dependent on imports for 
meeting its requirement of Solar PV Modules as well as other RE-
related equipments.” 
 
13. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“The Renewable Energy - Research and Technology Development 
(RE-RTD) Programme is being implemented for the period from FY 
2021-22 to FY 2025-26, with a budget allocation of Rs. 228 crores.   
Since November 2022, the research and development of RE sector 
was clubbed with Ministry of Power through ‘Mission on Advanced and 
High-Impact Research’ (MAHIR)which was launched, with its 
Secretariat at CPRI, Bengaluru, to quickly identify emerging 
technologies in the power sector and develop them indigenously, at 
scale, for deployment within and outside India.  The MAHIR being 
power centric has very less focus for research in RE sector and does not 
cover the entire RE sector.  Therefore,. During 2023-24, the major R&D 
fund was surrendered due to non-sanctioning of any R&D project.  
This mechanism of MAHIR was reviewed in MNRE and a decision 
has been taken on 01.07.2024 that the R&D projects related to 
Renewable Energy sector would be exclusively dealt by MNRE and R&D 
projects will be sanctioned as per existing Renewable Energy Research 
and Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme of MNRE. This will 
help to expedite the implementation process and sanctioning of R&D 

15 
 
projects, and will enable the effective utilization of allocated funds 
meant for research, innovation and development in the RE sector. 
In the Financial Year (FY) 2024-25, the Revised Estimate (RE) of 
₹30.00 crore, utilized completely. For FY 2025-26, already committed 
expenditure stands at Rs.23 crore and upcoming projects to promote 
New Technology & Start-ups may require fund of Rs.26 crore. Thus, the 
requested fund of Rs.49 crore shall meet the current requirement, any 
additional requirement of the funds shall be compensated through 
Supplementary Demands for Grants. 
The suggestion of the committee has been noted. However, the 
Ministry has sanctioned a National Centre for Photovoltaic Research and 
Education (NCPRE) at IIT Bombay, which is actively engaged in research 
and education in solar photovoltaics, including characterization, 
simulation, and modeling. Solar PV modules, along with other 
renewable energy-related equipment, are key thrust areas of focus 
under RE-RTD. 
14. The Committee have been constantly highlighting reduction in 
budgetary allocations over the years for the Research and Development 
(R&D) related scheme, Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD), of the Ministry of new and 
Renewable Energy. The Ministry has furnished that since November 
2022, the R&D of Renewable Energy (RE) sector was clubbed with the 
Ministry of Power through ‘Mission on Advanced and High-Impact 
Research’ (MAHIR). As per the Ministry, RE-RTD Programme was 
stagnated and no R&D project could be sanctioned since November, 
2022 because MAHIR was centered around the research related to 
power sector and had very less focus on research in RE sector. The 
Ministry has further furnished that the mechanism of MAHIR was 
reviewed in MNRE and a decision was taken in July, 2024 that the R&D 
projects related to RE sector would be exclusively dealt by MNRE and 
R&D projects will be sanctioned as per existing RE-RTD Programme of 
the Ministry. The Committee would like to highlight this indifference 
towards the critical area of R&D in RE sector. The Committee believe 
that reduced focus on RE related R&D under MAHIR for two long years 
may have led to missed opportunities and delay in achieving self-
sufficiency i.e. ‘atmanirbharta’ in the manufacturing of critical 
components in RE sector. Further, the Committee are of the view that 

16 
 
such an ineffective arrangement also reflect the lack of coordination 
between the two Ministries viz. Ministry of Power and Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy. The Committee note with some satisfaction that 
atleast the fund under the Revised Estimates (RE) of 2024-25 has been 
utilized completely and for 2025-26, the Ministry has already committed 
projects for spending its R&D related budget. The Committee expect 
that, after separation from the Ministry of Power’s MAHIR, the R&D 
related projects under RE-RTD will gain momentum. Given that the 
duration of RE-RTD ends in March 2026, the Committee would also like 
to know about the planning of the Ministry for promotion of RE related 
R&D beyond the stipulated period of March 2026. 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER –II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Recommendation No. 1 
Budget Allocation and Utilization 
The Committee note that the Ministry had projected the budgetary 
requirement of Rs. 41,343.19 crore for the financial year 2025-26 against 
which an amount of Rs. 26,549.38 crore has been allocated to the Ministry. 
This is a reduction of about 36% in the allocation vis-à-vis demand. The 
allocated amount of Rs. 26,549.38 crore includes Rs. 21,349.38 crore as 
Budget Estimates and Rs. 5,200 crore from Sovereign Green Fund. The 
Committee observe that about 91.2% budget of the Ministry is allocated for 
only one component i.e. Solar Energy. Under Solar Energy component itself, 
about 82.5% of the budget is for implementation of only one Scheme i.e. PM 
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. About 2.1% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities related to Wind and Small Hydro projects. National 
Bioenergy Programme has been allocated about 1.2% of the budget. National 
Green Hydrogen Mission and Green Energy Corridor have been allocated a 
budget of about 2.3% each. The Support Programme which includes 
Renewable Energy related Research & Development has been allocated 0.3% 
of the budget. The remaining 0.6% of the Budget has been allocated for 
Establishment Expenditure, Autonomous Bodies and other Capital 
expenditure. The Committee observe that the utilization has been about 86%, 
88%, 82% and 83% in the years 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, 
respectively. For the year 2024-25, the utilization has been about 68% (till 
15.02.2025). The two major reasons cited by the Ministry for under-utilization 
of budgetary allocations include two consecutive waves of COVID and non-
receipt of adequate proposals from the North-Eastern States. The Committee 
understand the difficulties faced by the Ministry in effective implementation 
of Schemes during COVID pandemic. With regard to poor utilization in North-
Eastern areas, the Committee are of the view that mere allocation of funds is 
not enough to develop renewable energy sector in this area. The Committee 
feel that North-East region has huge potential of renewable energy but the 
region’s difficult terrain, economic and technological backwardness as well as 
lack of skilled manpower discourage RE developers from setting projects 
there. Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that regular stakeholder 
consultations, additional incentivization of renewable energy developers and 
allaying apprehensions of the local communities by closely working with them 

18 
 
could create suitable conditions for setting up of renewable energy projects in 
the region. 
Reply of the Government 
During the year 2024-25, a total amount of Rs.14051.88 crore has been 
utilized which is 81.23% of the Revised Estimates of Rs.17,298.44 crore. As 
additional incentivization of renewable energy developer in North Eastern 
States, provision of higher CFA than the standard CFA has been made under 
PM Surya Ghar; Muft Bijli Yojana, PM KUSUM, Waste to Energy Programme 
and Biogas Programme.  Further, during the various review meetings taken by 
the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) also, MNRE 
has been requesting all the NER States to submit proposals under the different 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry.  Hon’ble Minister of New and 
Renewable Energy vide letter dated 30.12.2024 (copy attached)has also 
requested the Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region to request the NER States to submit proposals under the different 
schemes of MNRE.  MNRE had organized Chintan Shivir in Bhubaneswar 
during November, 2024, wherein a special session on Renewable Energy 
Integration in NE States was also held.  During December 2024, Hon'ble 
Minister of New and Renewable Energy during his visit to Kolkata and 
Agartala in December, 2024 had reviewed the progress of various renewable 
energy schemes in the NER region.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 
The Committee note that PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana was launched on 
13th February, 2024 with the aim of installing rooftop solar plants in one 
crore households. An allocation of Rs. 20,000 crore has been made for 2025-
26. As per the information furnished by the Ministry during the Sitting of the 
Committee on 25th February, 2025, around 1.72 crore registrations have been 
done and 45.85 lakh applications have been submitted on the National Portal 
for Rooftop Solar. However, when it comes to actual installation, only around 
9.05 lakh households have been installed with solar panels and around 6 lakh 
households have received subsidies. The Ministry has further furnished that 
the target for 2025-26 is around 35 lakh installations which is around four 

19 
 
times of the current installations. The Committee are of the view that given 
the current pace of installations, achieving the target of 2025-26 will be 
challenging for the Ministry. The Committee are happy to note the measures 
taken by the Ministry to simplify the installation process viz. dedicated 
national portal, easy vendor registration, vendor training, loan availability to 
consumers, deemed technical feasibility, time-bound inspection and online 
grievance redressal tools, etc. However, the Committee are of the opinion that 
the Scheme needs to hasten its pace in terms of actual installations made. The 
Committee are of the view that for the Scheme to be successful as envisaged, 
the State Governments, DISCOMs and other stakeholders need to be fully 
onboard. The Committee recommend the Ministry to take appropriate 
measures towards increasing awareness and educating the public about the 
Scheme, preferably in their local language, highlighting the benefit of long 
term savings in their electricity bill after opting for the Scheme. The 
Committee would also recommend for strengthening the Operation & 
Maintenance clause alongwith their strict compliance which would instill 
confidence among the consumers about the long term support under the 
Scheme. With regard to Solarization of Government buildings which is also a 
component under the Scheme, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
regularly monitor their progress in order to ensure their timely completion. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has undertaken a multipronged approach to popularize the PM 
Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, utilizing all communication media like print, 
digital, outdoor, television, radio, etc., to maximize reach and awareness. This 
includes widespread newspaper advertisements in major vernacular 
languages, TV commercials on national and regional TV networks, extensive 
radio campaigns, and digital promotions via Google Display Network, website 
banners, etc. Additionally, consumer testimonials on getting zero electricity 
bills and ease of process in getting necessary approval, interviews with 
banking partners, and engaging WhatsApp channels have been used for 
creating awareness amongst the citizens. The Ministry has also leveraged 
outdoor visibility through GIFs at railway stations, hoardings and digital 
cinemas. On-ground activations such as the ‘Run for Sun’ marathon, Solar Stop 
kiosks in malls, and Solar art competition have further fostered public 
engagement. Grassroots activities like NukkadNataks have helped spread 
awareness at the local level, ensuring the scheme reaches a wide and diverse 
audience across the country. 
In addition to the above, this Ministry has been organizing Regional 
Workshops for creating focused awareness about the components and the 
benefits of the scheme. This Ministry has also been handholding vendors to 

20 
 
facilitate smooth implementation. Regular amplification and relaying of the 
scheme through social media channels has further broadened its reach. 
As a result, the PMSG: MBY has witnessed impressive progress. Under 
the scheme, a total of 50.37 lakh no of applications have been submitted on 
the National Portal as on 25th April 2025.  A total no of 12.05 lakh no of 
households have been benefitted with rooftop solar installations. An amount 
of Rs 5496.17 crore has been disbursed as Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
to 7.05 lakh no of beneficiaries under the scheme.   
Registered vendors have to provide the services to the consumers for 
repairs/maintenance of the RTS plant free of cost for 5 years period from the 
date of commissioning of the plant. Nonperforming/ under-performing 
system component will be replaced/repaired free of cost in this period. The 
consumer is provided with the warranties given by the respective OEMs on 
the system components for any future replacement of malfunctioning 
components. In all cases, the vendors are bound to adhere to the minimum 
technical specifications provided in the scheme in their installations. Further, 
all installed systems undergo inspections by the DISCOMs to ensure 
compliance with scheme guidelines before the release of CFA. 
Vendors register with the DISCOMs/ REC (the NPIA) and submit Bank 
Guarantee (BG) depending upon the category of vendor i.e. National/ Multi 
State/ State level. DISCOMs/REC can take action against vendors in case of 
non-compliance of scheme guidelines including forfeiture of BG and 
deregistering, etc.     
Provision of Brand Owners and Channel Partners w.r.t vendor 
registration has been introduced for increasing the pace of the rooftop solar 
installations with maintaining the quality and standards of installations.    
The Ministry/ NPIA is regularly coordinating with Central 
Ministries/Department and State Governments agencies or ensuring 
solarization of Government Building on priority basis. A total of 1174.21 MW 
of rooftop solar capacity has been installed on 44,998 no of government 
buildings as on 21.04.2025.    
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
PM-KUSUM  
The Committee note that PM-KUSUM Scheme was launched in March, 2019 to 
provide financial support to the farmers for installation of standalone solar 
pumps, solarization of existing grid-connected agriculture pumps and also to 

21 
 
provide the farmers an opportunity to become solar entrepreneurs by 
installing solar power plants on their barren/fallow agriculture land. The total 
central financial outlay under the Scheme is Rs. 34,422 crore and a budget of 
Rs. 2,600 crore has been allocated for the year 2025-26. The Committee 
observe that targets under different components of the Scheme could not be 
achieved and hence its timeline has been extended till March, 2026. The 
Committee note that the component-A has been brought under Agriculture 
Infrastructure Fund (AIF) as a result of which loans at a subsidized rate are 
expected to be available to farmers for setting up solar plants of size upto 2 
MW. The Committee appreciate the inclusion of the Component-A under AIF 
and hope this will provide the required impetus to encourage farmers 
towards investing in solar plants. For Component-B, during last year, the 
Committee had highlighted the inadequacy of 7.5 Horsepower (HP) solar 
pumps in drawing required quantities of water in dark zones. The Committee 
are happy to note that a provision has been made to allow higher capacity 
solar pumps in dark zones, when applied as a group viz. Farmer Producer 
Organisations (FPOs), Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), Water 
Users Association (WUA) etc. Under Component-C, the Committee note with 
satisfaction the revisions in provisions related to land, sub-station and 
development of online portal, etc. to simplify feeder level solarisation in the 
country. The Committee further observe that under Component-C, the 
allocations of non-performing States have been diverted to States like Gujarat 
and Maharashtra etc. which are capable of adding solar capacity by the end of 
the Scheme viz. March, 2026. Given the wide changes incorporated under all 
three components of the Scheme, the Committee hope that the respective 
targets for the year 2025-26 would be met. The Ministry has furnished to the 
Committee that it is working towards a proposal for the approval of the 
Expenditure Finance Committee for PM KUSUM 2.0. The Committee expect the 
new version to be robust and flexible, incorporating all the important 
learnings from the current version and addressing issues thereto. The 
Committee also anticipate that under the new version, the Ministry would 
work towards handholding the weaker States in achievement of their targets 
alongwith justifiable share of allocation to economically stronger States of the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry noted the valuable comments of the esteemed committee 
members. PM KUSUM scheme, which was started in 2019 has started picking 
up in FY 2023-24. There has been a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) 
growth of 220% in Component A, 200% in component B and 600% in 
Component C since then. As on 31.03.2025, total of 563.48 MW has been 

22 
 
installed under Component A, and more than 11.10 lakh pumps are 
solarized/installed under Component B and Component C of the scheme.  
The scheme sunset date is 31.03.2026 and there is an overwhelming 
demand of more than 40 lakh pumps from the states. The Ministry is already 
in working toward EFC note for new scheme which aims to provide farmers 
with a clean and reliable source of renewable energy for irrigation purposes. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
NATIONAL BIOENERGY PROGRAMME 
The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme has a provision 
of Central Financial Assistance for setting up of Bioenergy projects in the 
country under the three components of Biomass Programme, Waste to Energy 
Programme and Biogas Programme. The Committee observe inconsistent 
target allocation and achievement under the programme. Under Waste to 
Energy Programme, during the last five years, the achievement has 
consistently been higher than the target except during 2024-25 when 97% of 
the target has been met by 31st January, 2025.  Under Biomass Programme, 
during 2020-21 and 2021-22, the achievement was too low compared to the 
target but for the last three years, the achievement has constantly overshot 
target by huge margins. Under Biogas Programme, the achievement has been 
poor and in no year during the last five years, it has been even close to the 
target. When it comes to budgetary allocation, the Committee note that during 
last five years, the allocation has been reduced at revised stage for each year. 
The reduction was significant during 2023-24 when the estimated amount of 
Rs. 381.85 crore was reduced by a huge 80% to only Rs. 75 crore at revised 
stage. Even after this significant reduction, the entire amount was not utilized. 
Similarly, for 2024-25, the Budget Estimate of Rs. 300 crore has been reduced 
by around 62% to Rs. 185 crore at revised stage, of which only around 65% 
has been utilized till 15th February, 2025. Overall, the Committee find under-
utilization as a persistent issue under this programme. The reasons cited by 
the Ministry for low utilization of funds include delay in commissioning of 
plants, non-achievement of plant performance and delay in inspection. The 
Committee believe that the reasons cited by the Ministry for low utilization of 
funds under the National Bioenergy Programme are avoidable and could have 
been mitigated to achieve the target. The Committee are of the view that the 
Phase-I of the Scheme is nearing completion in March 2026 and yet the 
Ministry has not been able to synchronize the targets and allocations under 

23 
 
the Scheme. The Ministry has furnished that proposal for Phase-II of the 
Programme is under preparation for submission to Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). The Committee, therefore, recommend for prioritization of 
this much needed programme and urge the Ministry to closely monitor the 
projects under all three components to ensure timely inspection, 
commissioning, achievement of required plant performance as well as timely 
disbursal of subsidies. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is making all out efforts for meeting the expenditure targets 
under the 3 Components of the National Bioenergy Programme (NBP).  During 
the year 2024-25, an expenditure of Rs.160.12 crore has been incurred 
against the Revised Estimates (RE) Rs.190.00 crore, which is about 84.27%. 
Ministry is making continuous efforts to ensure timely completion of projects.  
To address the issues being faced by developers, Ministry has proposed 
suitable revisions in Biomass and Waste to Energy Scheme Guidelines which 
have been referred to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, for 
their concurrence.  In addition to above, Ministry is having regular 
consultation meetings with the developers for attaining plant performance as 
desired under the Scheme. The provision of monitoring of plant performance, 
is being ensured to assess the plant performance and timely disbursal of CFA. 
For the current FY 2025-26, realistic achievable targets are being set in 
consultation with all the stakeholders concerned. The proposal for Phase-II of 
NBP is under preparation to be sent to Department of Expenditure (DoE).      
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
WIND ENERGY 
The Committee note that against the potential of 1,164 GW of Wind energy in 
the country, the installed capacity is only around 48 GW. The Ministry has 
furnished that wind power projects are being set up by private developers 
based on techno-economic viability and the funds allocated to the Ministry is 
being utilized for meeting liabilities under Wind Generation Based Incentive 
Scheme which was operational till March, 2017. Currently, there is no Scheme 
for Onshore wind power and hence, there is no linkage between capacity 
commissioned and budgetary allocation. With regard to Offshore wind, the 
Ministry has furnished that the potential is around 70 GW in the two zones of 
Gujarat coast and Tamil Nadu coast and the first tender for development of 

24 
 
500 MW of Offshore wind energy capacity off the coast of Gujarat has already 
been floated by SECI. The Committee urge the Ministry to devise a mechanism 
to closely and effectively monitor the development of Offshore wind projects 
in the country. The Ministry has furnished that the annual manufacturing 
capacity in wind is more than 18 GW with 14 manufacturers producing nearly 
80% of the components within the country. However, the Committee note that 
components like gear box, bearings, yaw components, wind turbine 
controllers etc. are still being imported. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that adequate measures be taken by the Ministry to facilitate the 
development and indigenization of entire technology related to wind energy. 
Further, the Committee are of the view that evacuation and grid integration of 
wind power should also be planned in advance by the Ministry for proper 
utilization of the wind energy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The wind energy installed capacity has crossed 50 GW and stands at 50.04 GW 
as on 31.03.2025. 
In order to provide policy guidance and oversee the execution and 
effective implementation of specific offshore wind energy activities, National 
Offshore Wind Energy Policy has provision for Offshore Wind Energy Steering 
Committee (OWESC) under the chairmanship of Secretary, MNRE.  
Further, two task forces (each off the coast of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu) 
has been constituted under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Wind) to 
examine various issues involved in development of wind energy projects off 
the coast of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, including power off take arrangements, 
evacuation infrastructure, and port & logistic infrastructure, and recommend 
suitable measures in this regard. Several meetings of these task forces were 
convened to discuss the issues.  
In addition, a dedicated cell for offshore wind, i.e. Offshore Wind Energy 
Cell, has been constituted in the ministry to perform/ carry out the following 
activities: 
a. Signing of Lease Agreements and management of the lease. 
b. Drafting of consenting and contractual documents such as Lease 
agreement, Concessionaire Agreement, Project Implementation Agreement, 
Grid connectivity agreement, Transmission Service Agreement etc. 
c. Coordination with CTU for development of offshore and onshore 
power evacuation system and grid infrastructure planning. 
d. Drafting of Guidelines for implementation of OSW projects (with 
or without financial support). 
e. Coordination with NIWE for Guidelines for study/survey and 
project clearances. 

25 
 
f. Procedures for getting site clearances. 
g. Co-ordination with various Ministries/Departments for project 
clearances. 
h. Co-ordination with Port authorities for Port Development. 
i. Monitoring the execution/milestones achievements of the OSW 
projects. 
j. Any other activities related to offshore wind. 
In order to increase indigenization of wind energy technology, this 
Ministry has constituted a committee under the chairmanship of Director 
General, National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE). Based on the Committee’s 
recommendations, Ministry has circulated ‘Draft amendment to Procedure for 
inclusion/ updating Wind Turbine Model in the Revised List of Models and 
Manufacturers of Wind Turbines (RLMM)’ incorporating mandatory 
manufacturing of blade, tower, Gearbox and Generator in India in addition to 
Hub & Nacelle assembly for enlistment of wind turbine models in RLMM.  
Central Electricity authority (CEA) has planned evacuation and grid 
integration for 500 GW RE capacity by 2030 including wind energy and 
published a report titled “Transmission system for integration of over 500 GW 
RE capacity by 2030” in December, 2022. The report inter-alia includes the 
transmission system for evacuation of power from the potential wind zones 
identified by NIWE. In addition, Transmission system has also been planned 
for 10 GW offshore wind potential, 5 GW each off the coast of Gujarat and 
Tamil Nadu. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
SMALL HYDRO POWER (SHP) 
The Committee note that Small Hydro Power programme was discontinued 
in 2017 and since then, the budget allocations have been used to clear old 
liabilities only. The Committee observe that the target under small hydro 
over the years has remained constant at 100 MW but still it has not been 
achieved for most years. The reasons cited by the Ministry include difficult 
locations, short working season in hilly areas and natural calamities such as 
flash floods, apart from Covid outbreak. Like previous years, this year too, 
the Ministry has furnished that it is working on approval of a new SHP 
Scheme. The Committee, while acknowledging the difficulties faced in 

26 
 
developing small hydro projects, would also expect that by now, the 
Ministry should have developed the knowhow and expertise to deal with 
difficulties  associated with hydro projects. The Committee are further of 
the view that a new comprehensive Scheme would enable the Ministry to 
develop small hydro projects in a dedicated manner and therefore, urge the 
Ministry to come out with the new SHP Scheme at the earliest without any 
further delay.    
 
Reply of the Government 
A Note for Approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) was 
submitted to PMO and Cabinet Secretariat on 21.10.2024.  A meeting was held 
with PMO on the note under consideration and based on the discussions and 
suggestions, a fresh Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum is 
under preparation. Further, the recommendations of the Committee have 
been duly noted and suitable incorporations will be made in the proposed 
scheme.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
GREEN ENERGY CORRIDOR (GEC) 
The Committee note that the Phase-I of Intra-State GEC has been given 
multiple extensions, but still the work has not been completed. Last year, the 
Ministry stated that the target envisaged under the Scheme viz. 9,767 Circuit 
Kilometers (CKM) of transmission lines and 22,689 Mega Volt-Amperes (MVA) 
transformation capacity of substations in eight States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, would be completed by March, 2025. However, as 
per the information furnished by the Ministry in February, 2025; the Intra-
State GEC Phase-I has been further delayed as the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra have sought extension upto June, 2025. 
The reasons cited by the Ministry for the incessant delay under the Scheme 
include Right of Way (RoW) issues, delay in issuing tenders because of delay in 
substation land acquisition, delay in award of works, court cases, forest 

27 
 
clearances, Great Indian Bustard (GIB) related clearance etc. Though, the 
Committee recognise Right of Way and land acquisition as major issues in 
laying of transmission lines and setting up of substations, they are also of the 
view that long delays should not become a regular feature in every 
transmission project. As transmission infrastructure is critical for timely 
evacuation of power from renewable energy projects, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to closely coordinate with State Governments as well as other 
stakeholders to resolve the issues being faced. The Committee also expect 
timely disbursement of compensation under RoW and land acquisition to 
prevent unnecessary delays under such Schemes. With regard to Phase-II of 
Intra-State GEC, the Committee note that it is scheduled to be completed by 
2025-26. The Committee urge the Ministry to regularly monitor its progress to 
ensure its timely completion. For Inter-State Transmission project in Ladakh, 
the Committee note that PowerGrid has been made the nodal agency. Being 
the dominant player in transmission sector, the Committee expect PowerGrid 
to have the technological knowhow and manpower to execute this project 
within the given budget and timeline. The Committee also expect the Ministry 
to closely monitor this ambitious project for its timely completion. 
Reply of the Government 
The phase-I of Green Energy Corridor has been delayed in the four states 
namely Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra due to 
various reasons such as Right of Way (RoW) issues, delay in issuing tenders 
because of delay in substation land acquisition, delay in award of works due to 
low bid turnout in various projects which resulted in retendering several 
times, court cases including Great Indian Bustard (GIB) matter, forest 
clearances, etc. TheseStates have been given extension up to 30 June, 2025. 
The Ministry is providing 70% of the CFA as advance in order to avoid delay in 
disbursement for RoW compensation and land acquisition.  Further, Ministry 
has repeatedly impressed upon the States to expedite the completion of the 
projects under this phase. 
Phase-II of GEC scheme is scheduled to be completed by FY 2025-26. Till 
March 2025, out of 91 packages, 72 have been tendered. Out of this, 52have 
been awarded. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is closely monitoring the 
status of Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) projects for power 
evacuation and grid integration of 13 GW renewable energy along with a 12 
GWh Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) in Ladakh, ensuring strict 

28 
 
adherence to timelines. The bids for the HVDC terminal stations at Pang and 
Kaithal were invited on July 18, 2024, with bid submission extended nine 
times, due to no bids received under Domestic Competitive Bidding (DCB). 
Thereafter, Ministry of Power provided approval to switch from DCB to Global 
Competitive Bidding (GCB) on December 27, 2024 and retendering was done 
on January 21,2025. Status of this project by March 2025, is as under: 
• Front End Engineering and Design (FEED-1) Studies have been 
completed. 
• Basic infrastructure establishment works started at Pang. 
• LIDAR Survey for 220kV Pang-Phyang transmission line corridor 
started. 
• Land (300 Acre) for Pang has been acquired and land for Kaithal HVDC 
Terminal Stations have been identified, and acquisition is under progress. 
• Pre-bid studies: Completion is expected by June, 2025 and award of 
HVDC Package is expected by August, 2025 
• NIT published for 220kV Transmission line on 30.08.2024 and award is 
expected by end of April, 2025 
• ±350 kV HVDC Line NIT is expected by April, 2025 and award by June, 
2025 
• 400 kV AC Line Package NIT is expected by May, 2025 and Award by 
July, 2025 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
NATIONAL GREEN HYDROGEN MISSION 
The Committee note that the National Green Hydrogen Mission is an 
ambitious plan that is aimed at building capabilities to produce 5 million 
metric tonnes per annum (MMTPA) of Green Hydrogen by 2030. The 
Mission also aims to make India a leader in technology and manufacturing 
of electrolysers and other enabling technologies for Green Hydrogen. An 
amount of Rs. 600 crore has been allocated under the Mission for 2025-26. 
The Committee believe that India has huge potential for developing and 
exporting Green Hydrogen and therefore, would like to appreciate the 
Government for launching this Mission. The Committee agree with the 

29 
 
Ministry’s submission that Green Hydrogen can prove beneficial in ‘Hard to 
Abate’ sectors, where power from renewable energy cannot be entirely 
relied upon like Steel, Cement, Transport etc. However, the Committee also 
note that there are certain issues associated with the development of Green 
Hydrogen which require attention. First and foremost, production of Green 
Hydrogen is an expensive process. Apart from high cost, the requirement of 
huge quantities of fresh water poses immense challenge to the sector. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the view that coherent advance planning is 
necessary to build the requisite infrastructure and technology for achieving 
scale and economy in Green Hydrogen production. The Committee are 
happy to note that discussions with coastal States like Odisha is underway 
to develop common facility for desalination of sea water to fresh water. 
Such a facility could lessen the burden on the already stressed fresh water 
resource in the country. The Committee would like to emphasise the need 
for investing in R&D related to Green Hydrogen. The Committee note that 
during 2024-25, the budgetary allocation of Rs. 600 crore was reduced to 
Rs. 300 crore at revised stage, out of which only Rs. 81.15 crore has been 
utilized till 15th February, 2025. Though, the Committee recognise that 
disbursement of funds under the Mission is largely dependent upon the 
progress of developers, they are also of the view that the Ministry need to 
work closely with the developers, removing any such regulatory bottlenecks 
that are causing delays in target achievement under the Mission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under National Green Hydrogen Mission, during the year 2024-25, an 
expenditure of Rs.167.35 crore has been incurred against the Revised 
Estimates of Rs.300 crore.   
Further, for production of 1 kg of green hydrogen via electrolysis, 
around 10 litres of demineralized water is needed. Accordingly, for 5 MMT 
(Million Metric Tonnes) Green Hydrogen production capacity per annum, the 
demineralized water requirement will be about 50 Million Cubic Meter (MCM) 
per annum. 
Majority of the Green Hydrogen production plants are expected to come 
up near port locations as per the industry feedback. In such cases, desalinated 
sea water could also be used for Green Hydrogen production. 

30 
 
Under the Research & Development scheme of the Mission, 21 projects 
have been sanctioned till March 2025, with an aggregate financial support 
from the Mission of approximately ₹111 crore.  
The Ministry is actively engaging with stakeholders in the green 
hydrogen sector through regular interactions and review meetings. These 
interactions aim to identify and address the challenges faced by the industry, 
leading to the creation of a conducive and enabling ecosystem for green 
hydrogen development in India. 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME (RE-RTD)  
The Committee note that for undertaking research and development (R&D) in 
Renewable Energy (RE) sector, the Ministry is implementing Renewable 
Energy Research and Technology Development Programme (RE-RTD) with a 
total budget of Rs. 228 crore for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. For the year 
2025-26, a budget of Rs. 46 crore has been allocated under the Scheme. The 
Committee note constant reduction in allocations at revised stage and even 
lesser utilization since the beginning of the Scheme, except during 2022-23 
when the budget was increased by Rs. 10 crore at revised stage. Even last year 
i.e. 2024-25, the allocation of Rs. 46 crore was reduced to Rs. 30 crore at 
revised stage, out of which Rs. 26.52 crore has been utilized till 15th February, 
2025. The Committee are of the view that R&D in RE needs greater focus in 
coming years, particularly considering the fact that India is still largely 
dependent on imports for meeting its requirement of Solar PV Modules as 
well as other RE-related equipments.  
Reply of the Government 
The Renewable Energy - Research and Technology Development (RE-RTD) 
Programme is being implemented for the period from FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-
26, with a budget allocation of Rs. 228 crores.   
Since November 2022, the research and development of RE sector was 
clubbed with Ministry of Power through ‘Mission on Advanced and High-
Impact Research’ (MAHIR)which was launched, with its Secretariat at CPRI, 
Bengaluru, to quickly identify emerging technologies in the power sector and 

31 
 
develop them indigenously, at scale, for deployment within and outside India.  
The MAHIR being power centric has very less focus for research in RE sector 
and does not cover the entire RE sector.  Therefore, RE-RTD Programme was 
stagnated and no R&D project could be sanctioned since November, 2022. 
During 2023-24, the major R&D fund was surrendered due to non-sanctioning 
of any R&D project.  
This mechanism of MAHIR was reviewed in MNRE and a decision has 
been taken on 01.07.2024 that the R&D projects related to Renewable Energy 
sector would be exclusively dealt by MNRE and R&D projects will be 
sanctioned as per existing Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development (RE-RTD) Programme of MNRE. This will help to expedite the 
implementation process and sanctioning of R&D projects, and will enable the 
effective utilization of allocated funds meant for research, innovation and 
development in the RE sector. 
In the Financial Year (FY) 2024-25, the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹30.00 
crore, utilized completely. For FY 2025-26, already committed expenditure 
stands at Rs.23 crore and upcoming projects to promote New Technology & 
Start-ups may require fund of Rs.26 crore. Thus, the requested fund of Rs.49 
crore shall meet the current requirement, any additional requirement of the 
funds shall be compensated through Supplementary Demands for Grants. 
The suggestion of the committee has been noted. However, the Ministry 
has sanctioned a National Centre for Photovoltaic Research and Education 
(NCPRE) at IIT Bombay, which is actively engaged in research and education 
in solar photovoltaics, including characterization, simulation, and modeling. 
Solar PV modules, along with other renewable energy-related equipment, are 
key thrust areas of focus under RE-RTD. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 09.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER –III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                    Shrirang Appa Barne 
30th July, 2025                                         Chairperson, 
Shravan 8, 1947 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Energy 

'n"rlE crr?tr
Ptl/lLt-tAD .J0Sl-tI
i
i
I
i
I
dteQd d,-,aq3
D.O. No.1 17ltlilt2:O}A-Solar Energy Group
3 0 t)flc 202(
Dear Shri Scindia Ji,
Kind reference is invited to your D.O. letter No. D.O.No. EandP- 1gl53l 2024'
O/o US (EAP) daled 22nd October 2024, expressing concern regarding the low
expenditure in tlie North Eastern Region (NER) by the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy (MNRE), which is rnandate.d to spend at least 10% of its Gross Budgetary
Support (GBS) for ItJER States.
2. ln ihis regard, lwould like to inforrl you that the MNRE is implernentirrg various
schemes and programmes providing higtrer Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for
pronrotion of renewable energy projecis in the NER. Details of these schemes and
programmes are atthched as Annexure.
3. During the various review meetings taken by Ministry of DONIER, MNRE has
'been requesting all the NER States to submit proposals under the different schemes
and programmes of this Ministry, so ihatthe fund absorption in the NER States coLrld
be enhanced.
4. I uncJerstand that there are various challenges for implernenting
renewable energy projects in the NER, these include higher Levelized Cost of
Electricity (LCoE) due to low solar irradiance and less sunny days, limited land
availability, difficult terrain leading to high transportation and nranpower cost, high
plant cost for Small Hydro Pourer projects, law & order issues in ceriain States,
comparatively high gestation period, lack of awareness, lack of capacity building and
skilled manpower, etc.
5. To overcome these challenges, apart from providing higher CFA, measures are
being undertal<en by the MNRE to creaie awareness, capacity building of state
implementing agencies and skitl development through training programmes for larger
participation of stal<eholders of NER in MNRE schernes and programnres. MNRE ts
also worl<ing to formulate a special scheme specitically for NER which would be able
to show significantly higher performance in coming years
bontd....
Oflico:8tlr Floor, Alal Akshay Urja Bhawan, Opp, CGO Cornplex; Locjhl Road, New Delhi-1 10003
1 Tcl' ;011-20849102,20849103, Fax:20849101, E.mail : ofcofrnin-mrrre@gov.in' Residcncc: '11, Akbar Boad, New Delhi-110001, Tel.: 011-23014097,2309409g
Ofticc of tulP Dlrarwad : chitaguppi Hos;:ital Conrpound, sir Siddappa l(ambli Marg, Hubballi-580020 (Karnaral(a)
Tel. : 0836-2251055, 2258955, Ernail : pralhadvjoshi@grrail.corn, of liceof pralhadjoshiii@gmail,com
Annexure
srrq'ffir qnr&, e"rcr sh sFiqfr'-.6 hmq arr
rfrT stTT rfi?..'Tufi-iT s..nlTi*
'{fCd Hfc5n
tvllN|STER Or COruSUrvrf R AFF/.\IBS
FOOD & PUBLIC DISTBIBUI'IOI! AND
MII.IISTEH OF NEW & RENEWAELE ENERGY
coveRNrulrnr oF tNDtA
3{

:rerh qrd
g]qilfi / Corrtinuation,...
6.lamhopefulthatwiththeabove-meritionedmeaSures,MNREwouldbeableto
enhancetheexpenditureinNER.lwouldliketorequestyouthatNorthEasternRegion
States,tnayberequestedtosubmitproposalsunderthedifferentschemesofMNRE.
so that the allocation towards NER states cor'rld be ftrlly utilized'
7'AnystrggestionsinthisregardfromMinistryofDoNERrewelcomeandwillbe
appreciated.
With regards,
Yours SincerelY,
(-\
\..L-.--'-'\ /
(Prf lhaa Joshi)
\
i
Shri JyotiraditYa M, Scindia
t-lon'ble Ministei of Communications; and
Development of North Eastern Region,
Vigyan Bhawan Annexe'
MaLrlana Azad Road,
New Delhi 1 10011.
o(f ice:8ttr Floor. Atal Akshay uria Bhavran, opp. cGo conrplex, Lodhi Road, Nerv Delhi-1 10003
Tet. : ol 1.208491 02,'208491 03. FBx: 208491 01, E-mall I d/co(ntin-mn*@99Y11
Residoncc:11,AI<barRoacl,Nev/Dclhi'110001,Tc|.:011.23014097,23094098
Offico of MF Dharwocl I Chitaguppl Hospital ConrpotrncJ, Sir Siddappa Karnbli Marg' Hubballi'580020 (l(arnataka)
Tol. : 0836-225ross, ezlasis, Email : prattradvioshi@gmail,com, ofliceofpralhadioshiii@grnail'com
36

Annetruc
Iwaior I4NI?L Schemes/Programn1es available for NEII states
1. PI[-I/"USUM Scheme:
PIvi-l(USUM (Praclhan lvlantri I(isarr Urja Sr"traksha Evam Ulthaan
Mahabhil,an) is a llagship schernc to solan-ise agriculture sector having three
components viz (i) Corrrponerrt A - to promotc small Grid-Cdurrectec[ Solzr,r'
Power Piants, (ii) Componerrt B - inst-aliation oI st;urd-alone solar-potverecl
agricr-ritural pumps and (iii) Compgncnt C - solarisation of exislirrg grict-
copnected agricultr-tral 1:limps including thrortgh feeder-Ievel solarisation.
For NER States the cFA/incentives under PM I{USUM are as follorvs: -
i. Uncler Component A: Plocurement Based lnceulives @ Rs. 0 40 per r-tnil"
for- five ye ars will be pror.ided to DISCOIvIs for setting up of
Deccntralized Ground/ stilt lr4ounted solar Potl,er Platrts on
barrerr/fallow/pasture/nrarshl' Iand oI larmers' Sttch planLs carr be
installecl by individual farmer, Sola-r' Porver- Developer, Cooperatives,
Panchayats and Farme|s Producer Organisations, The PBI is givet: to
the DISCOMs fol a periocl of hve years from t}re Commercial Operation
Date of l-I-re plant. Thereforc, the total PBI ttrat payabie to DISCOIT4s is
upto Rs. 33 Lakh per tvl\,V
ii, Uncler both the Component-B and Con:ponent-C, the Celrtral f-inancial
Assistance (CrlA) of 5O%o of the benchmeu-k cost or Lhe tender cost,
r.vhichever is lorver is provided to the individual Iarmers/group of
faflrrers installing/solarising the agriculture pumps of capacitl' 11p 1e
7.5HP. The CFA rvill also be available for 1:ump capacitl'up to 15 FIP,
ttolvever, il rlill be r'estricted to 10% o[ totat irrstallarions ill the slate-
iii. For Feed.er Level Solarisation under comllonent C, the CFA is calcltlaLed
considering the cost o[ the so]ar power plant as Rs. 3.5 Cro|e/ MlV.
'Tlrerefore, tire cFA of 1^75cr/lvllv will be 1>rovidccl for Feeder Le.r,el
Solarisation.
2. PM Surya Ghar: Iltuft Bijli Yojana:
The Ministry is implcmcnting the PM Surya Ghar: Nlrtft Eijli Yojana targeling
installation of rooftop solar plants in 1 crore residerrtial houscholds by
providing central ltnancial assistarrce (CFA) . The scheme provides subsidy @
6OYo ol t[-re benchmark costs for the firsi two kW of rooftop solar al'icl @ 4AYo
of 'benchrnark costs for the nexl one lcW of rooftclp solar. Tire CPA rvill be
capped at 3 kw capacitS'of rooftop solar plant. Detajls of cFA amoullt lor NER
states arc as follorvs:
3+
------.-

CFA irr NER)t.
No.
Type of Rcsidentia) Segrrrcnt
RAqi.le.ntiai H;G;troi.l fadditiorral i l(WP )
Rs 33,000/klvPI Rs 19,800/kW1r2.
R";kl",1ti.l Houseirold (above 3 tcWp)-
1,"
500 l(We @3 kWp Per irouse)
No CFA3. Rs 19,800/kWP4.
3. Nationai Bioerrergy Program'me:
The IvINRE is implcmentin.g National Bioe'erry Programme for the pe-riod from
FY 2O2l-22 lo 2025-26 covering folloq'ing compollellts:
1.
o For BioCNG/Enriched Biogas/Compressed Biogas ,generation:
(Maximunt CFA- Rs. 10 crore/project)
a. BioCNG generation from neo" Biogas plant- Rs 4'0 Crore per 4800
I(g/day;
f:. giuCiV-G generation from
4800 I{g/claY;
existirrg Biogas plant- Rs 3'0 Crore per
o For Power geireration basecl on Biogas (lvlaximum CFA- Rs' 5'00
Biornass Programrne : CFA patterrrr
For Briqttette/Peltet manufacturirrg plan[s: Rs' 9'00 Lakhs/ MTPH
(Maximum CFA- Rs. 45.00 Lakh pet'project)
For Non-Torre.firecl Pcllet manufactr.Lring plant: Rs' 2l lal<hs/MJPH
procluctioncapacityor30%oltirecapitalcostconsideredfor,piar.rt
Inc.l machinery o[ i fpU pla,t, *,hic]rever is lower (Maxinrr.tm Rs. 105
lakhs per Project).
For 'lorrefied Pellel- manlifacturillg plant: Rs' 42 latchs/ MTPI-l
p."a.ioi"" capaciry or 30% of the clpital cosL consiclerecl for plant
i.nd rnacirinerj' 61 i TpH plant, u'hichever is Iorver (Ma'timr'rm Rs' 21o
lakhs per project)
por Non_dagasse coger.reratior.r projects: Rs. 40 Lal<hs/ Megarvait
(Ma;iimum CFn- R". 5.00 Crore per project)'
Waste to Energy Programme: CF'0r pattern
For Biogas generation: Rs 0'25 crore pel' I2O0O cr'tm/da1' (Ma-xirnr''im
CFA- Rs.5.0 0 crc.rre / Project)
crore/ project):
a. Po*er gencration from uew biogas 'plant: Rs 0'75 Crore per lvlW
b. Po',ver [eneration from existing biogas plant: Rs 0'5 crore / M\'V
For pog,er generation based on bio & agro-indrtstrial rvaste (other tl-ran
MSW through incineration process) : Rs' 0'40 crore/MW (lvlaurimurm CFA
- Rs.5.O0 Crorc/Projec{.)
For Biomass Gasiher for eleclricily/ thermal applications:
a.Rs'2,5OoperlcW.rvitlrdrral[r"te[errginesforelecl.ricalapplication
b. Rs. i3,OOd per kW"with 100% gas engi.es for eiectrical application
c. Rs. 2 lakh per 3O0 l<!V,r. for therrnal applications'
11.
3g

Thc eligibic CIrA. for.' NER States would be ZOok higher than Stanciald
CFA indicated abovc,
iii. 'Biogas Programnrel CFP. Pattern
o lror small biogas plants (l-25 curbic nreter/clzry l)lau[ c?rpacity): Rs.
L7000/- to Rs. 70,4O0/- pet'plant basecl o,) sjize of the plant in cr-rl:ic
meter;
o For Pou,er generation and thermal application (capacitl, ranging front
al:ove 25to2500 cubic n-ieter biogas generation per day) , 3 lo 250 klVe
Porver Getreralion capacitl, per day): Rs. 35,0O0/- to Rs. 45,000/- per
l<ilorvatt for porver generation and Rs. 17,500 /- Lo Rs. 22,5001- per
liilorvatt equivdent for thelmal applications (25 - 2500 cubic me ter/da1'
plant calracity) . The eligibie CFA for NER States rvould be 2O"h
higher than Standard CFA indicated above.
4. New Soiar Po",ver Scheme (for Tribal and PVTG Ha.bitations/ Viilages)
under PM JANIVIAN and PIt4 JUGAI
Ministry on 18..10.2024 ha.s issttecl approval-along rvith implernentalion
gr.tidelines for New Solar Porver Scheme (for tribal lrrd PVTG
Habitations/Villagcs) Lrncler Pradharr lvlantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Iviaha
Abhiyan (PM JANA4AIII) and Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Uutrat Gram Abhiyan
(PM .IUGA). The Scheme will cover electri{ication oI One Lalch un-eiectlihed
households (FII{s) in Tribal a:rci PVTG areas iclentified by Ministry of Triba.l
Affairs (MoTA) by provision of oft-grid solar systcms. The scheme includes a
provision lor proviclir:.g ol't-grid solar lighting in i50O Multi-Purpose Cerrtre,s
(MPCs) in PVTG areas as approved under PM JANMAN. Similarly, the scherne
also includes provision for sola-r'isatior: of 2000 pubiic institutions through
off-gricl solar systerns as approved nnder PM JUGA. The oii-grid solsr sl,sfgng
shall be provicied only rvhere electriciq, supply through grid is not techno-
ecqnomica.l,ly feasible. l'he financial outlay approved for Ltre schenre undcr Pr\I
JANMAN and PM JUGA is civen beloli,:al-I lvet-l
st.
No,
Compouents Central Share
l1o0%)
Approved
Financial Outlay
(in Rs. Crore)
f imeline
i. Provision of 0.3 lcW Solar
olf-grid system for I lakh
Tribal anci PVI'G HHs
Rs. 5O,000 per
Fil-l or as tr)er
actual cost
500
FY 2023.
24 to FY
2025-26z, Soiar street lighting and
provision of iighting in 15O0
MPCs of PVTG areas
Rs. I lakh pcr
MPC
15
a Solari.saLion of 2000 putrlic
institu tions throngh off-
grid solar systcms
Rs I lakh per
liW
400 FY 2024-
25 to FY
2028-29
31

40 
 
APPENDIX - I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2024-25) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-62, 
SAMVIDHAN SADAN, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
 MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne - Chairperson 
 
2.  Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4.  Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
5.  Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
6.  Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
7.  Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
8.  Shri Dulu Mahato 
9.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
10.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
12.  Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
14.  Shri R. Dharmar 
15.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took 
up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in the 1st Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Power’. 

41 
 
(ii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
(iii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 5th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses during the 
current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
09 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 
 
Total:  09 
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 
 
 