  
1  
             MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2026-27) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]   THIRTEENTH REPORT      LOK SABHA SECRET ARIAT NEW DELHI    August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka)    
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2025-26) EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 13 

 
 
2 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants  
(2026-27) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to the Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2026 
 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRET ARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 


 
 
3 
 
C O E NO. 395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

 
 
4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
28 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
52 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
53 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
54 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 4th August, 
2026. 
55 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy. 
57 
     

 
 
5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2025-26) 
 LOK SABHA 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson 
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
11. Shri Dulu Mahato 
12. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
13. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
14. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri R. Dharmar  
26. Shri Terash Gowalla* 
27. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
28. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
29. Shri Vem Narendar Reddy* 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri P. Wilson 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Atul Anand Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Md. Ragib Ansari Assistant Committee Officer 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Members of this Committee w.e.f. 3rd June, 2026 vice Smt. Mamata Mohanta and Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan who ceased to be 
Members of this Committee consequent upon their retirement form Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2026 and 9th  April, 2026 respectively. 

 
 
6 
 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Thirteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12th March, 
2026 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of 
the Government to the observations/recommendations contained in this 
Report were received on 22nd May, 2026. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 4th August, 2026 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                           Shrirang Appa Barne 
  04 August, 2026                                         Chairperson, 
Shravana 13, 1948 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy (2025-26) deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Twelfth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for 
Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
2.  The Twelfth Report was presented to the  Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2026 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 
10 Observations/Recommendations.  
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and10 
       Total – 10 
Chapter II 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL       
     Total – 00 
Chapter III 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
NIL      
 Total – 00  
Chapter IV 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
NIL                    Total – 00 
Chapter V 

 
 
8 
 
4.  The Committee further desire that Action-taken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.   
 
A. BUDGET ALLOCATION OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation No.1 
6.    The Committee had recommended as under:   
“The Committee noted that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE) had projected the budgetary requirement of Rs. 45,806.61 crore for 
the financial year 2026-27, against which an amount of Rs. 32,914.67 crore 
has been allocated to the Ministry. This is a reduction of about 28% in the 
allocation vis-à-vis demand. The allocated amount of Rs. 32,914.67 crore 
included Rs. 32,911.14 crore as Revenue Head and Rs. 3.53 crore as 
Capital Head. While the fund in Revenue Head is mostly utilized by the 
Ministry for providing Central Financial Assistance (CFA) under its various 
Schemes and programmes, the Capital Head fund is used for meeting the 
expenditure of the affairs of office expenses, such as Motor Vehicles, 
Machinery & Equipment, Information, Computer & Telecommunication (ICT) 
Equipment, Furniture & Fixtures and other Fixed Assets of MNRE. The 
Committee observe that, like last year, about 92.8% of the budget of the 
Ministry has been allocated for only one component i.e. Solar Energy. Under 
Solar Energy component itself, about 72% of the budget is for 
implementation of only one Scheme i.e. PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. 
About 1.67% of the budget has been allocated for clearing past liabilities 
related to Wind and Small Hydro projects. National Bioenergy Programme 
has been allocated about 0.83% of the budget. National Green Hydrogen 
Mission and Green Energy Corridor have been allocated a budget of about 

 
 
9 
 
1.82% each. The Support Programme which includes Renewable Energy 
related Research and Development has been allocated 0.6% of the budget. 
The remaining 0.46% of the Budget has been allocated for Establishment, 
Autonomous Bodies and Capital expenditure. The Committee recommend 
the Ministry to utilize the allocated budget in an efficient manner by strictly 
adhering to the quarterly expenditure norms, under the different budgetary 
heads of the Ministry”.  
 
 
7.  In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“With regard to the observation of the Committee that about 92.8% of 
the budget of the Ministry has been allocated for Solar Energy, it is 
submitted that presently most of the ongoing schemes of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) are related to solar energy e.g. 
PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, PM Kisan Urja Suraksha evam 
Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM KUSUM), Scheme for Development of Solar 
Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects, Central Public Sector 
Undertaking (CPSU) Scheme Phase-II (Government Producer Scheme) 
for grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV) power projects by the 
Government producers, and the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme ‘National Programme on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules’.   
Hence the major allocation of the Ministry has been provided for solar 
energy component.  Further, regarding the observation that under Solar 
Energy about 72% of the budget is for implementation of only one 
Scheme i.e. PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, it is submitted the PM 
Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana has been launched in February, 2024 with 
the aim for installation of 1 crore rooftop solar systems by March 2027 
with an outlay of Rs.75,021 crore.  More than 30 lakh rooftop solar 
systems are expected to be installed during the year 2026-27.  In 
addition, the Ministry is also promoting the Utility-Led Aggregation 
(ULA) model with a target of 30 lakh installations by March 2027 
through participation of willing States.  Hence, the major allocation 
under solar energy component has been provided for PM Surya Ghar 
Muft Bijli Yojana. 
 The suggestion of the Committee to utilize the allocated budget in an 
efficient manner by strictly adhering to the quarterly expenditure norms, 
under the different budgetary heads of the Ministry has been noted for 
compliance.  The Programme Divisions have been sensitized in this 
regard.  Expenditure status under each scheme/programme is being 
regularly reviewed at the level of Secretary, MNRE”. 
 

 
 
10 
 
8. The Committee are aware of the fact that most of the schemes of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy are related to solar energy, 
particularly PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojna and PM Kusum, etc. and, 
therefore, majority of the budgetary allocation has been given to the solar 
energy component.  Although,  the focus on solar energy has undoubtedly 
contributed towards expanding clean energy access and advancing national 
energy transition goals in the Renewable Energy sector, the Committee are 
of the opinion that there exists substantial scope for expanding the 
renewable energy portfolio through greater emphasis on region specific 
renewable energy harnessing of other promising sectors such as wind 
energy, bioenergy, small hydro projects (SHP), tidal energy, geothermal 
energy, offshore renewable energy and hybrid renewable systems. The 
Committee, therefore, expects the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive 
and diversified roadmap to ensure a holistic and sustainable growth of all 
the renewable energy sectors in the country. The Committee would also like 
to be informed about the quarterly expenditure norms for Financial Year of 
2026-27 under the different budgetary heads of the Ministry.   
 
B. BUDGETARY UTILIZATION OVER YEARS 
  
Recommendation No. 2 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee while observing past budget utilization trends of the Ministry 
note that the average utilization over the past five years viz. 2021-22, 2022-
23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 (till 15.02.2026) has been in the range 
of 82-83%. This means that every year the budget remains unspent which 
has to be surrendered by the Ministry. On closer study of the reasons for 

 
 
11 
 
under-utilization of the budget, the Committee note that apart from COVID 
waves during 2021-22, non-receipt of adequate proposals from North-East 
States and delay in framing of Scheme guidelines as well as slow progress 
under certain Schemes viz. National Green Hydrogen Mission, Pradhan 
Mantri Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and Green Energy Corridor are the 
other prominent causes. While the delays under new Schemes and missions 
may be temporary and the Ministry has furnished that most of the issues in 
the above-mentioned Schemes had been taken care of and they have 
picked up pace, however, the constraint related to development of renewable 
projects in North-East States remain largely unresolved. On being asked 
about the reasons, the Ministry has submitted that the geographical 
conditions present in these States such as hilly and uneven terrain and less 
intense solar irradiation in comparison to other States contribute to increased 
cost for setting up renewable energy projects and could make the access 
difficult, making infrastructure development complex and costly. With regard 
to the measures taken by the Ministry to deal with such issues, it has 
submitted that provision of higher subsidies have been made under 
Schemes like PM Surya Ghar Yojana, PM-KUSUM and Biogas Programme 
as well as review meetings are being conducted with North-East States and 
regional workshops, awareness and Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) programmes are being carried out. The Committee 
while recognising the efforts of the Ministry to encourage development of 
renewable energy projects in the North-East States, would also like to draw 
the attention of the Ministry over under utilization of the budget that is 
especially allocated to the North-East States over the last five years. The 
Committee expected the Ministry to take special measures to identify, 
encourage and incentivize renewable energy developers to set up projects in 
North-East States and once identified, closely monitor the projects at the 
highest level for their time-bound completion. 
 
10. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in its action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
“The Ministry has duly noted the suggestions/observations of the 
Committee.  

 
 
12 
 
The Ministry, however, submits that During the Financial Year 2025-26, 
against the total Revised Estimates allocation of Rs.25,301.22 crore of 
the Ministry, expenditure of Rs.23,752.82 crore (i.e. about 94%) has been 
incurred.    
Further, the expenditure against NER allocation has also increased 
significantly during 2025-26 as compared to previous years as may be 
observed from the details given below: 
Year BE  
(Rs in 
Crore) 
RE  
(Rs in 
Crore) 
Expenditure 
(Rs in Crore) 
Expenditure 
(%) 
2021-22 565.00 499.00 66.81 13.38 
2022-23 679.00 670.00 16.37 2.44 
2023-24 988.00 748.56 39.94 5.33 
2024-25 1459.43 1692.82 60.62 3.58 
2025-26 2626.00 2503.85 734.24 29.32 
 
Further, the details of sanctions vs achievement under MNRE’s ongoing 
programme in NER as on 31.03.2026 are as follows: 
Sr. 
No. 
Scheme  Sanctioned/applications Installed/Achieve
ment 
1 PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli 
Yojana 
5,58,244 nos. of rooftop solar 
applications 
1,12,864 nos. 
2 PM KUSUM: Component 
A 
7 MW NIL 
PM KUSUM: Component 
B 
20964 nos. of Solar Pumps 11406 nos. 
PM KUSUM: Component 
C 
3600 nos. of Grid Connected 
Solar Pumps 
1043 nos. 
3 Solar Parks Scheme 20 MW 20 MW 
4 New Solar Power 
Scheme (for Tribal and 
PVTG 
Habitations/Villages) 
under PM JANMAN & DA 
JGUA 
5802 nos. Households with 
off grid solar & 8 Public 
institutes Solarization 
5802 nos. 
5 Biogas Programme 
(Phase-I) 
5600 nos. of Bio-gas plants 829 nos. 
 
These schemes are reviewed on regular basis w.r.t. their better implementation 
at the highest-level including status of NER States. 
The Ministry has taken various initiatives to improve the expenditure in NER 
which also reflected in the achievement of FY 2025-26 as the Ministry has 
achieved around 30% of its expenditure target as compared to 3-5% in last 
three years. The major initiatives taken by MNRE are as under:  
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 

 
 
13 
 
 Online process from registration to disbursal of subsidy directly into the bank 
account of the residential consumer through National Portal. 
 Availability of collateral free loan from nationalized banks at concessional 
interest rate of repo-rate plus 50 bps i.e. 5.75% per annum for the present, 
with tenure of 10 years.  
 Simplified the regulatory approval process by waiving technical feasibility 
requirement and introducing auto load enhancement upto 10 kW. 
 Net metering agreement has been made part of application in the National 
Portal 
 Capacity building and training programmes being conducted for creating 
skilled manpower. 
 Creating awareness about the scheme, through awareness and outreach 
program such as print advertising in leading newspapers, TV commercials 
campaigns, Radio campaigns across FM stations including regional 
channels, etc., in the country 
 
New Solar Power Scheme (for Tribal and PVTG Habitations/Villages) 
under PM JANMAN & DA JGUA 
 Implementing the New Solar Power Scheme (for Tribal and PVTG 
Habitations/Villages) under PM JANMAN and DA JGUA. Under the scheme, 
off-grid systems (Solar Home Lighting Systems/Solar Mini Grids) are 
provided to Tribal and PVTG households, multi-purpose centers and public 
institutions in areas where grid-connected electrification is not techno-
economically feasible.  
 
 PM KUSUM  
 Component-A provides for setting up of decentralized ground/ stilt 
mounted grid connected solar or other renewable energy-based power 
plants on farmer’s land. The beneficiaries could be Individual farmer/ group 
of farmers/ cooperatives/ panchayats/ Farmer Producer Organisations 
(FPO)/Water User associations (WUA) etc. Procurement Based Incentive 
(PBI) is provided to the DISCOMs @ 40 paise/kWh or Rs.6.60 
lakhs/MW/year, whichever is lower, for five years. There is no CFA under 
this Component. 
 Under Component-B and Component-C (Individual Pump Solarization), 
CFA@30% (50% for NER, Hilly region and Islands) of the benchmark cost 
or the tender cost, whichever is lower, is available for installing/solarizing the 
agriculture pumps up to 7.5 HP capacity. The CFA is also available for 
installing/solarizing pump capacity up to 15 HP, restricted to 10% of total 
installations in the state. The beneficiaries could be individual farmers, 
cluster irrigation systems, Water User Associations (WUA), Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPO), Primary Agriculture Credit Societies (PACS) 
etc. 
 For agriculture feeder solarization, CFA of Rs 1.05 Crore/MW (1.75 
Crore/MW for NER/Hilly regions/Island) is provided. There is no mandatory 
requirement of financial support from participating State/UT. The feeder 
solarization can be implemented in CAPEX or RESCO mode”.  
 

 
 
14 
 
11. The Committee note that approximately 29% of expenditure utilization 
with regard to North Eastern Region (NER) reflects the sincere efforts of the 
Ministry towards harnessing renewable energy in the North East States. 
However, the pace of physical achievements under renewable energy 
schemes, particularly with regard to PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, PM 
KUSUM- Component A and Component C and Biogas Programme (Phase-I) 
indicates the need for further focused interventions of the Ministry in the 
North Eastern Region. The Committee, while acknowledging efforts being 
made by the Ministry in encouraging and developing renewable energy in 
the North Eastern States, feels that scheme specific measures, particularly 
with regard to the PM KUSUM and PMSGBMY are required to be taken by the 
Ministry in the region. The Committee are also of the opinion that the 
Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of Development of North 
Eastern Region in mitigating the difficulties being faced, if any, alongwith 
the suggestive measures to be taken for effective Renewable Energy 
development in the North Eastern States. 
 
C. SOLAR ENERGY 
 
Recommendation No.3 
     12.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee has recommended as under: “The Committee note the 
biggest allocation of 92.8% of MNRE’s budget towards the head ‘Solar 
Energy’. Further, the Committee observe around only 79% utilization 
under this head over the last five years of 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 
2024-25 and 2025-26 (up to 15.02.2026). The major Schemes under 
which the Ministry had been providing CFA under ‘Solar Energy’ include 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, PM-KUSUM, Solar Park Scheme and 

 
 
15 
 
CPSU Scheme Phase-II. The Committee have commented upon PM 
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and PM-KUSUM in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSGMBY) 
12.1 The PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSGMBY) is currently the biggest 
Scheme of the Ministry budget-wise. The allocation of Rs. 22,000 crore i.e. 
66.8% of the budget for this single Scheme point towards the focus of the 
Government on promoting development of decentralised solar power by 
engaging the citizens to become power producers. The Scheme aims to install 
solar panels in one crore households by 2026-27. To incentivize the 
consumers, the Scheme has provision of subsidy by the Central Government 
and most of the State Governments. When it comes to performance, the 
Committee note both under-utilization of funds and non-achievement of 
physical targets under the Scheme i.e. the last two years when the Scheme 
has become operational, the Committee observed around 23.29 lakh 
installations against the target of 61 lakh and utilization of Rs. 22,402.97 crore 
out of the revised allocation of Rs. 28,100 crore (80%). As per the Ministry, the 
initial pace of implementation was impacted by the Model Code of Conduct 
(MCC) in 1st half of 2024 and delays in inspections, commissioning, net-
metering, financing, subsidy disbursement etc. To overcome these hurdles, 
the Ministry has submitted that it strengthened the implementation framework 
by empaneling vendors, standardizing processes related to bank financing 
and integrating verification mechanisms at the DISCOM level. These 
measures have significantly improved the subsidy disbursement timeline, thus 
generating strong consumer interest and accelerating monthly installations to 
about 2 lakh in January 2026. With regard to the target in 2026-27, the 
Ministry has furnished that it aims to install around 30 lakh solar panels by 
March 2027 and another 30 lakh installations under the Utility-Led 
Aggregation (ULA) model. The Committee would like to highlight that even 
going by the Ministry’s projection, the installation falls short of the target of 1 
crore by around 17 lakh. Further the Committee would like to point towards 
the specific case of Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited (MSEDCL) whereby against the earlier provision of households 

 
 
16 
 
installing solar systems based on their sanctioned load and anticipated future 
requirements, approvals are now reportedly restricted based on the average 
electricity consumption of the last 12 months. Although the Ministry had 
submitted that it has taken up the matter with both Maharashtra Government 
and MSEDCL and is working to get it rolled back, the Committee would like to 
highlight the issue of unwilling participation by DISCOMs, owing to the 
revenue losses on account of consumers shifting from conventional power 
consumption to solar installations. The Committee while acknowledging the 
provision of financial incentive to DISCOMs for facilitating solar rooftop in their 
jurisdiction, would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation that unless 
DISCOMs are fully onboard, it would be difficult for PMSGMBY to achieve the 
targets as envisaged. The Committee also desire to strengthen portal 
infrastructure and data validation systems under the PMSGMBY . 
 
13. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“The PMSG: MBY is a demand driven scheme wherein all 
residential consumers in the country, having a grid-connected 
electricity connection of the local DISCOM can avail the benefits of 
the scheme, for installation of RTS systems, by applying on the 
National Portal of the scheme. (www.pmsuryaghar.gov.in). With the 
efforts undertaken by the MNRE, including creating awareness, 
capacity building of DISCOM officers, upgrading of National Portal, 
enhancement of vendor base and more engagement with the 
various stakeholder, the RTS installation progress has been 
accelerated and during the month of March 2026, average per day 
rooftop solar installations have benefitted more than 9500 
households i.e. one lakh households have been covered in less 
than 11 days. 
 
The MNRE has included RESCO /Utility Led Aggregation (ULA) 
Models under the PMSG: MBY to enable DISCOMs/ State 
Governments/ State Designated entities to support rooftop solar 
development under RESCO and ULA models, primarily for low-
income households/ families. 
Under the ULA model of the PMSG: MBY, against the overall 
requested quantity of about 28 lakh installations, MNRE has already 
sanctioned 12.58 lakh installations in 10 States/UTs i.e. Andhra 
Pradesh, Odisha, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Ladakh, DNH & DD, Telangana, Bihar and Tripura. More 
proposals are expected under this model. 

 
 
17 
 
Further, the Ministry is also enabling the implementation of RESCO 
and Virtual Net Metering (VNM) mode. This will further accelerate 
installation by enabling a community model under the scheme. 
The Ministry has undertaken a multipronged approach to popularize 
the PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSG: MBY) across the 
nation, utilizing communication media like print, digital, outdoor, 
television, radio, social media, etc., to maximize reach and 
awareness. 
Additionally, all States/UTs in India have been provided a budget 
basis their population to undertake awareness and outreach plans in 
their respective regions. Promotional activities such as 
hoardings/banners, print ads, radio jingles, melas, Surya Rath, etc. 
have been used by various State Nodal Agencies/DISCOMs to 
create widespread awareness of PMSG: MBY. 
Keeping in view the households already benefited, the quantity 
sanctioned under the ULA model and accelerated pace of 
installation on a daily basis, the target of benefiting one crore 
households with rooftop solar installations under the PMSG: MBY 
by 2026-27 is on track. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has 
undertaken several initiatives to accelerate the implementation of 
the scheme across the country. The Government has simplified the 
regulatory approval process by waiving the requirement for technical 
feasibility and introducing automatic load enhancement of up to 10 
kW. Additionally, the net metering agreement has been integrated 
into the application process on the National Portal, thereby 
streamlining procedures for consumers. Furthermore, the 
Government has incorporated RESCO/Utility-Led Aggregation 
(ULA) models to facilitate the adoption of rooftop solar (RTS) 
systems, particularly for economically weaker sections under the 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. 
The Quality Council of India (QCI) is currently undertaking a mid-
term evaluation of the PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSG: 
MBY) to assess its implementation and effectiveness. The insights 
and recommendations emerging from this evaluation will guide 
targeted measures to further strengthen the portal infrastructure and 
enhance the robustness of data validation systems under the 
scheme, ensuring greater efficiency, transparency, and reliability”. 
 
14. The Committee have been highlighting the issue of persistent 
resistance of DISCOMs as one of the most critical bottlenecks in the 
large-scale adoption of rooftop solar systems under PMSGMBY, 
primarily due to apprehensions regarding loss of revenue due to 

 
 
18 
 
shifting of consumers from conventional power consumption to solar 
installations. The Committee had recommended that unless the 
DISCOMs are fully onboard, it would be difficult for the Ministry to 
achieve the anticipated targets under the PMSGMBY. The Ministry 
has submitted that they have included Renewable Energy Service 
Company (RESCO)/ Utility-Led Aggregation (ULA) Models under the 
PMSGMBY to enable DISCOMs, etc. to support rooftop solar 
development, primarily for low income household families. The 
Ministry has also submitted that they are undertaking several 
initiatives including implementation of RESCO and Virtual Net 
Metering (VNM), waiving of the requirement for technical feasibility 
and automotive load enhancement of upto 10 Kilowatt to accelerate 
the implementation of PMSGMBY across the country. 
The Committee, while appreciating the measures taken by the 
Ministry to accelerate the implementation of the PMSGMBY, still feel 
that this flagship scheme of the Ministry would achieve its 
anticipated outcome only when the DISCOMS and other State Nodal 
Agencies are fully on board and urge the Ministry to make concerted 
endeavours in this regard.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the evaluation study undertaken by the Quality Council of 
India (QCI) in assessing the implementation and effectiveness of the 
PMSGMBY.  
 
D. GREEN ENERGY CORRIDOR (GEC) 
Recommendation No.7 
 

 
 
19 
 
15.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee note consistent delays under Intra-State Green 
Energy Corridor Phase-I and Phase-II. The initial deadline of Phase-I 
was December 2020 which has been extended multiple times since 
then. The Ministry has submitted that while six States implementing 
GEC Phase-I have completed their work, two States viz. Maharashtra 
and Gujarat have sought further extension. The Phase-II of GEC has to 
be completed by March 2026. The Committee noted that, till 
31.01.2026, 76 out of 91 packages had been tendered and 74 
packages had been awarded, which means, most likely, Phase-II would 
too have to be extended. The Ministry has submitted that Phase-I has 
been delayed due to Right of Way (RoW) issues, delay in issuing 
tenders because of delay in substation land acquisition, delay in award 
of works due to low bid turnout in various projects which resulted in re-
tendering several times, court cases, forest clearances, Great Indian 
Bustard (GIB) related clearance etc. Similarly, Phase-II of GEC has 
been delayed due to reasons such as non-participation during 
tendering process, re-tendering, limited bidder participation, 
cancellation of tenders, Regulatory issues etc. The Committee while 
acknowledging the difficulties faced in laying of transmission lines and 
installation of transformation capacity, also appreciate the initiatives 
taken by the Government to provide adequate compensation under 
RoW and land acquisition and desire to standardize RoW compensation 
frameworks. The Ministry has furnished that it is working to launch 
Phase-III of GEC during 2026-27 under which it aims to evacuate 
around 135 GW of renewable energy by providing around 33% of the 
fund at approximately Rs. 54,000 crore. The Committee expect timely 
implementation of Phase-III, unlike Phase-I & II, by urging the Ministry 
to encourage States to adopt the Central Government’s guidelines on 
RoW and land acquisition related compensation, which in turn is 
expected to reduce tendering time as well as unnecessary court cases. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to create dedicated renewable 
energy land banks to mitigate the issue of land acquisition. Apart from 
Intra-State transmission infrastructure, the Committee would like to 

 
 
20 
 
highlight the recent development under Inter-State Green Energy 
Corridor Phase-II whereby the entire project is under review owing to 
the reports of Front-End Engineering and Design (FEED) studies. The 
Committee would like to understand the reasons behind the review of 
this ambitious project whereby High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) 
terminals at two locations of Pang (Ladakh) and Kaithal (Haryana) were 
aimed for inter-State transmission of RE along with 12 GWh Battery 
Energy Storage System (BESS). The Committee would request the 
Ministry to share the FEED studies, if possible. 
 
16.  In its action taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
 
“The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's observations on consistent 
delays in GEC Phase-I and Phase-II. Seven States under Phase-I have 
completed their work. Gujarat has sought further extension for two 
packages which were delayed due to RoW and Great Indian Bustard (GIB) 
issues, now on track after the decision by Hon’ble Supreme Court on GIB 
matter and likely to be complete by March 2027. States have requested 
extension under Phase II and the Ministry is actively monitoring completion 
through dedicated review mechanisms. 
 
The Ministry submits that GEC-III has been structured as a PPP scheme 
implemented in Tariff-Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) mode, which 
directly addresses the primary causes of delay in earlier phases such as 
RoW disputes, limited bidder participation and low enforcement on 
contractors, since private Transmission Service Providers (TSPs) under 
TBCB bear construction and RoW risk themselves, face stronger 
contractual penalties under performance monitoring, and have a financial 
incentive to resolve land-related issues proactively. Upgradation under 
GEC II operate entirely within the footprint of already-established 
infrastructure. Accordingly, upgradation packages are expected to be 
tendered and executed significantly faster than greenfield packages, with 
near-zero RoW litigation risk. 
 
Forest clearance bottlenecks, which caused significant delays in Rajasthan 
and Gujarat under Phase-I due to GIB-related restrictions, will be 
addressed through pre-planning using the PM Gati Shakti National Master 
Plan framework and Joint Coordination mechanism at the Cabinet 
Secretariat level, enabling early identification and resolution of forest and 
wildlife conflicts before tendering rather than during execution. 
 
On the Committee's recommendation to encourage States to adopt Central 
Government guidelines on RoW compensation, the Ministry submits that 
under GEC-III's Challenge Mode sanction framework, priority will be given 

 
 
21 
 
to States that have an RE policy and land compensation framework aligned 
with the directions of the Ministry of Power, making adoption of Central 
Government RoW guidelines a de facto eligibility condition for early project 
sanction. This approach directly incentivises States to align their 
compensation frameworks, which in turn is expected to reduce tendering 
timelines and court cases as the Committee has desired. 
 
On the recommendation to create dedicated renewable energy land banks, 
since land is a State subject, the Ministry has been regularly writing to States 
to identify suitable land for RE projects, expedite allocation of revenue land, 
and ease land-use conversion norms. Under GEC-III, DPR preparation using 
the Gati Shakti framework requires advance identification and mapping of 
substation land and transmission corridor alignments. A dedicated Project 
Monitoring Unit with an online MIS system for real-time physical and financial 
tracking will be established to ensure Phase-III does not repeat the execution 
trajectory of its predecessors. 
 
With regard to the observations of the Committee regarding the 
developments under Inter-State Green Energy Corridor Phase-II whereby the 
entire project is under review owing to the reports of Front-End Engineering 
and Design (FEED) studies, and based on the response received from 
POWERGRID, the following is submitted:  
 
A.  The Inter-State portion of the Green Energy Corridor Phase-II project 
was discussed in the meeting of Northern Region Power Committee 
(NRPC), held on 8th September 2025 wherein CEA, CTUIL, GRID INDIA 
and other State Transmission Utilities of Northern region participated. 
During the meeting CTUIL briefed that upon the completion of the Front-
End Engineering & Design (FEED) studies, it is observed that the Voltage 
Source Convertor (VSC) HVDC scheme had following challenges:  
 
 Complex Geography of PANG PS (at 4700m altitude and low 
temperature [-35 degree]) – No VSC HVDC solutions were available at 
such high altitude. 
 Design and performance challenges of equipment to be adopted for 
such altitude – exemption from performance requirements. 
 High level of UV & cosmic radiation – high failure rate of power 
electronic devices. 
 Weak network strength, presence of multiple inverter-based resources 
(Solar, BESS, HVDC, SynCon STATCOM), Transportation and logistics 
concerns. 
 Additional time requirement as well as scope exclusion requirements.  
 Other technical challenges i.e. working at derated voltage (leads to 
requirement of more no. of semiconductor devices to maintain voltage). 
 
Further, Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), which is responsible for 
aggregation and tendering of the renewable power, flagged concerns 
arising from the FEED study findings regarding the overall project 
configuration. The FEED studies undertaken by OEMs indicated that due to 
the weak grid conditions at the Pang node and high penetration of inverter-

 
 
22 
 
based renewable generation, substantial dynamic reactive power support 
would be required for stable operation of the HVDC system. Accordingly, 
the studies recommended installation of approximately 18 synchronous 
condensers (about 2250 MVAr) at the Pang side to maintain voltage 
stability and grid strength. The estimated cost of these synchronous 
condensers is around ₹7,000 crore, and the proposal envisaged that these 
would be implemented under the scope of RE developers. 
 
B.  A copy of the outcome of the FEED studies shared by POWERGRID is 
enclosed at Appendix-I for kind reference”. 
 
17. The Committee have been drawing the attention of the Ministry 
towards consistent delays under the Intra-State Green Energy Corridor 
Phase-I and Phase-II due to Right of Ways (RoW), delay in award, forest 
clearances and Great Indian Bustard (GIB) related clearances, etc. in case of 
Phase-I and non participation of states during tendering process, 
consultation of tender and regulatory issues, etc. in cases of Phase-II of the 
Scheme. The Ministry while acknowledging the observations made by the 
Committee have submitted that seven States out of eight, except the state of 
Gujarat, have completed their work under Phase-I and the States under 
Phase-II of the Scheme have sought extension, and the Ministry is actively 
monitoring completion of the scheme through dedicated review 
mechanisms. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry needs to 
work in tandem with all the States involved in Phase-II of the Intra-State 
Green Energy Corridor Project to ensure that all the issues involved are 
resolved amicably and the implementation of the transmission related 
projects is done as envisaged. As regards, Phase-III of the Scheme, the 
Ministry has submitted that issues related to forest clearance, will be 
addressed through pre-plans using the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
framework and the RoW compensation issues shall be aligned with the 
directions of the Ministry of Power. The Committee expect the Ministry to be 

 
 
23 
 
cautious while formulating Phase-III of the scheme and would also like to be 
apprised of roadmaps and anticipated outcomes of the proposed Phase-III of 
the Intra-state Green Energy Corridor Project. With regard to Inter-state 
Green Energy Corridor Phase-II Project, the Ministry has submitted that the 
entire project is under review owing to the reports of Front-End Engineering 
and Design (FEED) studies and the inputs of Powergrid. Central 
Transmission Utility of India Limited (CTUIL) has upon the completion of  
FEED studies, pointed out that no Voltage Source Converter (VSC) High 
Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) solutions were available at Pang in Union 
territory of Ladakh owing to extreme altitude of 4700 metres and -35 degree 
low temperature including high level of ultraviolet (UV) and cosmic radiation 
and other technical challenges. Moreover, Solar Energy Corporation of India 
(SECI) which is responsible for aggregation and tendering of the renewable 
power have flagged concerns arising from the FEED study findings on the 
project. The Committee understand the challenges being faced regarding 
implementation of the Inter-state Green Energy Corridor Phase-II project at 
critical location of Pang in the Union territory of Ladakh and expects the 
Ministry to take appropriate action on the basis of inputs received from the 
FEED study report to implement the project, and apprise the Committee 
about the same.  
E. RENEWABLE ENERGY RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME (RE-RTD) 
 
Recommendation No.9 
    18.  The Committee had recommended as under:  
 “The Committee note that for undertaking research and development 
(R&D) in Renewable Energy (RE) sector, the Ministry has been 

 
 
24 
 
implementing Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD) with a total budget of Rs. 228 
crore for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. For the year 2026-27, a 
proposed budget of Rs. 46 crore has been allocated, as the Scheme 
is presently under review for continuation beyond 2025-26 to a 
further period of five years i.e., from 2026-27 to 2030-31. The 
Committee note constant reduction in allocations at revised stage 
and even lesser utilization, except during 2022-23 when the budget 
was increased by Rs. 10 crore at the revised stage. Even during 
2025-26, the allocation of Rs. 46 crore has been reduced to Rs. 35 
crore at revised stage, out of which Rs. 32.87 crore has been 
utilized till 15th February, 2026. As per the Ministry, R&D projects are 
generally completed within a duration of three to four years and the 
funds are released after completion of various milestones and proper 
evaluation of the projects. The Ministry has further submitted that 
during the last five years, it has sanctioned around 15 new R&D 
projects in the areas of Solar PV, Small Hydro, Energy Storage, 
Geothermal Energy, Bioenergy and Tidal Energy under RE-RTD. 
Given that most of these technologies are still at a nascent stage and 
India depends on imports for meeting most of its requirement, the 
Committee expect that the RE-RTD Scheme be continued beyond 
2025-26 with a renewed focus on funding R&D in contemporary, 
emerging and future technologies and their time-bound testing and 
evaluation to supplement the requirements of renewable energy 
sector in the country. 
 
 
19. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
stated as under: 
 
“The Committee’s observations have been noted.  The Ministry has 
formulated proposal for the continuation of the Renewable Energy 
Research and Technology Development (RE-RTD) Scheme for a 
period of five years from FY 2026-27 to 2030-31 focusing on 
application-oriented R&D, including the establishment of pilot 
production lines, indigenous manufacturing of Long-Duration Energy 
Storage (LDES) technologies, demonstration projects in geothermal, 

 
 
25 
 
tidal and wave energy, exploration of natural hydrogen and resource 
assessment, circular economy initiatives (including recycling projects), 
laboratory infrastructure development, and support to Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs) and incubation centres, along with strengthened 
monitoring mechanisms and enhanced industry participation.   
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 
16.04.2026 has approved the continuation of RE-RTD Scheme for a 
period of five years from 2026-27 with a total financial outlay of Rs. 
436.93 Crore. 
The Ministry has already taken concrete steps in this direction. Five 
geothermal energy projects have been sanctioned under the 
Renewable Energy Research & Technology Development (RE-RTD) 
programme, focusing on resource assessment, pilot demonstrations, 
and development of suitable technologies for both power generation 
and direct-use applications. In addition, one research project on tidal 
energy has been sanctioned to an industry partner, and another 
project on sodium-ion battery storage has been supported at IIT 
Roorkee”. 
 
20.  The Committee have been constantly highlighting the reduction in 
budgetary allocation for implementing the scheme of Renewable Energy 
Research and Technology Development Programme (RE-RTD), a critical 
area of Research Development (R&D) in the RE sector.  The Ministry have 
submitted that RE-RTD Scheme has been extended for another five years 
i.e. from financial year 2026-27 to financial year 2030-31, with focus on 
application oriented R&D including indigenous manufacturing of Long 
Duration Energy Storage (LDES) technology.  The Ministry have also 
stated that Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has approved ₹ 436.93 
crore for the continuation of RE-RTD scheme. The Committee are of the 
view that the proposed allocation of merely ₹436.93 crore over the next 
five financial years for the RE-RTD Scheme would be inadequate to meet 
the desired result of India’s ambitious clean energy transition goals, and 
the target of achieving 500 GW of non-fossil fuel capacity by the year 
2030.  The Committee are of opinion that under the RE-RTD scheme, a 

 
 
26 
 
focused strategy involving targeted investments in indigenous research 
and development, stronger collaboration between industry, academia and 
research institutions, and incentives for innovation and patent generation 
in the field of Renewable Energy is required. The Committee, therefore, 
expect the Ministry to enhance the budgetary allocation alongwith 
optimum utilization of the fund with regard to RE-RTD scheme. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about any other scheme being 
launched by the Ministry for the R&D in Renewable Energy Sector. 
  

 
 
27 
 
APPENDICE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  
 
         10 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Serial Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and10 
 
 
 
Total – 10 
Percentage– 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – NIL 
Percentage – 00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – NIL 
Percentage –  00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – NIL 
Percentage – 00 
 
  

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
BUDGET ALLOCATION OF THE MINISTRY 
The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) had 
projected the budgetary requirement of Rs. 45,806.61 crore for the financial year 2026-27, 
against which an amount of Rs. 32,914.67 crore has been allocated to the Ministry. This is 
a reduction of about 28% in the allocation vis-à-vis demand. The allocated amount of Rs. 
32,914.67 crore includes Rs. 32,911.14 crore as Revenue Head and Rs. 3.53 crore as 
Capital Head. While the fund in Revenue Head is mostly utilized by the Ministry for 
providing Central Financial Assistance (CFA) under its various Schemes and programmes, 
the Capital Head fund is used for meeting the expenditure of the affairs of office expenses, 
such as Motor Vehicles, Machinery & Equipment, Information, Computer & 
Telecommunication (ICT) Equipment, Furniture & Fixtures and other Fixed Assets of 
MNRE. The Committee observe that, like last year, about 92.8% of the budget of the 
Ministry has been allocated for only one component i.e. Solar Energy. Under Solar Energy 
component itself, about 72% of the budget is for implementation of only one Scheme i.e. 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. About 1.67% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities related to Wind and Small Hydro projects. National Bioenergy 
Programme has been allocated about 0.83% of the budget. National Green Hydrogen 
Mission and Green Energy Corridor have been allocated a budget of about 1.82% each. 
The Support Programme which includes Renewable Energy related Research and 
Development has been allocated 0.6% of the budget. The remaining 0.46% of the Budget 
has been allocated for Establishment, Autonomous Bodies and Capital expenditure. The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to utilize the allocated budget in an efficient manner 
by strictly adhering to the quarterly expenditure norms, under the different budgetary 
heads of the Ministry. 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to the observation of the Committee that about 92.8% of the budget of the 
Ministry has been allocated for Solar Energy, it is submitted that presently most of the 
ongoing schemes of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) are related 
to solar energy e.g. PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, PM Kisan Urja Suraksha evam 
Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM KUSUM), Scheme for Development of Solar Parks and 
Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects, Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) Scheme 
Phase-II (Government Producer Scheme) for grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV) 
power projects by the Government producers, and the Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) Scheme ‘National Programme on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules’. Hence 
the major allocation of the Ministry has been provided for solar energy component.  
Further, regarding the observation that under Solar Energy about 72% of the budget is 
for implementation of only one Scheme i.e. PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, it is 
submitted the PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana has been launched in February, 2024 
with the aim for installation of 1 crore rooftop solar systems by March 2027 with an 
outlay of Rs.75,021 crore.  More than 30 lakh rooftop solar systems are expected to be 
installed during the year 2026-27.  In addition, the Ministry is also promoting the 
Utility-Led Aggregation (ULA) model with a target of 30 lakh installations by March 
2027 through participation of willing States.  Hence, the major allocation under solar 
energy component has been provided for PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana. 
 
The suggestion of the Committee to utilize the allocated budget in an efficient manner 
by strictly adhering to the quarterly expenditure norms, under the different budgetary 
heads of the Ministry has been noted for compliance. The Programme Divisions have 
been sensitized in this regard.  Expenditure status under each scheme/ programme is 
being regularly reviewed at the level of Secretary, MNRE. 
               O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
        BUDGETARY UTILIZATION OVER YEARS 
 
The Committee while observing past budget utilization trends of the Ministry note that 
the average utilization over the past five years viz. 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-
25 and 2025-26 (till 15.02.2026) has been in the range of 82-83%. This means that 
every year the budget remains unspent which has to be surrendered by the Ministry. 
On closer study of the reasons for under-utilization of the budget, the Committee note 
that apart from COVID waves during 2021-22, non-receipt of adequate proposals 
from North-East States and delay in framing of Scheme guidelines as well as slow 
progress under certain Schemes viz. National Green Hydrogen Mission, Pradhan 
Mantri Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and Green Energy Corridor are the other 
prominent causes. While the delays under new Schemes and missions may be 
temporary and the Ministry has furnished that most of the issues in the above-
mentioned Schemes have been taken care of and they have picked up pace, however, 
the constraint related to development of renewable projects in North-East States 
remain largely unresolved. On being asked about the reasons, the Ministry has 
submitted that the geographical conditions present in these States such as hilly and 
uneven terrain and less intense solar irradiation in comparison to other States 
contribute to increased cost for setting up renewable energy projects and can make the 
access difficult, making infrastructure development complex and costly. With regard 
to the measures taken by the Ministry to deal with such issues, it has submitted that 
provision of higher subsidies have been made under Schemes like PM Surya Ghar 
Yojana, PM-KUSUM and Biogas Programme as well as review meetings are being 
conducted with North-East States and regional workshops, awareness and 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) programmes are being carried out. 
The Committee while recognising the efforts of the Ministry to encourage 
development of renewable energy projects in the North-East States, would also like to 
draw the attention of the Ministry over under utilization of the budget that is 
especially allocated to the North-East States over the last five years. The Committee 
expect the Ministry to take special measures to identify, encourage and incentivize 
renewable energy developers to set up projects in North-East States and once 

 
 
31 
 
identified, closely monitor the projects at the highest level for their time-bound 
completion. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry has duly noted the suggestions/ observations of the Committee.  
The Ministry, however, submits that During the Financial Year 2025-26, against the 
total Revised Estimates allocation of Rs.25,301.22 crore of the Ministry, expenditure 
of Rs.23,752.82 crore (i.e. about 94%) has been incurred.    
Further, the expenditure against NER allocation has also increased significantly 
during 2025-26 as compared to previous years as may be observed from the details 
given below: 
Year         BE 
(Rs in Crore) 
RE 
(Rs in Crore) 
Expenditure 
(Rs in Crore) 
Expenditure 
(%) 
2021-
22 
565.00 499.00 66.81 13.38 
2022-
23 
679.00 670.00 16.37 2.44 
2023-
24 
988.00 748.56 39.94 5.33 
2024-
25 
1459.43 1692.82 60.62 3.58 
2025-
26 
2626.00 2503.85 734.24 29.32 
 
Further, the details of sanctions vs achievement under MNRE’s ongoing programme 
in NER as on 31.03.2026 are as follows: 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Scheme  Sanctioned/applications Installed/Ach
ievement 
1 PM Surya Ghar: 
Muft Bijli Yojana 
5,58,244 nos. of rooftop 
solar applications 
1,12,864 nos. 
2 PM KUSUM: 
Component A 
7 MW NIL 
PM KUSUM: 
Component B 
20964 nos. of Solar Pumps 11406 nos. 
PM KUSUM: 
Component C 
3600 nos. of Grid 
Connected Solar Pumps 
1043 nos. 
3 Solar Parks Scheme 20 MW 20 MW 
4 New Solar Power 5802 nos. Households with 5802 nos. 

 
 
32 
 
Scheme (for Tribal 
and PVTG 
Habitations/Villages) 
under PM JANMAN 
& DA JGUA 
off grid solar & 8 Public 
institutes Solarization 
5 Biogas Programme 
(Phase-I) 
5600 nos. of Bio-gas 
plants 
829 nos. 
 
These schemes are reviewed on regular basis w.r.t. their better implementation at the 
highest-level including status of NER States.The Ministry has taken various 
initiatives to improve the expenditure in NER which also reflected in the 
achievement of FY 2025-26 as the Ministry has achieved around 30% of its 
expenditure target as compared to 3-5% in last three years. The major initiatives 
taken by MNRE are as under:  
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 
 Online process from registration to disbursal of subsidy directly into the bank 
account of the residential consumer through National Portal. 
 Availability of collateral free loan from nationalized banks at concessional interest 
rate of repo-rate plus 50 bps i.e. 5.75% per annum for the present, with tenure of 10 
years.  
 Simplified the regulatory approval process by waiving technical feasibility 
requirement and introducing auto load enhancement upto 10 kW. 
 Net metering agreement has been made part of application in the National Portal 
 Capacity building and training programmes being conducted for creating skilled 
manpower. 
 Creating awareness about the scheme, through awareness and outreach program such 
as print advertising in leading newspapers, TV commercials campaigns, Radio 
campaigns across FM stations including regional channels, etc., in the country 
 
New Solar Power Scheme (for Tribal and PVTG Habitations/Villages) under 
PM JANMAN & DA JGUA 
 Implementing the New Solar Power Scheme (for Tribal and PVTG 
Habitations/Villages) under PM JANMAN and DA JGUA. Under the scheme, off-
grid systems (Solar Home Lighting Systems/Solar Mini Grids) are provided to Tribal 

 
 
33 
 
and PVTG households, multi-purpose centers and public institutions in areas where 
grid-connected electrification is not techno-economically feasible.  
 
PM KUSUM  
 Component-A provides for setting up of decentralized ground/ stilt mounted grid 
connected solar or other renewable energy-based power plants on farmer’s land. The 
beneficiaries could be Individual farmer/ group of farmers/ cooperatives/ panchayats/ 
Farmer Producer Organisations (FPO)/ Water User associations (WUA), etc. 
Procurement Based Incentive (PBI) is provided to the DISCOMs @ 40 paise/ kWh 
or Rs.6.60 lakhs/ MW/ year, whichever is lower, for five years. There is no CFA 
under this Component. 
 Under Component-B and Component-C (Individual Pump Solarization), CFA@30% 
(50% for NER, Hilly region and Islands) of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, 
whichever is lower, is available for installing/solarizing the agriculture pumps up to 
7.5 HP capacity. The CFA is also available for installing/solarizing pump capacity up 
to 15 HP, restricted to 10% of total installations in the state. The beneficiaries could 
be individual farmers, cluster irrigation systems, Water User Associations (WUA), 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPO), Primary Agriculture Credit Societies (PACS) 
etc. 
 For agriculture feeder solarization, CFA of Rs 1.05 Crore/MW (1.75 Crore/MW for 
NER/Hilly regions/Island) is provided. There is no mandatory requirement of 
financial support from participating State/UT. The feeder solarization can be 
implemented in CAPEX or RESCO mode.  
 
           O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
 
34 
 
Recommendation No. 3  
SOLAR ENERGY 
 
The Committee note the biggest allocation of 92.8% of MNRE’s budget towards the head 
‘Solar Energy’. Further, the Committee observe around only 79% utilization under this 
head over the last five years of 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 (up 
to 15.02.2026). The major Schemes under which the Ministry has been providing CFA 
under ‘Solar Energy’ include PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, PM-KUSUM, Solar Park 
Scheme and CPSU Scheme Phase-II. The Committee have commented upon PM Surya 
Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and PM-KUSUM in the succeeding paragraphs: 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSGMBY) 
 The PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSGMBY) is currently the biggest 
Scheme of the Ministry budget-wise. The allocation of Rs. 22,000 crore i.e. 66.8% of the 
budget for this single Scheme point towards the focus of the Government on promoting 
development of decentralised solar power by engaging the citizens to become power 
producers. The Scheme aims to install solar panels in one crore households by 2026-27. To 
incentivize the consumers, the Scheme has provision of subsidy by the Central 
Government and most of the State Governments. When it comes to performance, the 
Committee note both under-utilization of funds and non-achievement of physical targets 
under the Scheme i.e. the last two years when the Scheme has become operational, the 
Committee observe around 23.29 lakh installations against the target of 61 lakh and 
utilization of Rs. 22,402.97 crore out of the revised allocation of Rs. 28,100 crore (80%). 
As per the Ministry, the initial pace of implementation was impacted by the Model Code of 
Conduct (MCC) in 1st half of 2024 and delays in inspections, commissioning, net-
metering, financing, subsidy disbursement etc. To overcome these hurdles, the Ministry 
has submitted that it strengthened the implementation framework by empaneling vendors, 
standardizing processes related to bank financing and integrating verification mechanisms 
at the DISCOM level. These measures have significantly improved the subsidy 
disbursement timeline, thus generating strong consumer interest and accelerating monthly 
installations to about 2 lakh in January 2026. With regard to the target in 2026-27, the 
Ministry has furnished that it aims to install around 30 lakh solar panels by March 2027 
and another 30 lakh installations under the Utility-Led Aggregation (ULA) model. The 
Committee would like to highlight that even going by the Ministry’s projection, the 

 
 
35 
 
installation falls short of the target of 1 crore by around 17 lakh. Further the Committee 
would like to point towards the specific case of Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution 
Company Limited (MSEDCL) whereby against the earlier provision of households 
installing solar systems based on their sanctioned load and anticipated future requirements, 
approvals are now reportedly restricted based on the average electricity consumption of the 
last 12 months. Although the Ministry has submitted that it has taken up the matter with 
both Maharashtra Government and MSEDCL and is working to get it rolled back, the 
Committee would like to highlight the issue of unwilling participation by DISCOMs, 
owing to the revenue losses on account of consumers shifting from conventional power 
consumption to solar installations. The Committee while acknowledging the provision of 
financial incentive to DISCOMs for facilitating solar rooftop in their jurisdiction, would 
like to reiterate their earlier recommendation that unless DISCOMs are fully onboard, it 
would be difficult for PMSGMBY to achieve the targets as envisaged. The Committee also 
desire to strengthen portal infrastructure and data validation systems under the 
PMSGMBY . 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The PMSG: MBY is a demand driven scheme wherein all residential consumers in the 
country, having a grid-connected electricity connection of the local DISCOM can avail the 
benefits of the scheme, for installation of RTS systems, by applying on the National Portal 
of the scheme. (www.pmsuryaghar.gov.in). With the efforts undertaken by the MNRE, 
including creating awareness, capacity building of DISCOM officers, upgrading of 
National Portal, enhancement of vendor base and more engagement with the various 
stakeholder, the RTS installation progress has been accelerated and during the month of 
March 2026, average per day rooftop solar installations have benefitted more than 9500 
households i.e. one lakh households have been covered in less than 11 days. 
 
The MNRE has included RESCO /Utility Led Aggregation (ULA) Models under the 
PMSG: MBY to enable DISCOMs/ State Governments/ State Designated entities to 
support rooftop solar development under RESCO and ULA models, primarily for low-
income households/ families. 
 

 
 
36 
 
Under the ULA model of the PMSG: MBY , against the overall requested quantity of about 
28 lakh installations, MNRE has already sanctioned 12.58 lakh installations in 10 
States/UTs i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Ladakh, DNH & DD, Telangana, Bihar and Tripura. More proposals are expected 
under this model. 
Further, the Ministry is also enabling the implementation of RESCO and Virtual Net 
Metering (VNM) mode. This will further accelerate installation by enabling a community 
model under the scheme. 
 
The Ministry has undertaken a multipronged approach to popularize the PM Surya Ghar 
Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSG: MBY) across the nation, utilizing communication media like 
print, digital, outdoor, television, radio, social media, etc., to maximize reach and 
awareness. 
 
Additionally, all States/UTs in India have been provided a budget basis their population to 
undertake awareness and outreach plans in their respective regions. Promotional activities 
such as hoardings/banners, print ads, radio jingles, melas, Surya Rath, etc. have been used 
by various State Nodal Agencies/DISCOMs to create widespread awareness of PMSG: 
MBY . 
 
Keeping in view the households already benefited, the quantity sanctioned under the ULA 
model and accelerated pace of installation on a daily basis, the target of benefiting one 
crore households with rooftop solar installations under the PMSG: MBY by 2026-27 is on 
track. 
  
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has undertaken several initiatives to 
accelerate the implementation of the scheme across the country. The Government has 
simplified the regulatory approval process by waiving the requirement for technical 
feasibility and introducing automatic load enhancement of up to 10 kW. Additionally, the 
net metering agreement has been integrated into the application process on the National 

 
 
37 
 
Portal, thereby streamlining procedures for consumers. Furthermore, the Government has 
incorporated RESCO/Utility-Led Aggregation (ULA) models to facilitate the adoption of 
rooftop solar (RTS) systems, particularly for economically weaker sections under the PM 
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. 
 
The Quality Council of India (QCI) is currently undertaking a mid-term evaluation of the 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (PMSG: MBY) to assess its implementation and 
effectiveness. The insights and recommendations emerging from this evaluation will guide 
targeted measures to further strengthen the portal infrastructure and enhance the robustness 
of data validation systems under the scheme, ensuring greater efficiency, transparency, and 
reliability. 
 
         O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
NATIONAL BIOENERGY PROGRAMME (NBP) 
 
The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme has a provision of Central 
Financial Assistance for setting up of Bioenergy projects in the country under the three 
components of Biomass Programme, Waste to Energy Programme and Biogas Programme. 
The Committee observe that during the last five years, the allocation under the Programme 
has been reduced every year at RE stage and event his reduced RE has also not been 
utilized fully. During 2024-25 and 2025-26, the BE was reduced by 38% and 46%, 
respectively at RE while the utilization was 86% and 78%. The Committee also note the 
inconsistent target allocation and achievement under the programme. Under Waste to 
Energy Programme, during 2025-26 (till 31.01.2026) the achievement has been a mere 
13% of the target of 125 MWeq whereas during the previous four years, the achievement 
had consistently been higher than the target. Similarly, under Biomass Programme, during 

 
 
38 
 
2025-26 (till 31.01.2026), the achievement has been around 57% unlike previous three 
years when the achievement outperformed the targets. This indicates poor implementation 
of the Programme during 2025-26. No target was allotted under Biogas Programme during 
2025-26 as the entire budget of the Biogas component under National Bioenergy 
Programme Phase-I was exhausted beforehand. The Committee are of the view that the 
Phase-I of the Scheme is nearing completion in March 2026 and yet the Ministry has not 
been able to synchronize the targets and allocations under the Scheme. The Ministry has 
furnished that it aims to seek EFC approval for Phase-II of the Programme and accordingly 
notify the Scheme guidelines for its three components during 2026-27. The Committee 
note that physical targets and budget allocation have been made for 2026-27, where the 
physical targets are subject to approval of the  
Phase-II of the Programme. The Committee note that during last year also, the Ministry 
had submitted that it is working on the proposal of Phase-II of NBP. Therefore, the 
Committee expect that all work related to Phase-II of NBP be completed and the work on 
meeting 2026-27 targets started on time. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry has been implementing the National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) 
under its three components, by proving Central Financial Assistance (CFA), for 
installation of Biogas, Biomass & Waste to Energy Projects in the country.  
 
The Ministry has made satisfactory financial progress under the Programme. During 
2025-26, against the Budget Estimate (BE) of ₹325 crore, the Revised Estimate (RE) 
after re-appropriation was ₹235 crore and the actual expenditure incurred was 
₹218.48 crore, i.e. about 93% utilization of the RE. 
 
Under the Biomass Programme, an installed capacity addition of 126 MW has been 
achieved against the target of 25 MW during 2025-26, surpassing the annual targets. 
 
Under the Biogas Programme, no fresh annual physical target could be allocated to 
States during 2025-26 as the budgetary allocation exhausted under Phase-I of the 
NBP. However, the Ministry continued releasing past liabilities under Biogas 
Programme which were sanctioned in previous Financial Years expeditiously. 

 
 
39 
 
 
The Ministry has taken note of the observations of the Committee regarding 
synchronization of targets and allocations under the Scheme. In this regard, the EFC 
Memorandum for Phase-II of the National Bioenergy Programme has been prepared 
and is under Inter-Ministerial Consultation. Necessary steps are being taken to get 
the timely approval of Phase-II of the NBP, so that the Scheme can continue at the 
earliest without much delay during the current FY 2026-27. 
 
                        O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
WIND ENERGY 
 
The Committee note that against the potential of 1,164 GW of wind energy in the country, 
the installed capacity is only around 54.65 GW (till 31.01.2026). The Ministry has 
furnished that wind power projects are being set up by private developers based on techno-
economic viability and the funds allocated to the Ministry is being utilized for meeting 
liabilities under Wind Generation Based Incentive (GBI) Scheme, which was operational 
till March 2017. Currently, there is no Scheme for Onshore wind power and hence, there is 
no linkage between capacity commissioned and budgetary allocation. However, the 
Government is providing certain fiscal and technical incentives to the wind sector such as 
Accelerated Depreciation benefit, Concessional Custom Duty on certain components of 
wind electric generators and technical support from National Institute of Wind Energy. 
With regard to Offshore wind, the Ministry has informed that National Institute of Wind 
Energy (NIWE) has conducted technical studies off Gujarat and Tamil Nadu coast to 
assess Offshore wind potential at these sites. Further, the Government has launched 
“Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme for Offshore Wind Energy Projects” at a total 
outlay of Rs. 7453 crore, including an outlay of Rs. 6853 crore for installation and 
commissioning of 1 GW of Offshore wind energy projects (500 MW each off the coast of 
States of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu) and grant of Rs. 600 crore for upgradation of two ports 
to meet logistics. The Committee note that under the VGF Scheme, first tender for 
development of 500 MW Oﬀshore wind energy project oﬀ Gujarat coast was issued by 
Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) on 13.09.2024. However, no bid was received 

 
 
40 
 
till last date i.e. 31.07.2025. The Ministry has furnished that during 2026-27, it plans to 
issue tender of Offshore wind energy capacity off the coast of Tamil Nadu supported by 
the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme. The Committee, while appreciating the 
Ministry for undertaking initiatives in Offshore wind sector, would also like to mention 
that Offshore wind technology is new for the country due to which bidders are being extra 
cautious about its future and returns. The Committee, therefore, feel that apart from VGF, 
the Ministry and NIWE need to regularly interact with wind developers and other 
stakeholders in the Offshore wind market to understand their apprehensions and gain their 
confidence. The Committee are also of the view that collaborating with global Offshore 
wind developers would enable the Ministry to holistically understand the opportunities and 
challenges of Offshore wind market. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Ministry has been actively interacting with industry stakeholders, developers, 
financial institutions and other concerned agencies to understand their concerns and 
facilitate the development of offshore wind projects. In this regard, A round table 
meeting chaired by the Secretary, MNRE convened on 26 September 2025 brought 
together representatives from Global Offshore Wind Developers, Central Ministries, 
Transmission Utilities, Wind Turbine Manufacturers (OEMs), financial investors and 
other stakeholders to deliberate on strategies for accelerating offshore wind 
development in the country.  
Further, in order to strengthen international collaboration and leverage global 
expertise in offshore wind development, the India–UK Offshore Wind Taskforce was 
launched on 18 February 2026, in the presence of Rt. Hon’ble David Lammy, 
Deputy Prime Minister of UK and Shri Pralhad Joshi, Hon’ble Union Minister of 
New and Renewable Energy, Government of India. The first meeting of the task 
force also convened on 9th March 2026. The Task force aims to facilitate 
cooperation between India and the United Kingdom in areas such as policy and 
regulatory frameworks, offshore wind supply chains, financing mechanisms, and 
technical expertise to support the development of offshore wind projects in India. 
 
                                             O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026  
 

 
 
41 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
SMALL HYDRO POWER (SHP) 
The Committee note that Small Hydro Power programme was discontinued in 2017 and 
since then, the budget allocations have been used to clear old liabilities only. The 
Committee observe that the target under small hydro over the years has remained constant 
at 100 MW but still it has not been achieved for most years. During 2025-26, till 
31.01.2026, the achievement has been only 58.06 MW out of the target of 100 MW. The 
reasons cited by the Ministry for poor achievement include difficult locations of SHP sites, 
short working season in hilly areas and natural calamities such as flash floods. With regard 
to the difficulties being faced in developing small hydro projects, the Committee are of the 
view that by now, the Ministry should have developed the knowhow and expertise to deal 
with difficulties associated with the hydro projects. The Committee observe that the 
Ministry has not been able to start a new SHP Scheme since 2017. Year after year, the 
Ministry has furnished that it is working on approval of a new SHP Scheme but till date 
the new Scheme has not come into operation. The Committee note that North-East States 
have huge potential for SHP due to abundant hydro sources to which even the Ministry 
agrees. This also presents an opportunity for the Ministry to improve its budget utilization 
in the North-Eastern region which has been lagging at a mere 10% of the allocation. The 
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to complete all formalities in order to come out 
with the new SHP Scheme at the earliest, particularly in North-East States. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A new Small Hydro Power (SHP) Scheme for period from FY 2026-27 to 2030-31 has 
been approved by the Union Cabinet on 18.03.2026 with a total financial outlay of 
Rs.2584.60 crore.  The Scheme has provision of a higher subsidy for NER States to 
encourage faster development of SHP projects.  It is further submitted that during FY 
2025-26 (upto March, 2026), SHP capacity of 70.81 MW has been installed. 
 
             O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 7  
GREEN ENERGY CORRIDOR (GEC) 
 

 
 
42 
 
The Committee note consistent delays under Intra-State Green Energy Corridor Phase-I 
and Phase-II. The initial deadline of Phase-I was December 2020 which has been extended 
multiple times since then. The Ministry has submitted that while six States implementing 
GEC Phase-I have completed their work, two States viz. Maharashtra and Gujarat have 
sought further extension. The Phase-II of GEC has to be completed by March 2026. The 
Committee note that, till 31.01.2026, 76 out of 91 packages have been tendered and 74 
packages have been awarded, which means, most likely, Phase-II would too have to be 
extended. The Ministry has submitted that Phase-I has been delayed due to Right of Way 
(RoW) issues, delay in issuing tenders because of delay in substation land acquisition, 
delay in award of works due to low bid turnout in various projects which resulted in re-
tendering several times, court cases, forest clearances, Great Indian Bustard (GIB) related 
clearance etc. Similarly, Phase-II of GEC has been delayed due to reasons such as non-
participation during tendering process, re-tendering, limited bidder participation, 
cancellation of tenders, Regulatory issues etc. The Committee while acknowledging the 
difficulties faced in laying of transmission lines and installation of transformation 
capacity, also appreciate the initiatives taken by the Government to provide adequate 
compensation under RoW and land acquisition and desire to standardize RoW 
compensation frameworks. The Ministry has furnished that it is working to launch Phase-
III of GEC during 2026-27 under which it aims to evacuate around 135 GW of renewable 
energy by providing around 33% of the fund at approximately Rs. 54,000 crore. The 
Committee expect timely implementation of Phase-III, unlike Phase-I & II, by urging the 
Ministry to encourage States to adopt the Central Government’s guidelines on RoW and 
land acquisition related compensation, which in turn is expected to reduce tendering time 
as well as unnecessary court cases. The Committee would like the Ministry to create 
dedicated renewable energy land banks to mitigate the issue of land acquisition. Apart 
from Intra-State transmission infrastructure, the Committee would like to highlight the 
recent development under Inter-State Green Energy Corridor Phase-II whereby the entire 
project is under review owing to the reports of Front-End Engineering and Design (FEED) 
studies. The Committee would like to understand the reasons behind the review of this 
ambitious project whereby High V oltage Direct Current (HVDC) terminals at two 
locations of Pang (Ladakh) and Kaithal (Haryana) were aimed for inter-State transmission 
of RE along with 12 GWh Battery Energy Storage System (BESS). The Committee would 
request the Ministry to share the FEED studies, if possible. 
 

 
 
43 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's observations on consistent delays in GEC 
Phase-I and Phase-II. Seven States under Phase-I have completed their work. Gujarat has 
sought further extension for two packages which were delayed due to RoW and Great 
Indian Bustard (GIB) issues, now on track after the decision by Hon’ble Supreme Court on 
GIB matter and likely to be complete by March 2027. States have requested extension 
under Phase II and the Ministry is actively monitoring completion through dedicated 
review mechanisms. 
 
The Ministry submits that GEC-III has been structured as a PPP scheme implemented in 
Tariff-Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) mode, which directly addresses the primary 
causes of delay in earlier phases such as RoW disputes, limited bidder participation and 
low enforcement on contractors, since private Transmission Service Providers (TSPs) 
under TBCB bear construction and RoW risk themselves, face stronger contractual 
penalties under performance monitoring, and have a financial incentive to resolve land-
related issues proactively. Upgradation under GEC II operate entirely within the footprint 
of already-established infrastructure. Accordingly, upgradation packages are expected to be 
tendered and executed significantly faster than greenfield packages, with near-zero RoW 
litigation risk. 
 
Forest clearance bottlenecks, which caused significant delays in Rajasthan and Gujarat 
under Phase-I due to GIB-related restrictions, will be addressed through pre-planning 
using the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan framework and Joint Coordination 
mechanism at the Cabinet Secretariat level, enabling early identification and resolution of 
forest and wildlife conflicts before tendering rather than during execution. 
 
On the Committee's recommendation to encourage States to adopt Central Government 
guidelines on RoW compensation, the Ministry submits that under GEC-III's Challenge 
Mode sanction framework, priority will be given to States that have an RE policy and land 
compensation framework aligned with the directions of the Ministry of Power, making 
adoption of Central Government RoW guidelines a de facto eligibility condition for early 
project sanction. This approach directly incentivises States to align their compensation 
frameworks, which in turn is expected to reduce tendering timelines and court cases as the 

 
 
44 
 
Committee has desired. 
 
On the recommendation to create dedicated renewable energy land banks, since land is a 
State subject, the Ministry has been regularly writing to States to identify suitable land for 
RE projects, expedite allocation of revenue land, and ease land-use conversion norms. 
Under GEC-III, DPR preparation using the Gati Shakti framework requires advance 
identification and mapping of substation land and transmission corridor alignments. A 
dedicated Project Monitoring Unit with an online MIS system for real-time physical and 
financial tracking will be established to ensure Phase-III does not repeat the execution 
trajectory of its predecessors. 
 
With regard to the observations of the Committee regarding the developments under Inter-
State Green Energy Corridor Phase-II whereby the entire project is under review owing to 
the reports of Front-End Engineering and Design (FEED) studies, and based on the 
response received from POWERGRID, the following is submitted:  
 
A. The Inter-State portion of the Green Energy Corridor Phase-II project was discussed in 
the meeting of Northern Region Power Committee (NRPC), held on 8th September 2025 
wherein CEA, CTUIL, GRID INDIA and other State Transmission Utilities of Northern 
region participated. During the meeting CTUIL briefed that upon the completion of the 
Front-End Engineering & Design (FEED) studies, it is observed that the V oltage Source 
Convertor (VSC) HVDC scheme had following challenges:  
 
 Complex Geography of PANG PS (at 4700m altitude and low temperature [-35 degree]) – 
No VSC HVDC solutions were available at such high altitude. 
 Design and performance challenges of equipment to be adopted for such altitude – 
exemption from performance requirements. 
 High level of UV & cosmic radiation – high failure rate of power electronic devices. 
 Weak network strength, presence of multiple inverter-based resources (Solar, BESS, 
HVDC, SynCon STA TCOM), Transportation and logistics concerns. 
 Additional time requirement as well as scope exclusion requirements.  
 Other technical challenges i.e. working at derated voltage (leads to requirement of more 
no. of semiconductor devices to maintain voltage). 
 

 
 
45 
 
Further, Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), which is responsible for aggregation 
and tendering of the renewable power, flagged concerns arising from the FEED study 
findings regarding the overall project configuration. The FEED studies undertaken by 
OEMs indicated that due to the weak grid conditions at the Pang node and high penetration 
of inverter-based renewable generation, substantial dynamic reactive power support would 
be required for stable operation of the HVDC system. Accordingly, the studies 
recommended installation of approximately 18 synchronous condensers (about 2250 
MV Ar) at the Pang side to maintain voltage stability and grid strength. The estimated cost 
of these synchronous condensers is around ₹7,000 crore, and the proposal envisaged that 
these would be implemented under the scope of RE developers. 
 
A copy of the outcome of the FEED studies shared by POWERGRID is enclosed at 
Appendix-I for kind reference. 
 
O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
      
Recommendation No. 8 
 
NATIONAL GREEN HYDROGEN MISSION (NGHM) 
 
The Committee note that the National Green Hydrogen Mission (NGHM) is an ambitious 
plan that is aimed at building capabilities to produce 5 million metric tonnes per annum 
(MMTPA) of Green Hydrogen by 2030. The Mission also aims to make India a leader in 
technology and manufacturing of electrolyser and other enabling technologies for Green 
Hydrogen. Like last year, an amount of Rs. 600 crore has been allocated under the Mission 
for 2026-27. The Committee note initial hiccups under the Mission as out of the total 
budget of Rs.19,744 crore which has to be spent till 2030, only around 1.3% i.e. Rs. 249.44 
crore could be spent in the last three years (January 2023 to January 2026). Even the 
Ministry has agreed that one of the reasons for under-utilization of its budget during 2023-

 
 
46 
 
24 and 2024-25 was delays under NGHM. However, the Ministry has also furnished that 
the Mission has progressed since then and incentives have been awarded under it for 
electrolyser manufacturing and green hydrogen production. Further, pilot projects have 
been awarded to use green hydrogen in steel, mobility and shipping sectors. This is 
noteworthy as ‘Hard to Abate’ sectors like steel and transport are usually not able to use 
common renewable energy like solar and wind and emits dangerous pollutants during their 
operation. Also R&D projects and testing facilities have been sanctioned under the 
Mission. The Committee appreciate the focus of the Ministry on funding R&D projects in 
green hydrogen sector as the Committee believe that to become Aatmanirbhar (self-reliant) 
in clean energy, our country needs to develop indigenous technology that is affordable and 
suited to our domestic requirements. The Committee are of the view that given the 
emerging nature of green hydrogen sector, the greatest challenge lies in its high cost, lack 
of expertise and apprehensions regarding its uptake by the market. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to closely monitor all the pilot and R&D projects in 
order to understand the difficulties and concerns of different projects under the Mission 
and take effective measures to resolve them to ensure that the projects are able to progress 
without time and cost overruns. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the 
progress of the projects, from time to time. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
It is submitted that the relatively lower utilization of funds during the initial years of 
the Mission (2023–24 and 2024–25) is attributable to the preparatory nature of 
activities undertaken during this period. As the Mission was at a nascent stage, 
efforts were focused on establishing robust frameworks, with emphasis on ensuring 
the long-term viability and effectiveness of the interventions. 
The Ministry would like to apprise the Committee that significant progress has been 
achieved in implementation of the Mission. Under the Strategic Interventions for 
Green Hydrogen Transition (SIGHT) Programme of the Mission, incentives have 
been awarded for green hydrogen production and electrolyser manufacturing. 
Notably, Local Value Addition has been incorporated as a key parameter for both 
selection of bidders and determination of incentive disbursement under the 
electrolyser manufacturing component. 

 
 
47 
 
Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) has discovered prices for the production 
and supply of Green Ammonia (a derivative of Green Hydrogen) to 13 fertilizer units 
across India. The total quantity to be supplied is 7,24,000 tons per annum. 
In addition, four pilot projects have been sanctioned for the use of hydrogen in the 
steel sector. The V . O. Chidambaranar Port Authority has awarded a project for the 
development of bunkering and refueling facilities for green methanol at the port. 
Further, five pilot projects have been sanctioned for the deployment of 37 hydrogen-
fueled vehicles, supported by 9 Hydrogen Refueling Stations (HRS), across 10 
routes in the country. Moreover, twenty-one (21) projects have been awarded under 
the Research and Development (R&D) component of the Mission. 
The Ministry concurs with the Committee’s assessment that high costs, limited 
technical expertise, and market uncertainties constitute key challenges for the scale-
up of green hydrogen. At present, the cost of grey hydrogen produced in Indian 
refineries is in the range of approximately Rs. 180 – Rs. 240 per kg. Under the 
SIGHT Scheme, the discovered Levelized Costs of Hydrogen (LCOH) through 
competitive bidding serve as a benchmark for assessing the cost trajectory of green 
hydrogen. The discovered prices are Rs. 397 per kg (inclusive of 18% GST) for 
supply to the refinery of Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Rs. 387 per kg 
(inclusive of 18% GST) for supply to the refineries of Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited. These benchmark prices are 
being utilised to monitor cost trends for green hydrogen in order to assess the cost 
competitiveness with conventional grey hydrogen.  
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation on monitoring of pilot and R&D 
projects, it is submitted that a robust monitoring framework has been instituted under 
the Mission. Dedicated Scheme Monitoring and Appraisal Committees have been 
constituted for various components, which undertake periodic reviews to track 
progress, identify bottlenecks, and facilitate timely resolution of issues.  
The Ministry assures the Committee that continuous efforts are being made to 
strengthen implementation mechanisms and ensure expeditious progress of all 
projects under the Mission. The Ministry shall also keep the Committee apprised of 
the progress of various components of the Mission on a periodic basis. 
     O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 

 
 
48 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME (RE-RTD) 
 
 The Committee note that for undertaking research and development (R&D) in Renewable 
Energy (RE) sector, the Ministry has been implementing Renewable Energy Research and 
Technology Development Programme (RE-RTD) with a total budget of Rs. 228 crore for 
the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. For the year 2026-27, a proposed budget of Rs. 46 crore 
has been allocated, as the Scheme is presently under review for continuation beyond 2025-
26 to a further period of five years i.e., from 2026-27 to 2030-31. The Committee note 
constant reduction in allocations at revised stage and even lesser utilization, except during 
2022-23 when the budget was increased by Rs. 10 crore at the revised stage. Even during 
2025-26, the allocation of Rs. 46 crore has been reduced to Rs. 35 crore at revised stage, 
out of which Rs. 32.87 crore has been utilized till 15th February, 2026. As per the 
Ministry, R&D projects are generally completed within a duration of three to four years 
and the funds are released after completion of various milestones and proper evaluation of 
the projects. The Ministry has further submitted that during the last five years, it has 
sanctioned around 15 new R&D projects in the areas of Solar PV , Small Hydro, Energy 
Storage, Geothermal Energy, Bioenergy and Tidal Energy under RE-RTD. Given that most 
of these technologies are still at a nascent stage and India depends on imports for meeting 
most of its requirement, the Committee expect that the RE-RTD Scheme be continued 
beyond 2025-26 with a renewed focus on funding R&D in contemporary, emerging and 
future technologies and their time-bound testing and evaluation to supplement the 
requirements of renewable energy sector in the country. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Committee’s observations have been noted.  The Ministry has formulated proposal for 
the continuation of the Renewable Energy Research and Technology Development (RE-
RTD) Scheme for a period of five years from FY 2026-27 to 2030-31 focusing on 

 
 
49 
 
application-oriented R&D, including the establishment of pilot production lines, 
indigenous manufacturing of Long-Duration Energy Storage (LDES) technologies, 
demonstration projects in geothermal, tidal and wave energy, exploration of natural 
hydrogen and resource assessment, circular economy initiatives (including recycling 
projects), laboratory infrastructure development, and support to Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) and incubation centres, along with strengthened monitoring mechanisms and 
enhanced industry participation.   
 
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 16.04.2026 has 
approved the continuation of RE-RTD Scheme for a period of five years from 2026-27 
with a total financial outlay of Rs. 436.93 Crore. 
 
The Ministry has already taken concrete steps in this direction. Five geothermal energy 
projects have been sanctioned under the Renewable Energy Research & Technology 
Development (RE-RTD) programme, focusing on resource assessment, pilot 
demonstrations, and development of suitable technologies for both power generation and 
direct-use applications. In addition, one research project on tidal energy has been 
sanctioned to an industry partner, and another project on sodium-ion battery storage has 
been supported at IIT Roorkee. 
 
 O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
MNRE’S EMPOWERMENT UNDER ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003 AND THE 
NEED FOR AN OFF-GRID RE POLICY 
 
In view of the rapidly expanding scale and strategic importance of the renewable 
energy sector and to strengthen institutional clarity and effective administration of 
the renewable energy sector, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) 

 
 
50 
 
has expressed its desire to be empowered in all aspects pertaining to renewable 
energy under the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. Further, the 
Ministry has submitted that a unified administrative structure under MNRE for all 
renewable sources including Large Hydro would enable integrated policy 
formulation, holistic renewable energy planning, sectoral synergy across all 
renewable energy technologies and improved coordination in achieving national 
renewable energy and Net-Zero goals. With regard to Off-grid and Decentralized 
Renewable Energy (DRE), the Ministry has furnished that a separate policy for Off-
grid RE applications would promote sustainable deployment in remote and rural 
areas, and provide regulatory clarity for decentralized renewable energy ecosystems 
in line with national clean energy objectives. The Committee are of the view that being 
the nodal Ministry of the Government of India for all matters relating to renewable 
energy resources, MNRE should have more powers and authority to administer the 
planning, execution and evaluation of renewable energy projects so as to sustain India’s 
renewable energy transition. The Committee further note that since 2019, capacities 
from Large Hydro projects are being considered under RE targets but the sector 
continues to be administered by the Ministry of Power. Therefore, the Committee are of 
the view that a unified authority for all renewable energy sources, including Large 
Hydro, would be better placed to generate the necessary synergy to achieve the national 
RE and Net-Zero goals. The Committee observe that against the global average of 
around 40-45%, India’s Off-grid and DRE (rooftop/small-scale) is only about 15% and 
therefore, the Committee agree with the Ministry’s submission that a separate policy for 
Off-grid/DRE renewable energy would be beneficial in meeting the country’s RE 
targets, especially in promoting RE projects in rural and remote areas. In view of the 
above, the Committee recommend that, 
 
The Ministry should take up the matter regarding empowering the Ministry for the 
matters related to the renewable energy under the relevant provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003. 
 
A  separate Off-grid RE policy may be formulated at the earliest to develop Off-grid and 
decentralized renewable energy in the country. 
 

 
 
51 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(a) The Ministry is taking appropriate steps towards the need of empowering it for the 
matters related to the renewable energy under the relevant provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003 and the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. The matter has been brought to the 
notice of concerned authorities in various forums on implementation of Renewable 
Energy Programme and achievement of 500 GW target by 2030 and Net-Zero by 2070. 
Ministry will continue to take necessary steps as per the laid down procedure to address 
such issues.  
 
(b) Off-grid and Decentralized Renewable Energy (DRE) applications provide energy 
access in rural and remote areas where grid connectivity is either not techno-
economically feasible or not reliable. These includes from lighting and household needs 
to livelihood applications such as biogas plants, solar pumps, solar street lights, solar 
home lighting system, power plants, solar dryers, cold storages, solar charkha, etc. 
 
Though a separate policy has not been formulated, DRE applications are being taken up 
under the following renewable energy schemes: 
 PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 
 PM Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) 
 New Solar Power Scheme [for Tribal and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group 
(PVTG) Habitations/Villages) under PM Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyaan (PM 
JANMAN) and Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DAJGUA) 
 National Bioenergy Programme 
 
     O.M.No.151/1/2026-P&C dated 22 May, 2026  

 
 
52 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
54 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                            Shrirang Appa Barne 
 04 August, 2026                                          Chairperson, 
Shravana  13, 1948 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Energy 
  

 
 
55 
 
APPENDIX – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2025-26) HELD ON 4TH JULY, 2026 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, 
EPHA, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson   
2. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
5. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
6. Shri Dulu Mahato 
7. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
8. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
10. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
11. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
12. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
13. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Gulam Ali 
15. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
16. Shri Terash Gowalla 
17. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
18. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
19. Shri Vem Narendar Reddy 
20. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
21. Shri P. Wilson 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Atul Anand Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Maneesh Mohan Kamble Under Secretary 
 

 
 
56 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The 
Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the draft Report on 
‘Action-taken by the Government on Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 12th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2026-27) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Report in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned draft Report without any 
amendment/modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament 
during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
57 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
10 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
 
Total:  10  
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil  
Percentage: 00  
 