i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
12 

ii 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.08.2025 
                                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CSJE. NO:220 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 19.08.2025. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
 
   2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
25. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26. Shri Ramji 
27. Shri Rameswar Teli 
28. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
29. Smt. P. T. Usha 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Krishendra Kumar       - Deputy Secretary 
3. Ms. Melody Vungthiansiam  - Committee Officer 
 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twelfth Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18.12.2024. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) have furnished their replies indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in that Report on 30.06.2025. The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 19.08.2025. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
19th August, 2025                                                            
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
      

1 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
1.2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18.12.2024. It contained 15 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No. 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.12, 3.13 
8.11, 9.23 and 10.13  
(Total: 8, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. 2.11 and 11.10   
(Total: 2, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.28, 5.9 and 6.13 
(Total: 3, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: –   
Rec. Para No. 7.9 and 9.22 
(Total: 2, Chapter: V) 
1.3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report may 
be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 

2 
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.  SCHOLARSHIP FOR HIGHER EDUCATION FOR YOUNG ACHIEVERS 
SCHEME (SHREYAS) FOR SCs 
     
   Recommendation (Para No.4.28) 
1.5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Scholarship for Higher Education for Young Achievers Scheme (SHREYAS) 
for SCs is the Umbrella Scheme which has four existing sub-Schemes viz. 
National Fellowships for SCs, National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for SCs, 
Top Class Education Scheme for SCs and Free Coaching Scheme for SC and 
OBC students. The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for 2022-23 
and 2023-24 was less in comparison to 2021-22 but the actual expenditure has 
been constantly increasing since 2021-22, as it was ₹271.21 crore, ₹293.77 
crore and ₹363.31crore in 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, respectively. The 
Committee find that the Free Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBC is not available 
on the National Scholarship Portal and onboarding of the Scheme on the portal 
is under consideration. The Committee also find that the Scheme is being 
implemented by Dr Ambedkar Foundation through empanelled Central 
Universities after revision of the Scheme in 2023-24 and only 19 Central 
Universities have signed the MOU with the Foundation. The Committee desire 
that the Department should take necessary steps to on-board the Free 
Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBCs on National Scholarship Portal and more 
Central Universities should be empanelled so that a large number of students 
of SC and OBC communities are able to appear in competitive and entrance 
examinations for obtaining jobs in Public/Private Sector as well as to secure 
admission in reputed higher educational institutions.” 
 
1.6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“Continuous follow-up is done with all 56 Central Universities. However, as on 
date, only 19 Central Universities have signed Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with Dr. Ambedkar Foundation and become part of the Scheme. The 
Department will continue its efforts for on-boarding more Central Universities.”  
 
 
 

3 
 
 
1.7.  The Committee, while acknowledging the steady increase in the 
actual expenditure over the last three years under the Scholarship for 
Higher Education for Young Achievers Scheme (SHREYAS), had observed 
that the Free Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBCs is not available on the 
National Scholarship Portal. Following the revision of SHREYAS Scheme in 
2023-24, the Committee found that the Scheme is being implemented by 
Dr. Ambedkar Foundation through empanelled Central Universities and 19 
Central Universities have signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with the Foundation. The Ministry have informed that while continuous 
follow-up is being done with all 56 Central Universities, only 19 Central 
Universities have signed MoU with Dr. Ambedkar Foundation so far. In order 
to enhance the effectiveness and reach of the SHREYAS scheme aimed at 
benefiting a larger number of students from SC and OBC communities, the 
Committee reiterate that the Department should expedite the process of 
on-boarding the Free Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBCs on the National 
Scholarship Portal. Further, the Committee desire that the Department 
should strive to empanel remaining Central Universities with the Ambedkar 
Foundation as early as possible, thereby, expanding its reach to enable 
large number of students preparing for competitive examinations and 
securing admission in reputed higher educational institutions can take 
advantage of the Scheme. 
 
B.  PRADHAN MANTRI ANUSUCHIT JAATI ABHYUDAY YOJANA (PM-
AJAY) 
    Recommendation (Para No.5.9) 
1.8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana 
(PM-AJAY) is an Umbrella scheme wherein 3 centrally sponsored scheme, 
namely, Pradhan Mantri Adrash Gram Yojana (PM-AJAY), Special Central 
Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCA to SCSP) and Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) have been merged in 2021-22 due to similarity in 
nature. The Committee find that since 2021-22, 6282 villages in the country 
have been declared Adrash Grams, Rs.1023 crore provided to 184815 

4 
 
beneficiaries under GIA component and Rs. 114.23 crore sanctioned for 44 
hostels covering 4985 beneficiaries. The Committee appreciate the efforts of 
the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for taking several steps for 
effective implementation of the Scheme. The Committee are however, slightly 
worried with the pace of actual expenditure incurred during 2022-23 and 2023-
24. The Committee feel that the gap between Budgetary Estimate and Actual 
Expenditure should be narrowed down so that the objectives of the Scheme are 
fully achieved. The State Governments should be guided to take necessary 
steps so that more and more villages are declared Adarsh Grams in their States 
as it has happened in Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh. Similarly, 
the construction of hostels in educational institutions should also be prioritized 
as large numbers of students belonging to SC community are not able to join 
good educational institution due to limited availability of hostels.” 
 
1.9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-AJAY), consists of 
three components namely Adarsh Gram, Grants in Aid to State/District level 
Projects and Hostel component. The scheme is 100 % centrally sponsored and 
being implemented by the State Government/UT Administration. The 
expenditure incurred during last two years has been relatively low due to the 
introduction of the SNA system which requires States/UTs to complete the 
necessary mapping, causing a procedural delay. Additionally, pending 
Utilization Certificates and fewer proposals for Hostels and non-submission of 
Grants-in-aid perspective plans by some States contributed to reduced 
expenditure. To address this, the Department holds monthly review meetings 
and maintains regular communication with States/UTs to improve 
implementation, clear SNA balances, and ensure timely submission of UCs for 
smooth fund release. Furthermore, Ministry officials visit villages to oversee the 
implementation of Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyudyay Yojana (PM-
AJAY) so that declaration of Adarsh Gram is expedited by the State 
Governments. This Department is implementing Hostel component of PM-AJAY 
which aims to increase literacy and encourage enrolment of SCs students in 
schools and higher educational institutions by providing adequate residential 
facilities in quality institutions, especially in the SC dominated blocks and 
elsewhere in India.  
With efforts and follow-up, as compared to earlier years during the FY 2024-
25, the utilisation was Rs 736 Crore as against Rs 471 Crore in FY 2023-24 
which is an increase of 56%. The Department will ensure higher utilisation in 
the next financial year.” 

5 
 
 
1.10.  While appreciating the efforts taken by the Department for effective 
implementation of PM-AJAY Scheme, the Committee highlighted the need 
for narrowing the gap between the Budgetary Estimates and the Actual 
Expenditure under the Scheme. The Committee further opined the need for 
guiding the State Governments towards more villages being declared 
Adarsh Grams and to prioritize the construction of hostels in educational 
institutions. The Department have informed that low expenditure in the last 
two years were due to introduction of the SNA system, pending Utilization 
Certificates, fewer proposal for Hostels and non-submission of Grants-in-
aid perspective plans by some States. On the implementation of the hostel 
component of PM-AJAY, the Department have informed that they are 
providing adequate residential facilities in quality institutions, especially in 
SC dominated blocks. The Committee are of the view that the Department 
should take necessary measures to ensure that the reasons affecting 
utilization of funds do not anymore hinder the expenditure and improve 
further to maximise utilization of funds. Further, in order to ensure timely 
implementation and maximum benefit to SC communities, the Committee 
reiterate the need for prioritizing the construction of hostels in educational 
institutions and guiding the State Governments lagging behind in 
declaration of villages as Adarsh Grams so that the benefit of the Scheme 
reaches large number of villages in the country.  
 
C. Enforcement of the Protection of Civil Rights (PCR) Act, 1955 and the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 
 
   Recommendation (Para No.6.13) 
1.11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“As abolition of untouchability is enshrined in the Constitution of India, the 
Government of India has taken several measures such as enactment of 
Protection of Civil Rights (PCR) Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. The Committee note that 
a centrally sponsored scheme was introduced to financially assist the 
States/UTs for strengthening the machinery for Implementation of these Acts. 

6 
 
The Committee find that the Central assistance of ₹535.70 crore was released 
to various States during the year 2023-24 for functioning and strengthening of 
the SC/ST Protection Cell and Special Police Stations, strengthening and 
enforcement of judicial machinery, relief and rehabilitation of atrocity victims, 
incentive for inter-caste marriages and awareness generation and publicity. In 
this regard, the Committee have found that maximum financial assistance has 
been released to Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Odisha and Bihar 
during the year 2023-24. However, the Committee have observed that several 
States have not been able to set up the requisite system to effectively 
implement the provisions contained in the Acts and to deal with the cases of 
atrocities against SCs. The Committee were also made to understand that there 
is no financial constraints with the Government of India, and they are ready to 
release more funds to the States for the establishment of the machinery 
required for effective implementation of the Acts. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the issue of atrocities against the persons belonging to Scheduled 
castes should be sincerely tackled by the State Governments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all the State Governments should be pursued by 
the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to establish and strengthen 
the machinery required for enforcement of the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 
1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989, effectively.” 
 
1.12.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Caste and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme. The objective of the Scheme is to financially assist the States/UTs 
towards effective implementation of various provisions of these Acts.  The 
Department releases funds to States/UTs only on the basis of their proposals.  
To ensure that the beneficiaries are not deprived besides monitoring through 
the periodic progress reports Department is organizing conferences of State 
Social Welfare Ministers, State Welfare Secretaries, regular capacity building 
programmes, field visits by the officers of the Department. A committee under 
the chairpersonship of the Hon’ble Minister for the Social Justice & 
Empowerment exists to review the effective implementation of these Acts and 
the Scheme, where all States/UTs participate.  
Regional meetings are being conducted by the Department to review the 
implementation of these Acts and the scheme, wherein region-wise the SC/ST 
Development/Social Welfare Department of the 5-8 States/UTs are being 
called for the review of the implementation of these Acts and the scheme and 
the State-wise review of the mechanisms set up by the States and their further 

7 
 
requirement as per the provisions made in the Acts, has been made a 
permanent agenda of the meeting. These matter are discussed in the 
meetings with the States/UTs to emphasize the need to set up the requisite 
systems as prescribed in the SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 and the rules framed there 
under for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.” 
 
1.13. Noting that a centrally sponsored scheme was introduced to 
financially assist the States/UTs for implementation of Protection of Civil 
Rights (PCR) Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, the Committee found that a central 
assistance of ₹535.70 crore was released during 2023-24 to various States. 
The Committee had observed that while several States were unable to set 
up the requisite system for implementation of these Acts, maximum 
financial assistance had been released to a cluster of five States in Central 
India. Given that there were no financial constraints with the Government 
in releasing funds under these Acts, the Committee were of the opinion that 
the atrocities against SCs should be sincerely tackled by the Department by 
establishing and strengthening the machinery for enforcement of these 
Acts. The Department have informed that funds are released to States/UTs 
on the basis of their proposals. For effective implementation of the 
provisions of the Acts, the Department in their reply have cited various 
measures taken by them including periodic progress monitoring, organizing 
conferences, capacity building programmes, field visits and regional 
meetings for review of the implementation of these Acts. The Committee 
laud the efforts made by the Department towards implementation of these 
Acts aimed at reducing atrocities against the SC community. However, the 
Committee feel that the Department while conducting State-wise reviews 
should focus on those States which are facing challenges in setting up the 
machinery for enforcement of these Acts and ensure that the funds meant 
for curbing offences of untouchability and atrocities against SCs and STs 
are not concentrated in a few States. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment should engage 
with each of the State Governments to create and enhance the necessary 
mechanisms required for enforcement of the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 

8 
 
1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 so that the requisite machinery is established in each 
State at the earliest. 
 
D. SCHEME OF RESIDENTIAL EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS IN HIGH SCHOOL 
IN TARGETED AREA (SRESHTA) FOR SC 
   Recommendation (Para No.7.9) 
1.14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Scheme of Residential Education for Students in 
High School in Targeted area (SRESHTA) for SCs came into existence in 2021-
22 in place of Grants-in-aid to Voluntary and Other Organizations working for 
Scheduled Caste to provide environment for Socio-economic upliftment and 
overall development of Scheduled Castes. The Committee find that the Scheme 
is operated in two modes, as per the established norms, every year 3000 
meritorious SC students (1500 for lXth class and '1500 for Xth Class) are selected 
for admission in the best private residential schools under Mode-I whereas 
under Mode-II schools/hostels run by VOs/NGOs are provided Grants-In-aid for 
13500 SC Students per year. The Committee are happy to note that annual 
allocation of ₹2428.00 crore made for 2024-25 is much higher in comparison to 
the allocation of ₹2371.00 crore made in 2023-24 and ₹2364.00 crore made in 
2022-23 but the quantum of actual expenditure for 2021-22, 2022-23 and 
2023-24 is little discouraging for the Committee. Further, only 2405 students 
were selected under Mode-I in 2022-23 against 3000 Students fixed for 
selection. The Committee also note that large number of VOs/NGOs from 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh received Grants-in-aid 
under Mode-II from 2020-21 to 2023-24 but many States did not receive any 
grant. The Committee believe that the SRESHTA Scheme is crucial for the SC 
students to get proper education from the best schools in the country. Hence, 
the Committee desire that the Scheme should be well publicized so that large 
number of students get the benefit of the scheme. Since, the Scheme under 
Mode-II appears to be popular in some States only, the Committee would like 
the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to take suitable steps to 
increase awareness about the Scheme in the country to increase the footprints 
of the Scheme among the SC students. The Committee hope necessary action 
will be taken by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in this 
regard”. 
 
 

9 
 
 
1.15.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“This Department has taken several measures like requesting State/UT 
Governments to publicize the scheme in the Schools & motivate SC students to 
participate in the SHRESHTA scheme. Further, the State/UT Governments were 
also requested to issue necessary directions to the concerned officers to 
facilitate the SC students for obtaining their SC certificates at the earliest. The 
scheme is being published through website of the Ministry and print media as 
well. The Department has planned that national-level entrance exam in 2025 
through which admission in best private residential schools takes place earlier, 
so that all the admission process such as declaration of result, e-counselling 
and reporting of the selected students etc. are completed by 30th June, 2025 
to enable filling up all the 3000 seats.”  
 
1.16. The Committee had pointed out that the actual expenditure under the 
SRESHTA Scheme had been low during the last three consecutive years 
from 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 and that out of a fixed number of 3000 
students to be selected under Mode-I in 2023-24, only 2405 students had 
been selected. The Committee had desired that the Scheme should be well 
publicized so that a larger number of students would benefit from the 
SRESHTA Scheme. The Ministry in their action taken reply have informed 
that a national-level entrance exam is being planned in 2025 through which 
the entire process of selection of students would be completed by 30th June, 
2025 to enable filling up all 3000 seats. The Committee expect that the said 
process is followed through by the Ministry and reiterate that the number 
of students fixed for selection in Mode-I i.e. 3000 students be categorically 
filled. Further, in order to identify the reasons for the shortfall in the number 
of selected students and underutilization of funds under the Scheme, a 
thorough review may be conducted on the implementation of the Scheme 
and a strategy may be developed for increasing participation from 
States/UTs that have not benefitted from the Scheme so far. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
 

10 
 
E. NATIONAL ACTION FOR MECHANISED SANITATION ECOSYSTEM 
(NAMASTE) 
   Recommendation (Para No.9.22) 
1.17. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“National Action Plan for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem Scheme (NAMASTE) 
was launched in July, 2023 to formalize the Sewer and Septic Tank Workers 
(SSWs) and to ensure safety and dignity of sanitation workers in Urban India. 
It is implemented in convergence amongst key stakeholders including Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation and Ministry of skill Development and Entrepreneurship. As per the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, there are likely to be one lakh Sewer and 
Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) in the country. The Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs are required to converge for interventions such as profiling of SSWs 
through MIS portal, nomination of Responsible Sanitation Authority, setting up 
of Emergency Response Sanitation Unit, etc. In view of the involvement of 
several Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations, the Committee are of the 
opinion that for the success of the NAMASTE, it is important that there is proper 
coordination amongst them so that the responsibilities entrusted over them are 
carried out smoothly. Unless all the SSWs are validated, they would be deprived 
from the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee find that out of 43961 profiled 
SSWs, 37407 SSWs have been validated by the concerned Urban Local Bodies. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that all the SSWs should be profiled and 
validated urgently. Further, the pace of the distribution of PPE Kits, Safety 
devices and Ayushman Bharat Cards to SSWs is required to be increased as 
only 16741 PPE Kits, 42 Safety Devices and 13412 Ayushman Bharat Cards 
have been provided to them. The Committee expect that the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment would take all necessary steps for the welfare 
of the SSWs and effective Implementation of NAMASTE in a time bound 
manner.” 
1.18.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“National Action for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMASTE) has been 
launched in July, 2023 with aim to ensure safety and dignity of Sewer and 
Septic Tank Workers (SSWs). Profiling of SSWs could be started in last week of 
December, 2024 and is being done continuously in coordination with 
States/UTs. Profiling has been carried out in all States / UTs.  Tamil Nadu and 
Odisha have their own schemes and are profiling SSWs. The details of validated 
SSWs by Tamil Nadu and Odisha will be merged with details of validated SSWs.   
As on 13.04.2025, out of 73,289 profiled SSWs, 69,231 SSWs have been 
validated by the concerned Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 45,871 PPE kits for 

11 
 
SSWs have been delivered to States / Uts. 354 Safety Devices Kit for Emergency 
Response Sanitation Units (ERSUs) have been supplied. Ayushman cards have 
been made available to 16,962 beneficiaries. Support of Urban Local bodies, 
National Health Authority (NHA), Common Service Centre (CSC) etc. Is being 
sought to expedite the process for issuance of Ayushman Cards. Responsible 
Sanitation Authorities (RSA) have been appointed in 557 Districts.  ERSUs have 
been established in 576 ULBs. Helpline number including 14420 has been made 
operational in 290 ERSUs. 961 workshops have been conducted on Prevention 
of Hazardous Cleaning of Sewer and Septic Tanks in Municipal Corporation/ 
Municipality/ Nagar Palika and other such organizations engaging Sewer and 
septic tank cleaning workers. Further, the recommendation of the Committee 
is noted for strict compliance.” 
1.19. The Committee had desired in their original Report that all Sewer and 
Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) should be profiled and validated urgently as 
only 43961 SSWs had been profiled and 37407 SSWs had been validated by 
Urban Local Bodies out of a probable one lakh Sewer and Septic Tank 
Workers (SSWs). The Committee also highlighted the need for increase in 
the pace of distribution of PPE Kits, Safety devices and Ayushman Bharat 
Cards to SSWs as only 16741 PPE Kits, 42 Safety Devices and 13412 
Ayushman Bharat Cards had been distributed. The Department in their 
Action taken reply have stated that as on 13th April, 2025, out of 73,289 
SSWs profiled, 69,231 SSWs have been validated. The Department have 
informed that 45,871 PPE kits for SSWs have been delivered to States/UTs, 
354 Safety Devices Kit for Emergency Response Sanitation Units (ERSUs) 
have been supplied and 16,962 Ayushman cards have been made available. 
The Committee observe that despite the efforts made by the Department, 
there is still a significant gap in the profiling and validation of SSWs, 
distributions of PPE Kits, safety devices and Ayushman cards. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the profiling and validation of SSWs 
should be completed in a time bound manner and also ensure that the 
safety kits, PPE kits & Ayushman Cards are distributed to all the eligible 
SSWs without any delay. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should ensure that the safety kits and PPE kits delivered to 
States/UTs reaches the beneficiaries thus achieving one of the objectives 
of NAMASTE Scheme i.e. ‘No sanitation workers come in direct contact with 
human fecal matter’. SSWs may also be provided training on the use of 
safety devices and PPE kits to ensure safety and dignity.  
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No.2.12) 
The Committee find that the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment have 
fixed annual physical targets for various schemes such as Pre-Matric and Post-Matric 
Scholarship Schemes, National Fellowships for SCs, National Oversees Scholarships 
for SCs, Pradhan Mantri Dakshta Aur Kushalta Samparna Hitgrahi (PM- DAKSH) etc. 
Simultaneously, the Committee also find that there are several schemes under which 
physical targets are not fixed by the Department, such as Pradhan Mantri Adarsh 
Gram Yojana (PMAGY), Babu Jagjiwan Ram Chatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) and Venture 
Capital Fund (VCF) for SCs and OBCs, etc. The Committee believe that the success 
of any scheme can be measured with the achievement of targets/ goals. In the 
absence of targets/goals it would not be possible to assess the outcome of any 
scheme. The Committee would be happy if the annual physical targets are fixed for 
such Schemes where the welfare measures can be quantified as the Committee have 
found that the schemes with targets perform better than the Scheme without annual 
targets. In view of the above, the Committee would like the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment to examine the viability and fix the physical targets of all 
the welfare schemes of the Department so that there is no laxity in the 
implementation of the Schemes at any stage by the States or other Implementing 
Agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
In so far as Pre-Matric & Post-Matric Scholarship schemes for SCs are concerned no 
annual targets are fixed by the DoSJE.  The scheme is a saturation-based scheme and 
whosoever applies and is eligible is sanctioned the scholarship irrespective of the 
number of students.  As regards National Fellowships and National Overseas 
Scholarships for SCs annual maximum slots are fixed.   
Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) is one component of umbrella scheme 
PM-AJAY.  Under this component infrastructure development in identified SC Villages 
are being covered.  Since the thrust is on gap-filling of infrastructure in the identified 

13 
 
villages, the targets related to beneficiaries cannot be computed and predicted. 
However, there is an overall target of number of villages to be declared as Adarsh 
Gram.The VCF-SC (including ASIIM) and VCF-BC specify year-wise targets for the 
number of SC and BC-owned companies to be supported through assistance under 
these schemes until the closure of the fund.  Under VCF-SC, an annual target of 
supporting 18 companies and nurturing 250 new incubation ideas and startups has 
been set.  Under VCF-BC, the annual target is to support 13 companies owned by 
entrepreneurship from Backward Classes.  The Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana 
(BJRCY) is now amalgamated into Hostel Component of PM-AJAY wherein, proposals 
are received from the State Governments/UTs after conducting a need based study 
for the requirement of hostel for SC students.  As this component of the scheme is 
based on proposals received from States, the targets are not fixed. However, under 
this Scheme a certain percentage of funds are allocated for the Hostel Component of 
PM-AJAY Scheme. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.13) 
The Committee note that the funds were surrendered in many schemes in 2023-24 
due to multiple reasons. In Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes, funds 
were surrendered due to less receipt of application/ proposals and in Top class 
education for SCs and Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs proposals were received late. 
Similarly, in Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-AJAY) funds were 
surrendered due to the introduction of Single Nodal Account System and in Scheme 
of Residential Education for Students in High School in Targeted Area (SHRESHTA) for 
SCs it was due to revision in the scheme. The Committee believe that the changes 
introduced in the Schemes were to streamline the system and to prevent fraud and 
misuse of funds. The Committee, however, do not find that surrender of funds due to 
reduction in late receipt of application/ proposals from States is in the interest of 
beneficiary. The Committee feel that delay in submission of proposal reflects very 
poorly on the part of State/UT Governments. The reduction in number of applications 
due to delay in processing of applications by the State/UT Governments is not 
acceptable and should be avoided by the State/UT Governments. The Committee 
expect that the Department would devise suitable mechanism for capacity building, 

14 
 
handholding to various implementing institutions of the State Governments so that all 
the Schemes are implemented effectively.  
Reply of the Government 
For effective implementation of all the Schemes of DoSJE, various measures have 
been introduced including capacity building, handholding/cluster/regional meetings 
and/or workshops for all States/UTs. These are being conducted periodically to review 
the progress of the States as well as to resolve any pending issues. In particular, 
regular Chintan Shivirs at the National level under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Union 
Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment, and regular Regional Review meetings 
are being conducted under the Chairmanship of Secretary SJ&E. Every year, Project 
Appraisal Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, D/o SJ&E reviews and 
appraises the Annual Action Plan received from States/UTs under the respective 
schemes. By hand-holding supports to the States/UTs, district, block and gram 
panchayat-level authorities, all eligible beneficiaries are facilitated. The National 
Institute of Social Defence (NISD), an autonomous body of DoSJE, also provides 
capacity-building and training sessions for the State government functionaries for 
certain Schemes. Because of the concerted effort of the Department budget utilisation 
in 2024-25 has shown significant improvement from 74.03% against BE and 96.53% 
against RE in 2023-24 to 76.93% against BE and 99.83% against RE in 2024-25. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.14) 
National Institute of Social Defence (NISD) is undertaking work of training and 
research in the field of Social Defence and also addresses critical areas such as Drug 
Abuse prevention, Senior Citizens Welfare, transgender welfare, Beggary prevention 
and rehabilitation of socially marginalized and vulnerable groups. The Committee 
are happy to find that NISD has done remarkable work by conducting 2100 
programmes during 2021-22 to 2024-25 for NGOs, GIA functionaries, social worker, 
schools, service providers and for different target groups on drug prevention. 
However, the Committee find that the Institute encounters certain challenges 
primarily due to shortage of human resources. The Committee find that the Institute 
has prepared a comprehensive plan for expansion of Rehabilitation centres, training 
and capacity building and to strengthen the infrastructure. The Committee 

15 
 
appreciate the efforts of the Institute and expect that they would continue to 
increase their presence amongst Senior Citizens, Transgenders, beggars and the 
persons suffering from drug abuse, etc. The Committee would recommend that the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment will make all out efforts to ensure 
that the welfare activities undertaken by the Institute do not suffer for want of 
funds, human resources etc. and the Institute continues to contribute effectively in 
the welfare of the targeted persons. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance and the Department 
will continue to support the welfare activities being undertaken by the National 
Institute of Social Defence (NISD). 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.12) 
The Committee notes that under Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for SCs, the financial 
assistance is provided to Scheduled Caste students studying at Post matriculation or 
post-secondary stage to complete their education. The Committee find that the 
budgetary allocation under the Scheme was ₹3,415.62 crore, ₹6,660.00 crore, 
₹6,359.14 crore, whereas the actual expenditure was ₹1,978.56 crore, 4,392.50 crore 
and ₹5,476.22 crore in 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, respectively. The Committee 
also find that the funds allocated during these years could not be spent as bigger 
States such as Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar and Chhattisgarh have submitted 
reduced annual action plan in terms of beneficiaries in 2022-23 and 2023-24 and large 
number of applications are pending with Rajasthan, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu and Punjab for 2022-23. The Committee find it hard to believe that despite the 
stop wise mechanism established by the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, the State Governments are not able to complete all the formalities on 
time. The Committee also find that several efforts have been made by the Department 
for active participation of State/UT Governments for Implementation of Post Matric 
Scholarship Scheme. However, nothing fruitful seems to work out to avoid the delay 
in submission of proposals by the States. The Committee feel that the State 
Governments should own up their responsibility for proper implementation of the 
Scheme. The Committee recommend that the Department should make all-out efforts 

16 
 
to establish a fool proof mechanism to deal with those States that are not performing 
well in terms of number of beneficiaries and expenditure under the scheme so that 
the large number of Scheduled Castes students would be able to complete their higher 
education. 
Reply of the Government 
The Post-Matric Scheme is not fund-limiting and the objective is to achieve full-
saturation for all the eligible beneficiaries. The suggestions of the Committee are 
agreed and the Department makes all out efforts to ensure that the concerned State 
Governments are provided the required hand-holding and support for full-saturation. 
 Suitable help is provided to the States so as to prevent delays in submitting the data 
in respect of beneficiaries particularly concerning the Scholarship Schemes.  
Loopholes, if any, in delays relating to transmitting of data etc., are addressed with 
the objective that all eligible beneficiaries are benefitted. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.13) 
The Committee note that Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC students was revised 
in 2020-21 to increase the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) of SCs in higher education 
from 23.0 percent to the national average of 27.0 percent. The Committee have found 
that the GER of SC students has increased to 25.9 per cent in 2021-22 from 23.1 per 
cent in 2020-21 which is a significant improvement in GER of 18.9 per cent in 2014-
15. However, the Committee are little apprehensive with regard to the target of 27 
per cent fixed to be achieved by 2025-26 as several States are submitting reduced 
annual action plan and there is substantial delay in submitting the proposals by State/ 
UT Governments including the pendency with several States for 2022-23 and 2023-
24. The Committee feel that unless the measures taken by the Department are 
stringently complied by the State Governments, the target of the Department to 
increase the GER of SCs in higher education to the national average of GER may not 
be achieved. The Committee are of the opinion that the criteria adopted by the 
Department to identify the poorest household may also supplement the efforts of the 
Department in enhancing the GER of SCs subject to the condition that the State/UT 
Governments efficiently execute them and enhance the enrolment of SC students. The 
Committee have no doubts about the efforts and the competency of the Department 

17 
 
but the active participation of State/UT Governments is very essential to achieve the 
target. Hence, the Committee would like the Department to direct all the State/ UT 
Governments for expediting the process of identifying the poorest households from 
various sources and enrol the eligible SC students under the Scholarship schemes in 
a mission mode so that the Department would achieve the target of GER of SCs fixed 
to be achieved by 2025-26. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestions of the Committee are noted and continuous efforts are being made 
to ensure that the targeted GER is achieved. As under the Scholarship Schemes of the 
Department there is an income criteria to be eligible for availing the benefits, the 
Department efforts supplement the overall action being taken by the Government on 
achieving the targeted GER. The Department works with the concerned State 
Governments to identify and ensure that all students from the SC poorest households 
are enrolled under the Scholarship schemes. As Post Matric Scholarships Scheme for 
SC Students is implemented on DBT mode, States/UTs are submitting realistic 
numbers with regard to their target in Annual Action Plan. In the beginning of every 
financial year, Project Appraisal Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, 
D/o SJ&E reviews and appraises the Annual Action Plan in the month of April/May 
received from States/UTs.  This Department is also taking necessary steps and 
providing time to time handholding to States/UTS to clear the pendency of earlier 
years so that target may be achieved. Scheme guidelines envisage that States/UTs 
are required to undertake awareness drive about the scheme through the Gram 
Panchayats Notice Boards, school committees, and discussions in the parent-teacher 
association meetings and other public awareness measures, in order to extend its 
coverage and also minimize any misuse by unscrupulous elements. Moreover, 
classified advertisements are published in National and regional newspapers in Hindi, 
English and regional languages. Scheme snippets are being uploaded on social media 
platforms for awareness. Every State Government is required to undertake a campaign 
every year in March/April to identify such students and mentor them to enrol and avail 
scholarships. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8.11) 
The Committee note that the Pre-matric Scholarship for children of parents/guardians 
engaged in unclean and hazardous occupation was merged with Pre-matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SCs. In 2021-22 with the objective of streamlining the 
implementation and optimizing resources. The Committee find that prior to the merger 
the Central share was released only to Gujarat during 2019-20 & 2020-21 and now 
the proposals have been received from 11 State/UT Governments in 2024-25. The 
Committee find that the merger has increased the number of beneficiaries from the 
children of persons engaged in hazardous occupation from 234592 in 2020-21 to 
332969 in 2021-22. However, the actual expenditure has been less than the Budgetary 
Estimate in 2022-23 and 2023-24. The Committee also find that States such as 
Haryana, Goa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra did not have a single 
beneficiary and Central share was also not released to them in 2023-24. Further, some 
of the States/UTs such as Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Nagaland and Telangana are not implementing the Scheme. 
The Committee believe that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment must 
have taken appropriate measures with regard to the reasons due to which actual 
expenditure was less than the Budgetary Estimate and if any action is yet to be taken, 
then the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment may expedite it. Similarly, 
in regard to the non-achievement of targets fixed for 2022-23 and 2023-24, the 
Committee are sure that the measures taken to enhance the actual expenditure would 
certainly help the Department in achieving the target of 27 lakhs set up for 2024-25. 
The Committee desire that the States that are not implementing the Scheme and non-
release of Central Share to certain States requires to be examined and the necessary 
action taken so that the objective of promoting literacy and uninterrupted education 
of the Pre-matric level amongst the SC students and children of persons engaged in 
hazardous occupation is achieved. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
action taken by the Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Under Pre-Matric Scholarships Scheme for SCs & Others, Budgetary Estimate is for 
both the components combined. The details of Budgetary Estimate, Revised Estimate 
and Actual Expenditure during the 2022-23 and 2023-24 are as follows: 
 
 

19 
 
(₹. in Cr.) 
FY Budgetary Estimate Revised Estimate Actual Expenditure 
2022-23 500.00 500.00 208.62 
2023-24 500.00 430.00 446.64 
*During 2022-23, DBT Started. 
 State Govt. of Haryana has not shared their Annual Action Plan under the Pre-
Matric Scholarships Scheme for SCs & Others since the revision of the scheme 
guidelines. Similarly, the State of Jharkhand has not shared their complete Annual 
Action Plan for 2023-24. 
Since, Goa and Madhya Pradesh have not shared any State share paid data, the 
Government of India contribution could not be paid. State Govt. of Maharashtra was 
facing challenges regarding development of Pre-Matric Scholarship Portal. This 
resulted in spill-over of earlier years State share paid data on the National Scholarship 
Portal. However, the systems have been strengthened lately. For the State 
Government final verified State share paid data sent on the National Scholarship Portal 
(NSP), the Government of India contribution has been paid during FY 2024-25. 
 There is no proposal from the States/UTs of Andaman and Nicobar Island, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Mizoram and Nagaland, as either they have 
no SC population or there are no eligible students. State Govt. of Telangana was not 
implementing the scheme as they have not adopted the revised scheme guidelines. 
However, recently, they have agreed to adopt the scheme guidelines in 2024-25 and 
therefore, the SC students would be covered under the Scheme in future. 
 This Department is taking several actions to achieve the targets as proposed 
by the States/UTs under their Annual Action plans set up for 2024-25: 
 With the change in the scheme architecture as well as the funding pattern, 
a state of fiscal discipline and financial responsibility has come to the 
States/UTs where both States and UTs being the implementing agencies 
have streamlined their systems in line with the department guidelines as 
well as upgraded themselves and stabilised their systems. Moreover, with 
the advent of Aadhaar Payment Bridge System, the scholarship is disbursed 
directly into the Aadhaar-seeded accounts of the beneficiaries which has 
become a flag bearer among the major scholarship schemes of this 
department.  

20 
 
 Regular capacity building and handholding/cluster/regional meetings and/or 
workshops for all States/UTs are conducted to review the progress of the 
States as well as to resolve any pending issues. 
 Advertisements to promote outreach and increase awareness: 
i. Scheme snippets are being uploaded on social media platforms 
(Facebook, Twitter and Instagram). 
ii. Classified advertisements are being published in National and 
regional newspapers in Hindi, English and regional languages. 
 Field visits: Officials dealing with Pre and Post Matric Scholarship schemes 
for SCs visit various institutes in the States to understand their concerns. 
 Channelising various agencies/partners: Services from National Payment 
Corporation of India (NPCI), Indian Post Payments Bank (IPPB) are being 
taken to ensure Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries as non-seeding of Aadhaar 
is a major concern for non-disbursement of SC scholarships. PMU staff is 
also deputed to visit the districts with the maximum pendency so that 
coordination with bankers and institutions may be done. 
 Monthly review of Pre & Post Matric scholarship scheme for SCs under the 
Chairmanship of JS (SCD)& Director, D/oSJ&E: This Division monitors the 
progress of the implementation of the schemes on monthly basis wherein 
review of schemes, State wise is undertaken. 
 This Department is making all efforts with the States. Regular State visits are 
also made for providing technical assistance and hand-holding to the States so that 
timely release of scholarship may be made.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.9.23) 
The aim of NAMASTE is to ensure that there is zero fatalities in sanitation work in 
India, all sanitation work is performed by formalized skilled workers and no sanitation 
workers come in direct contact with human faecal matter, occupational safety training 
to SSWs, etc. However, the Committee have found that the Department is lagging 
behind in this regard as several instances of death of unskilled sanitation workers due 
to negligence/ non-availability of safety equipment are reported every year in the 
press. There is utmost need for capacity building of sanitation workers by enhancing 

21 
 
their occupational skills. The Committee therefore, desire that the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment should ensure that all the sanitation workers are 
adequately trained and conduct comprehensive campaign to increase awareness 
amongst sanitation service seekers to obtain services for cleaning of sewer septic 
tanks from trained SSWs. The Committee also desire that the minimum wages may 
be ensured for SSWs and the State/UT Governments may be suitably directed to 
ensure that SSWs get minimum wages prescribed.  
Reply of the Government 
961 workshops have been conducted since 2023-24 for increasing awareness on 
Prevention of Hazardous Cleaning of Sewer and Septic Tanks amongst all stakeholders 
engaging Sewer and septic tank cleaning workers. Responsible Sanitation Authority 
(RSA) has been appointed in 508 Districts.  ERSUs have been established in 543 ULBs. 
Helpline number including 14420 has been made operational in 260 ERSUs.  
 States have been facilitated to conduct IEC campaigns in their respective ULBs. 
PPE kits are being supplied to validated SSWs under the scheme. Capacity building 
occupational training for surface SSWs has been taken up with Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and validated SSWs will be provided 
training in phased manner. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has 
formulated the Model Contract to ensure the systematic emptying/ transportation/ 
maintenance of Sewerage/ Septic Tank and safety of all Safai Mitras. It has the 
provisions for formal engagement, direct payments, working hours and minimum 
wages etc. Payment of minimum wages is a statutory requirement under the Payment 
of Minimum Wages Act. However, the rates vary from State to State. Instructions have 
been issued to the States/UTs to ensure that statutory requirements are met.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10.13) 
The Committee note that 32097, 42002, 33021 and 80135 persons were trained in 
2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, respectively under Pradhan Mantri Dakshta 
aur Kushalta Sampan Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) for SCs, OBCs and others. The Committee 
are happy to find that 24652, 31033 and 21552 persons trained under the Scheme 
secured employment in 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23. The Committee appreciate 
the performance of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment under the 

22 
 
Scheme but strongly feel that the number of persons trained/employed is not sufficient 
to cater to the large percentage of population belonging to SCs, OBCs, EWSs, DNTS, 
Safai Karamcharis, waste pickers, etc. It is true that there are several other Schemes 
under which people receive training but it is also a fact that the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment is a nodal Department for these sections of the society, 
hence, they cannot absolve themselves from their responsibility. The Committee feel 
that ₹450 crore approved by the Standing Finance Committee would be prudently 
utilized during the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26 and all measures will be taken to 
ensure that the target fixed are achieved. The Committee trust that the norms fixed 
by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for the selection of candidates 
for training will be meticulously applied in selection of candidates and also expect that 
the Institutes imparting training will be properly monitored so that qualitative training 
is provided to the candidates for their gainful employment and suitable action would 
be taken against Institutes not complying to the norms fixed for training, 
infrastructure, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
PM-DAKSH Scheme is additionally to PMKVY Scheme being implemented by M/o Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). The Department is committed to train 
approved number of candidates within the allocated and approved budget by the 
Standing Finance Committee (SFC). Increasing the number of candidates under PM-
DAKSH Scheme will require additional fund allocation. Third-party evaluation will be 
undertaken before expiry of the period of Scheme and based on the recommendations, 
fresh appraisal of the scheme will be done, for any changes. The scheme is 
implemented on pan-India basis for providing training and employment opportunities 
in accordance with the guidelines of the PM-DAKSH Scheme. As per the scheme’s 
guidelines, we ensure that individuals from marginalized communities, i.e. Scheduled 
Castes (SC), Other Backward Classes (OBCs), Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs), 
De-notified Tribes (DNTs), Safai Karamcharis, and Waste Pickers are offered relevant 
skill development training. For 2023-24, a total of 53,900 trainee target had been fixed 
by SFC. However, a total of 80,185 trainees were trained under the scheme for 2023-
24 to compensate for less number of trainees trained in the previous years. 
The concern of the Committee is noted regarding the insufficient number of trained 
personnel to meet the needs of these communities. The selection of eligible candidates 
/ trainees, their eligibility criteria, verification of all documents including educational 

23 
 
certificate and caste certificate etc. is checked by the Selection Committee and it 
ensures that norms fixed by the Department is meticulously applied. The 
DoSJE monitors all training programmes. This includes participation either directly or 
through their representatives in the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) meetings, 
review of PAC meeting minutes having details of the trainees, e-based and direct 
surveillance of the training programmes, consolidation of details of trained 
beneficiaries in the designated portal etc. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.11) 
The objective of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment is to empower 
the socially, educationally and economically marginalised sections of the society 
including Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes, Denotified and Nomadic Tribes 
(DNTs), Economically Weaker Sections, Senior Citizens, Persons engaged in act of 
begging, Transgenders, Victims of Alcoholism and Substance abuse through various 
Schemes and programmes. The Committee find that the Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment was able to spend more than 85 per cent of revised allocation in 
2022-23 and 2023-24. The Department has furnished various reasons for the shortfall 
in the expenditure viz. due to non- receipt of proposals from States, availability of 
lucrative Schemes in the States, submission of annual action plan with reduced targets 
by bigger States such as Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and 
Gujarat. The Committee were informed that the Department have taken various steps 
such as monitoring through the periodic progress reports, organizing conferences of 
State Social Welfare Ministers, State Welfare Secretaries, regular capacity building 
programmes, field visits by the officers of the Department to ensure full utilization of 
enhanced BE of ₹13,000.20 crore for 2024-25. The Committee appreciate the steps 
taken by Department of Social Justice and Empowerment and hope that these steps 
will help them in fixing the problems that may arise in implementation of various 
welfare Schemes of the Department by the State/UT Governments. Since active 
participation of State implementing agencies Governments and other is crucial for 
success of schemes of the Department, the Committee would not deter from 
recommending that the States/UTs that are not able to justify their role in 
implementing the welfare schemes should be dealt strictly, ensuring that the 
beneficiaries are not deprived of any of the welfare Scheme.   
Reply of the Government 
Funds are allocated to States/UTs at the beginning of the year as per proportion of 
target population to the total population of the States/UTs, in respect of certain 
Schemes. This notional allocation of funds is reviewed and revised in the fourth quarter 
of the year to accommodate higher demands of some States that have fully utilised 

25 
 
their notional allocation. The unspent funds of States that do not raise any demand 
are reallocated to other States/UTs that have fully exhausted their notional allocation 
and have more demand. This is done to ensure that demands of States are met to the 
fullest extent and to ensure that no funds remain unutilised because of less demand 
from few States and at the same time the States which are not able to fully utilise the 
funds get a reduced allocation. This is a new initiative and has been started from FY 
2024-25.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment    OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget  Dated   30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11.10) 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment are 
running various programmes for the welfare of the senior citizens such as Integrated 
Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC), Rastriya Vayoshree Yojana (RVY), Elderline, 
Senior-care Ageing Growth Engine (SAGE), Training of Geriatric Care Givers under Atal 
Vayo Abhyuday Yojana(AVYAY).The Committee find that the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment have not been able to spend the allocated funds in the 
programmes where State Governments are involved, as ₹59.32 crore could only be 
spent out of ₹92.15 crore allocated under Rastriya Vayoshree Yojana and ₹118.96 
crore could be spent out of ₹275.05 crore allocated under Integrated Programme for 
senior citizens in 2023-24. The Committee believe that the role of State Governments 
is very crucial for effective implementation of all the component of the Scheme, hence, 
concrete efforts should be made to make the State Governments proactive for 
identifying the beneficiaries under RVY and IPSrC. The Committee are happy to note 
that the programmes falling under Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana were evaluated 
regularly. The suggestions/ recommendations received on evaluations are required to 
be exhaustively examined and implemented. The Committee also expect that with the 
expansion of Rastriya Vayoshree Yojana by increasing distribution of devices from 8 
to 17 would cover large number of the senior citizens. The Committee feel that in view 
of increasing number of the senior citizens, the responsibility of the Central 
Government increases multiple times, hence, it is required that the Central and State 
Governments should justify their role and carry out their responsibilities with proper 
coordination so that senior citizens are not made to suffer due to any reasons. 
 

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the scheme of Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana (RVY), beneficiaries in each district 
are identified by the State Governments/UT Administrations through the Committee 
chaired by the Deputy Commissioner/District Collector. Based on the data provided by 
State/UT Government, the implementing agency conducts camps. Between the 
financial years 2022-23 and 2024-25, outreach activities through camp and walk-in 
mode have been scaled up to provide assistive devices to beneficiaries across the 
country. In 2022-23, a total of 39 camps were organized, where 3,98,858 assistive 
devices, valued at ₹88.84 crore were distributed to 63,307 beneficiaries. In 2023-24, 
the number of camps increased to 130, with 62,584 beneficiaries receiving 2,54,280 
assistive devices worth ₹59.32 crore. In 2024-25, 6,21,300 assistive devices valued at 
138.84 crore were distributed to 1,28,645 beneficiaries. During the Mahakumbh event 
of 2025, 1,29,240 assistive devices valued at ₹20.22 crore were distributed to 25,428 
beneficiaries. Thus, during the financial year 2024-25, 1,54,073 beneficiaries received 
7,50,540 assistive devices valued at ₹159.06 crore.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated  30.06.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28) 
The Scholarship for Higher Education for Young Achievers Scheme (SHREYAS) for SCs 
is the Umbrella Scheme which has four existing sub-Schemes viz. National Fellowships 
for SCs, National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for SCs, Top Class Education Scheme 
for SCs and Free Coaching Scheme for SC and OBC students. The Committee note 
that the budgetary allocation for 2022-23 and 2023-24 was less in comparison to 
2021-22 but the actual expenditure has been constantly increasing since 2021-22, as 
it was ₹271.21 crore, ₹293.77 crore and ₹363.31crore in 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24, respectively. The Committee find that the Free Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBC 
is not available on the National Scholarship Portal and onboarding of the Scheme on 
the portal is under consideration. The Committee also find that the Scheme is being 
implemented by Dr Ambedkar Foundation through empanelled Central Universities 
after revision of the Scheme in 2023-24 and only 19 Central Universities have signed 
the MOU with the Foundation. The Committee desire that the Department should take 
necessary steps to on-board the Free Coaching Scheme for SCs and OBCs on National 
Scholarship Portal and more Central Universities should be empanelled so that a large 
number of students of SC and OBC communities are able to appear in competitive and 
entrance examinations for obtaining jobs in Public/Private Sector as well as to secure 
admission in reputed higher educational institutions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Continuous follow-up is done with all 56 Central Universities. However, as on date, 
only 19 Central Universities have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
Dr. Ambedkar Foundation and become part of the Scheme. The Department will 
continue its efforts for on-boarding more Central Universities.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated  30.06.2025 
 

28 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9) 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-
AJAY) is an Umbrella scheme wherein 3 centrally sponsored scheme, namely, 
Pradhan Mantri Adrash Gram Yojana (PM-AJAY), Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCA to SCSP) and Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas 
Yojana (BJRCY) have been merged in 2021-22 due to similarity in nature. The 
Committee find that since 2021-22, 6282 villages in the country have been declared 
Adrash Grams, ₹1,023 crore provided to 184815 beneficiaries under GIA component 
and ₹114.23 crore sanctioned for 44 hostels covering 4985 beneficiaries. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment for taking several steps for effective implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee are however, slightly worried with the pace of actual expenditure 
incurred during 2022-23 and 2023-24. The Committee feel that the gap between 
Budgetary Estimate and Actual Expenditure should be narrowed down so that the 
objectives of the Scheme are fully achieved. The State Governments should be 
guided to take necessary steps so that more and more villages are declared Adarsh 
Grams in their States as it has happened in Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Madhya 
Pradesh. Similarly, the construction of hostels in educational institutions should also 
be prioritized as large numbers of students belonging to SC community are not able 
to join good educational institution due to limited availability of hostels. 
Reply of the Government 
The Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-AJAY), consists of three 
components namely Adarsh Gram, Grants in Aid to State/District level Projects and 
Hostel component. The scheme is 100 % centrally sponsored and being implemented 
by the State Government/UT Administration. The expenditure incurred during last 
two years has been relatively low due to the introduction of the SNA system which 
requires States/UTs to complete the necessary mapping, causing a procedural delay. 
Additionally, pending Utilization Certificates and fewer proposals for Hostels and non-
submission of Grants-in-aid perspective plans by some States contributed to reduced 
expenditure. To address this, the Department holds monthly review meetings and 
maintains regular communication with States/UTs to improve implementation, clear 
SNA balances, and ensure timely submission of UCs for smooth fund release. 
Furthermore, Ministry officials visit villages to oversee the implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyudyay Yojana (PM-AJAY) so that declaration of Adarsh 

29 
 
Gram is expedited by the State Governments. This Department is implementing 
Hostel component of PM-AJAY which aims to increase literacy and encourage 
enrolment of SCs students in schools and higher educational institutions by providing 
adequate residential facilities in quality institutions, especially in the SC dominated 
blocks and elsewhere in India.  With efforts and follow-up, as compared to earlier 
years during the FY 2024-25, the utilisation was Rs 736 Crore as against ₹471 Crore 
in FY 2023-24 which is an increase of 56%. The Department will ensure higher 
utilisation in the next financial year.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated 30.06.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13) 
As abolition of untouchability is enshrined in the Constitution of India, the Government 
of India has taken several measures such as enactment of Protection of Civil Rights 
(PCR) Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989. The Committee note that a centrally sponsored scheme was 
introduced to financially assist the States/UTs for strengthening the machinery for 
Implementation of these Acts. The Committee find that the Central assistance of 
₹535.70 crore was released to various States during the year 2023-24 for functioning 
and strengthening of the SC/ST Protection Cell and Special Police Stations, 
strengthening and enforcement of judicial machinery, relief and rehabilitation of 
atrocity victims, incentive for inter-caste marriages and awareness generation and 
publicity. In this regard, the Committee have found that maximum financial assistance 
has been released to Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Odisha and Bihar 
during the year 2023-24. However, the Committee have observed that several States 
have not been able to set up the requisite system to effectively implement the 
provisions contained in the Acts and to deal with the cases of atrocities against SCs. 
The Committee were also made to understand that there is no financial constraints 
with the Government of India, and they are ready to release more funds to the States 
for the establishment of the machinery required for effective implementation of the 
Acts. The Committee are of the opinion that the issue of atrocities against the persons 
belonging to Scheduled castes should be sincerely tackled by the State Governments. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the State Governments should be 
pursued by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to establish and 

30 
 
strengthen the machinery required for enforcement of the Protection of Civil Rights 
Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989, effectively. " 
Reply of the Government 
The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The objective of 
the Scheme is to financially assist the States/UTs towards effective implementation of 
various provisions of these Acts.  The Department releases funds to States/UTs only 
on the basis of their proposals. To ensure that the beneficiaries are not deprived 
besides monitoring through the periodic progress reports Department is organizing 
conferences of State Social Welfare Ministers, State Welfare Secretaries, regular 
capacity building programmes, field visits by the officers of the Department. A 
committee under the chairpersonship of the Hon’ble Minister for the Social Justice & 
Empowerment exists to review the effective implementation of these Acts and the 
Scheme, where all States/UTs participate.  
Regional meetings are being conducted by the Department to review the 
implementation of these Acts and the scheme, wherein region-wise the SC/ST 
Development/Social Welfare Department of the 5-8 States/UTs are being called for 
the review of the implementation of these Acts and the scheme and the State-wise 
review of the mechanisms set up by the States and their further requirement as per 
the provisions made in the Acts, has been made a permanent agenda of the meeting. 
These matter are discussed in the meetings with the States/UTs to emphasize the 
need to set up the requisite systems as prescribed in the SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 and 
the rules framed there under for effective implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated 30.06.2025 

31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation Para No.7.9) 
The Committee note that the Scheme of Residential Education for Students in High 
School in Targeted area (SRESHTA) for SCs came into existence in 2021-22 in place 
of Grants-in-aid to Voluntary and Other Organizations working for Scheduled Caste to 
provide environment for Socio-economic upliftment and overall development of 
Scheduled Castes. The Committee find that the Scheme is operated in two modes, as 
per the established norms, every year 3000 meritorious SC students (1500 for lXth 
class and '1500 for Xth Class) are selected for admission in the best private residential 
schools under Mode-I whereas under Mode-II schools/hostels run by VOs/NGOs are 
provided Grants-In-aid for 13500 SC Students per year. The Committee are happy to 
note that annual allocation of ₹2,428.00 crore made for 2024-25 is much higher in 
comparison to the allocation of ₹2,371.00 crore made in 2023-24 and ₹2,364.00 crore 
made in 2022-23 but the quantum of actual expenditure for 2021-22, 2022-23 and 
2023-24 is little discouraging for the Committee. Further, only 2405 students were 
selected under Mode-I in 2022-23 against 3000 Students fixed for selection. The 
Committee also note that large number of VOs/NGOs from Maharashtra, Odisha, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh received Grants-in-aid under Mode-II from 2020-21 to 
2023-24 but many States did not receive any grant. The Committee believe that the 
SRESHTA Scheme is crucial for the SC students to get proper education from the best 
schools in the country. Hence, the Committee desire that the Scheme should be well 
publicized so that large number of students get the benefit of the scheme. Since, the 
Scheme under Mode-II appears to be popular in some States only, the Committee 
would like the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to take suitable steps 
to increase awareness about the Scheme in the country to increase the footprints of 
the Scheme among the SC students. The Committee hope necessary action will be 
taken by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
This Department has taken several measures like requesting State/UT Governments 
to publicize the scheme in the Schools & motivate SC students to participate in the 
SHRESHTA scheme. Further, the State/UT Governments were also requested to issue 

32 
 
necessary directions to the concerned officers to facilitate the SC students for 
obtaining their SC certificates at the earliest. The scheme is being published through 
website of the Ministry and print media as well. The Department has planned that 
national-level entrance exam in 2025 through which admission in best private 
residential schools takes place earlier, so that all the admission process such as 
declaration of result, e-counselling and reporting of the selected students etc. are 
completed by 30th June, 2025 to enable filling up all the 3000 seats.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated 30.06.2025 
 
(Recommendation Para No.9.22) 
National Action Plan for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem Scheme (NAMASTE) was 
launched in July, 2023 to formalize the Sewer and Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) and 
to ensure safety and dignity of sanitation workers in Urban India. It is implemented in 
convergence amongst key stakeholders including Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation and Ministry of skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship. As per the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, there are 
likely to be one lakh Sewer and Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) in the country. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs are required to converge for interventions such 
as profiling of SSWs through MIS portal, nomination of Responsible Sanitation 
Authority, setting up of Emergency Response Sanitation Unit, etc. In view of the 
involvement of several Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations, the Committee are of 
the opinion that for the success of the NAMASTE. It is important that there is proper 
coordination amongst them so that the responsibilities entrusted over them are carried 
out smoothly. Unless all the SSWs are validated they would be deprived from the 
benefits of the Scheme. The Committee find that out of 43961 profiled SSWs, 37407 
SSWs have been validated by the concerned Urban Local Bodies. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that all the SSWs should be profiled and validated urgently. Further, 
the pace of the distribution of PPE Kits, Safety devices and Ayushman Bharat Cards to 
SSWs is required to be increased as only 16741 PPE Kits, 42 Safety Devices and 13412 
Ayushman Bharat Cards have been provided to them. The Committee expect that the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment would take all necessary steps for the 

33 
 
welfare of the SSWs and effective Implementation of NAMASTE in a time bound 
manner. 
Reply of the Government 
National Action for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMASTE) has been launched 
in July, 2023 with aim to ensure safety and dignity of Sewer and Septic Tank Workers 
(SSWs). Profiling of SSWs could be started in last week of December, 2024 and is 
being done continuously in coordination with States/UTs. Profiling has been carried 
out in all States / UTs.  Tamil Nadu and Odisha have their own schemes and are 
profiling SSWs. The details of validated SSWs by Tamil Nadu and Odisha will be 
merged with details of validated SSWs.  As on 13.04.2025, out of 73,289 profiled 
SSWs, 69,231 SSWs have been validated by the concerned Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
45,871 PPE kits for SSWs have been delivered to States / UTs. 354 Safety Devices Kit 
for Emergency Response Sanitation Units (ERSUs) have been supplied.  Ayushman 
cards have been made available to 16,962 beneficiaries. Support of Urban Local 
bodies, National Health Authority (NHA), Common Service Centre (CSC) etc. is being 
sought to expedite the process for issuance of Ayushman Cards.  Responsible 
Sanitation Authorities (RSA) have been appointed in 557 Districts.  ERSUs have been 
established in 576 ULBs. Helpline number including 14420 has been made operational 
in 290 ERSUs. 961 workshops have been conducted on Prevention of Hazardous 
Cleaning of Sewer and Septic Tanks in Municipal Corporation/ Municipality/ Nagar 
Palika and other such organizations engaging Sewer and septic tank cleaning workers. 
Further, the recommendation of the Committee is noted for strict compliance. 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No. G-3/2/2024-
Budget Dated 30.06.2025 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
19th August, 2025                                                             
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
  Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) HELD ON TUESDAY, 19TH 
AUGUST, 2025. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
     Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
3. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
4. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
5. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
6. Smt. Bag Mitali 
7. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
8. Shri Godam Nagesh 
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
10. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
11. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
12. Adv. Priya Saroj 
13. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
14. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
15. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
16. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
17.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
18. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
19. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
20. Shri Rameswar Teli 
21. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
22. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
  

35 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment (Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment).  
(ii)  *** *** *** *** *** 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
*** Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
  

36 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
THEIR FIRST REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT). 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 15  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.12, 3.13, 
8.11, 9.23 & 10.13 
8 53.33% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
Rec. Para No. 2.11 & 11.10 
2 13.33% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.28, 5.9 & 6.13 
3 20% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
Rec. Para No.7.9 & 9.22  
2 13.34% 
   100% 
 
 