i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
                                              
14 

ii 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2025 
                                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2025 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
                                              
 

iii 
 
CSJE. NO: 222 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 04.12.2025. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) 
                                 SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
 
   2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
25. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26. Shri Ramji 
27. Shri Rameswar Teli 
28. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
29. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
30. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
31. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar         - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Fourteenth Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
17.03.2025. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) have furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 30.06.2025. The Report was considered 
and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their 
sitting held on 04.12.2025. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
 04  December, 2025                                                            
 13  Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
  
           
The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2.       The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
17.03.2025. It contained 17 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
 
Rec. Para No. 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.13, 4.14,  
6.17, 6.19, 6.20, 7.23 and 8.22  
(Total: 10,  
Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: –  
 
Rec. Para No. 2.11, 3.14 and 4.15 
(Total:  3,  
Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: –  
 
Rec. Para No. 5.12, 5.13, 6.18 and 7.24 
(Total: 4,  
Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature: –   
NIL 
(Total: NIL,  
Chapter: V) 
  
3.       The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
  
4.       The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government which 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
A.      Pradhan Mantri Dakshata Aur Kushalata Sampana Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12) 
  
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
6.  
“The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment is 
implementing Pradhan Mantri Dakshata Aur Kushalata Sampana Hitgrahi (PM-
DAKSH) for SC, OBC and others since 2020-21. It is found that during the year 
2022-23 and 2023-24, the Department was able to spend ₹14.94 crore out of RE 
of ₹84.00 crore, ₹58.34 crore out of RE of ₹140.00 crore respectively. Further, the 
Department has not been able to spend even a single rupee in 2024-25 till 
February, 2025 out of Revised Estimate of ₹80.00 crore as empanelment of 
Training Institutes was delayed. The Committee are concerned with the socio-
economic development of SC, OBC and others, hence, believe that any slackness 
on behalf of the concerned authorities would defeat the purpose of the Scheme. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the Schemes instituted with the noble 
objectives cannot be left at the mercy of the concerned authorities, particularly 
when the Government of India is making all efforts for the socio- economic 
development of the targeted communities by allocating huge funds. The 
Committee would therefore, like to recommend that in future all necessary steps 
are taken to ensure that the empanelment of Training Institutes, etc. is not delayed 
and the necessary formalities are timely completed. The Committee would like the 
Department to take necessary measures so that the targets fixed are achieved. 
The Committee would also like the Department to enhance the targets keeping 
into consideration the population of these categories i.e., SC, OBC and others so 
that the maximum people can take benefit of the Scheme.” 
  
6.       The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“PM-DAKSH Scheme is being implemented by three Corporations of DoSJE, i.e. 
NBCFDC, NSKFDC and NSFDC. The Corporations are entrusted with the 
responsibilities of examining the claims/bills of the Training Institutes (TIs) and 
making payment against them as per the provisions laid down in Scheme 
Guidelines, Work Order and directions of DoSJE from time to time. As per claims/ 
bills received from the TIs, the Corporations submit request to DoSJE for release 
of funds. Therefore, the funds released by DoSJE are subject to the request 
received from Corporations in this regard. Recently, DoSJE has received 
proposals for release of funds under PM-DAKSH scheme for settling pending bills 
of TIs and payment of the stipends to the trainees for the year 2022-23 and 2023-
24. ₹37.5 Cr to NBCFDC, ₹36.32 Cr to NSFDC and ₹5.58 Cr to NSKFDC has 
been released by the Department in 2024-25. As per the recent information 
submitted by all three Corporations, a total of ₹62.74 Cr has been released by the 
Corporations for training conducted in 2023-24 out of 2024-25 Budget. Further, it 
is informed that this Department spent ₹58.34 Cr in 2023-24.” 
  
 
 

3 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.13) 
  
7.       The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee have found that the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment has sent a proposal to Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship to merge the PM- DAKSH Scheme with the Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) scheme in order to improve efficiency and 
optimize public expenditure as the PM-DAKSH scheme largely overlaps with the 
objectives and structure of PMKVY. The Committee urge that as the proposal has 
been sent recently, the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment may 
ensure that the beneficiary targeted for 2025-26 are not affected. The Committee 
may like to be apprised of the status of the proposals received and also of the 
implementation of the Scheme in 2025-26.” 
  
8.       The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“For the year 2024-25 onwards, a decision has been taken in this Department to 
merge PM-DAKSH scheme with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 
Scheme of Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). It was 
observed that all the job roles under which training is imparted under PM-DAKSH 
scheme are available on SIDH Portal and covered under PMKVY Scheme. 
Therefore, it was not considered logical to run same skilling programme under this 
Department. Further, the scheme was additionality to PMKVY Scheme under 
which SCs and OBCs are also trained under other schemes including PMKVY 
conducted by MSDE. As such the skilling of the target group would continue to be 
conducted for their upliftment under the skilling programmes of MSDE. 
 
As it has been decided to merge PM-DAKSH Scheme with PMKVY Scheme for 
2024-25 onwards, no proposals were sought by this Department for 
implementation of the Scheme for 2025-26. However, with regard to status of 
proposal sent by DoSJE to MSDE for merging PM-DAKSH Scheme with PMKVY 
scheme, the proposal of merging the Scheme is under consideration in MSDE.” 
   
9.       In their Original Report the Committee had noted that the decision had been 
taken to merge PM-DAKSH Scheme with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
(PMKVY) scheme of Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) 
and the proposal in this regard was sent to the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in 2024-25. The Committee were also informed that the 
target for 2024-25 & 2025-26 was fixed and empanelment of the Training Institutes 
was completed and the process of allocating target to them was underway. The 
Committee, therefore, desired to be apprised on the status of the proposals 
received and also of the implementation status of the scheme in 2025-26. The 

4 
 
Committee have now been informed that no proposals were sought by the 
Department for the implementation of the scheme for 2025-26 and the proposal of 
merging the Scheme is under consideration in MSDE. The Committee strongly 
believe that since the Scheme was being implemented by Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment the proposals for the year 2025-26 should have been 
sought until the merger of PM-DAKSH scheme with PMKVY of MSDE. Since, the 
proposal has not been sought for 2025-26, the Committee desire that the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment should seek proposals along with 
enhanced targets at least for 2025-26 so that the targeted beneficiaries fixed under 
the Scheme get their due benefit and also to ensure that the proposal of merger is 
materialised at the earliest to protect the interest of targeted section of the society.  
 
B.       FREE COACHING FOR SCs AND OBCs 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.18) 
 
10.     The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee find that the proposals under Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs 
were delayed in 2024-25 due to late commencement of courses in the academic 
year 2023-24 and some proposals are also expected to be received in the month 
of February/ March, 2025. The Committee also note that the Department have 
revised the guidelines from the selection year 2023-24 to achieve the target. 
However, the Memorandum of Understanding required to be signed with Dr. 
Ambedkar Foundation by all the Central Universities to become part of the 
Scheme has been signed by 19 out of 55 Central Universities. The Committee 
would therefore like the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to ensure 
that the MOUs is signed by the remaining Central Universities as early as possible 
so that the economically disadvantaged Scheduled Caste and other Backward 
Classes candidates are not deprived from availing benefits of the Scheme. The 
Committee also desire that the empanelled Central Universities may be persuaded 
to timely commence the classes without any further delay and take necessary 
measures to expeditiously release the funds to them.” 
 
11.     The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The direction of the Committee have been noted. Other Central Universities will 
also be requested to sign MoU for implementing the Scheme and empanelled 
Central Universities will be followed up to send proposals at the earliest.”  
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
12.     The Committee had inter-alia recommended in their original report that the 
Memorandum of Understanding between the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation should be 
signed with all the Central Universities as it was signed only by 19 out of 55 
Central Universities so that the economically disadvantaged Scheduled Caste and 
other Backward Classes candidates are not deprived from the benefits of Free 
coaching under SCs and OBCs Scheme. The Committee feel that the sufficient 
time has elapsed since the revision of the guidelines in 2023-24, hence the 
Department should regularly follow up with Central Universities to ensure that they 
all sign the Memorandum of Understanding in a time bound manner. In case there 
is any concrete reason for delay then an alternate mechanism should be evolved 
so that the objectives of the Scheme for free coaching for SCs and OBCs are 
achieved.   
 
 
 
C.      CONSTRUCTION OF HOSTELS FOR OBC BOYS AND GIRLS  
  
Recommendation (Para No.7.24) 
 
13.     The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment 
provides grant to State Governments and UT Administrations and the Institutions 
of repute to construct hostels for OBC Boys and Girls. The Committee find that out 
of 1095 hostels sanctioned by the Department, the construction of only 848 have 
completed and 247 are still incomplete due to Administrative hurdles, procurement 
and contracting issues, design and structural approvals, etc. The Committee 
desire that the 18 months period stipulated for construction of a hostel should be 
strictly complied by the respective Institutions, State Governments and UT 
Administration and any hindrance in the construction activity should be resolved 
within the least possible time so that the construction work do not exceed the 
prescribed time period. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Project 
Monitoring Units set up to monitor Projects may be directed to regularly monitor 
the construction work and take necessary steps to settle the issues hampering the 
construction work.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
14.     The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The Department has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee for 
compliance and is monitoring the project regularly.” 
 
 
15.     The Committee had recommended that the Project Monitoring Units set up to 
monitor Projects may be directed to regularly monitor the construction work and 
take necessary steps to settle the issues hampering the construction work as there 
was delay in the construction of hostels for OBC Boys and Girls. The Department 
has, however, stated that they have noted the recommendations of the Committee 
for compliance and is monitoring the project regularly. Since, 247 hostels out of 
1095 hostels were yet to be completed at the time of examination of Demand for 
Grants (2025-26), the Committee expected that they would be provided with the 
update on the latest status of the hostels constructed during 2025-26, however, no 
such information has been provided in this regard. The Committee may, therefore, 
assume that the construction of no new hostel has been completed. Accordingly, 
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 18 
months period stipulated for construction should be strictly complied with and all 
the hurdles should be resolved in a time bound manner.  The Department should 
evolve a fool proof mechanism so that the work is completed in a given timeframe 
and after the responsibility has been entrusted over Project Monitoring Units, they 
should be held accountable in case of any delay.    
  
  
  
  
----------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 1 Para 2.12) 
 
The Committee find that about 72.5 per cent of the Budgetary allocation of the 
Department of Social Justice & Empowerment is utilized on the Scholarships and other 
Educational Schemes of the Department. Keeping in view huge mandate of the 
Department to cater the needs of various marginalized sections including Scheduled 
Castes, Other Backward Classes, Denotified and Nomadic Tribes, Economically Weaker 
sections, Senior Citizens, Transgender, victims of substance abuse through various 
welfare schemes, the Committee urge that the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment should focus on other schemes also. For this purpose, if additional funds 
are required, they may seek more budgetary allocations. Further, the Committee find that 
there are frequent changes in the guidelines of various Schemes such as PM-AJAY, 
SHRESHTA, NAMASTE, PM-VISVAS etc. The Committee are of the view that the 
guidelines of any Scheme should be properly examined by seeking suggestions from all 
the stakeholders before they are finalized. In this regard, the Committee expect that the 
Department will find out the solution by taking into confidence the State Governments 
and also consider stepping up the budgetary allocation in future so that the Schemes 
other than educational schemes become meaningful for the targeted sections of the 
society. 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment (D/o Social Justice & 
Empowerment) is mandated with the welfare, social justice, and empowerment of 
disadvantaged and marginalized sections of society. This includes Scheduled Castes, 
Other Backward Classes, Senior Citizens, Victims of Substance Abuse, Transgender 
Persons, etc. The department's goal is to integrate these groups into mainstream 
development and make them self-reliant. Accordingly, this department is running various 
schemes and fund allocation for all the schemes including scholarship schemes are 
made based on Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)/ Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) recommendations. Hence, in case of enhancement of fund for schemes, revision 
of EFC/SFC based on the need/demand and stakeholder consultations need to be done.  
  
It may be noted that NITI Aayog has issued Guidelines vide OM dated 25.01.2019 for 
earmarking of funds for Development Action Plan for SCs and STs (DAPSC & DAPST). 
As per the guidelines “As far as the nodal Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(SJE) is concerned, the present level of earmarking of 72.5% of funds by the D/o SJE for 
SCs as recommended by the Task Force should continue”. 
 
Accordingly, in 2024–25, ₹10,309.0 Crore was allocated for the welfare of Scheduled 
Castes (SCs), accounting for 76.13% of the total budget allocation of the Department. 
Out of total budget allocated for SCs, ₹7420.65 crore was allocated for educational 
schemes for SCs. which is 71.98 percentage of SC welfare allocation. This leaves very 

8 
 
limited fiscal space for other welfare schemes. Similarly out of ₹2565.24 crore of budget 
allocated for Other Backward Classes (OBC), ₹2440.13 crore is allotted for education 
schemes for OBC, which is nearly 95 per cent of total OBC budget. Therefore, even if the 
overall budgetary allocations are increased, educational schemes are likely to continue 
receiving the largest share of funding. 
 
This being the final year of the 15th Finance Commission cycle, revising fund allocation 
at this stage may not be feasible. However, the revision process for the next cycle (2026–
27 onwards) is underway and will aim to address current needs, including additional fund 
demand. Inputs from stakeholders, including States/UTs and relevant Ministries, will be 
duly considered in the formulation of the EFC/SFC proposals.  
 
Further, it is informed, that the Department ensures that stakeholder consultations are an 
integral part of the process while making any changes to the scheme guidelines. Regular 
review meetings and consultations are held with State/UT Governments, and their 
suggestions are duly recorded for consideration. These inputs are examined and, 
wherever feasible, are incorporated during the subsequent revisions of the scheme. 
Further, prior to any revision of the scheme, evaluation studies are undertaken in the 
implementing States/UTs. The recommendations and observations emerging from such 
studies are thoroughly assessed and taken into account while updating the scheme 
guidelines to enhance their effectiveness and relevance. 
 
For the upcoming FC cycle, efforts will be made to incorporate changes in scheme 
guidelines based on recommendations of evaluations studies and suggestions emerging 
from stakeholder engagement for ensuring that frequent changes in scheme contours are 
not made frequently.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 1 Para 2.13) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has been 
able to implement the SNA system for flow of funds across the country. The Committee 
find that the Department is organizing 'Chintan Shivir', meetings with the State 
Governments and other Implementing Agencies so that the complete proposals and 
Utilization Certificates are timely submitted to the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment for timely release of funds. The Department has also been able to 
persuade some State Governments to return the unspent funds lying with their SNA 
Accounts. However, there are certain States such as Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Assam, 
Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, etc. have failed in returning the unspent 
balance in their SNA Accounts. The Committee are satisfied with the provisions 
contained in the SNA System and expect that the system will certainly help the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in maximizing the use of funds allocated 
to the Department. Since some of the State Governments are yet to surrender the 
unutilized amount, they may be asked to surrender it immediately so that the next 
installment is released to them and the marginalized people for whom these Schemes 
have been framed do not suffer for the failure of the State Government in completing the 
formalities required from them. The Committee would also like the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment to consider incentivizing those State Governments that are 
completing all the formalities in time so that the defaulting States also make sincere 
efforts to implement the Schemes of the Government of India. 
 

9 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The Department acknowledges the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee. The implementing States are regularly sensitized both through written 
communications and during review meetings regarding the need to surrender the un-
utilized amounts lying in their SNA accounts. The Department has consistently pursued 
this matter with the concerned States to ensure the timely return of such funds, thereby 
facilitating efficient fund utilization. 
 
With the introduction of SNA SPARSH model that allows timely release of funds, it is 
expected that fund flow will become smoother and will contribute to better utilization of 
funds.  
 
Further, the Department ensures that States which complete all requisite formalities, 
including timely submission of complete proposals and Utilization Certificates, are 
prioritized for the release of Central Assistance. Notional allocations of States are revised 
periodically for ensuring that better performing states are allocated more funds. This is 
done to promote greater accountability and encourage lagging States to improve their 
performance. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 2 Para 2.14) 
 
The Committee are well aware that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
is spending large amount of budgetary allocation in Scholarship Schemes. The 
Committee have found that year after year the scholarship amount released to the 
eligible students spills over to the next academic year as the applications from State 
Governments are received up to the months of February and March. The Committee are 
of the view that current system is required to be reviewed as the students should get 
scholarship within the same academic year so that the education of the student is not 
disrupted for want of money. The Committee would like the Department to give all the 
handholding support to the State Governments to start the process early so that the 
requisite formalities are completed in time. The Committee expect that the Department 
should make all out efforts to sensitize the State Governments and Other Implementing 
agencies on this aspect and get the issue of last-minute spending resolved. 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
Scheme guidelines of the centrally sponsored schemes of the Department related to 
Scholarships are in effect till the FY2025-26 (i.e. 15th FC). For timely disbursement of 
scholarships to the students, this Department has constituted a Working Group on the 
Revision of Guidelines for Pre and Post Matric scholarship scheme for SCs to be 
effective from FY2026-27. The Working Group includes representatives from the State 
Governments as well. Some of the important Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Committee 
are to provide recommendations for: 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
 
 Reducing Disbursement Turnaround Time; 
 Aligning Scholarship Timelines with Academic Calendars 
  
Further, regular Regional Review meetings are conducted with the officers from the 
States/UTs. National level Chintan Shivirs have been organized with 
States/UTs regarding the various matters/issues in the implementation of the Schemes. 
States/UTs are sensitized regarding the requirement of complying with the timelines in 
submission of proposals to the Ministry so that the scholarships are disbursed in time. 
These efforts are aimed at expediting the application process by States, and ensuring 
timely disbursement of funds so that students do not face delays or hardships. 
Additionally, this will help prevent spillover into the next financial year and avoid last-
minute expenditure in the current year. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 3 Para 3.13) 
 
The Committee note that the Vanchit Ikai Samooh Aur Vargon Ki Arthik Sahayata 
(VISVAS) Yojana for SC and OBCs was launched on a pilot basis in 2020-21 to support 
livelihood activities for marginalized SC and OBC with a 5 per cent interest subvention on 
income-generating loans upto ₹2 lakhs for individuals and ₹4 lakhs for Self-Help Groups 
(SHGs). However, the actual expenditure was 'nil' in 2022-23 and 2023-24 as the 
Scheme was not approved for 2022-23. Since the new guidelines for the Scheme were 
issued on 14.06.2024, the actual expenditure of ₹1.50 crore and ₹1.00 crore could only 
be made out of allocated funds of₹ 11.49 crore and ₹11.95 crore under the VISVAS 
Scheme for SCs and OBCs, respectively in 2024-25 (till February, 2025). The Committee 
are not able to comprehend the reasons due to which the Scheme could not take off till 
2024-25 and the Department took almost two years in finalizing the guidelines even after 
the third-party evaluation report was submitted in February, 2022. The Committee are of 
the opinion that any new Scheme should be launched after exhaustive consultations with 
all the State Governments, stakeholders, banks and other implementing agencies. The 
Committee desire that some mechanism should be evolved for the periodic review of 
Schemes so that the flaws are noticed and the requisite changes are made in the 
guidelines to plug the loopholes found during the implementation. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the instructions issued in this regard. 
 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The VISVAS Scheme was initially approved for implementation in 2020–21 on a pilot 
basis, with further continuation subject to a third-party evaluation. The evaluation report 
was submitted in February 2022. Subsequently, a draft SFC note was uploaded by the 
Department on 12.12.2022 to seek comments from other Ministries/Departments, and an 
SFC meeting was scheduled on 23.12.2022. 
However, the Department of Expenditure (DoE), vide OM dated 23.12.2022, clarified that 
only in-principle approval had been granted for the pilot Scheme for 2020–21, and 
therefore, the scheme should not be treated as a continuing scheme under existing 
guidelines. Accordingly, a fresh Concept Note was submitted to DoE on 26.09.2023. In-
principle approval for implementation during 2024–25 and 2025–26 was granted by DoE 

11 
 
on 22.02.2024. The SFC meeting was convened on 09.04.2024, and the revised 
guidelines were issued on 14.06.2024, after the Model Code of Conduct concluded. 
The delay in relaunching the scheme was primarily due to procedural requirements and 
the need for fresh approvals. The initial evaluation conducted in 2021–22 formed the 
basis for the redesigned scheme launched in 2024–25. As the scheme is approved till 
2025–26, a fresh evaluation is currently underway to assess its outcomes and consider 
further improvements for its extension during the next cycle of Finance Commission. A 
budget provision of ₹23.44 crore was made under RE 2024–25, which has been fully 
utilized.  
Periodic review mechanisms, as suggested by the Committee, are being incorporated 
into the scheme framework to enable timely course correction and improved 
implementation. Additionally, the implementing corporations currently monitor day-to-day 
progress through regular meetings with their channelizing agencies. Review meeting in 
the department also takes place on regular basis with the implementing Corporations for 
monitoring progress of the Scheme. The Committee’s suggestion for institutionalizing 
such reviews will be factored into the design of subsequent extensions of the scheme. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 4 Para 4.14) 
 
The Committee note that the Scheme of Venture Capital Fund for SCs and OBCs were 
launched in 2015 and 2019 respectively with a Corpus of ₹750 crore and ₹180.92 crore. 
The Committee find that ₹571.60 crore to 234 companies belonging to Scheduled Caste 
Entrepreneurs and ₹112.35 crore to 22 companies belonging to Backward Classes have 
been sanctioned. The Committee find that the Scheme will be discontinued by 31st 
March, 2025. The Committee also find from the Report of the evaluation study conducted 
by IIPA that the VCF-SC is a distinct Scheme and needs continuation. The Committee 
feel that the suggestions made in the Evaluation study such as, delays in security 
clearances, better post loan support, dissemination about the Scheme, grievance 
redressal mechanism, etc. should have been addressed instead of discontinuing the 
Scheme. Since the Scheme is proposed to be discontinued by 31st March, 2025, the 
Committee expect that the sanctioned loan will be disbursed to the entrepreneurs in full 
as out of ₹558.09 crore sanctioned to 143 companies upto December, 2024 under VCF-
SC only ₹393.87 crore has been sanctioned. Similarly, under VCF-BC out of ₹94.08 
crore sanctioned to 18 companies upto December, 2024 only ₹51.50 crore has been 
disbursed. The Committee would also like to be informed of the proposals received after 
December, 2024 upto 31st March, 2025 and the action taken on these proposals. 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
At the outset, it is important to clarify that the Venture Capital Fund (VCF) Scheme is not 
being discontinued. Rather, it is being transitioned into a new and enhanced scheme with 
broader scope, improved coverage, and a more robust funding architecture. The existing 
VCF scheme will remain operational till 31.03.2025, and crucially, the investment period 
extends up to 31.03.2029, by which time the fund is expected to be fully deployed. This 
ensures continuity of support to SC entrepreneurs while enabling a smooth shift to the 
upgraded framework. 
While the IIPA evaluation has noted certain implementation deficiencies in loan support, 
grievance redressal, and dissemination, these are already being addressed through 
systemic improvements, which are mentioned below: 

12 
 
A. Enhanced Mentorship Support 
Aye Mentor (A Mentorship Platform for SC/ST Entrepreneurs to connect with Mentors) is 
a structured digital initiative launched to support early-stage SC entrepreneurs through 
high-quality mentorship: 
 Free Support: First 10 mentorship sessions are free for SC mentees. 
 Expanding Mentor Network: 92 mentors have been on boarded, with some more 
in the pipeline, covering diverse sectors. 
 Search & Match Functionality: Mentees can find mentors tailored to their 
business needs. 
 In-House Mentoring: Dedicated internal mentors provide additional support. 
 Progress So Far: 233 mentorship sessions held, supporting 64 mentees. 
B. Digitized Application Process via FINTECH Portal: To streamline and modernize 
access to the scheme, the FINTECH Portal was launched on 18.01.2023, replacing the 
earlier manual application system: 
 Online Registration & Submission: Fully digital process with user-friendly interface. 
 Real-Time Document Verification: Integrated APIs ensure authenticity and speed. 
 Enhanced Efficiency: Significant reduction in turnaround time (TAT) and improved 
transparency. 
 
 
 
The details of the proposals received after December 2024 upto 31st March 2025 and the 
action taken are as below: 
 
VCF-SC 
Total No. of Applications Received 15 
No. of Application Cancelled by Screening Committee 4 
No. of Applications Recommended by Screening Committee 2 
No. of Applications under Consideration  3 
No. of applications being cancelled due to non-receipt of required documents within 3 
months 6 
   
    
ASIIM 
Total No. of Applications Received 16 
No. of Applications Sanctioned by Investment Committee 5 
No. of Applications being submitted before Investment Committee 5 
No. of Applications under Consideration. 1 
No. of Applications found In-eligible 3 
No. of Application withdrawn by the Applicant 1 
No. of Application being proposed for cancelation due to non-receipt of required 
documents within 90 days. 1 
    
    
VCF-BC 
Total No. of Applications Received 6 
No. of Applications Sanctioned by Investment Committee 2 
No. of application recommended by the Screening Committee 1 

13 
 
No. of Applications under Consideration 2 
No. of Application being recommended forcancelation by the Screening Committee 1 
  
 
The details of fund utilization for 2024-25 is indicated as under  
 (In  ₹Crore) 
  VCF-SC including ASIIM VCF-BC 
Fund Corpus 750 200 
Total Sanction Amount 633.48 117.34 
Total Disbursement Amount 425.73 57.84 
One Time Expenses 22.5 3 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6 Para 6.17) 
 
The Committee note that the Department implements an Umbrella Scheme of SHREYAS 
consisting of 4 sub-schemes viz. National fellowship for SCs, National Overseas 
Scholarship for SCs, Top Class Education for SCs and Free Coaching for SCs and 
OBCs. On the scrutiny of the Budgetary Allocation made for the scheme in 2024-25, it is 
found that the Department was not able to utilize budgetary allocation fully on any of the 
four sub-schemes. The Committee are made to understand that proposals of ₹3.00 crore 
for National Overseas Scholarship Scheme and ₹55.00 crore under National Fellowship 
for SCs are expected to be received by 31st March, 2025. The Committee also found that 
the proposal for ₹52.46 crore under Top Class Education for SCs and ₹18.00 crore under 
National Fellowship for SCs are pending in the Department for approval. The Committee 
find that proposals to the tune of ₹70.46 crore are pending for approval with the 
Department as late as February, 2025 and proposals to the tune of ₹93.00 crore under 
various sub-schemes are expected by 31st March, 2025. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department should issue instructions to the Institutions/Organisations to 
submit the complete proposals within the given time frame to avoid any delay in future. 
With regard to the proposals of 2024-25 pending with the Department for approval and 
also the proposals expected by 31st March 2025, the Department may take necessary 
action for early approval so that funds allocated under this Scheme is utilized fully in this 
Financial Year. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
As per the directions of the Committee, necessary actions were taken to expedite the 
approval and release of pending proposals. Further the implementing agencies were also 
pursued to send proposals at the earliest.  
  
The Revised Estimates 2024-25 and expenditure under all four Sub Schemes of 
Umbrella Scheme of SHREYAS is as follows:    
 
(₹ in crore) 
Sub Scheme name RE 2024-25 Expenditure 2024-25 
Top Class Education for SCs 103.00 103.26 
Free Coaching for SCs, 
OBCs and Beneficiaries of 18.00 17.68 

14 
 
PM CARES Children Scheme
National Fellowship for SCs 212.00 209.50 
National Overseas 
Scholarship for SCs etc. 95.00 74.17 
Total 428.00 404.61 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6 Para 6.19) 
 
The Committee find that during the period 2022-23 to 2024-25 out of 1881 applications 
received for National Overseas Scholarship, 629 applications were complete and 325 
candidates were selected for the Scholarship. Keeping into consideration the number of 
aspiring candidates for National Overseas Scholarship, the Committee feel that there is a 
urgent need to increase the number of 125 slots fixed under the Scholarship Scheme 
each year. The Committee are of the strong opinion that the income eligibility criteria 
fixed for the Scholarship Schemes deprives many meritorious candidates from availing 
the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that the income fixed for 
making candidate eligible for scholarship needs to be reviewed so that more candidates 
are covered under the Scheme. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The views of the Committee have been noted and will be taken into account while 
proposing the scheme for continuation over the next Finance Commission Cycle starting 
from 2026-27. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6 Para 6.20) 
 
The Committee note that an evaluation study was conducted in 2020-21 for Top Class 
Education Scheme for SC and in 2019-20 for National Overseas Scholarship Scheme. 
The Committee find that the Department has again initiated the process of conducting the 
evaluation study for all the four sub-schemes under the SHREYAS for SCs for its 
continuation in the upcoming 16th Financial cycle commencing in 2026-27. Since the 
Evaluation process has begun, the Committee would like the Department to take 
suggestions from all the stakeholders while evaluating all the Schemes so that the 
difficulties faced by them in implementing the Scheme are taken care of while framing the 
new guidelines. The Committee also desire that the necessary measures may be taken 
for timely completion of the evaluation process and the Report on Evaluation Study 
should be ready before the commencement of financial year 2026-27 to avoid any 
disruption in continuation of the Scheme. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The process of evaluation of Schemes is going on and as per the recommendation of the 
Committee, suggestions from stakeholders will be taken on board. All efforts will be made 
to ensure timely completion of the process.  
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7 Para 7.23) 
 
The Committee note that the PM Young Achievers Scholarship Award Scheme for 
Vibrant India for OBC and others (PM-YASASVI) implemented for the educational 
empowerment consists of five Schemes viz, Pre-Matric, Post-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme, Top Class School, Top Class College education and Construction of Hostel for 
OBC boys and girls. The Committee find that during the year 2022-23, 2023-24 and 
2024-25 the Department spent ₹1388.82 crore, ₹1316.65 crore and ₹383.12 crore out of 
revised allocation of ₹1581.00 crore, ₹1603.00 crore and ₹1380.63 crore respectively 
under the Scheme. The Committee also find that the Department was not able to spend 
the allocated budget fully during these years as the Department did not either receive 
proposals from some States/UTs or incomplete proposals were received from some 
States/UTs. Further, Top Class Education in schools/ college Schemes are since being 
implemented from 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively, hence, they are taking time to 
stabilize for its optimum performance. The Committee appreciate the Department for 
taking necessary measures such as organizing National Conference/ Regional 
Conference, setting up of Project Monitoring Units and expect that the measures taken 
will improve the performance of PM-YASASVI and the situation of 2024-25 where 
Department could spend only ₹383.12 crore out of Revised Estimate of ₹1380.63 crore 
will not be repeated in 2025-26. The Committee desire that the measures taken should 
be scrupulously followed and the requisite steps may be taken to ensure that the Top 
Class School/ College Education Schemes stabilize at the earliest and the performance 
is optimized as sufficient time has passed since these Schemes came into existence. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The Department has taken measures to increase the expenditure of umbrella scheme of 
PM YASASVI resulting in spending of ₹1388.82 crore out of RE of ₹1581.00 crore 
(87.8%) for 2022-23; ₹1316.65 crore out of RE of ₹1603.000 crore (82.1%) for 2023-24 
and ₹1331.16 crore out of RE of ₹1380.63 crore (96.41%) for 2024-25. It may also be 
noted that the scheme expenditure has yielded positive results during the financial year 
2024-25 by utilising 96.41% of RE.   
 
The Department has been continuously in touch with the stakeholders viz. States, UTs 
and other Top-Class College Institutions so that the scheme can reach the maximum 
number of beneficiaries. It may also be noted that the department has released ₹31 crore 
in FY 2024-25 to States/UTs for construction of OBC Hostels which is among the highest 
in recent past. In 2024–25, the Department released ₹30.5 crore for the Top-Class 
Education scheme in schools, a significant increase from ₹6.72 crore in the previous 
year. Similarly, for the Top-Class Education scheme in colleges, there was an increase in 
spending of ₹213.98 crore, compared to ₹111.40 crore in the previous year. This shows 
that the efforts of the department has been bearing positive results.   
To optimize utilization of funds, measures like re-allocation of Notional allocation to 
States/UTs who have been doing good work have been initiated in 2024-25 to encourage 
the states/UTs. As has been observed by the Committee, Department is making 
progressive efforts and conducting National Conferences, Regional Conferences, etc. at 
various locations and continuing its efforts. Follow up with States/UTs are also regularly 
undertaken to expedite submission of proposals. Awareness is also created among the 
targeted beneficiaries through Press, electronics and social media. 

16 
 
For the next Financial Cycle, the department would be conducting extensive series of 
stake holder consultations with States/UTs/Top Class Schools/Top Class colleges and 
premier institutions for exploring ways of ensuring better scheme delivery and maximize 
its reach to eligible beneficiaries. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 8 Para 8.22) 
 
The Committee note that under SHRESHTA Scheme, the Residential Schools are 
selected from across the States/UTs on the recommendations of CBSE and State Boards 
to provide high quality residential education from class IX to XII to meritorious students 
form Scheduled Caste communities. The Committee find that 144 Private residential 
schools were selected to accommodate 3000 students on the basis of NTA examination 
during the year 2023-24 and 2024-25 under the scheme. The Committee note that an 
annual fee between ₹1,00,000 to ₹1,35,000 is granted to schools for each student taking 
admission in the Residential Schools. The Committee were informed that the students 
are getting admission in schools across the country as per their performance in NTA 
examination and preference made by the students. The Committee find that the students 
selected for admission are provided bridge course of 3 months to cover the study missed 
due to the time consumed in completion of the admission process. The Committee desire 
that the admission process should be completed in each school by the time academic 
session begins so that the students do not undergo any pressure due to delay in 
admission. The Committee feel that the fee fixed for each student is not sufficient to meet 
boarding, tuition fee expenses and other infrastructure required to provide ton class 
education to the students. Therefore, there is a need to have inbuilt mechanism for 
review and revision of the fee in order to maintain standards of top class education. The 
Committee during the study visit to one of the schools under SHRESHTA, while 
interacting with the students who are coming from other States, observed that it is difficult 
for a school student to cope up with different socio-cultural and linguistic environment. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department may examine the entire process to 
explore the possibility that a student get admission in their domicile State. Hence, the 
Department should evolve a mechanism where a student is provided admission in a Top 
Class Residential Schools selected in their domicile State. In view of the foregoing, the 
Committee recommend that the Department would revise the Scheme at the earliest and 
apprise the Committee in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
During the year 2021-22, the annual fee for class 9th & 10th was ₹75000/-per student and 
for class 11th &12th it was ₹1.25 Lakh per student. This was increased to 1.00 Lakh for 
class 9th,  1.10 Lakh for Class 10th, 1.25 Lakh for Class 11th, and 1.35 Lakh for class 12th 
during 2022-23. However, the need to revise these ceilings have been duly noted for 
incorporation in the scheme guidelines in the EFC for next Financial Commission Cycle 
starting from 2026-27. 
 
Further, it is mentioned here that the scheme is approved till 2025-26 and selection 
process of SC for Residential Education for the academic year 2025-26 has already 
started. Exam schedule has also been published on public domain. NTA has been 
requested to conduct the SHRESHTA (NETS) exam in December 2025 for the academic 
session 2026-27 so that admission process can be completed before the academic 

17 
 
session begins and students do not undergo any hardship due to delay in admission. 
Further, any change in the guidelines of this stage, will more delay the selection process.  
 
On analysis the data, it has been found that 70% students get admission in their domicile 
schools. However, to increase the number of students getting admission in domicile 
states, following procedure is being adopted. 
 
(i) Candidates will be required to select two states in which they are interested to take 
admission; in case a seat is allotted. 
(ii) During the choice filling process, only the schools located in the selected 
states will be displayed. Candidates will be allowed to submit choices only from this 
filtered list. 
(iii) After allotment of a seat in any round, the candidate must download the Seat 
Allotment Letter and report to the allotted school to complete the admission process.  
    
(iv) If a candidate fails to report to the allotted school after any round of seat allotment, 
he/she will not be considered in any subsequent round of counselling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 1 Para 2.11) 
 
The Committee find that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment spent 
6,410.09 crore and ₹7,830.26 crore on various Scholarships and other educational 
schemes in 2022- 23 and 2023-24 respectively. Similarly, in the year 2024-25, the 
Department has spent ₹3,403.51 crore on Educational Scholarship Schemes till 
February, 2025. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department in making 
education accessible to the deprived sections of the Society through various Schemes. 
The Committee believe that for the success of any educational scheme, other factors are 
also significant such as cost of education, availability of good Government 
Schools/Colleges and teaching staff for its effective implementation. The Committee are 
of the opinion that the annual scholarship granted to a student for pursuing education is 
not sufficient to meet the present-day expenditure required to get proper and quality 
education. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department of Social Justice & 
Empowerment to review the annual scholarship amount granted to each student pursuing 
various courses alongwith the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders to achieve 
the envisaged objectives of the various scholarship schemes of the Department. The 
Committee would like to recommend that the quantum of Scholarship granted to a 
student under each Scheme should be periodically reviewed to contain the inflation so 
that the Scheme is more fruitful. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The Department remains committed to ensuring equitable access to quality education for 
SC and OBC students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Concerns regarding the 
adequacy of annual fees and scholarship amounts under schemes such as SHRESHTA, 
SHREYAS (for SCs and OBCs), PM YASASVI, and the Post-Matric and Pre-Matric 
scholarships for SCs etc. have been duly acknowledged. As the current scheme 
guidelines are valid until FY 2025–26, and this being the final year of the 15th Finance 
Commission cycle, revising scholarship rates at this stage may not be feasible. However, 
the revision process for the next cycle (2026–27 to 2030-31) is underway and will aim to 
address current needs, including inflation adjustments. Inputs from stakeholders, 
including States/UTs and relevant Ministries, will be duly considered in the formulation of 
the revised guidelines. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 3 Para 3.14) 
 
The Committee find that ₹251 crore has been earmarked with the aim of benefitting 15 
lakh beneficiaries during 2024-25 and 2025-26 under the Scheme. The Committee also 
find from the figures given by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment that 
financial assistance of only ₹3.00 crore benefitting 47,809 OBC individuals and ₹4.452 
crore benefitting 44,006 SC individuals have been provided in 2024 25. The Committee 
find that even after the issuance of revised guidelines, the Scheme is not attracting 
targeted beneficiaries. The Committee believe that the target of 15 lakh beneficiary fixed 
for 2024-25 and 2025-26 is very difficult to be achieved. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the reasons due to which Scheme is not picking up should be identified. The 
initiatives taken by the Department to promote the Scheme may yield desired results if 

19 
 
concerted efforts by the Department including NSFDC, NBCFDC, NSKFDC and Banks 
are made to make the Scheme successful. Since the Scheme is to be initially 
implemented in 2024-25 and 2025-26, the Committee are concerned about the tenure of 
the Scheme and desire that the Department should consider extending the tenure of the 
Scheme as the tenure of two years is too less for any Scheme to be successful. 
 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The initial estimate of 15 lakh beneficiaries under the VISVAS Interest Subvention 
Scheme was based on a projected outlay of ₹251 crore, with on boarding scheduled 
across 2024–25 and 2025–26. 
In 2024-25, 7.96 lakh claims have already been received from BC, SC, and Safai 
Karamchari beneficiaries on the VISVAS portal, surpassing the annual target of 6.96 lakh 
beneficiaries. However, against a projected requirement of ₹97.5 crore in the Revised 
Estimates for 2024–25, only ₹23.44 crore was allocated, which was fully utilized. This 
funding shortfall has limited beneficiary coverage so far. During 2025-26, BE of ₹50.27 
crore has been allocated against the demand of ₹96.00crore. 
With the said allocation subvention benefit to 5.83 lakh beneficiaries will be provided 
during the two years duration of the scheme. 
While the scheme was initially approved for two years (2024–25 and 2025–26), it 
includes provision to meet committed liabilities until 2030. Given the evident demand, the 
uncovered but already on boarded beneficiaries will be progressively supported, 
especially as the scheme is likely to continue over the 16th Finance Commission period. 
To sustain momentum, continuous efforts are being made to raise awareness through 
channel partners. Standard IEC materials have been shared to support promotion and 
beneficiary outreach. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 4 Para 4.15) 
 
The Venture Capital Fund for SCs and OBC will be discontinued after 31st March, 2025 
and the Department is in the process of formulating a new Venture Capital Fund for 
deprived and marginalized sections. The Committee hope that the observations made by 
IIPA in the evaluation study may also be considered before finalizing the new Scheme 
and take all the necessary steps to make it effective so that it is not required to revise the 
Scheme frequently. The Committee would like the Department to take requisite action for 
early finalization of the new Scheme with detailed guidelines for all the implementing 
agencies. The Committee may like to be apprised of the current status and the time by 
which the new Scheme is likely to be launched. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
It is clarified that the Venture Capital Fund (VCF) Scheme is not being discontinued. 
Rather, it is being transitioned into a new and enhanced scheme with broader scope, 
improved coverage, and a more robust funding architecture. The existing VCF scheme 
will remain operational till 31.03.2025 and crucially, the investment period extends up to 
31.03.2029, by which time the fund is expected to be fully deployed. This ensures 
continuity of support to SC entrepreneurs while enabling a smooth shift to the upgraded 

20 
 
framework. The proposed scheme builds on the strengths of the existing VCF and 
incorporates critical feedback from stakeholder consultations and the findings of the IIPA 
evaluation study. 
 
A.  Incorporation of IIPA Evaluation Findings: 
 
The key concerns raised by IIPA—such as limited dissemination, inadequate grievance 
redressal, and challenges in loan support—have been carefully addressed in the revised 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) proposal. The restructured scheme introduces 
several enhancements, including: 
 
 Promotion of Grassroots Entrepreneurship: With targeted outreach, 
awareness-building, and handholding support for first-generation SC entrepreneurs. 
 Strengthened Capacity Building and Mentorship: 
o Continued support through the “Aye Mentor” platform, offering structured 
digital mentorship. 
o Convergence with existing mentorship frameworks of DPIIT, such as the 
Mentorship, Advisory, MAARG, to expand access to sectoral experts, accelerators, and 
incubators. 
o A hybrid mentorship model, combining virtual and in-person guidance, 
especially in underserved geographies. 
 Accelerated and Transparent Funding Mechanism: Digital application and 
monitoring through the FINTECH portal, enabling faster turnaround and greater 
accountability. 
 Improved Grievance Redressal System: Integration of a time-bound, tech-
enabled redressal framework within the portal itself. 
These reforms complement systemic improvements already operational, such as 
digitized application processing, real-time verification, and the on-going on boarding of 
mentors and partners. 
 
B. Current Status of the Revised Proposal: 
 
The revised EFC memorandum for the new scheme has been formulated with a 
comprehensive, outcome-oriented design. It is currently under inter-ministerial 
consultation prior to submission to the Department of Expenditure. The proposed scheme 
is aligned with national priorities for inclusive development and is expected to drive 
scalable, SC-led entrepreneurship. 
The existing VCF fund remains operational up to 31.03.2025, with the investment period 
extending till 31.03.2029, ensuring continued financial support during the transition to the 
new scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 5 Para 5.12) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment is 
implementing Pradhan Mantri Dakshata Aur Kushalata Sampana Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) 
for SC, OBC and others since 2020-21. It is found that during the year 2022-23 and 
2023-24, the Department was able to spend ₹14.94 crore out of RE of ₹84.00 crore, 
₹58.34 crore out of RE of ₹140.00 crore respectively. Further, the Department has not 
been able to spend even a single rupee in 2024-25 till February, 2025 out of Revised 
Estimate of ₹80.00 crore as empanelment of Training Institutes was delayed. The 
Committee are concerned with the socio-economic development of SC, OBC and others, 
hence, believe that any slackness on behalf of the concerned authorities would defeat 
the purpose of the Scheme. The Committee are of the opinion that the Schemes 
instituted with the noble objectives cannot be left at the mercy of the concerned 
authorities, particularly when the Government of India is making all efforts for the socio- 
economic development of the targeted communities by allocating huge funds. The 
Committee would therefore, like to recommend that in future all necessary steps are 
taken to ensure that the empanelment of Training Institutes, etc. is not delayed and the 
necessary formalities are timely completed. The Committee would like the Department to 
take necessary measures so that the targets fixed are achieved. The Committee would 
also like the Department to enhance the targets keeping into consideration the population 
of these categories i.e., SC, OBC and others so that the maximum people can take 
benefit of the Scheme. 
 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
PM-DAKSH Scheme is being implemented by three Corporations of DoSJE, i.e. 
NBCFDC, NSKFDC and NSFDC. The Corporations are entrusted with the responsibilities 
of examining the claims/bills of the Training Institutes (TIs) and making payment against 
them as per the provisions laid down in Scheme Guidelines, Work Order and directions of 
DoSJE from time to time. As per claims/ bills received from the TIs, the Corporations 
submit request to DoSJE for release of funds. Therefore, the funds released by DoSJE 
are subject to the request received from Corporations in this regard. Recently, DoSJE 
has received proposals for release of funds under PM-DAKSH Scheme for settling 
pending bills of TIs and payment of the stipends to the trainees for the year 2022-23 and 
2023-24. ₹37.5 Cr to NBCFDC, ₹36.32 Cr to NSFDC and ₹5.58 Cr to NSKFDC has been 
released by the Department in 2024-25. As per the recent information submitted by all 
three Corporations, a total of ₹62.74 Cr has been released by the Corporations for 
training conducted in 2023-24 out of 2024-25 Budget. Further, it is informed that this 
Department spent ₹58.34 Cr in 2023-24. 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 5 Para 5.13) 
 
The Committee have found that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has 
sent a proposal to Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship to merge the PM- 
DAKSH Scheme with the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Scheme in 
order to improve efficiency and optimize public expenditure as the PM-DAKSH Scheme 
largely overlaps with the objectives and structure of PMKVY. The Committee urge that as 
the proposal has been sent recently, the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
may ensure that the beneficiary targeted for 2025-26 are not affected. The Committee 
may like to be apprised of the status of the proposals received and also of the 
implementation of the Scheme in 2025-26. 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
  For the year 2024-25 onwards, a decision has been taken in this Department to 
merge PM-DAKSH Scheme with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 
Scheme of Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). It was observed 
that all the job roles under which training is imparted under PM-DAKSH scheme are 
available on SIDH Portal and covered under PMKVY Scheme. Therefore, it was not 
considered logical to run same skilling programme under this Department. Further, the 
scheme was additionality to PMKVY Scheme under which SCs and OBCs are also 
trained under other schemes including PMKVY conducted by MSDE. As such the skilling 
of the target group would continue to be conducted for their upliftment under the skilling 
programmes of MSDE. 
 
As it has been decided to merge PM-DAKSH Scheme with PMKVY Scheme for 2024-25 
onwards, no proposals were sought by this Department for implementation of the 
Scheme for 2025-26. However, with regard to status of proposal sent by DoSJE to MSDE 
for merging PM-DAKSH Scheme with PMKVY Scheme, the proposal of merging the 
Scheme is under consideration in MSDE. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6 Para 6.18) 
 
The Committee find that the proposals under Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs were 
delayed in 2024-25 due to late commencement of courses in the academic year 2023-24 
and some proposals are also expected to be received in the month of February/ March, 
2025. The Committee also note that the Department have revised the guidelines from the 
selection year 2023-24 to achieve the target. However, the Memorandum of 
Understanding required to be signed with Dr. Ambedkar Foundation by all the Central 
Universities to become part of the Scheme has been signed by 19 out of 55 Central 
Universities. The Committee would therefore like the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment to ensure that the MOUs is signed by the remaining Central Universities 
as early as possible so that the economically disadvantaged Scheduled Caste and other 
Backward Classes candidates are not deprived from availing benefits of the Scheme. 
The Committee also desire that the empaneled Central Universities may be persuaded to 
timely commence the classes without any further delay and take necessary measures to 
expeditiously release the funds to them.  

23 
 
 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The direction of the Committee have been noted. Other Central Universities will also be 
requested to sign MoU for implementing the Scheme and empaneled Central Universities 
will be followed up to send proposals at the earliest. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7 Para 7.24) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment provides 
giving grant to State Governments and UT Administrations and the Institutions of repute 
to construct hostels for OBC Boys and Girls. The Committee find that out of 1095 hostels 
sanctioned by the Department, the construction of only 848 have completed and 247 are 
still incomplete due to Administrative hurdles, procurement and contracting issues, 
design and structural approvals, etc. The Committee desire that the 18 months period 
stipulated for constructions of a hostel should be strictly compiled by the respective 
Institutions, State Governments and UT Administration and any hindrance in the 
construction activity should be resolved within the least possible time so that the 
construction work do not exceed the prescribed time period. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Project Monitoring Units set up to monitor Projects may be directed 
to regularly monitor the construction work and take necessary steps to settle the issues 
hampering the construction work. 
 
Reply of Government: 
 
The Department has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee for 
compliance and is monitoring the project regularly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
 04 December, 2025                                                            
 13 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) HELD ON THURSDAY, 04TH DECEMBER, 
2025. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 
113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
                   
    PRESENT 
 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
    Lok Sabha 
 
2.       Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3.       Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare   
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
7. Smt. Bag Mitali 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
9. Adv. Priya Saroj 
10. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
11. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
  
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
13. Shri Ramji 
14. Shri Rameswar Teli 
15. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
16. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Fifth Report (Eighteenth) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
(ii) **  **  **  ** 
 
(iii)  **  **  **  ** 
 
 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on 
the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
THEIR FIFTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2025-26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT). 
 
 
 
 
   Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   17  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
 
Rec. Para No. 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.13, 4.14, 6.17, 
6.19, 6.20, 7.23 and 8.22  
  10   58.8% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
 
Rec. Para No. 2.11, 3.14 and 4.15  
   3   17.7% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
 
Rec. Para No. 6.18 and 7.24  
   4   23.5% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
 
NIL   
  NIL    NIL 
     100% 
 
 