i 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
9 

ii 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.8.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.8.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 

iii 
 
 
CSJE. NO:217 
 
Price : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 6.8.2025. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) 
 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
 
                            MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
25. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26. Shri Ramji 
27. Shri Rameswar Teli 
28. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
29. Smt. P. T. Usha 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
3. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Under Secretary 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Ninth Report on the Action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18.12.2024. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) have furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 23.04.2025. 
The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 06.08.2025. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) is 
given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                                           
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
       
                

1 
 
         CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment).  
 
1.2.  The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18.12.2024. It contained 16 observations/recommendations. Action Taken 
Replies of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have 
been examined and are categorized as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: - Rec. Para No. 3.22, 
3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26, 4.17, 4.19, 4.20, 5.15, 
6.18, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11 and 8.4. 
(Total: 14,  Chapter: II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: – NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not  been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration: – 
Rec. Para No. 2.18 & 4.18. 
(Total: 02, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are  interim in 
nature: – NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: V) 
 
 

2 
 
1.3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken notes 
in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter V of this 
Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18) 
  
1.5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee observe that from 2021-22 to 2023-24, there has been a 
consistent trend of under spending compared to both Revised Estimates 
(RE) and Budget Estimates (BE), with actual expenditures falling short 
across various schemes of the Department. While the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) has locked both the allocations and physical targets for 
the schemes under the Department, including ADIP, SIPDA, DDRS, and 
Scholarships, for the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26, the Department 
must address the recurring shortfalls in fund utilization. The Committee 
urge the Department to conduct a thorough review of the factors 
contributing to the underutilization of funds and take immediate and 
focused remedial actions. The Committee are also of the opinion that 
proactive engagement with stakeholders is essential to address delays in 
proposal submissions from State Governments, NGOs, and implementing 
agencies, ensuring timely and complete proposals to facilitate smooth fund 
release. Streamlining fund disbursement processes, particularly for skill 
training programs and capital expenditure, is crucial to mitigating delays 

3 
 
and enhancing program delivery. Furthermore, given the challenges in 
meeting the fixed targets for schemes like SIPDA and DDRS, the 
Department should reassess the targets setting to ensure they are realistic 
and achievable while maintaining flexibility in adjustments based on 
performance trends. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take decisive actions to improve fund utilization and 
achieve the intended outcomes of all the schemes in the remaining years 
of the current financial cycle (2023-2026). This will ensure that the 
resources allocated for the welfare of persons with disabilities are utilized 
effectively, enabling the Department to meet the targets set under various 
Schemes.” 
  
  
1.6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:-  
  
“ADIP scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred 
under the ADIP Scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 
2025-26 are as under:     
  
(₹ in Cr) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 235.00 230.00 242.29 
2023-24 245.00 305.00 290.60 
2024-25 315.00 350.00 348.81 
2025-26 316.70     
  

4 
 
Under the ADIP Scheme, BE for FY 2025-26 is ₹316.70 crores that will be 
utilized in various activities under ADIP Scheme. For FY 2025-26, 
requirement of funds has been projected by ALIMCO which is the major 
Implementing Agency of ADIP Scheme. Apart from this, demand for funds 
has also been raised by National Institutes for pilot projects on TLM Kits. 
  
Scholarship scheme: The budget allocation fixed by EFC for the period 
2021-22 to 2025-26 is ₹560 Crore and the number of slots are fixed as per 
EFC. The Department has utilized more than the RE funds under the 
Scholarship scheme during FY 2024-25. The details of BE, RE and actual 
expenditure incurred under the Scholarship scheme for the years 2022-23 
to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are as under: 
                 (₹ in Cr) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 105.00 145.00 142.00 
2023-24 155.00 155.00 130.07 
2024-25 142.68 80.00 89.63 
2025-26 145.00     
  
The Department is actively organizing meetings with State Nodal Officers 
(SNOs) to ensure effective implementation of the schemes. The 
Department is also taking necessary steps to sensitize the States/UTs to 
clear the pendency at various levels of the State Nodal Officers and other 
Stakeholders. The Department has published advertisements in leading 
Newspapers across the country twice to increase awareness of these 
schemes amongst students and other stakeholders. All other types of 
media and social media platforms are also used for spreading awareness. 
The Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States are also addressed 

5 
 
to spread awareness of the schemes through various mediums of 
communication in their respective States/UTs. 
  
DDRS scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred 
under the DDRS scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 
2025-26 are as under: 
          (₹ in Cr) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 125.00 105.00 114.69 
2023-24 130.00 130.00 129.98 
2024-25 165.00 139.00 139.39 
2025-26 165.00     
Under the DDRS scheme, the remedial measures taken by this Department 
for smooth utilization of funds are as under: 
  
 Model projects have been conceptualized to cover all 21 disabilities as per 
RPwD Act, 2016. 
 Maximum age limit of the ID beneficiaries has been increased from 18 to 
23 years. 
 Grant-in-aid to the Implementing Agencies is being released on Advance-
cum-reimbursement basis. 
 With effect from 2023-24, the implementing agencies are required to 
submit UDID cards of all the eligible beneficiaries. The data regarding 
UDID cards is being directly fetched through API from UDID Portal 
(Swavlamban Portal). 
 With effect from 01.10.2024, if the proposal submitted by the PIAs/NGOs 
on e-anudaan portal is pending at District level for one month without any 
action, then it will automatically be forwarded to the State Government. 
Further, if the same proposal is pending with the State Government for 

6 
 
one month without any action, then it will automatically be forwarded 
(without recommendation of State Government) to the Department. 
However, this will not be applicable in case of supplementary grant being 
given by the State Government to the PIAs/NGOs. 
 CPMU consultants and young professionals of the Department are 
conducting video inspections to monitor the smooth functioning of the 
organizations and the timely submission of grants-in-aid proposals. 
  
SIPDA scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred under 
the DDRS scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are 
as under: 
 (₹ in Cr) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 240.39 100.00 65.59 
2023-24 150.00 67.00 76.79 
2024-25 135.33 111.00 44.16* 
2025-26 115.10     
*Due to implementation of TSA module from 2024-25, some States could not onboard on 
TSA module and make expenditure of sanctioned amount of about ₹40 crore. 
  
It has been observed that certain issues led to underutilization of funds, some 
of which are: 
  Delayed and Incomplete Proposals: A significant cause of 
underutilization has been submission of late or incomplete proposals from 
State Governments, UTs, and implementing agencies. 
 Pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs): Release of further funds is 
contingent upon receipt of UCs for earlier releases. Delays in submission of 
the same by States/UTs have directly hindered timely disbursement. 

7 
 
 Systemic Changes: The introduction of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) 
and Treasury Single Account (TSA) models led to transitional delays. 
 Inadequate Proposals from Certain Regions: Particularly from North-
Eastern States, the number of proposals received has been insufficient, 
further affecting overall utilization. 
In order to address the shortfalls in fund utilization and to facilitate full 
appropriate utilization of funds, the Department is actively pursuing several 
redressal mechanisms, such as: 
  
A committee consisting of Joint Secretary (SIPDA), Director/Deputy Secretary 
(SIPDA), and two experts in the field of disability duly examine the proposals for 
release of Grant-in-Aid (GIA) under the Barrier Free and Accessible India 
component. 
 The Department conducts regular follow ups with the concerned 
stakeholders through meetings/VCs to expedite the release of GIA under 
the Barrier Free (CBFE)/ Accessible India Campaign (AIC) component of 
the Umbrella Scheme SIPDA, which includes frequent communications by 
the Department for obtaining the requisite documents and/or proposals for 
consideration. 
 The Department is currently in the process of reviewing and further 
simplifying the fund release process in respect of the 2nd instalment under 
the Creation of Barrier Free Environment (CBFE) Scheme for prompt fund 
disbursal. 
 A dedicated online portal for receiving proposals under Awareness 
Generation and Publicity (AGP) Scheme has been launched. For the 
events/initiatives to be taken up through National Institutes, the 
Department has planned to work out a model to make advance payments 

8 
 
to the NIs in anticipation of those activities, which would improve the fund 
utilization and timely program execution. 
Further, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.” 
   
1.7. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had drawn 
attention to the recurring mismatch between budgetary allocations 
and actual expenditures under key schemes of the Department—
including ADIP, SIPDA, DDRS, and Scholarships—despite clearly 
defined targets and financial ceilings under the EFC framework. The 
Committee had called for a systematic review of implementation 
bottlenecks, delays in proposal submissions, and procedural rigidities 
that continue to undermine the effectiveness of these schemes. 
 
In response, the Department has outlined a set of administrative 
measures and procedural adjustments, including auto-forwarding of 
proposals, video inspections, stakeholder sensitization, and 
simplification of the second instalment release process. However, these 
responses fail to account for the deeper structural issues impeding the 
schemes, particularly under SIPDA, where expenditure continues to lag 
far behind allocations year after year. The persistence of delayed and 
incomplete proposals, inadequate capacity at the State level, and the 
inability to adapt swiftly to systemic transitions like the Treasury 
Single Account (TSA) model point to weak institutional preparedness 
and a reactive, rather than anticipatory, mode of functioning. The 
Committee are of the view that the Department’s interventions remain 
fragmented, lacking the urgency and coherence required to address 
chronic underperformance. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 

9 
 
recommendation that the Department should take decisive actions to 
improve fund utilization and achieve the intended outcomes of all the 
schemes in the remaining years of the current financial cycle (2023-
2026) and recommend that the Department move beyond generic 
procedural actions and initiate a time-bound, scheme-wise corrective 
action plan, supported by real-time performance monitoring, region-
specific diagnostics, and greater accountability mechanisms for 
implementing partners.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22) 
  
1.8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee find that the ADIP Scheme has consistently demonstrated 
commendable performance in empowering persons with disabilities (PwDs) 
through efficient financial management, exceeding physical targets, and 
adopting innovative measures. The utilization of funds has been robust, 
surpassing revised estimates. The scheme's ability to achieve 121.5 per 
cent, 140.0 per cent and 160.0 per cent of its physical targets in 2021-22, 
2022-23, and 2023-24, respectively, reflects its effectiveness. The 
Committee are confident that the target in 2024-25 would be easily met.” 
  
1.9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“The physical target of 3.15 lakh beneficiaries for FY 2024-25 was set 
based on the assumption of cost incurred per beneficiary at ₹10,000/-. 
However, due to increasing demand of costlier items among beneficiaries 

10 
 
such as Motorized Tricycle, Accessible Smart Phones and High-end 
Prosthesis, the cost incurred per beneficiary during FY 2024-25 came 
around ₹14,120.29/- (Total funds utilized in 2024-25: ₹354. 61 crore; 
number of beneficiaries = 2,51,136). Due to increase in average cost of 
devices per beneficiary, the physical target of 3.15 lakh beneficiaries for 
2024-25 could not be achieved and only 2.51 lakh beneficiaries were given 
assistance.” 
 
1.10. The Committee had appreciated the notable performance of the 
ADIP Scheme over the years, particularly its effective financial 
management and consistent overachievement of physical targets 
during 2021–22 to 2023–24. Given this positive trajectory, the 
Committee had anticipated that the target of covering 3.15 lakh 
beneficiaries in 2024–25 would also be comfortably achieved. 
In its response, the Department has clarified that although the 
entire budgetary allocation was utilized, the physical target could not 
be met due to a significant increase in the average cost per beneficiary. 
This was attributed to rising demand for cost-intensive aids and 
appliances such as motorized tricycles, accessible smartphones, and 
high-end prosthesis. The Committee acknowledge this shift in 
beneficiary preferences and understand that the quality and relevance 
of support are equally critical as is the number of beneficiaries covered. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that while formulating future 
targets, the Department may adopt a more flexible and cost-sensitive 
approach, taking into account emerging trends in assistive technology 
and user needs, to ensure optimal and inclusive outcomes. 

11 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 4.17) 
  
1.11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee find that the SIPDA scheme has made significant stride in 
enhancing the lives of Persons with Disabilities (PwDs). Collaborative 
initiatives, such as training programs with IIT Kharagpur and the Council 
of Architecture, have strengthened professional expertise in accessibility 
auditing and design. Non-financial MoUs with prominent companies like 
Amazon, Flipkart, and Zomato have successfully expanded the employment 
opportunities for PwDs, utilizing models such as Recruit-Train-Deploy 
(RTD). The PM-DAKSH-DEPwD portal has emerged as a one-stop digital 
platform for skill training and employment tracking, offering a more 
integrated approach to empowering PwDs. The Committee believe that 
issuance of over 1.13 crore Unique Disability Identity (UDID) cards and the 
launch of a revamped portal have improved accessibility and streamlined 
the identification process for PwDs. The Committee recommend leveraging 
the PM-DAKSH-DEPwD portal, establishing regional training hubs, and 
deepening industry collaborations to enhance skill training and placement 
opportunities for PwDs.” 
 
  
1.12. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“The recommendation of the Committee in respect of NAP-SDP 
Scheme/PM-Daksh-DePwD Portal has been noted. This Department 
implements National Action Plan for Skill Development of Persons with 
Disabilities (NAP-SDP) with the objective of providing skill training to 

12 
 
Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) for enabling them to become self-reliant 
and productive members of the society and to integrate them with the 
mainstream of the society. Several initiatives have been taken from time to 
time by the Department since its inception, for proper implementation of 
the scheme as well as to achieve the objective of the scheme. 
  
PM-DAKSH-DePwD Portal has been developed for monitoring of NAP-SDP 
Scheme. This portal is providing a vast pool of empaneled training partners 
and the PwDs have the opportunity to apply for skill training as per their 
choice of training partner, place of training centre and desired job role. 
This Department has signed MOUs with Non-Government Organization like 
Youth4jobs, Saarthak, Volvo, Zomato to increase the placement 
opportunities of trained PwDs. This Department is also taking up Special 
Projects under NAP-SDP Scheme for providing skill training and 
employment.” 
 
1.13.  The Committee, in their original Report, had observed the 
notable progress achieved under the National Action Plan for Skill 
Development of Persons with Disabilities (NAP-SDP) scheme in 
advancing accessibility, skill development, and employment 
opportunities for Persons with Disabilities (PwDs). They noted the 
collaborative training initiatives with institutions such as IIT 
Kharagpur and the Council of Architecture, as well as non-financial 
MoUs with private sector companies like Amazon, Flipkart, and Zomato 
to promote employment through the Recruit-Train-Deploy (RTD) 
model. The PM-DAKSH-DePwD portal was also recognized as a valuable 
digital platform for facilitating skill training and employment tracking. 
In view of these developments, the Committee had stressed the 

13 
 
importance of building on these initiatives to ensure wider impact and 
inclusion. 
In response, the Ministry has highlighted its ongoing efforts 
under the National Action Plan for Skill Development of Persons with 
Disabilities (NAP-SDP), including the operationalization of the PM-
DAKSH-DePWD portal, partnerships with NGOs and corporates, and 
implementation of special projects to support skill training and job 
placement. While appreciating the initiatives outlined by the 
Department, the Committee are of the opinion that efforts must now 
focus on expanding the reach of these programmes by establishing 
regional training hubs and further strengthening industry partnerships. 
The Committee also reiterate that the portal should be utilized more 
effectively to provide customized training options and job 
opportunities, ensuring greater accessibility and empowerment of 
PwDs across the country. 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 4.18) 
  
1.14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the scheme faces challenges, particularly in 
fund utilization. Allocated budgets have often gone underutilized due to 
delays in receiving project proposals and incomplete utilization certificates, 
especially under the Accessible India Campaign (AIC). Efforts to create a 
barrier-free environment remain slow, with limited participation from 
States and UTs. Given that SIPDA is one of the largest umbrella schemes 
administered by the Department, such underperformance raises concerns 
about the adequacy of planning and execution by the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should emphasize 

14 
 
improved coordination with States/UTs to ensure timely submission of 
proposals and optimal fund utilization, supported by a real-time tracking 
mechanism for project milestones. The Committee urge the Department to 
scale accessibility efforts by forging partnerships with NGOs and private 
players to accelerate retrofitting initiatives and provide training in universal 
design principles.”  
  
1.15. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 “Certain issues led to underutilization of funds, some of which are: 
  Delayed and Incomplete Proposals: A significant cause of 
underutilization has been due to the late or incomplete submission of 
proposals from State Governments, UTs, and implementing agencies.  
 Pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs): Release of further funds is 
contingent upon receipt of UCs for earlier releases. Delays in submission of 
the same by States/UTs have hindered timely disbursement. 
 Systemic Changes: The introduction of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) 
and Treasury Single Account (TSA) models led to transitional delays. 
 Inadequate Proposals from Certain Regions: Particularly from North-
Eastern States, the number of proposals received has been insufficient, 
further affecting overall utilization. 
In order to address the shortfalls in fund utilization and to facilitate full 
appropriate utilization of funds, the Department is actively pursuing several 
redressal mechanisms, such as: 
  

15 
 
Screening Committee: A committee consisting of Joint Secretary (SIPDA), 
Director/Deputy Secretary (SIPDA), and two experts in the field of disability 
duly examine the proposals for release of Grants-in-Aid (GIA) under the 
Barrier Free and Accessible India component. 
 Regular follow ups: The Department conducts regular follow ups with 
the concerned stakeholders through meetings/VCs to expedite the release 
of GIA under the Creation of Barrier Free (CBFE)/ Accessible India 
Campaign (AIC) component of the Umbrella Scheme SIPDA, which 
includes frequent communications by the Department for obtaining the 
requisite documents and/or proposals for consideration. 
 Reassessment of fund release procedure: The Department is 
currently in the process of reviewing and further simplifying the fund 
release process in respect of the 2nd instalments under the Creation of 
Barrier Free Environment (CBFE) Scheme for prompt fund disbursal. 
In addition to the above, the Department also engages with private players 
for furthering the agenda of increased accessibility for Divyangjans in the 
nation by the following activities: 
  
 Signing of MoU with the Council of Architecture (CoA): The Department 
has collaborated with CoA and developed a training course on accessibility 
under the MoU; furthermore 41 access auditors have been trained under 
the MoU. 
 The Department signed an MoU with Enable Me Access for providing 
training to stakeholders on existing accessibility standards in India. 
 The Department has signed an MoU with Association for Persons with 
Disabilities (APD) to enable the Department to use ‘Yes to Access’ app for 

16 
 
conducting accessibility evaluation by stakeholders during the Sugamya 
Yatra under which a total of 588 users have conducted audit of 1040 
public buildings/premises across 18 States and 05 Union Territories.  
 The Department has empaneled 59 accessibility auditors in Built 
Environment and 10 accessibility auditors in web environment; applications 
are open throughout the year for empaneling more number of web 
accessibility auditors. 
 Sugamya Bharat App-a crowdsourcing app that registers infrastructure 
accessibility related issues and escalates the same to the concerned 
authorities for prompt redressal-has been revamped by involving 
technocrats from within the Divyangjan community. The app is compatible 
with both iOS and Android platforms.” 
1.16. Recognizing the pivotal role of the Accessible India Campaign 
scheme in advancing accessibility and inclusion for Persons with 
Disabilities (PwDs), the Committee had earlier drawn attention to its 
uneven performance, particularly in terms of fund utilization and 
project execution. While the scheme holds considerable potential—
especially through initiatives like accessibility training collaborations, 
skill development platforms, and private sector engagement—the 
Committee expressed concern over procedural delays, limited 
participation by States/UTs, and slow implementation of the Accessible 
India Campaign (AIC). They had urged the Department to strengthen 
coordination mechanisms, adopt real-time project monitoring, and 
forge broader partnerships to accelerate progress and ensure that 
allocated funds translate into tangible outcomes on the ground. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by the 
Department as it largely reiterates ongoing processes without 

17 
 
providing substantive evidence of their effectiveness in resolving the 
structural bottlenecks. For instance, despite empanelment of 
accessibility auditors and partnerships with private stakeholders, the 
pace of retrofitting and accessible infrastructure creation remains 
slow. Furthermore, the reliance on crowdsourcing apps and volunteer-
led initiatives cannot substitute for systematic policy-driven execution 
and financial accountability. 
The Committee are, therefore, constrained to reiterate their 
concern that unless the Department takes firm steps to reform its 
implementation strategy, the objectives of the scheme will remain only 
partially fulfilled. They recommend that the Department adopt a 
mission-mode approach to the Accessible India Campaign with fixed 
timelines, strengthen real-time project monitoring systems, and 
introduce performance-based incentives or disincentives for State 
Governments. Furthermore, measurable outcomes must be periodically 
reviewed and reported to ensure transparency and accountability in 
the use of public funds meant for the empowerment of Divyangjan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22) 
The Committee find that the ADIP Scheme has consistently demonstrated 
commendable performance in empowering persons with disabilities (PwDs) through 
efficient financial management, exceeding physical targets, and adopting innovative 
measures. The utilization of funds has been robust, surpassing revised estimates. The 
scheme's ability to achieve 121.5 per cent, 140.0 per cent and 160.0 per cent of its 
physical targets in 2021-22, 2022-23, and 2023-24, respectively, reflects its 
effectiveness. The Committee are confident that the target in 2024-25 would be easily 
met. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The physical target of 3.15 lakh beneficiaries for FY 2024-25 was set based on the 
assumption of cost incurred per beneficiary at ₹10,000/-. However, due to increasing 
demand of costlier items among beneficiaries such as Motorized Tricycle, Accessible 
Smart Phones and High-end Prosthesis, the cost incurred per beneficiary during FY 
2024-25 came around ₹14,120.29/- (Total funds utilized in 2024-25: ₹354. 61 crore; 
number of beneficiaries = 2,51,136). Due to increase in average cost of devices per 
beneficiary, the physical target of 3.15 lakh beneficiaries for 2024-25 could not be 
achieved and only 2.51 lakh beneficiaries were given assistance. 
  
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23) 
 
The Committee find that while Digital innovations like the Arjun ADIP- MIS Portal have 
enhanced data management, the challenges like network issues in remote areas and 
difficulties faced by beneficiaries with low literacy must be addressed. The Committee in 
this regard would like to recommend that, offline data collection mechanisms that sync 
with the portal when connectivity is available which can bridge this gap may be 
explored by the Department. Additionally, user-friendly features and multilingual 
support can make the portal more accessible. 
  
 
 
 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
To address challenges such as network issues in remote areas for beneficiary 
registration under the ARJUN Portal, provision for offline data collection has been 
initiated. Additionally, beneficiaries facing difficulties due to low literacy can visit the 
nearest ALIMCO center (AAPCs/RMCs/PMDKs/AASRA), where trained staff are available 
to assist them in availing the benefits of the ADIP scheme. ALIMCO has 6 production 
facilities, 8 Regional Marketing Centres (RMCs), 70 Pradhan Mantri Divyasha Kendra 
(PMDKs) and 60 ALIMCO Authorized Service & Repair Agency (AASRA) where 
beneficiaries can walk-in & avail benefits. 
  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24) 
The Committee note that the Department has taken a major step to establish Pradhan 
Mantri Divyasha Kendras (PMDKs) of ALIMCO, the walk-in centers, where eligible 
beneficiary can directly avail required aids and appliances free of cost. The Committee 
find that expansion of Pradhan Mantri Divyasha Kendras (PMDKs) provides greater 
accessibility to services. The Committee commend the Department on the 
establishment of 64 functional PMDKs in the country and hope that the plan of the 
Department of scaling this initiative to the planned 300 centers over the next two years 
will improve accessibility and reduce dependency on ADIP camps. The Committee 
recommend that the Department ensure that these centers are equipped with adequate 
staff and resources for same-day fitments to the beneficiaries.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
With the objective of extending the benefits of the ADIP and RVY (Rashtriya Vayoshri 
Yojana) Schemes of the Government of India, Department through ALIMCO has been 
actively establishing Pradhan Mantri Divyasha Kendras (PMDKs). Till date, 70 PMDKs 
have been made functional covering all States and Union Territories across the country 
and Department plans to open total 300 PMDKs by 2029. Further, ALIMCO ensures 
Same-Day Delivery for all Ready-to-Use (RTU) items. For customized fabricated 
appliances, measurement and casting are conducted on the same day, while delivery is 
typically completed within 7-10 days after ensuring proper fitment, trial, and Gait 
Training. Efforts are underway to further reduce this lead time progressively. As on 
date, ALIMCO has 130 P&Os (Prosthetic and Orthotic professionals) & 31 Audiologist on 
roll deputed at various PMDKs. More rehabilitation staff will be added to meet the 
requirements. 
  

20 
 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25) 
The Committee find that the production capacity of ALIMCO has enhanced by 2.5 times 
and its turnover increased from ₹350 crore in 2021-22 to ₹634 crore in 2023-24 after 
modernization. The Committee would like to commend the Department on the 
performance and efficiency of ALIMCO. The Committee are of the opinion that there is 
a requirement of Leveraging ALIMCO’s Modernization. They feel that ALIMCO’s 
enhanced capacity and European certifications open opportunities for global 
partnerships and exports. Encouraging ALIMCO to adopt cutting-edge technologies and 
explore newer product lines tailored to diverse disabilities can further elevate its impact. 
The Committee would like the Department to further explore this aspect.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Following modernization, ALIMCO has established an SMT (Surface Mount Technology) 
assembly line for manufacturing PCBs for electronic products at its Faridabad unit. This 
facility is capable of producing PCBs for Smart Cane and BTE (Behind the Ear hearing 
aid), trial production has been successfully commenced. Additionally, 3D printing 
machines for manufacturing of customized sockets have been installed at ALIMCO. 
  
In its efforts to strengthen innovation, ALIMCO has forged strategic partnerships with 
leading government organizations and institutes to develop advanced assistive devices. 
These collaborations include CSIR-CSIO, Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering 
& Technology (CIPET), Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), the National Institute of 
Design, IIT Chennai, CDAC Thiruvananthapuram, MIDHANI Hyderabad, AMTZ Vizag, 
SBMT Bangalore, and NSIC. These partnerships focus on the design, development, and 
manufacturing of cutting-edge assistive technologies. Products so produced under tie 
ups shall be promoted exclusively in Private and for Exports Market. 
  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26) 
 
The Committee find that many eligible beneficiaries may remain unaware of the scheme 
or its benefits. They therefore recommend that the Department may explore 
collaborations with local governments, NGOs, and media platforms for extensive 
awareness campaigns which can enhance enrollment. 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The following measures have been undertaken by ALIMCO which is the major 
implementing agency of the ADIP Scheme: 
  
(a)        Establishment of PMDKs: ALIMCO, in collaboration with National Institutes 
(NIs), Composite Regional Centers (CRCs), NGOs, AIIMS, and State Governments, have 
been setting up Pradhan Mantri Divyasha Kendras (PMDKs) across the country to 
enhance accessibility. 
  
(b)   Localized Awareness Campaigns: To ensure effective communication, 
advertisements in vernacular languages are scheduled for publication in leading local 
dailies across all States and Union Territories. Further, Social Media platform of ALIMCO 
shall be utilized more efficiently through special campaigns to disseminate awareness 
about the scheme. Instruction videos of usage of most running items like MTC 
(Motorized Tricycle), Hearing Aid etc. are uploaded on ALIMCO social media handles. 
  
(c)     Collaborations with Stakeholders: ALIMCO is actively working towards 
collaborations with District Disability Rehabilitation Centers (DDRCs), Deendayal 
Divyangjan Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) organizations, Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), and Voluntary Organizations (VOs) to strengthen outreach 
efforts. 
  
(d)       Inclusion of Special Schools and National Trust Beneficiaries: Efforts 
are underway to ensure coverage of beneficiaries from Special Schools and Regional 
Offices of the National Trust, thereby expanding the reach of the scheme to children 
and individuals in need. 
  
2.         Further, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17) 
The Committee find that the SIPDA scheme has made significant stride in enhancing 
the lives of Persons with Disabilities (PwDs). Collaborative initiatives, such as training 
programs with IIT Kharagpur and the Council of Architecture, have strengthened 
professional expertise in accessibility auditing and design. Non-financial MoUs with 
prominent companies like Amazon, Flipkart, and Zomato have successfully expanded 
the employment opportunities for PwDs, utilizing models such as Recruit-Train-Deploy 
(RTD). The PM-DAKSH-DEPwD portal has emerged as a one-stop digital platform for 
skill training and employment tracking, offering a more integrated approach to 

22 
 
empowering PwDs. The Committee believe that issuance of over 1.13 crore Unique 
Disability Identity (UDID) cards and the launch of a revamped portal have improved 
accessibility and streamlined the identification process for PwDs. The Committee 
recommend leveraging the PM-DAKSH-DEPwD portal, establishing regional training 
hubs, and deepening industry collaborations to enhance skill training and placement 
opportunities for PwDs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The recommendation of the Committee in respect of NAP-SDP Scheme/PM-Daksh-
DEPwD Portal has been noted. This Department implements National Action Plan for 
Skill Development of Persons with Disabilities (NAP-SDP) with the objective of providing 
skill training to Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) for enabling them to become self-reliant 
and productive members of the society and to integrate them with the mainstream of 
the society. Several initiatives have been taken from time to time by the Department 
since its inception, for proper implementation of the scheme as well as to achieve the 
objective of the scheme. 
 PM-DAKSH-DEPwD Portal has been developed for monitoring of NAP-SDP Scheme. This 
portal is providing a vast pool of empaneled training partners and the PwDs have the 
opportunity to apply for skill training as per their choice of training partner, place of 
training centre and desired job role. This Department has signed MOUs with Non-
Government Organization like Youth4jobs, Saarthak, Volvo, Zomato to increase the 
placement opportunities of trained PwDs. This Department is also taking up Special 
Projects under NAP-SDP Scheme for providing skill training and employment. 
  (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19) 
To simplify the disability certification process, the Committee recommend deploying 
mobile certification teams and utilizing digital tools to improve access for underserved 
areas. The Committee further recommend organizing awareness campaigns, such as 
Divya Kala Melas, and conducting stakeholder workshops to improve outreach and 
implementation. The Committee urge the Department to allocate dedicated R&D 
funding and foster collaborations with premier institutions to develop assistive devices 
and innovative solutions tailored to PwD needs. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has advised the States/UTs to facilitate disability assessment and 
certification through mobile vans in island and hilly areas to ensure coverage of genuine 
Persons with Disabilities (PwDs). Divya Kala Melas are being organized in the various 
parts of the country regularly. Since December, 2022, 25 Divya Kala Melas have been 
organized. Through these Divya Kala Melas awareness campaigns for sensitization of 
Local Level Officials such as Sarpanch/Village Level workers, Anganwadi Workers etc. 

23 
 
about the various schemes being offered by the Department for welfare of the 
Divyangjans is done. Collaboration with premier institutions for R&D on assistive devices 
has been strengthened, with increased budget allocations under SIPDA for technological 
innovation benefiting PwDs. 
   
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20) 
The Committee recommend incentivizing States/UTs with performance-linked grants for 
achieving significant progress under SIPDA and providing targeted support to 
underperforming regions. The Committee urge the Department to integrate universal 
accessibility principles into education curriculums and establish a National Center for 
Accessibility to serve as a hub for research, training, and policy advocacy. The 
Committee recommend strengthening monitoring and accountability mechanisms, using 
AI and digital tools like the Sugamya Bharat App to enhance real-time tracking, 
optimize training outcomes, and address accessibility challenges effectively, advancing 
SIPDA’s mission to empower PwDs. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Specialised courses on accessibility have been developed in collaboration with IIT 
Kharagpur in B. Planning and B. Architecture programs to integrate universal 
accessibility principles into educational curriculums. 
  
The Department also engages with private players for furthering the agenda of 
increased accessibility for Divyangjans in the nation by the following activities: 
  
 Signing of MoU with the Council of Architecture: The Department has 
collaborated with CoA and developed a training course on accessibility under the 
MoU; furthermore 41 access auditors have been trained under the MoU. 
 The Department signed an MoU with EnableMeAccess for providing training to 
stakeholders on existing accessibility standards in India. 
 The Department has signed an MoU with Associations for Persons with 
Disabilities (APD) to enable the Department to use ‘Yes to Access’ app for 
conducting accessibility evaluation by stakeholders during the Sugamya Yatra 
under which a total of 588 users have conducted audit of 1040 public 
buildings/premises across 18 States and 05 Union Territories.  
 The Department has empaneled 59 accessibility auditors in Built Environment 
and 10 accessibility auditors in web environment; applications are open 
throughout the year for empaneling more number of web accessibility auditors. 

24 
 
 Sugamya Bharat App-a crowdsourcing app that registers infrastructure 
accessibility related issues and escalates the same to the concerned authorities 
for prompt redressal-has been revamped by involving technocrats from within 
the Divyangjan community. The app is compatible with both iOS and Android 
platforms. 
  (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15) 
 
The Committee find that while the Deendayal Divyangjan Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) 
has made progress in reaching its targets, there are significant challenges in fund 
utilization and physical achievements. The Committee note that there were variations in 
actual expenditure, as only 56 per cent utilized in 2022-23 and 15 per cent utilized as of 
November 2024 for 2024-25, indicating inefficiencies in fund disbursement and 
implementation. The Committee would like to recommend that the Department enhance 
fund utilization efficiency by streamlining the disbursement process and implementing 
real-time tracking mechanisms. The Committee urge the Department to expedite the 
approval of new project proposals, particularly those targeting cross-disabilities and 
specific learning disabilities, to meet the consistent target of 40,000 beneficiaries. To 
address delays in project implementation, the Committee recommend strengthening the 
monitoring and reporting systems, alongside introducing automatic escalation for 
pending proposals. The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
incentivize timely project proposals, expand collaborations with NGOs, and provide 
capacity-building support to all the stakeholders to improve the effectiveness of the 
scheme. These steps will help overcome current bottlenecks, ensuring DDRS achieves 
its objectives and impacts the lives of persons with disabilities more effectively. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Details of financial and physical achievements during the last three years are as under: 
     (₹ in Cr ) 
  
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
expenditure 
Beneficiaries 
2022-23 125.00 105.00 114.69 35349 
2023-24 130.00 130.00 129.98 30589 
2024-25 165.00 139.00 139.39 34898 
(Note: It may be noted from the above table that the complete allotted fund or more 
than allotted fund has been utilized during the year 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25.) 
  

25 
 
Regarding the Committee’s recommendation to streamline the disbursement process 
and implement real-time tracking mechanisms, Department is already working on 
enhancing these systems. This will ensure regular monitoring and evaluation of ongoing 
projects, allowing the Department to track progress and address any delays or issues in 
a timely manner.  
  
In response to the Committee’s suggestion to expedite the approval of new project 
proposals, the Department is committed to prioritizing projects, particularly those 
addressing cross-disabilities and specific learning disabilities, to meet the target of 
40,000 beneficiaries per year.  
  
The Department established a Central Project Monitoring Unit (CPMU) in 2022-23 to 
enhance oversight and ensure effective implementation and monitoring of DDRS 
projects. The Department also coordinates with National Institutes/CRCs for supervising 
and monitoring District Disability Rehabilitation Centers (DDRCs), working with 
implementing agencies and officials. 
  
Furthermore, the Department is taking steps to incentivize timely project proposals and 
collaborate more with NGOs. These measures will improve the overall effectiveness of 
the DDRS scheme. 
  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.18) 
The Committee find that while the Central Sector Umbrella Scheme of Scholarship for 
Students with Disabilities has made commendable efforts in empowering students with 
disabilities, several challenges persist in achieving its full potential. The Committee note 
that, despite an increase in budgetary allocations over the years, utilization rates have 
been inconsistent, and physical achievements have fallen short. Challenges such as 
delays in application verifications, insufficient awareness, and technical issues with 
UDID and Aadhaar-based systems have hampered effective implementation. The 
Committee would like to recommend strengthening the verification process at the State 
Nodal Officer level, enhancing the capacity of the National Scholarship Portal to address 
technical bottlenecks, and expanding the scope of outreach programs through targeted 
awareness campaigns. The Committee emphasize the need for timely disbursal of 
funds, regular monitoring through physical inspections, and improved coordination with 
State/UT Governments to reduce pendency and duplication. The Committee further 
recommend revising the scholarship guidelines to ensure adequate flexibility for 
addressing emerging needs and streamlining the documentation process for applicants. 

26 
 
These measures will enhance the effectiveness of the scheme and better serve the 
educational aspirations of students with disabilities. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Under the Scholarship Umbrella Scheme, applications are received on NSP online portal 
for the Pre-matric, Post-matric and Top Class Education Scholarship Scheme. Aadhaar 
and UDID have been made mandatory to get the benefits of Scholarships. The Aadhaar 
details of beneficiaries are collected through the National Scholarship 
Portal and Fellowship Management Portal. UDID has also been integrated and 
beneficiary’s information is  fetched through API without any manual intervention for 
correct and accurate data. 
  
The applications are verified at various levels such as from the school or institute level 
to the domicile State or UT level. The State Nodal Officer verifies the application form 
and uploaded documents. The Nodal Officer can verify, defect, reject, or mark the 
application as fake. Once the application is verified at these levels, the National 
Scholarship Portal runs the Sanity checks and generates Red Flags. The doubtful 
applications are again sent to the State Nodal Officers for re-validation. The Department 
releases the scholarship amount only for those applications which are duly verified and 
approved by all verification authorities. The scholarship is disbursed only to the 
Aadhaar-seeded bank account of the beneficiary. Beside of this, the data verification 
works are assigned to the CPMU team for the Post Matric/Top Class Education 
applications and National Fellowship Scholarship Schemes on regular basis. The 
Department has revised the scholarship guideline for the year 2024-25 to ensure 
adequate flexibility for addressing emerging needs and streamlining the documentation 
process for applicants. 
 
  (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.9) 
The Committee note with appreciation that the establishment of the Atal Bihari 
Vajpayee Training Centre for Disability Sports (ABVTCDS) in Gwalior as a landmark 
initiative to empower Divyangjan athletes and foster inclusivity in sports. The Centre’s 
state-of-the-art infrastructure and focus on disciplines such as athletics, football, 
swimming, badminton, table tennis, and Bocce provide significant opportunities for 
athletes with disabilities. The Committee find that the Centre has already hosted several 
national and State-level events, benefiting a substantial number of participants and 
showcasing its potential as a hub for para-sports in the country. The Committee 
recommend regular monitoring and feedback mechanisms to ensure the continuous 

27 
 
improvement of the Centre’s programs and infrastructure, making ABVTCDS a model 
institution for nurturing talent and promoting inclusivity in para-sports. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
The Department assures that regular review for periodic assessments, athlete 
performance evaluations, and infrastructural reviews are being conducted to ensure the 
Centre's continuous development. Moreover, a structured reporting system is being 
institutionalized to maintain high standards and incorporate stakeholder feedback for 
further improvements. 
   
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.10) 
The Committee would like to recommend that efforts be intensified to ensure universal 
accessibility at the Centre, catering to athletes with diverse disabilities. Additionally, the 
Committee underscore the need for expanding outreach. The Committee also 
recommend the creation of a structured framework for talent identification and 
development, supported by a transparent ranking system to nurture promising athletes. 
The inclusion of emerging sports such as wheelchair rugby, para-yogasana, and Bocce 
should be further encouraged with targeted funding and the development of adaptive 
sports equipment. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
The Department is committed to ensuring universal accessibility at ABVTCDS. The 
Centre is being upgraded with additional accessibility features to accommodate a 
broader range of disabilities. ABVTCDS is actively implementing various initiatives to 
enhance its impact on para-sports development. Several major national and state-level 
para-sports events have already been conducted, and many more are planned to 
increase visibility and outreach. The Department remains committed to scaling up these 
initiatives with targeted funding to further improve accessibility, participation, and 
competitive performance in emerging para-sports disciplines. 
  
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 

28 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.11) 
The Committee further note that partnerships with global disability sports organizations 
and international athlete exchange programs may provide valuable exposure and 
elevate the standards of para-sports in India. Furthermore, the integration of sports 
with education through initiatives like the proposed National University for Divyangjans 
in Assam is essential to holistically support athletes. The Committee emphasize the 
importance of community engagement through awareness campaigns and workshops to 
foster societal inclusion and reduce stigma around disabilities. 
   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department is actively engaging with global disability sports organizations to foster 
international collaborations, providing Indian para-athletes with greater exposure. 
Moreover, awareness campaigns and stakeholder workshops are being scaled up to 
promote inclusivity and address social stigma associated with disabilities. Large-scale 
awareness campaigns, including participation in Divya Kala Mela, Purple Fest, and 
Swachhata Rallies are being done to promote social inclusivity and reduce stigma 
associated with disabilities. Through these measures, the Department aims to elevate 
the standards of para-sports in India while ensuring that athletes receive 
comprehensive educational, infrastructural, and social support to excel at national and 
international levels. 
  
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.4) 
The Committee find that the Department's efforts in implementing and monitoring its 
schemes through the development of various portals such as ARJUN, PM-DAKSH, NSP, 
e-Anudaan, and UDID are commendable, reflecting a strong commitment to improving 
accessibility, transparency, and efficiency. The meticulous approach to tracking 
beneficiary data, ensuring compliance through timely audits, and regular inspections 
demonstrates a solid foundation for effective implementation. The Committee also feel 
that the incorporation of biometric attendance, online verification, and de-duplication 
mechanisms further enhances accountability. However, it is essential for the 
Department to continue refining these systems, addressing any gaps in proposal 
submissions or delays, and ensuring greater engagement with all the stakeholders to 
ensure that the persons with disabilities, receive the full benefit of these initiatives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should focus on strengthening 
communication and capacity-building efforts with State Governments, NGOs, and other 

29 
 
implementing agencies to ensure timely and complete proposals. The Department 
should also prioritize regular, real-time monitoring to identify and address any 
discrepancies promptly. 
   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The Department notes the recommendation. 
The monitoring mechanism under different schemes is as below: 
  
ADIP scheme: Regarding the ARJUN Portal, online verification of beneficiaries is 
conducted exclusively through the UDID API under the ADIP Scheme. Additionally, a 
unified database of all implementing agencies, including NGOs and trusts, has been 
developed to prevent duplication of beneficiaries receiving the same benefits. 
  
Furthermore, the Department has removed the requirement for State Government 
recommendations in processing NGO proposals submitted through the e-Anudaan 
Portal. This decision was made to ensure the timely release of Grant-in-Aid to 
implementing agencies and to simplify the application process under the ADIP Scheme. 
  
Additionally, the Department will keep refining these portals to meet evolving 
requirements, enhancing their effectiveness and efficiency. 
  
Scholarship schemes: The monitoring of the National Fellowship program is done by 
DEPwD.  The award of Senior Research Fellowships is done after an appropriate 
evaluation by the committee of institutes in respect of performance in the research 
work of the candidate in the Junior Research Fellowship phase.  
  
Under the National Overseas Scholarship Scheme, the bi-annual progress report of the 
student is obtained from the concerned College/Institute/University through the Indian 
Embassy/ High Commission before the release of further annual maintenance, tuition 
fees, and other allowances. 
  
The Department also takes necessary steps to sensitize the States/UTs to reduce the 
time lag at various levels of the State Nodal Officers and other Stakeholders by 
conducting review meetings with State Nodal Officers of the States/UTs, through VCs 
and monitors the progress and sort out the discrepancies promptly with the 
coordination of NSP-NIC/PFMS Team. 
  
DDRS scheme: Under DDRS, proposals are received on e-Anudaan portal. One of the 
key challenges is the delay in receiving proposals at the Central Ministry level in e-
Anudaan portal. To address this issue, a new process has been implemented on e-
Anudaan portal. Now, if the proposal of PIAs/NGOs on the e-Anudaan portal remains 

30 
 
pending at the District level for one month without action, it will be automatically 
forwarded to the State Government. Further, if the proposal is left pending with the 
State Government for another month without action, it will be forwarded directly to the 
Department at the Central level, without the State Government's recommendation. This 
change is expected to resolve delays in the release of funds.  
  
The UDID integration with e-Anudaan helps in verifying the data of the beneficiaries. 
Further, through RCI integration with e-Anudaan, staff CRR number is also being 
verified and has been made mandatory in the e-Anudaan portal. 
  
Regarding monitoring of the DDRS - In the Department's monitoring system, a Central 
Project Monitoring Unit (CPMU) was established in the financial year 2022-23 to 
enhance oversight and ensure the effective implementation of projects under DDRS. 
The Department also coordinates with the National Institutes/ CRCs for supervision and 
monitoring of District Disability Rehabilitation Centers (DDRCs) by coordinating with the 
implementing agencies, district/state officials etc. NI/CRCs play a critical role in 
identifying areas for improvement, ensuring transparency, and promoting accountability 
in the management and utilization of funds. 
  
UDID: The following monitoring mechanism is in place: 
  
At central level, the UDID Project is managed by the Department. At state level, UDID 
project is managed by the State Social Welfare Departments in consultation with the 
State Health Departments. Also there is provision to appoint one state coordinator in 
each State/UT for smooth implementation of the UDID project in the country.  
 NAP-SDP scheme: The Department is striving to take various initiatives like, 
preparation of courses/ curriculum based on contemporary job demand in coordination 
with Sector Skill Council for Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD), signing of MOUs with 
Non-Government Organization like Youth4jobs, Saarthak, Volvo, Zomato to increase the 
placement opportunities of trained PwDs. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18) 
 
The Committee observe that from 2021-22 to 2023-24, there has been a consistent 
trend of under spending compared to both Revised Estimates (RE) and Budget 
Estimates (BE), with actual expenditures falling short across various schemes of the 
Department. While the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has locked both the 
allocations and physical targets for the schemes under the Department, including ADIP, 
SIPDA, DDRS, and Scholarships, for the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26, the 
Department must address the recurring shortfalls in fund utilization. The Committee 
urge the Department to conduct a thorough review of the factors contributing to the 
underutilization of funds and take immediate and focused remedial actions. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that proactive engagement with stakeholders is 
essential to address delays in proposal submissions from State Governments, NGOs, 
and implementing agencies, ensuring timely and complete proposals to facilitate 
smooth fund release. Streamlining fund disbursement processes, particularly for skill 
training programs and capital expenditure, is crucial to mitigating delays and enhancing 
program delivery. Furthermore, given the challenges in meeting the fixed targets for 
schemes like SIPDA and DDRS, the Department should reassess the targets setting to 
ensure they are realistic and achievable while maintaining flexibility in adjustments 
based on performance trends. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take decisive actions to improve fund utilization and achieve the 
intended outcomes of all the schemes in the remaining years of the current financial 
cycle (2023-2026). This will ensure that the resources allocated for the welfare of 
persons with disabilities are utilized effectively, enabling the Department to meet the 
targets set under various Schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
  
The replies in respect of different schemes are as under: 
  
ADIP scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred under the ADIP 
Scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are as under:   
 
   
  

33 
 
                                                                                                 (₹ in Cr ) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 235.00 230.00 242.29 
2023-24 245.00 305.00 290.60 
2024-25 315.00 350.00 348.81 
2025-26 316.70     
  
Under the ADIP Scheme, BE for FY 2025-26 is Rs. 316.70 crores that will be utilized in 
various activities under ADIP Scheme. For FY 2025-26,  requirement of funds has been 
projected by ALIMCO which is the major Implementing Agency of ADIP Scheme. Apart 
from this, demand for funds has also been raised by National Institutes for pilot 
projects on TLM Kits. 
  
Scholarship scheme: The budget allocation fixed by EFC for the period 2021-22 to 
2025-26 is ₹ 560 Crore and the number of slots are fixed as per EFC. The Department 
has utilized more than the RE funds under the Scholarship scheme during FY 2024-25. 
The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred under the Scholarship scheme for 
the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are as under: 
                                                                                                         (₹ in Cr ) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 105.00 145.00 142.00 
2023-24 155.00 155.00 130.07 
2024-25 142.68 80.00 89.63 
2025-26 145.00     
  
The Department is actively organizing meetings with State Nodal Officers (SNOs) to 
ensure effective implementation of the schemes. The Department is also taking 
necessary steps to sensitize the States/UTs to clear the pendency at various levels of 
the State Nodal Officers and other Stakeholders. The Department has published 
advertisements in leading Newspapers across the country twice to increase awareness 
of these schemes amongst students and other stakeholders. All other types of media 
and social media platforms are also used for spreading awareness. The Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States are also addressed to spread awareness 
of the schemes through various mediums of communication in their respective 
States/UTs. 
  
DDRS scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred under the DDRS 
scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are as under: 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
                                                                                                   (₹ in Cr ) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 125.00 105.00 114.69 
2023-24 130.00 130.00 129.98 
2024-25 165.00 139.00 139.39 
2025-26 165.00     
Under the DDRS scheme, the remedial measures taken by this Department for smooth 
utilization of funds are as under: 
  
 Model projects have been conceptualized to cover all 21 disabilities as per RPwD 
Act, 2016 . 
 Maximum age limit of the ID beneficiaries has been increased from 18 to 23 
years. 
 Grant-in-aid to the Implementing Agencies is being released on Advance-cum-
reimbursement basis. 
 With effect from 2023-24, the implementing agencies are required to submit 
UDID cards of all the eligible beneficiaries. The data regarding UDID cards is 
being directly fetched through API from UDID Portal (Swavlamban Portal). 
 With effect from 01.10.2024, if the proposal submitted by the PIAs/NGOs on e-
anudaan portal is pending at District level for one month without any action, 
then it will automatically be forwarded to the State Government. Further, if the 
same proposal is pending with the State Government for one month without any 
action, then it will automatically be forwarded (without recommendation of State 
Government) to the Department. However, this will not be applicable in case of 
supplementary grant being given by the State Government to the PIAs/NGOs. 
 CPMU consultants and young professionals of the Department are conducting 
video inspections to monitor the smooth functioning of the organizations and the 
timely submission of grants-in-aid proposals. 
  
SIPDA scheme: The details of BE, RE and actual expenditure incurred under the 
DDRS scheme for the years 2022-23 to 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 are as under: 
                                                                                                         (₹ in Cr ) 
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual expenditure 
2022-23 240.39 100.00 65.59 
2023-24 150.00 67.00 76.79 
2024-25 135.33 111.00 44.16* 
2025-26 115.10     
*Due to implementation of TSA module from 2024-25, some States could not onboard 
on TSA module and make expenditure of sanctioned amount of about ₹ 40 crore. 
  
 
 

35 
 
It has been observed that certain issues led to underutilization of funds, some of which 
are: 
  Delayed and Incomplete Proposals: A significant cause of underutilization 
has been  submission of late or incomplete proposals from State Governments, 
UTs, and implementing agencies. 
 Pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs): Release of further funds is 
contingent upon receipt of UCs for earlier releases. Delays in submission of the 
same by States/UTs have directly hindered timely disbursement. 
 Systemic Changes: The introduction of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) and 
Treasury Single Account (TSA) models led to transitional delays. 
 Inadequate Proposals from Certain Regions: Particularly from North-
Eastern States, the number of proposals received has been insufficient, further 
affecting overall utilization. 
 In order to address the shortfalls in fund utilization and to facilitate full appropriate 
utilization of funds, the Department is actively pursuing several redressal mechanisms, 
such as: 
  
 A committee consisting of Joint Secretary (SIPDA), Director/Deputy Secretary 
(SIPDA), and two experts in the field of disability duly examine the proposals for 
release of Grant-in-Aid (GIA) under the Barrier Free and Accessible India 
component. 
 The Department conducts regular follow ups with the concerned stakeholders 
through meetings/VCs to expedite the release of GIA under the Barrier Free 
(CBFE)/ Accessible India Campaign (AIC) component of the Umbrella Scheme 
SIPDA, which includes frequent communications by the Department for obtaining 
the requisite documents and/or proposals for consideration. 
 The Department is currently in the process of reviewing and further simplifying 
the fund release process in respect of the 2nd instalment under the Creation of 
Barrier Free Environment (CBFE) Scheme for prompt fund disbursal. 
 A dedicated online portal for receiving proposals under Awareness Generation 
and Publicity (AGP) Scheme has been launched. For the events/initiatives to be 
taken up through National Institutes, the Department has planned to work out a 
model to make advance payments to the NIs in anticipation of those activities, 
which would improve the fund utilization and timely program execution. 
2.         Further, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4.18) 
 
The Committee note that the scheme faces challenges, particularly in fund utilization. 
Allocated budgets have often gone underutilized due to delays in receiving project 
proposals and incomplete utilization certificates, especially under the Accessible India 
Campaign (AIC). Efforts to create a barrier-free environment remain slow, with limited 
participation from States and UTs. Given that SIPDA is one of the largest umbrella 
schemes administered by the Department, such underperformance raises concerns 
about the adequacy of planning and execution by the Department. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should emphasize improved coordination 
with States/UTs to ensure timely submission of proposals and optimal fund utilization, 
supported by a real-time tracking mechanism for project milestones. The Committee 
urge the Department to scale accessibility efforts by forging partnerships with NGOs 
and private players to accelerate retrofitting initiatives and provide training in universal 
design principles.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Certain issues led to underutilization of funds, some of which are: 
 Delayed and Incomplete Proposals: A significant cause of underutilization has 
been due to the late or incomplete submission of proposals from State Governments, 
UTs, and implementing agencies.  
 Pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs): Release of further funds is 
contingent upon receipt of UCs for earlier releases. Delays in submission of the 
same by States/UTs have hindered timely disbursement. 
 Systemic Changes: The introduction of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) and 
Treasury Single Account (TSA) models led to transitional delays. 
 Inadequate Proposals from Certain Regions: Particularly from North-
Eastern States, the number of proposals received has been insufficient, further 
affecting overall utilization. 
 In order to address the shortfalls in fund utilization and to facilitate full appropriate 
utilization of funds, the Department is actively pursuing several redressal mechanisms, 
such as: 
 Screening Committee: A committee consisting of Joint Secretary (SIPDA), 
Director/Deputy Secretary (SIPDA), and two experts in the field of disability duly 
examine the proposals for release of Grants-in-Aid(GIA) under the Barrier Free and 
Accessible India component. 
 Regular follow ups: The Department conducts regular follow ups with the 
concerned stakeholders through meetings/VCs to expedite the release of GIA 
under the Creation of Barrier Free (CBFE)/ Accessible India Campaign (AIC) 
component of the Umbrella Scheme SIPDA, which includes frequent 
communications by the Department for obtaining the requisite documents and/or 
proposals for consideration. 

37 
 
 Reassessment of fund release procedure: The Department is currently in 
the process of reviewing and further simplifying the fund release process in 
respect of the 2nd instalments under the Creation of Barrier Free Environment 
(CBFE) Scheme for prompt fund disbursal. 
 In addition to the above, the Department also engages with private players for 
furthering the agenda of increased accessibility for Divyangjans in the nation by the 
following activities: 
  
 Signing of MoU with the Council of Architecture (CoA): The Department has 
collaborated with CoA and developed a training course on accessibility under the 
MoU; furthermore 41 access auditors have been trained under the MoU. 
 The Department signed an MoU with EnableMeAccess for providing training to 
stakeholders on existing accessibility standards in India. 
 The Department has signed an MoU with Association for Persons with Disabilities 
(APD) to enable the Department to use ‘Yes to Access’ app for conducting 
accessibility evaluation by stakeholders during the Sugamya Yatra under which a 
total of 588 users have conducted audit of 1040 public buildings/premises across 
18 States and 05 Union Territories.  
 The Department has empaneled 59 accessibility auditors in Built Environment 
and 10 accessibility auditors in web environment; applications are open 
throughout the year for empaneling more number of web accessibility auditors. 
 Sugamya Bharat App-a crowdsourcing app that registers infrastructure 
accessibility related issues and escalates the same to the concerned authorities 
for prompt redressal-has been revamped by involving technocrats from within 
the Divyangjan community. The app is compatible with both iOS and Android 
platforms. 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. No.1/4/2024-25/Budget/DEPwD dated 
23rd April, 2025) 
 

38 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                                           
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 

39 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
06TH AUGUST, 2025 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 
113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
                   
   PRESENT 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
     
MEMBERS 
    Lok Sabha 
 
2.       Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3.       Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare   
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
6. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
7. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
9. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
10. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
11. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
12. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
13.    Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
14. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
15. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
16. Shri Rameswar Teli 
17. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
18. Shri Abdul Wahab 
19. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 

40 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment).  
 
(ii)  *** *** *** *** *** 
 
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*** Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
SECOND REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)’ OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH 
DISABILITIES (MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 16  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.3.22, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26, 
4.17, 
4.19, 4.20, 5.15, 6.18, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11 & 8.4  
14 87.5% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
NIL 
 
00 00 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 2.18 & 4.18 
 
02 12.5% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
NIL  
00 00 
   100% 
 
 