i 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
10 

ii 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.8.2025 
                                          Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.8.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  


iii 
 
CSJE. NO:218 
 
Price : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
  
APPENDIX 
 
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 06.08.2025. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
25. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26. Shri Ramji 
27. Shri Rameswar Teli 
28. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
29. Smt. P. T. Usha 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Krishendra Kumar       - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Aritra Das   - Committee Officer 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Tenth Report on the Action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18.12.2024. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
17.03.2025. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
06.08.2025. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                                             
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
    
  

1 
 
                      
CHAPTER  I 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
 
1.2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18.12.2024. It contained 9 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government: - 
Rec. Para No. 2.7, 3.11, 5.11 and 7.19  
(Total: 04, Chapter: 
II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.18 and 8.11 
(Total: 02, Chapter: 
III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.17, 4.19 and 6.9 
(Total: 03, Chapter: 
IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: –   
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(00, Chapter: V) 
 
1.3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 

2 
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17) 
1.5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that as per the announcement in 2018-19 Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRS) are to be established in every block having more 
than 50 per cent ST population and at least 20,000 tribal persons. Accordingly, 
452 new EMRS are to be established along with the existing 288 EMRS 
sanctioned under Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution since 1988. 
The Committee, however, find that out of 452 new EMRS sanctioned 223 are 
functional and 211 out of 288 old EMRS have been identified for upgradation. 
The Committee also find that several challenges such as availability of 
appropriate land, non-availability of construction material due to State 
Government policy, extreme weather conditions, non-availability of electricity 
supply etc. are being faced by the construction agencies in constructions of 
EMRS. The Committee note that 9 new EMRS have been sanctioned in 2023-
24 and 100 more new EMRS have been requested to the Government of India 
to meet the present requirement since the 452 EMRS sanctioned till date were 
based on 2011 census. The Committee find that several decisions were taken 
for effective implementation of EMRS scheme in Manthan Shivir held on 18-19 
July, 2024 including to consider minimum 8-10 acres of land where 15 acres 
of land is not available for construction of EMRS. The Committee believe that 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs will take suitable steps to ensure that the 
hindrances coming in the execution of the Scheme would be carefully resolved 
in a time bound manner. The Committee desire that all the old schools are 
upgraded in a time bound manner and new schools sanctioned are made 
functional, if possible, in their own building within the given time frame. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the requisite funds and necessary 
guidance is provided to the Executing agencies and suitable steps are taken 
so that the Scheme does not face shortage of funds at any stage”  
1.6. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “The construction status of EMRS schools as on 17.01.2025 is as under: 
Scheme Location 
Approved  
Completed Work In 
Progress 
Pre-
construction 
Stage 
Article 275 (1)  288 256 23 9 
New Scheme  429 87 222 120 

3 
 
TOTAL  717 343 245 129 
 
  The functional status of schools is as under: 
EMRSs under Article 275(1) New Schools (Sanctioned 
as per CCEA approval) 
Total 
Locations 
Approved 
Functional Locations 
Approved 
Functional Locations 
Approved 
Functional 
288 270 429 206 717 476 
 
Upgradation Progress as on 17.01.2025: 
 
 The proposal for the upgradation of 189 old Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools (EMRSs) has been approved. NESTS is consistently engaging with 
State Governments to make use of this opportunity.  
Steps Taken by MoTA and NESTS: 
 
(i) Land Requirement Adjustment: 
During the Manthan Shivir organized on 18-19 July 2023, it was resolved to 
reduce the minimum land requirement from 15 acres to 8-10 acres to address 
land availability issues. 
(ii) Follow up with State Authorities for Electricity and Water Connection: 
 
The issues are regularly being followed up with the authorities of respective 
State Government at the level of Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary and 
District Magistrate.  
EMRS District Construction Management Committees have been formed by 
MoTA under the Chairmanship of District Magistrate/District Collector for all 
EMRS management and related issues  
(iii) Monitoring Mechanisms: 
       Progress is closely monitored at multiple levels: 
       By the Hon'ble Minister of Tribal Affairs. 
      By the Secretary, MoTA. 
      Monthly review meetings by the Commissioner, NESTS. 

4 
 
      Fortnightly review meetings at the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) level of  
NESTS. 
(iv) Guidance and Amendments: 
      EMRS guidelines were issued to all construction agencies. 
    Necessary amendments were incorporated based on stakeholders' 
feedback to address practical challenges. 
(v) Project Funding Mechanism: 
Project wise Escrow Accounts have been opened to ensure that funds are not 
diverted and available for the designated project only. 
      Advance funds are being released to construction agencies to ensure 
sufficient liquidity. 
    The fund release mechanism is being reviewed on quarterly basis to ensure 
optimum  utilisation  of funds. 
 Commitment to Timely Execution: 
 MoTA and NESTS are committed to resolving hindrances in a time-bound 
manner. 
Through the outlined monitoring mechanisms, financial strategies, and 
adaptive guidelines, significant progress has been achieved and will continue 
to be expedited to meet the expectations of the Standing Committee. 
Conclusion: 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs and NESTS are steadfast in their resolve to ensure 
the timely construction and functionality of EMRS schools. The coordinated 
efforts and robust mechanisms in place reflect the commitment to achieving 
these goals efficiently and effectively.” 
 
1.7.  Noting delay in making EMRS functional from their own buildings as 
a total of 476 schools out of 717 schools have been made functional till 
date, the Committee recommended in their Original Report that all EMRS 
should be made functional preferably from their own buildings within the 
given timeframe. In the action taken reply of the Ministry, the Committee 
find that majority of new schools are being run from the rental buildings 
as only 87 school buildings have been constructed so far. The work of 222 

5 
 
schools is under progress and 120 EMRS are in pre-construction stage in 
the new Scheme.  The Committee also find that various steps such as Land 
Requirement Adjustment, Follow-up with State Authorities for Electricity 
and Water Connection, Mechanism for monitoring of progress at multiple 
levels and creation of Project wise Escrow Accounts with review of fund 
release on quarterly basis are being taken by the Ministry for timely 
completion of construction of all the schools.  The Committee are of the 
firm view that the role of EMRS is very crucial for providing quality 
education to the tribal students particularly in remote areas and , 
therefore, desire that NEST should adopt a more concerted, result oriented 
and pro-active approach through continuous and rigorous monitoring of 
all activities related to the construction of schools and close coordination 
with all the Implementing Agencies so that construction work of all EMRS 
irrespective of old or new schemes are completed in a given timeframe.   
Recommendation (Para No.4.19) 
1.8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs propose 
to set up Centre of Excellence for Sports in 15 identified EMRS. However, the 
Committee are worried with regard to the time likely to be consumed in setting 
up of Centre of Excellence for Sports as out of 15 identified EMRS only 5 have 
been finalized in first phase. The Committee believe that the engagement of 
students in sports activities in schools is very essential for their physical 
development, hence they should be set up at priority in a time bound manner. 
The Committee also believe that the revised timelines fixed for 
operationalization of Centre of Excellence for Sports will be adhered. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that strict timelines should be laid down to set 
up all the 15 Centre of Excellence for Sports. The Committee may be apprised 
in this regard”.  
 
1.9.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“The Ministry of Tribal Affairs acknowledges the Committee's recognition of 
the importance of sports in promoting the physical development of students 

6 
 
and shares the concern regarding the timely operationalization of these 
Centres of Excellence. 
In this regard, the Ministry would like to update the Committee as follows: 
1. Identification of Locations: 
The CoEs will be co located with the EMRSs to extent feasible  
To identify the location of CoEs, the type of sports has been captured from 
the school Principals across the EMRSs based on the prevalent sports in the 
respective areas. 
The Sports Authority of India (SAI) has been roped in for consultation to 
design the CoEs in line with SAI standards. 
2. Cost Optimization: 
NESTS has been optimizing the higher estimated cost to bring it within the 
sanctioned limit of Rs. 5 Crore. 
The designs are being finalized for establishing the CoEs in line with the 
inputs from stakeholders, experts and within the sanctioned cost. 
3. Progress of the First Phase: 
Out of the 15 identified EMRS, five CoE locations have been finalized for the 
first phase. The requisite groundwork, including site assessments, 
infrastructure planning, and selection of sporting disciplines, is underway. 
4. Timelines for Implementation: 
To expedite the process, the Ministry has adopted a phase-wise approach, 
ensuring that operationalization in the first five schools serves as a model for 
subsequent establishments. 
Revised timelines have been fixed, and efforts are being made to adhere to 
these strictly. The expected timeline for making these five Centres 
operational is June 2026. 
5. Capacity Building and Support: 
Collaboration with SAI and stakeholders is underway to ensure the availability 
of quality training, coaching staff, and equipment. 
Regular monitoring mechanisms have also been put in place. 
6. Second Phase Implementation: 
The groundwork for the remaining ten Centres is being initiated parallelly to 
minimize delays. 

7 
 
The aim is to achieve full operationalization of all 15 Centres of Excellence 
by December 2026. 
7. Commitment to Time-Bound Execution: 
The Ministry is committed to implementing these Centres within a time-
bound framework. The revised timelines are being strictly monitored. 
The Ministry assures the Committee that the establishment of these Centres 
is being treated as a high-priority initiative. A detailed timeline and the status 
of progress will be submitted for the Committee’s review at regular intervals.” 
 
1.10. In view of the importance of sports for the students of EMRS, the 
proposal of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to set up Centres of Excellence for 
Sports was well appreciated by the Committee. The Committee had noted 
in their original report that out of 15 Centres of Excellence for Sports, only 
5 have been finalized. The Committee, accordingly, desired that the strict 
timelines should be laid down to set up all the 15 centers so that all the 
Centres are set up in that timeframe. However, the Committee find from 
the reply by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs that location for only five centres 
has been finalized for the first phase and the expected timeline for making 
these five centers operational is June, 2026. The Committee have also 
found that the groundwork of remaining centres is being simultaneously 
initiated to minimize the delays and all the 15 Centers of Excellence for 
Sports will be set up by December, 2026, however, the locations for the 
remaining 10 Centres are yet to be finalized. The Committee expect that 
the location for remaining 10 centres would also be finalized at the earliest 
by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs so that they are able to adhere new 
timelines of December, 2026 set up to make all Centres of Excellence for 
Sports operational. The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise them 
about the steps taken in this regard at Final Action Taken stage. 
 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9) 
1.11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Ministry of Tribal Affairs revamped the Scheme of Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub-Scheme into Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojana 
(PMAAGY) with the aim of integrated development of 36428 villages and 
provisioned a sum of ₹ 20.38 lakh per village as ‘Gap Filling’. The Committee 
note that during the year 2023-24, Ministry of Tribal Affairs could release 
₹149.65 crore from the revised allocation of ₹375.00 crore. The Committee 
further note that Dharti Abba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) has 
been launched under which more than 63000 villages including 36428 villages 
covered under PMAAGY would also be included. The Committee believe that 
with the launch of DA-JGUA, the difficulties and challenges faced in PMAAGY 
will be resolved. The Committee find that the role of Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
has since increased multiple times in implementation of DA-JGUA as multi-
sectoral interventions through convergence of specific Schemes of several 
Ministries. The Committee, therefore, expect that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
should coordinate with all the Ministries/Department so that the difficulties 
/challenges faced under PMAAGY do not arise. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the PM Gatishakti Portal developed for monitoring and evaluation 
of physical and financial progress of all the projects on regular basis should be 
utilized so that the objectives of the DA-JGUA are fully achieved. The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should draw an action plan so that 
63000 villages identified under DA-JGUA can achieve integrated socio-
economic development of the tribal people as envisaged in the Abhiyan in a 
time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time 
schedule fixed for implementation of the Abhiyan and also the latest status of 
the achievement made in this regard after the implementation of DA-JGUA” 
 
1.12.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“Based on learning from the success of PM JANMAN, Dharti Abba Janjatiya 
Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA JGUA) has been launched which is more structured 
and expanded version of PMAAGY with dedicated convergence of funds and 
Saturation for key interventions from line Ministries and State departments.   
The Abhiyan comprises of 25 interventions implemented by 17 line Ministries 
and aims to saturate infrastructural gaps in 63,843 villages, improve access to 
health, education, Anganwadi facilities and providing livelihood opportunities 
in 549 districts and 2,911 blocks in 30 States/UTs in 5 years. The observations 
of the Committee for utilization of PM  Gati Shakti portal has been duly noted 

9 
 
and the Ministry is in the process of development of dedicated portal for DA 
JGUA for monitoring purposes. Ministry is regularly consulting line Ministries / 
Departments / States for achieving the desired results in a time bound manner. 
The progress of Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (as on 
11.02.2025), along with Mission Targets Ministry-wise, is as under: 
 
Ministry Activity Mission Target 
(2024-2028) Sanction details 
Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
(MoRD) 
Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojna (PMAY)- 
Gramin (MoRD) 
20 Lakhs pucca 
houses 
794191 HH and 10040 
Completed. 
Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojna 
PMGSY (MoRD) 
25,000 Km Road Survey & GIS based 
verification is in progress. 
Ministry of Jal 
Shakti 
Jal Jeevan Mission 
(JJM) 
Every eligible 
village/Hamlet  
For 36557 villages work 
order has been issued.   
Ministry of 
Power 
Revamped 
Distribution Sector 
Scheme - RDSS 
Every unelectrified 
HH and unconnected 
public institutions (~ 
2.35 lakh) 
 44045 HHs 
Ministry of 
Health and 
family Welfare 
PM Ayushman 
Bharat Health 
Infrastructure 
Mission – PM 
ABHIM 
1000 MMUs 
36 MMU have been 
sanctioned and 
operationalised 
Ministry of 
Women and 
Child 
Development 
Anganwadi Centre- 
Poshan 2.0 (ICDS) 
8000 Saksham AWC 
(2000 New AWC & 
6000 upgradation) 
236 new AWCs 
sanctioned. 
DoSE&L, 
Ministry of 
Education 
Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) 1000 hostels 304 hostels have been 
sanctioned 
Ministry of 
Communication 
& Information 
Technology 
Universal Service 
Obligation Fund 
(USOF) 
5000 villages 889 villages covered (792 
towers commissioned) 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Farmers 
Welfare 
Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
Sustainable 
agriculture support 
to FRA patta holders 
(~ 2 lakh) 
Benefit of Schemes of 
Agriculture 
(seeds/implements/soil 
cards) has been provided 
to more than 50000 
beneficiaries 
Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs  
PMAAGY/ SCA to 
TD  
100 TMMC - Mutli-
purpose Marketing 
Centres  
41 TMMC have been 
approved in 11 states  
Upgradation of 
Ashram 
2426 projects of schools 
approved in 11 states   

10 
 
Ministry Activity Mission Target 
(2024-2028) Sanction details 
Schools/Govt. 
Schools & Hostels for 
Tribals 
FRA Claim Support 
Proposals of preparation 
for 810 Community 
Forest Resource Rights 
Management Plans have 
been approved covering 
more than 80,000 
hectares of forest land. 
Creation of FRA cells 
have been approved in 9 
states  
CoC for Sickle Cell 
Disease in 16 states 
15 CoC approved in 14 
states   
 
# Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, D/o Fisheries, D/o Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying, Ministry of Tourism: - have issued their revised 
guidelines. 
# Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of AYUSH and Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship: - Pending for approval of main scheme. 
 
1.13. In the Original Report, the Committee had noted that the Dharti 
Abha Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA JGUA) has been launched for 
the integrated development of 63000 villages including 36428 villages 
covered under erstwhile Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojana 
(PMAGGY). The Committee had also noted that 17 line Ministries have 
been involved to saturate infrastructural gaps in 63,843 villages under this 
Abhiyan in 5 years. Since several Ministries have been involved for the 
implementation of the Abhiyan, the Committee had desired that the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs should draw an action plan so that the objectives 
of the Abhiyan are achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee are 
happy to note from the reply of the Ministry that the several 
activities/projects have been sanctioned by 9 line Ministries. The 
Committee, further, note that some line Ministries/ Departments such as 
New and Renewable Energy, Fisheries and Animal Husbandry and Dairies, 
Tourism have issued revised guidelines and main scheme is pending for 

11 
 
approval in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of AYUSH 
and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. The Committee 
feel that the involvement of all the Line Ministries is important to achieve 
the objectives of the Abhiyan within the Mission target period of 2024-
2028. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
should take necessary steps for early approval of the Scheme by the line 
Ministries who are yet to approve the Scheme so that the work proposed 
to be undertaken for the integrated development under Abhiyan is 
completed in the stipulated time.  
--------------------- 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have been allocated 
₹12,938.32 crore by the Ministry of Finance against the proposed demand of ₹ 
12,433.22 crore for the year 2024-25. This indicates the efforts and commitment of 
the Central Government for overall development of tribal people in the country. The 
Committee also note that a new Scheme Dharti Abba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan 
(DA-JGUA) have been launched by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs after the 
announcement of Budget. The Committee are, however, little apprehensive about 
the trend of expenditure incurred by the Ministry during 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 as the actual expenditure during three years was much less in comparison to the 
Budgetary Estimates. The Committee strongly view that the purpose of the Schemes 
implemented by Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be defeated if funds are not fruitfully 
utilized. The Committee believe that with the introduction of the Single Nodal Account 
(SNA) system for the release of funds to the States/UTs, the responsibility of the 
Implementing Agencies in the States has been increased to utilize 75 per cent of 
released funds and if they are not able to spend it timely, the funds available with 
the Government of India will not remain idle and can be fruitfully utilized by diverting 
to other Schemes. The Committee are satisfied with the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to resolve the hurdles in implementation  of various schemes 
such as non-submission of UCs by States/UTs/ Implementing Agencies, adoption of 
SNA system by State/UT Governments, technical issues of PFMS would make the 
implementation of schemes flawless. In view of the above, the Committee expect 
that the Budget Estimates of 2024-25 would be utilized fully for the effective 
implementation of all the Schemes and will achieve the targets laid down by the 
Ministry for the overall welfare/development of the tribal community. Since, the 
State/UT Governments have been found to be lacking in their approach, the 
Committee therefore desire that the State/UT Governments should be regularly 
pursued for delay and appropriately guided so that the financial and physical targets 
set by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs are achieved without any failure. 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
The steps taken by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to achieve the financial and physical 
targets, inter-alia includes the following: 
(i)  monitoring and review of the progress on implementation and execution 
of schemes/projects with States/UTs Governments.  
(ii) Conducting Manthan Shivirs at regular intervals and to sensitize the states 
about the need to release the funds with the treasury, utilize SNA balances 
and submit UCs within the stipulated time. 
(iii) Regular review of fund utilization and regular interaction with the State 
Governments to reduce the SNA Balance and to address the PFMS related 
issues of the States. 
(iv) Meetings at Secretary/FA/Joint Secretary level with the State Tribal 
Welfare Departments to monitor the progress of the implementation of the 
schemes and accelerate the implementation, understand the 
problems/bottlenecks for delayed expenditure and resolving the same.  
(v) The Ministry has designated senior officers as State Prabharis to liaise with 
states, undertake field visits and resolve bottlenecks. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11) 
 
The Committee note that five Scholarship Schemes viz Pre-Matric, Post-Matric, 
National Fellowship, National Scholarship for Higher Studies and National Overseas 
Scholarship are being implemented by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the 
Educational Empowerment of the Tribal Students. The Pre-Matric and Post-Matric 
Scholarship Schemes are Centrally Sponsored open ended Scheme and National 
Fellowship, National Scholarship for Higher Education and Overseas Scholarship are 
Central Sector Schemes. The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
contribute a certain percentage to State/ UTs in Centrally Sponsored Schemes and in 
Central Sector Schemes are 100 per cent funded by the Union Government. The 
Committee, however, note that the actual expenditure under Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes is much less than the Budgetary Allocation in 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 whereas under Central Sector Schemes, the actual expenditure is almost equal to 
Revised Estimate. Similarly, in case of Centrally Sponsored Scheme there is shortfall 
in physical achievement and there was 100 per cent physical achievements in Central 
Sector Schemes during these years. The Committee feel that the income eligibility 
criteria and delay in submission of beneficiaries data by the States/UTs may have 
restricted the number of applicants under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The 

14 
 
Committee are happy to note that harmonization of Scholarship Scheme is under 
process and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have recommended to increase the annual 
income limit from ₹2.5 lakhs to ₹ 4.5 lakhs for Centrally Sponsored Schemes i.e Pre-
Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes. The Committee also note that several 
other measures are being taken to enhance the implementation of educational 
empowerment Schemes such as timely disbursal of scholarship to eligible students, 
regular review meetings with States/UTs, regular capacity building of all the 
stakeholders, etc. The Committee believe that the initiatives taken up and the action 
plan drawn by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in Manthan Shivir would yield the desired 
results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable mechanism should be 
developed so that the decisions taken at Manthan Shivir is implemented in a time 
bound manner. The Committee would appreciate, if they, are apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is taking action on the decisions taken during the Manthan Shivir. Point-
wise details are submitted below:- 
i. Bio-authentication of all Institutes –Bio-authentication is already under 
process in every States/UTs by a collaboration of multiple ministries. Bio-
authentication is an ongoing exercise as Institute Nodal Officers (INOs), Head 
of Institutes (HoIs) and other officials are transferred or retired and new 
person joins at their place.  
ii. Empanelment of Private Institutes and Fee Capping- States/UTs have already 
taken up within the State the process of grading or empanelment exercise of 
private institutes. For fee capping, Ministry of Tribal Affairs has capped the fee 
in private institutes under Post Matric Scholarship as per the details given 
below: - 
For engineering courses: - Rs.2.5 lakhs per annum 
For medical courses: - Rs.6.00 lakhs per annum 
For other courses: - Rs.1.00 lakhs per annum 
However, the concerned State Govt. is free to give additional scholarship over 
and above the fee capping prescribed by Ministry of Tribal Affairs using their 
own State fund. 
iii. One Time Registration by NSP – OTR module is launched by NSP and all 
States/UTs whether onboarded on the NSP or having their own scholarship 
portal now need to implement the OTR functionality.  
iv. Uniformity of format for inviting application for all portals: - Ministry has 
developed a 44 column format which is forwarded to all States/UTs and NSP 
for bringing uniformity under scholarship schemes for ST students. 
v. Direct DBT to Aadhar linked bank account: - All States/UTs are doing direct 
DBT to the student’s bank account. Ministry has issued instructions to all 
States/UTs for DBT of scholarship to the Aadhar linked bank account of the 

15 
 
beneficiaries of scholarship scheme for ST students. Disbursement of 
Scholarship through Adhar link Bank Acount has been made mandatory since 
2023-24. 
vi. Dedicated PMU:- The scholarship division of Ministry of Tribal Affairs has 
already setup a dedicated PMU team for monitoring the scheme 
implementation and analyse the beneficiary data submitted by the States/UTs. 
The beneficiary data is also used for evaluating performance of various States 
and shared on Performance Dashboard of Ministry. The compiled data is also 
shared with DBT Mission, Prayas Dashboard and NITI Aayog for monitoring 
Output Outcome Indicators. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have funded 190 
NGOs for approximately 320 projects in education, health and livelihood sectors and 
successfully spent the funds allocated under the Scheme during 2022-23 and 2023-
24. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in 
achieving 112.47 per cent and 93.17 per cent of the target fixed for the projects 
related to 10 bedded hospitals/mobile dispensaries during 2021-22 and 2022- 23, 
respectively. The Committee are, however, little worried about the low percentage 
of achievement under some projects as 47 per cent target could only be achieved for 
Residential/non-residential schools and 33.06 per cent fixed for 10 bedded 
hospitals/mobile dispensaries during 2023-24. The Committee have no doubt about 
the efficiency and competency of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs but the role of State 
/UT Governments is significant as the projects are to be recommended/ executed by 
them. The Committee are convinced with the steps taken for the improvement in 
implementation of the Scheme such as mandatory annual Inspection, 
recommendation by District Authority, submission of annual audited accounts by 
NGOs/ VOs, communication module in the portal for NGOs to resolve their 
grievances/ clarifications etc. will yield the desired results. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the observations of the committee set up by the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs for finalization of modalities for evaluation/ review of the performance of the 
ongoing projects under the scheme and the action taken thereon.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The data on physical achievement was based on the cases for FY 2023-24 reimbursed 
till 31st March, 2024. However, the revised data including cases for FY 2023-24 

16 
 
reimbursed during the current FY show that target achieved is 70.92% in case of 
residential/non residential schools and 97% for mobile dispensaries and hospitals. 
 
A meeting of the Committee for Evaluation for ongoing projects (CEOP) was held on 
23.08.2024. 
  In its first meeting, the Committee recommended that Grants in Aid for additional 
beneficiaries upto 50 students in educational projects may be considered subject to 
availability of funds during FY 2024-25 for the projects of FY 2023-24. NGO Division 
may prepare details of budget available for FY 2024-25, committed liability for 
FY 2022-23, 2023-24 & 2024-25 (1ST installment) and budget implications for 
additional 50 beneficiaries in educational projects.  
It has been asked to delve into greater detail on the logical and field realities before 
considering the recommendations.  
  
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.19) 
 
The Committee note that the Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation 
of India (TRIFED) has been entrusted with the responsibility to develop a mechanism 
for marketing of Minor Forest Produce (MFP) and development of value chain for 
MFP. The Committee find that 3950 Van Dhan Kendras have been set up in the 
States/ UTs but there are several States such as Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttrakhand, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, etc. where the number of Van Dhan Kendras 
established is very less. The Committee also note that the procurement of Tribal 
produce by TRIFED was less in 2022-23 and 2023-24 as the TRIFED already had 
existing stock, hence, they could not purchase new stock. The Committee feel that 
TRIFED requires to vigorously work to strengthen the system so that the procurement 
and sale of the Forest produce is enhanced. The Committee strongly believe that 
forest produce is the lifeline of tribal people in the country as it provides regular 
livelihood and income generating opportunities to them, hence, Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs/TRIFED should take suitable measures to resolve the issues that have been 
hampering the production and marketing of the forest produce. The Committee 
recommend that the necessary steps will be taken for setting up of Van Dhan Vikas 
Kendras, Haat Bazaars, storage godowns, skill and entrepreneurship, research and 
development, etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken and 
the progress achieved till date under Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Vikas Mission. 
Reply of the Government 
TRIFED, is implementing the “Pradhan Mantri Jan Jatiya Vikas Mission (PMJVM)”. 
 TRIFED has informed that it does not allocate VDVKs to any States/UTs. These are 
established in response to the proposals received from the states. That is the reason 

17 
 
for variation in the number of VDVKs in different states. However, endeavours are 
being made to establish more VDVKs in all states to cover the tribal communities.  
The efforts for setting up more VDVKs are further fortified by regular meetings, 
conferences and the field tours undertaken by TRIFED. Targets have been set up for 
establishing Van Dhan Vikas Kendras, Haat Bazaars, Storage Godowns, 
Entrepreneurship training, Skill Development of tribal populace, research and 
development, procurement of MSP for MFP through State Implementing Agency etc.  
Since the launch of Van Dhan Yojana from August, 2019 onwards, TRIFED has 
sanctioned 3959 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras amounting to Rs.587.36 Crores, associated 
with 11.83 Lakhs members (men and women) in 25 States and 3 UTs under PMJVM 
Scheme.  
The states/UTs with tribal populations are being encouraged to give more proposals 
for the establishment of VDVKs for providing round the year livelihood opportunities 
to be tribal brothers and sisters.  
The State Nodal Departments (SNDs) and State Implementing Agencies (SIAs) are 
continually being approached to intensify their efforts for a greater outreach resulting 
in more procurement and more number of VDVKs.  
Besides, TRIFED is also engaged in generating livelihood opportunities for tribal 
communities through marketing development of the tribal products organic & natural 
created by them in terms of handicraft, handloom and other items. Under the scheme 
of Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Vikas Mission (PMJVM), TRIFED undertakes 
empanelment of tribal artisan and procurement of various tribal products from them 
for generating livelihood opportunities for tribal communities. TRIFED undertakes 
retail marketing of tribal products through its 114 TRIBES India Outlets, E-Commerce 
platforms & Exhibitions like Aadi Mahotsav, Aadi Bazaar etc. TRIFED also participates 
in few exhibitions for promotion of tribal products at national & international 
platforms.  
The total number of suppliers/producers empaneled with TRIFED as on 30.10.2024 
are 5291. The details about the initiatives undertaken by TRIFED as on 31.12.2024 
are enumerated in following paragraphs. 
i) Sourcing: The purchases of tribal products valuing Rs. 11.84 crores is made 
by TRIFED during current financial year (as on 31.12.2024).  
 
ii) Organizing Tribal artisan empanelment Mela (TAeM): TRIFED has initiated a 
concept of organizing Tribal Artisan Empanelment Mela (TAeM) at District/Tehsil level 
as an exercise to reach out to tribals located in interior tribal areas and source tribal 
art and craft directly from the tribal artisans. Under this initiative, TRIFED in 
association with State Govt./Organizations invites Tribal Artisans to an exhibition area 
where they display their art and craft items. TRIFED deputes its merchandising team 

18 
 
to these Melas to identify the new artisans and new products which can be marketed 
through its outlets. This initiative not only helps in sourcing tribal art and craft in its 
original form but also helps in spreading message about TRIFED’s activities and ways 
and means for a tribal to avail the benefits of TRIFED’s activities. During current 
financial year, TRIFED has organised 18 TAeMs across the country.  
 
iii) Sale of Tribal Products: TRIFED has been marketing tribal products through 
its own shops called “TRIBES India” & through Franchise Outlets and outlets of the 
state emporia on consignment basis. Sales of Rs. 24.08 crores have been made 
during current year (till 31.12.2024). 
 
iv) Exhibitions: TRIFED has been organising and participating in exhibitions for 
marketing and promotion of tribal products. During the current financial year 2024- 
2025, TRIFED has organized Aadi Mahotsavs at Delhi (16-24 February, 2025), 
Ahmedabad (13 – 22 October, 2024), Chennai (15 – 24 November, 2024), Jaipur (29 
November, 2024-18 December, 2024) and Bhopal (20 – 30 December, 2024). In 
addition to above, in order to promote regional level participation of tribal artisans, 
Aadi Bazaars are organised at different state capitals and other potential cities. Aadi 
Bazaars were organized at Mussoorie, Indore, Bhubaneswar, Ooty, Bangalore, 
Puducherry, Ahmedabad, Udaipur, Leh, New Delhi, Jaipur and Hyderabad during 
current financial year. Besides, TRIFED has participated in more than 125 exhibitions 
all over the country for marketing and promotion tribal products. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18) 
 
The Committee note that National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) 
established as an Autonomous Society is mandated to plan, construct, establish, 
endow and administer the schools and do all the acts and things necessary for or 
conductive to tribal education. Similarly, EMRS society is to be established in each 
State/UT and these Societies are responsible for the overall implementation/ 
administration of schools sanctioned/ established in the State/UT. As per the norms, 
each State/ UT EMRS society is to sign a MoU with NESTS. The Committee, however, 
note that EMRS society is yet to be established in Bihar and MOU with NESTS have 
been signed with 25 States till date. The Committee are satisfied with the progress 
made in the establishment of EMRS as targets set up for establishing ATAL Tinkering 
Labs, affiliation of schools to CBSE and digitization and technological initiatives during 
2021- 22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 were achieved. Since the requisite system has been 
set up for the establishment and functioning of EMRS, the Committee expect that 
timely action will be taken with regard to establish smart class rooms, affiliation of 
all EMRSs with CBSE and recruitment of adequate number of teachers/ staff for 
providing quality education in schools so that education of the students is not 
compromised. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in this 
direction. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Smart Classroom Establishment in EMRSs: The project “Establishment 
of intelligent educational Infrastructure (Smart) in Eklavya Model Residential School 
(EMRSs)” is a collaborative programme with Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (Meity) and funded/supported by Meity, Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) 
& National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS). ERNET India, an 
autonomous Scientific Society under Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology, Government of India which is the implementing agency to execute the 
smart class project.  
The objective of the project is to provide a digital interactive board, access point, 
UPS, manpower support and BSNL internet facilities. Smart class enablement and 
internet connectivity has been targeted in 175 EMRSs across the country in phase 
manner. In Phase 1 and Phase 2, smart classroom infrastructure was successfully 
established in 174 EMRSs, and teaching and learning processes were initiated. The 
third phase of the project aims to extend smart class enablement to 154 additional 

20 
 
EMRSs, further enhancing the educational environment and providing tribal students 
with access to modern educational tools. 
This initiative is a significant step towards modernizing the educational infrastructure 
in EMRSs, ensuring that tribal students receive quality education with the support of 
advanced technological tools. 
2. Facilitation of CBSE Affiliation of Schools: Concerted efforts have been 
made to encourage EMRSs to apply for CBSE Affiliation under different categories. 
The matter with respect to CBSE affiliation of EMRSs is being managed centrally by 
NESTS and the schools are encouraged and facilitated at each step to apply for 
Affiliation. There are total of 361 EMRSs affiliated to CBSE so far, 103 are affiliated 
under State Boards and the remaining 12 applied/to be applied. 
3. Recruitment of staff for EMRSs: NESTS is an organization formed in 2018-
19 for management of EMRSs across India. The Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance had approved the creation of posts @ 52 posts per EMRS for teaching and 
non-teaching staff for 740 EMRSs across the country advising to make the 
recruitment to fill these posts in a phased manner from 2022-23 to 2026-27. 
As per the sanction, notification was issued in 2023 to fill 10391 teaching and non-
teaching posts through ESSE 2023. The Appointment cum posting orders have been 
issued to more than 9000 shortlisted candidates as per norms. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.11) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has discontinued “Development 
of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs)” Scheme from 2024-25 and have 
launched Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan from 2023-24 targeted 
at development of PVTGs. The Government of India intends to enhance the socio-
economic conditions of PVTGs in a mission mode in three years with budgetary 
allocation of about ₹24,000 crore with the 11 interventions of 9 Ministries such as 
Rural Development, Health & Family Welfare, Power, Tribal Affairs, Women and Child 
Development, etc. The Committee note that during the period 2020-21 to 2022-23, 
the budgetary allocation made under Development of particularly vulnerable Tribal 
Groups (PVTGs) was substantially reduced at revision stage. Further, the Committee 
also note that during 2022-23 no fund was released to Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttrakhand, etc. The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for not 
releasing funds to these States, particularly when large number of tribal populations 

21 
 
resides in these States and how did the work envisaged under development of PVTG 
Scheme was carried out in the absence of funds. The Committee believe that the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs must have gained experience from the execution of 
Development of PVTG Scheme and would be utilized in the implementation of PM-
JANMAN Scheme so that there are no hurdles in the implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee expect that the target fixed for three years for the enhancement of 
socio-economic conditions of PVTGs communities across the country would be 
completed in a time bound manner. The Committee certainly hope that with the 
involvement of nine Ministries, the objectives envisaged under the Scheme will be 
achieved if there is proper coordination amongst them and the monitoring 
mechanism developed by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is stringently applied. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For socio-economic and holistic development of PVTGs, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
was implementing scheme of “Development of PVTGs” wherein funds are provided 
to the concerned State Government / UT on the basis of their proposals for 
Conservation cum Development (CCD) plans. 
 
 The release of funds under the scheme was subject to submission of utilization 
certificates, progress reports, SNA compliances/revised procedure of releases as per 
MoF instructions. During 2022-23, under the scheme Rs.13717.93 lakhs was released 
to 10 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana Tripura and West Bengal)  
  
For the other states Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand funds could not be 
released due to high UC and SNA compliances  
 
Based on the insights gained from the implementation of the PVTGs scheme, PM 
JANMAN has been thoughtfully designed, with targeted interventions being carried 
out by the relevant ministries. Ministry, for swift implementation of the mission has 
been coordinating with line Ministries/States/DMs on regular basis. Additionally, a 
monitoring unit (PVTG support Cell) has been established within the Ministry to 
coordinate with line ministries, as well as State and district authorities, on a regular 
basis. Under PM JANMAN a Centralised portal has also been developed on PM Gati 
shakti portal, which is integrated with the portals of respective schemes of 9 
Ministries. 
 
A dashboard to monitor the physical and financial progress of each intervention has 
also been developed. Each Ministry has to populate the Centralized portal with their 
progress through API’s.  
 

22 
 
This Ministry has been actively working towards resolving any bottlenecks in 
implementation in partnership with stakeholders. Ministry has been organizing 
Manthan Shivirs with line ministries/States to expedite progress. Such Manthan 
Shivirs were held on 15 December 2023, 18-19 July, 2024 with participation from 
State TWDs / Ministries. Ministry also engaged with DMs / District Officials, line 
Ministries and state officials of all 17 states in a Conference at New Delhi on 21 st 
January 2025, where Line ministries and districts discussed bottlenecks and way 
forward. Subsequent to that the same has been conveyed to all Chief Secretaries 
with a suggestion that DMs may designate a day in a month to review progress of all 
flagships schemes of MoTA. The progress under the mission as on 11th February, 
2025 is as follows: 
 
Name of Ministry Activity Mission Target 
(2023-2026) Sanctions Physical 
Achievements 
M/o Rural Development 
Provision of pucca 
houses 
4.90 lakh 
houses 386725 houses  82385 houses 
completed. 
Connecting roads 8000 km road 4831.62 km road 62 Km Road 
completed 
M/o Health and Family 
Welfare 
Mobile Medical 
Units  
1000 MMU 
(725 MMUs 
sufficient to 
cover all as per 
MoHFW) 
687 MMUs  687 MMUs 
operationalized 
M/o Jal Shakti Piped Water Supply 18810 Villages 17873 Villages  6650 Villages 
100% Saturated 
M/o Women and Child 
Development 
Construction and 
running of 
Anganwadi Centres 
2500 
2139 AWCs  
1001 AWCs 
made 
operational. 
M/o Education Construction and 
running of hostels 
500 194 Hostels On going  
M/o Power Energization of 
unelectrified HHs 
142133 HHs 142133 HHs 92311 HHs 
Electrified 
M/o New and 
Renewable Energy 
Households 
sanctioned under 
New Solar Power 
Scheme 
As per 
identification of 
beneficiaries 
eligible for off 
grid 
9961 HHs 1694 HHs 
Electrified 
M/o Communications Installation of 
mobile towers 
Coverage of 
4543 
habitations 
2115 habitations  334 Mobile 
towers installed 
M/o Tribal Affairs 
Multipurpose 
Centres 
1000 873 MPCs  Work started in 
513 MPCs. 
Setting up of 
VDVKs 
500 505 VDVKs 156 VDVKs 
Operational 
# As per information received from line Ministries 
 
Ministry of Tribal Aﬀairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17) 
The Committee note that as per the announcement in 2018-19 Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRS) are to be established in every block having more than 50 
per cent ST population and at least 20,000 tribal persons. Accordingly, 452 new EMRS 
are to be established along with the existing 288 EMRS sanctioned under Grants 
under Article 275(1) of the Constitution since 1988. The Committee, however, find 
that out of 452 new EMRS sanctioned 223 are functional and 211 out of 288 old 
EMRS have been identified for upgradation. The Committee also find that several 
challenges such as availability of appropriate land, non-availability of construction 
material due to State Government policy, extreme weather conditions, non-
availability of electricity supply etc. are being faced by the construction agencies in 
constructions of EMRS. The Committee note that 9 new EMRS have been sanctioned 
in 2023-24 and 100 more new EMRS have been requested to the Government of 
India to meet the present requirement since the 452 EMRS sanctioned till date were 
based on 2011 census. The Committee find that several decisions were taken for 
effective implementation of EMRS scheme in Manthan Shivir held on 18-19 July, 2024 
including to consider minimum 8-10 acres of land where 15 acres of land is not 
available for construction of EMRS. The Committee believe that the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs will take suitable steps to ensure that the hindrances coming in the execution 
of the Scheme would be carefully resolved in a time bound manner. The Committee 
desire that all the old schools are upgraded in a time bound manner and new schools 
sanctioned are made functional if possible in their own building within the given time 
frame. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the requisite funds and necessary 
guidance is provided to the Executing agencies and suitable steps are taken so that 
the Scheme does not face shortage of funds at any stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The construction status of EMRS schools as on 17.01.2025 is as under: 
Scheme Location 
Approved  
Completed Work In 
Progress 
Pre-
construction 
Stage 
Article 275 (1)  288 256 23 9 
New Scheme  429 87 222 120 

24 
 
TOTAL  717 343 245 129 
 
The functional status of schools is as under: 
EMRSs under Article 
275(1) 
New Schools  
(Sanctioned as per CCEA 
approval) 
Total 
Locations 
Approved 
Functional Locations 
Approved 
Functional Locations 
Approved 
Functional 
288 270 429 206 717 476 
 
Upgradation Progress as on 17.01.2025: 
 The proposal for the upgradation of 189 old Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
(EMRSs) has been approved. NESTS is consistently engaging with State 
Governments to make use of this opportunity.  
 Steps Taken by MoTA and NESTS: 
1. Land Requirement Adjustment: 
o During the Manthan Shivir organized on 18-19 July 2023, it was 
resolved to reduce the minimum land requirement from 15 acres to 8-
10 acres to address land availability issues. 
2. Follow up with State Authorities for Electricity and Water 
Connection: 
 
o The issues are regularly being followed up with the authorities of 
respective State Government at the level of Chief Secretary, Principal 
Secretary and District Magistrate.  
o EMRS District Construction Management Committees have been formed 
by MoTA under the Chairmanship of District Magistrate/District 
Collector for all EMRS management and related issues  
3. Monitoring Mechanisms: 
o Progress is closely monitored at multiple levels: 
 By the Hon'ble Minister of Tribal Affairs. 
 By the Secretary, MoTA. 
 Monthly review meetings by the Commissioner, NESTS. 
 Fortnightly review meetings at the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) 
level of NESTS. 

25 
 
4. Guidance and Amendments: 
o EMRS guidelines were issued to all construction agencies. 
o Necessary amendments were incorporated based on stakeholders' 
feedback to address practical challenges. 
5. Project Funding Mechanism: 
o Project wise Escrow Accounts have been opened to ensure that funds 
are not diverted and available for the designated project only. 
o Advance funds are being released to construction agencies to ensure 
sufficient liquidity. 
o The fund release mechanism is being reviewed on quarterly basis to 
ensure optimum utilisation of funds. 
Commitment to Timely Execution: 
 MoTA and NESTS are committed to resolving hindrances in a time-bound 
manner. 
 Through the outlined monitoring mechanisms, financial strategies, and 
adaptive guidelines, significant progress has been achieved and will continue 
to be expedited to meet the expectations of the Standing Committee. 
Conclusion: 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs and NESTS are steadfast in their resolve to ensure the 
timely construction and functionality of EMRS schools. The coordinated efforts and 
robust mechanisms in place reflect the commitment to achieving these goals 
efficiently and effectively. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4.19) 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs propose to set 
up Centre of Excellence for Sports in 15 identified EMRS. However, the Committee 
are worried with regard to the time likely to be consumed in setting up of Centre of 
Excellence for Sports as out of 15 identified EMRS only 5 have been finalized in first 
phase. The Committee believe that the engagement of students in sports activities 
in schools is very essential for their physical development, hence they should be set 
up at priority in a time bound manner. The Committee also believe that the revised 
timelines fixed for operationalization of Centre of Excellence for Sports will be 
adhered. The Committee, therefore, desire that strict timelines should be laid down 
to set up all the 15 Centre of Excellence for Sports. The Committee may be apprised 
in this regard.  

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs acknowledges the Committee's recognition of the 
importance of sports in promoting the physical development of students and shares 
the concern regarding the timely operationalization of these Centres of Excellence. 
In this regard, the Ministry would like to update the Committee as follows: 
8. Identification of Locations: 
o The CoEs will be co located with the EMRSs to extent feasible  
o To identify the location of CoEs, the type of sports has been captured from the school 
Principals across the EMRSs based on the prevalent sports in the respective areas. 
o The Sports Authority of India (SAI) has been roped in for consultation to design the 
CoEs in line with SAI standards. 
9. Cost Optimization: 
o NESTS has been optimizing the higher estimated cost to bring it within the sanctioned 
limit of Rs. 5 Crore. 
o The designs are being finalized for establishing the CoEs in line with the inputs from 
stakeholders, experts and within the sanctioned cost. 
10. Progress of the First Phase: 
o Out of the 15 identified EMRS, five CoE locations have been finalized for the first 
phase. The requisite groundwork, including site assessments, infrastructure planning, 
and selection of sporting disciplines, is underway. 
11. Timelines for Implementation: 
o To expedite the process, the Ministry has adopted a phase-wise approach, ensuring 
that operationalization in the first five schools serves as a model for subsequent 
establishments. 
o Revised timelines have been fixed, and efforts are being made to adhere to these 
strictly. The expected timeline for making these five Centres operational is June 2026. 
12. Capacity Building and Support: 
o Collaboration with SAI and stakeholders is underway to ensure the availability of 
quality training, coaching staff, and equipment. 
o Regular monitoring mechanisms have also been put in place. 
13. Second Phase Implementation: 

27 
 
o The groundwork for the remaining ten Centres is being initiated parallelly to minimize 
delays. 
o The aim is to achieve full operationalization of all 15 Centres of Excellence by 
December 2026. 
14. Commitment to Time-Bound Execution: 
o The Ministry is committed to implementing these Centres within a time-bound 
framework. The revised timelines are being strictly monitored. 
The Ministry assures the Committee that the establishment of these Centres is being 
treated as a high-priority initiative. A detailed timeline and the status of progress will 
be submitted for the Committee’s review at regular intervals. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Para No.6.9) 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs revamped the Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Tribal Sub-Scheme into ‘Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAAGY) with the 
aim of integrated development of 36428 villages and provisioned a sum of ₹ 20.38 
lakh per village as ‘Gap Filling’. The Committee note that during the year 2023-24, 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs could release ₹149.65 crore from the revised allocation of 
₹375.00 crore. The Committee further note that Dharti Abba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh 
Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) has been launched under which more than 63000 villages 
including 36428 villages covered under PMAAGY would also be included. The 
Committee believe that with the launch of DAJGUA, the difficulties and challenges 
faced in PMAAGY will be resolved. The Committee find that the role of Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs has since increased multiple times in implementation of DA-JGUA as 
multi-sectoral interventions through convergence of specific Schemes of several 
Ministries. The Committee, therefore, expect that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should 
coordinate with all the Ministries/Department so that the difficulties /challenges faced 
under PMAAGY do not arise. The Committee, therefore, desire that the PM Gatishakti 
Portal developed for monitoring and evaluation of physical and financial progress of 
all the projects on regular basis should be utilized so that the objectives of the DA-
JGUA are fully achieved. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should draw an 
action plan so that 63000 villages identified under DAJGUA can achieve integrated 
socio-economic development of the tribal people as envisaged in the Abhiyan in a 
time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time schedule 
fixed for implementation of the Abhiyan and also the latest status of the achievement 
made in this regard after the implementation of DA-JGUA. 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
Based on learning from the success of PM JANMAN, Dharti Abba Janjatiya Gram 
Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA JGUA) has been launched which is more structured and 
expanded version of PMAAGY with dedicated convergence of funds and Saturation 
for key interventions from line Ministries and State departments.   The Abhiyan 
comprises of 25 interventions implemented by 17 line Ministries and aims to saturate 
infrastructural gaps in 63,843 villages, improve access to health, education, 
Anganwadi facilities and providing livelihood opportunities in 549 districts and 2,911 
blocks in 30 States/UTs in 5 years.  
 
The observations of the Committee for utilization of PM GatiShakti portal has been 
duly noted and the Ministry is in the process of development of dedicated portal for 
DA JGUA for monitoring purposes. 
 
Ministry is regularly consulting line Ministries / Departments / States for achieving 
the desired results in a time bound manner. 
  
The progress of Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (as on 11.02.2025), 
along with Mission Targets Ministry-wise, is as under: 
Ministry Activity Mission Target 
(2024-2028) Sanction details 
Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
(MoRD) 
Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojna 
(PMAY)- Gramin 
(MoRD) 
20 Lakhs pucca 
houses 
794191 HH and 10040 
Completed. 
Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojna 
PMGSY (MoRD) 
25,000 Km Road 
Survey & GIS based 
verification is in 
progress. 
Ministry of Jal 
Shakti 
Jal Jeevan Mission 
(JJM) 
Every eligible 
village/Hamlet  
For 36557 villages 
work order has been 
issued.   
Ministry of 
Power 
Revamped 
Distribution Sector 
Scheme - RDSS 
Every unelectrified 
HH and unconnected 
public institutions (~ 
2.35 lakh) 
 44045 HHs 
Ministry of 
Health and 
family Welfare 
PM Ayushman 
Bharat Health 
Infrastructure 
Mission – PM 
ABHIM 
1000 MMUs 
36 MMU have been 
sanctioned and 
operationalised  
Ministry of 
Women and 
Child 
Development 
Anganwadi Centre- 
Poshan 2.0 (ICDS) 
8000 Saksham AWC 
(2000 New AWC & 
6000 upgradation) 
236 new AWCs 
sanctioned. 
DoSE&L, 
Ministry of 
Education 
Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) 1000 hostels 304 hostels have been 
sanctioned 

29 
 
Ministry Activity Mission Target 
(2024-2028) Sanction details 
Ministry of 
Communication 
& Information 
Technology 
Universal Service 
Obligation Fund 
(USOF) 
5000 villages 
889 villages covered 
(792 towers 
commissioned) 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare 
Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY) 
Sustainable 
agriculture support to 
FRA patta holders (~ 
2 lakh) 
Benefit of Schemes of 
Agriculture 
(seeds/implements/soil 
cards) has been 
provided to more than 
50000 beneficiaries 
Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs  
PMAAGY/ SCA to 
TD  
100 TMMC - Mutli-
purpose Marketing 
Centres  
41 TMMC have been 
approved in 11 states  
Upgradation of 
Ashram 
Schools/Govt. 
Schools & Hostels 
for Tribals 
2426 projects of 
schools approved in 
11 states   
FRA Claim Support 
Proposals of 
preparation for 810 
Community Forest 
Resource Rights 
Management Plans 
have been approved 
covering more than 
80,000 hectares of 
forest land. 
Creation of FRA cells 
have been approved in 
9 states  
CoC for Sickle Cell 
Disease in 16 states 
15 CoC approved in 
14 states   
 
# Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, D/o Fisheries, D/o Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying, Ministry of Tourism: - have issued their revised guidelines. 
# Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of AYUSH and Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship: - Pending for approval of main scheme. 
Ministry of Tribal Aﬀairs OM No.  16015/07/2024-PC dated 17.03.2025 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                                          
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,   
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 06TH 
AUGUST, 2025. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
                   
    PRESENT 
 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
    Lok Sabha 
2.       Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3.       Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare   
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
6. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
7. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
9. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
10. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
11. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
12. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
13.    Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
14. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
15. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
16. Shri Rameswar Teli 
17. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
18. Shri Abdul Wahab 
19. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 

32 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) *** *** *** ***   
(ii)  Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’ of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
(iii) *** *** *** *** 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
***  Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
THIRD REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 9  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.7, 3.11, 5.11 & 7.19 
4 44.45% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
Rec. Para No.4.18 and 8.11 
02 22.22% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.17,4.19 & 6.9 
03 33.33% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
NIL  
00 00 
   100% 
 
 