22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
LONG TERM PURCHASE POLICY AND STRATEGIC 
STORAGE OF CRUDE OIL 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Eighteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2012-13)] 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
LONG TERM PURCHASE POLICY AND STRATEGIC 
STORAGE OF CRUDE OIL 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2012-13)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.02.2014 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
(iii) 
 
     CONTENTS      
Page 
 
            
 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14)………………………                    (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………                    (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report ………………………………………………….     
                   
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………           
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted                                             by the 
Committee ……………………………………                          
 
CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of w hich final replies of 
the Government are still awaited ……                        
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2013-14) held on 12.2.2014 
 
 
II. 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2013 -14) on `Long Term 
Purchase Policy and Strategic Storage of Crude Oil’ 
 

4 
 
(iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS  
(2013-14) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
4 Dr. Mehboob Beg 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
7 Shri Ram Sundar Das 
8 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav 
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath 
11 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
12 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
13 Shri Somabhai Gandalal Koli Patel 
14 Shri Rao Saheb Danve Patil 
15 Shri P.L.Punia 
16 Shri Takam Sanjoy 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
20 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
21 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Sabir Ali 
23 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
24 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
25 Shri Ahmed Patel 
26 Dr. Ram Prakash 
27 Smt. Kusum Rai 
28 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
30 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
31 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
       SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Deputy Secretary 
   

5 
 
 (iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on thei r behalf, present this Twenty 
Second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Eighteenth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  the subject „Long 
Term Purchase Policy And Strategic Storage Of Crude Oil‟. 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 8.5.2013. The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
to all the recommend ations contained in the Eighteenth  Report were received on 
6.9.2013.. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2013 -14) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 12.2.2014.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the  Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Co mmittee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
12 February,  2014 
 23 Magha ,1935 (Saka)     
ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
Chairman,                                                    
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2013 -14) on „Long Term Purchase Policy  and Strategic Storage of Crude 
Oil‟ of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟, which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 8.5.2013. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Gov ernment in respect of all 
the 15  Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: SI. Nos. 4,12,13,15 (Total 4) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies SI. Nos.- 8 and 10 (Total 2) 
               (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - 1,2,3,9 and 14  
(Total 5)       
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - SI. Nos. 5,6,7and 11 (Total 4)                
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final Replies 
in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government (included in Chapter-V), should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  

7 
 
Recommendation SL.No /Para No.1 
MINIMIZING DEPENDENCE OVER CRUDE OIL 
5.   The Committee note that the Indian crude oil imports have been steadily increasing 
and the country imported 159 MMT in 2009,  163.6 MMT in 2010 and 171.7 MMT in 
2011. In the global scenario, the country is 6 th largest importer of crude oil and it 
constituted 9.1 percent of total crude oil imports in 2011 increasing from 8.4 percent in 
2009.  The Committee find that though India is deficient in crude oil and importing 80 
percent of its requirements, the energy mix of the country is predominantly skewed 
towards crude oil for its energy requirements.   
 Since natural gas has emerged as an important fuel worldwide because of 
inherent advantages over other fuels by being more fuel efficient and environment 
friendly, the Committee would like the Government to shift decisively to gas based 
consumption in preference to oil by increasing the percentage of gas imports in the 
overall import basket.  Since, the discovery of huge deposits of shale gas worldwide has 
spawned off new hope in meeting future energy requirements, the Committee 
recommend that India should also take advantage of this development and promote use 
of gas in meeting its en ergy requirements so that dependency on crude oil could be 
brought down.  The Committee therefore desire that MoPNG should prepare a strategic 
plan in this regard to consciously shift the energy consumption pattern.             
6.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
submitted as below:- 
“1.         As per the XII Plan document of Planning Commission, the share of oil in 
total commercial energy consumption in India is expected to decline from 31.5 
per cent in 2011–12 to 23.3 per cent in 2021–22 and the share of natural gas and 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) is projected to rise from 10.3 per cent to 13 per cent 
in the same period. 
2.         The natural gas production in the country during the las t three years 
(2010-11 to 2012-13) is as under: 
                                                                                                      (In MMSCMD) 
Company/Regime 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
ONGC 63.3 63.9 64.52 
OIL 6.4 7.2 7.2 
PSC 73.4 59.2 39.70 
Total 143.1 130.3 111.4 
(MMSCMD – Million Standard Cubic Meters per Day) 

8 
 
 
 
It may be seen that the gas production by ONGC and OIL over the last three 
years has remained almost constant or has marginally increased. However, 
during the same period, the gas production under the Production Sharing 
Contract (PSC) regime has decreased drastically, mainly due to fall in gas 
production from KG-DWN-98/3 (KG-D6) block. 
  
3.    The Government has taken several steps to increase the natural gas 
production in t he country to encourage use of this clean and green fuel. Apart 
from exploration and production of conventional gas, various unconventional 
sources of gas are being pursued. The details are as under: 
 
i.            In order to accelerate exploration and pr oduction of oil/gas, so far 254 
exploration blocks have been awarded under nine rounds of New Exploration 
Licensing Policy  (NELP). A total of 124 discoveries have been made under 
NELP till date in 41 blocks of which 78 are gas discoveries, including major gas 
discoveries in East Coast. Under NELP In -place gas volume of about 704 
Billion Cubic Meters  (BCM) has been established as on 01.04.2013. Current 
gas production from NELP blocks is about 14 MMSCMD. 
 
ii.          As far as unconventional energy source of  natural gas is concerned, so 
far 33 Coal Bed Methane  (CBM) blocks have been awarded through 
nomination as well as four bidding rounds. In -Place CBM volume to the tune of 
9.9 Trillion Cubic Feet  (TCF) has been established so far in 8 blocks. 
Commercial CBM production had commenced from one block in West Bengal 
in 2007. Development activities are currently in progress in another 6 CBM 
blocks. It is estimated that the current CBM production of 0.38 MMSCMD is 
likely to increase to about 4 MMSCMD by 2016-17. 
 
iii.         The presence of gas hydrates have been established in Krishna 
Godavari, Mahanadi and Andaman offshore areas during “Expedition -01” 
carried out in 2006. It is planned to undertake “Expedition -02” in future to carry 
out drilling and coring activi ties in identified locations in offshore, subject to the 
approval of the Steering Committee of National Gas Hydrate 
Programme(NGHP). Currently, there is no technology available for commercial 
production of gas from gas hydrates, which are mostly under R & D stage. 
 
iv.          Resource estimation for shale gas /shale oil have been taken up by 
several agencies in selected basins/sub -basins  in India, such as Cambay, 
Cauvery onland, KG onland, Ganga, Gondwana and Assam -Arakan etc. GoI 
has formulated a draft Shale gas/Shale oil Policy which is currently under final 
approval process. Further, MoP&NG has entered into MoU with Department of 
State, USA for co-operation in various areas related to Shale Oil/Shale Gas. 
  
  

9 
 
4.         The projected natural gas produc tion in the country during the current 
year and next three years (2013-14 to 2016-17) is as under: 
                                                                                                          
(In MMSCMD) 
Company/Regime 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
ONGC 64.2 73.0 77.3 105.9 
OIL 7.5 10.9 11.2 11.5 
PSC 33.6 34.6 38.4 45.2 
Total 105.3   118.5 126.9  162.6 
  
(The above projections are based on estimates of domestic gas production in XII 
Plan Document and data submitted by ONGC & OIL to DGH subsequently) 
  
5.         National Oil Companies have been employing the best in class 
technologies for pursuing the objective of improving production from their oil 
fields/wells.  These measures include application of state -of-art and fit for 
purpose technologies suited for western offshore reservoirs. ONGC has adopted 
the latest technologies in the area of Drilling operations, Well completion, 
Stimulation, Work over Operations, Artificial Lift, Water Injection, Offshore 
Production facilities and remote m onitoring/control of operations and production 
optimization. 
  
6.       The Government has appointed a Committee on “Roadmap for Enhancing 
Domestic Oil & Gas Production and Sustainable Reduction in Import 
Dependency by 2030”, Chaired by Dr. Vijay Kelkar wi th various Terms of 
Reference (ToRs)  including “ Steps to be taken for enhancing domestic Oil and 
Gas production from the Unconventional as well as Conventional Energy 
Sources”. The Committee is to submit the report within six months”. 
 
7. The Committee note that Government has taken several measures t o 
increase the Natural Gas produ ction and has also been pursuing R&D activities 
pertaining to unconventional source s of gas like CBM, Gas hydrates , & Shale 
Gas. The C ommittee however wish to point out  that action taken reply  of the 
Government only enumerates the MoPNG efforts to increase domestic N atural 
gas production by various ways but fails to give any concrete strategy for gradual 
and systematic shift in the  consumption pattern  to natural gas and this  
completely misses out the thrust and crux of the Committee's recommendation. 
The Committee therefore  would like to  reiterate that MoPNG must workout the  
roadmap for bringing in the requisite transition in a time bound manner which will 
also be in line with the changing global environment. 
  

10 
 
Recommendation SL.No /Para No. 2 
NEED FOR A JOINT VENTURE COMPANY  
8. The Committee note that the total crude oil import for 2012 -13 by PSU oil 
companies is estimated at 120 MMT.  Among these PSUs, import by IOC is placed at 
66.3 MMT, BPCL at 22.80 MMT, HPCL at 17 MMT and MRPL at 14.40 MMT.   
  
The Committee note that till July 1998, the entire requirement of crude oil imports 
was canalized through Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), the sole canalizing agency. 
Thereafter the crude oil import was decanalized and private and joint sector refineries 
were allowed to procure their own requirement of crude oil.  Import of crude oil was 
further decanalized from April 2002, with all PSU oil companies being permitted to 
import crude oil independently to meet their refinery configuration through term 
contracts and spot tenders in accordance with the guidelines issued by MoPNG. The 
Committee, however, note that purchase of crude oil is a complex process which 
involves negotiations of contract with NOCs or floating of tenders, shipping 
arrangements, unloading at po rts, transporting to refineries etc. are to be made by the 
OMCs. The Committee also note that private refiners are able to procure crude oil at 
lower prices.   
  
The Committee are of the view that lot of resources of OMCs are spent on this 
activity. Instea d of all oil  PSU's carrying out  purchase of crude oil, the Committee 
recommend for the formation of a joint venture company promoted by all interested 
PSUs and  entrusted with the work of importing of crude oil required for them in line with 
their refini ng specifications.  The Committee desire that this company may be given 
enough flexibility as enjoyed by private sector refineries to carry out their operations 
including price negotiation, hiring of ships and negotiate better terms on freight etc. 
which will help PSUs save lot of work relating to imports. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
submitted as below:- 
1. “In August 1979, based on a Cabinet decision, the Empowered Standing 
Committee (ESC) comprising Chairman, IndianOil, Joint Secretary, MoP&NG, 
Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor, MoP&NG and Joint Secretary,  Department of 
Economic Affairs was formed as a re sponse to the second crude oil shock, in 
order to enhance flexibility and quick decision making. The ESC, as per the 

11 
 
formation directive, was required to deal with organizing adequate import of crude 
oil & petroleum products through bilateral negotiations with National Oil 
Companies (NOCs) as well as purchase the same from the spot market. 
 
2. Till July 1998, the entire requirement of crude oil import was canalized through 
IndianOil. With deregulation of the Indian refining sector, effective from 01.04.1998, 
there was a need to decanalize crude oil import for the private and joint sector 
refineries and accordingly crude oil imports were decanalized w.e.f. July 1998.  
Subsequently, the Cabinet, in its meeting held on 13.03.2001, allowed the other oil 
PSUs to import their own crude oil requirement in a phased manner.  The Cabinet 
also decided that the procurement of crude oil through the tender route be 
continued through company specific ESCs constituted on the lines of the ESC of 
IndianOil. Accordingly, effective  April 2002, separate ESCs were constituted for 
HPCL and BPCL, and in July 2003 for MRPL. 
 
3. Setting up a JV for procurement of crude oil may not be appropriate for the 
following reasons: 
 
3(i)  Individual PSUs have distinct and unique requirements which would be difficult to 
aggregate through a JV, as indicated below: 
 
 Varying configuration of refineries govern the crude diet of the particular 
refinery. 
 Continuously changing refinery economics due to changing market 
fundamentals. 
 Varying levels of require ment of each refinery based on economics, market 
demand, environmental norms, etc. 
 Technical factors specific to a particular refinery, infrastructural constraints, 
shutdowns – planned & unplanned, etc. 
 
3(ii)   Crude oil procurement process, within an ind ividual company involves, very close 
coordination between its various refineries, procurement group, commercial/ 
shipping and operations groups. It would not be feasible for the JV company to 
undertake this coordination on behalf of individual CPSUs, given  the size and 
scale of operations.  Separating the procurement function from the associated 
functions, which are refinery specific, may lead to complications and become 
counter-productive. 
 
3(iii) Creation of a separate JV Company exclusively for procurement of crude oil may 
result in the creation of an additional establishment with associated costs, which 
may or may not deliver commensurate benefits and may curtail the flexibility 
currently available to the refiners. 
 
3(iv) Procurement of crude oi l through a JV Company could possibly result in tax 
implications to the partner oil PSUs, as given below: 
 
a. Procurement of crude oil through another entity like the JV Company will 
have sales tax implication. In order to avoid sales tax implications, the JV  

12 
 
Company could act as a canalizing agency whereby the contract for 
purchase of crude oil could be entered into between the overseas supplier 
and the respective oil PSU and the bill(s) of lading could be prepared in the 
name of the oil PSU. Even in this cas e, the commission charged by the JV 
Company for its services would attract service tax. Therefore, importing 
crude oil through a JV Company will increase to some extent the cost of 
procurement due to tax implications. Besides, it is very likely that some o f 
the suppliers may not agree for these kinds of arrangements. 
 
b. The other option is for the JV Company to not act as an agent but to import 
crude oil in its own name and then transfer the title of the goods as high sea 
sales i.e. transfer of goods before e ntering the Indian customs area to the 
respective oil PSU. While in such transaction there would be no service tax 
implication, however, there have been in the past issues with tax authorities 
due to lack of clarity relating to sales tax implications, whic h have not yet 
been resolved.  
    
4. Since OMCs are different entities competing in the market for selling their 
products, hence centralization of crude oil procurement may affect the 
competitiveness in market and may result in conflict of interest.  
 
5. In view of above, creation of a separate joint venture company exclusively 
for the procurement of crude oil may lead to creation of an additional 
establishment with associated costs but with no commensurate benefits and is 
also likely to curtail the flexib ility currently available to refiners to process certain 
mix of crude as per their processing plan”.  
 
10. The Committee had recommended for the formation of a Joint venture 
company for collective import of crude oil requirements on behalf of all OMC’s. In 
response, the Action Taken Reply of MoPNG have put -forth a number of limiting 
circumstances and  disadvantages in implementing the concept of single JV 
Company holding charge of purchasing crude oil requirements on behalf of the 
oil PSUs. In Committee’s view these constraints are inconsequential as compared 
to the intended payb ack that would accrue to these PSUs . This JV company 
would be instrumental in cutting down the input cost of PSU Refineries and 
would save individual PSU resources being spent on this activity as the proposed 
JVs being autonomous would be able to take decisions at a faster pace . The 
Committee therefore, strongly reiterate their recommendation and  would like the 
Government should look in to every feasibility of actualizing this concept. 
 
  

13 
 
Recommendation SL.No /Para No.3 
 
COOPERATION AMONG OIL IMPORTING COUNTRIES 
  
11. The Committee note that high volatility in crude oil prices which has fluctuated 
from $ 25 per barrel to $110 per barrel during the past decade has greatly impacted 
finances of developing countries like India which is required to import 80% of crude oil 
to meet its energy requirements.  The Committee have been informed that if the price of 
crude oil increases by one dollar the country has to bear an extra burden of Rs 4000 cr. 
Though hardening in crude oil prices is largely due to increase in its  demand, t he 
Committee feel  that extraneous factors including speculation, strategic cut down  in 
production by oil exporting countries, geo -political factors like instability in oil producing 
regions  etc. could also be reasons for higher prices of crude oil rathe r than supply -
demand  mismatch.   
  
The Committee feel such high crude oil prices would be a burden on the finances 
of any country especially developing countries like India  as it will restrict the allocation 
of funds for other social programmes like educ ation, health and irrigation etc.  While the 
Committee understand the need for price discovery in the market place in a free market 
scenario, it could not ignore the fact that this has led to huge volatility and one sided 
increase in prices has drained awa y precious resources from many developing 
countries like India. 
  
The Committee learn that more than 90% of crude oil is imported by six 
countries/regions which also includes three Asian countries namely, China, India and 
Japan.  Needless to say that deman d in these countries have a bearing on the crude oil 
prices. The Committee however, note that though there are bodies like International 
Energy Agency (IEA) for enhancing the cooperation amongst various players in the 
global energy market, there is no foru m for oil importing countries to strategize on the 
fluctuations in the international price of crude oil.   
  
The Committee further note that the OMCs enter into contracts for supply of 
crude oil with National Oil Companies of oil exporting countries.  As p er the standard 
international practices, these contracts are guided by the General terms and conditions 

14 
 
which are common to all buyers.  The Committee have however, been informed that the 
terms of sale are predominantly in favour of NOCs.     
  
In view of the above, the Committee would like to emphasize that fair price for 
crude oil is an imperative for equity and justice to global human community and  
therefore, recommend  that MoPNG/Government should coordinate with other importing 
countries and take up t he issue of fair prices for crude oil through international 
institutions. 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
 “Crude oil resources are not uniformly spread in the world and only limited 
number of countries are significant producers of crude oil. This clearly divides the 
world into oil exporting and oil importing nations. India is the fourth largest oil 
consumer in the world after the United States, China, and Japan.  India depends 
heavily on imported crude oil, mostly from the Middle East.  The majority of 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries are 
also net importers of crude oil and  their economics would also struggle without 
global security in the oil export market. 
 
Following points are worthy of mention where appropriate action is being taken or 
could be taken in line with the recommendations of the Standing Committee:- 
 
a. International Energy Forum (IEF), Riyadh is a body which provides a common 
platform for both crude oil consumers as well as producers for fair energy trade, 
and international cooperation. India, along with other major crude oil importing 
countries, can use this bod y to take up the matter regarding crude oil price 
volatility and fair price through dialogues with major oil exporting countries. 
 
b. India is developing its Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR).  These strategic oil 
reserves could help in stabilizing oil price s since they can be utilized, whenever 
there is increase in prices due to any supply disruption caused by disruptive 
events like force majeure, political unrest in crude oil supply region or shipping 
route.  Potentiality of SPR could be enlarged in collabo ration with other large 
importers of the region.  
 
c. India, in collaboration with other major crude oil importing countries of the region, 
may acquire more and more crude oil producing assets overseas to secure crude 
oil supplies, thereby reducing dependence on oil exporting nations.   
 
d. To ensure security of demand for crude oil exporting countries and security of 
supplies for crude oil consuming countries, the exporting and the consuming 
countries could work together through criss -cross investment.  India co uld, 
therefore, look for long term crude oil supply contracts with crude oil exporting 
countries with tie -up of crude oil volumes along -with investment by such 

15 
 
countries in Indian refineries and other areas of the downstream sector. There 
could also be col laboration in projects like construction of transnational pipelines 
for bringing in the crude oil from land locked and isolated oil rich countries to the 
nearby sea ports. 
 
As regards the concern of the Standing Committee that the oil PSUs enter into 
contracts for supply of crude oil with NOCs of oil exporting countries, wherein the 
terms of sale are predominantly in favor of the supplier NOCs, these NOCs sell 
their crude oil at Official Selling Price (OSP), which is uniformly applicable to all 
the buyers of a particular region, irrespective of the quantities procured by them. 
These crude oil supply contracts are guided by the General Terms & Conditions 
of the seller, which are not only as per the standard international practices but 
are also uniformly applicable to all buyers”.  
 
13. The Committee in their report had invited attention towards the absence of 
any international forum to maneuver on the fluctuations in the internat ional price 
of crude oil and accordingly address the concerns of oil importing countries.They 
had further desired MoPNG  to take up the issue  of fair prices for crude  oil 
through international institutions. In its reply, the MoP&NG has stated  that there 
are agencies like International Energy Forum  (IEF) working in this arena by 
providing a common platform  to establish cooperation among  producing oil as 
well as consuming nations  and services of this institution could be utilized to 
take up the issues like crude oil price , volatility and fair prices  etc. with oil 
exporting countries.  The Ministry in their reply have however not specified  
whether  the forum of any such international institutions have been utilized to 
highlight and discuss the issues. The Committee would urge 
Government/Ministry to make use of the services being pr ovided by IEF and also 
other multilateral institutions to ensure better negotiation terms and fair crude oil 
prices for themselves and in this regard must also start coordinating with other 
oil importing countries to collectively take up the matter  at international level  to 
espouse the cause of developing nations.  
Recommendation SL.No /Para No.5 & 6 
REVIEW OF GUIDELINES 
  
14. The Committee note that the guidelines laid down by the Ministry of Petroleum &  
Natural Gas to be followed by PSU OMC‟s with regard to import  of crude oil had been 
last revised in 2001 and no changes have been made in the past 12 years.   

16 
 
  
The Committee note that these guidelines lays down the procedure to be 
followed by OMCs to en ter into Term Contracts with NOCs and also provides a list of 
MNCs which can be approached for sourcing the crude oil requirements. The guidelines 
also specify the powers of Empowered Standing Committee of OMCs and that of 
Ministry in approval of these contracts.     
  
The Committee are of view that  these guidelines should enable the OMC‟s to 
follow  a transparent and efficient  procedure to import crude oil and should not place 
any hurdle in  availing any opportunity to buy required type of crude oil at l ower prices.  
The Committee feel that the guidelines has to reflect  the present structure of the 
international oil market which has undergone lot of changes since 2001 and therefore 
recommend MoP&NG to review the guidelines  in consultation with OMC‟s to widen 
their purchase opportunities by simultaneously providing for necessary  safeguards and 
monitoring mechanisms to bring about transparency and accountability .   
 
REVISION OF LIST OF MNCs IN THE GUIDELINES 
15. The Committee observe that Public Sector Oil Companies enter into contract with 
National Oil Companies (NOC‟s) of oil exporting nations having surplus quantities of 
crude oil, which may or may not have Official Selling Price (OSP).  This is in accordance 
with the guidelines issued by MoPNG in 2001. Besides, MNCs mentioned in the list as 
part of guidelines, may also be approached by OMCs for sourcing the crude oil 
requirements. The Committee note that this list which forms the basis of crude oil 
agreements e ntered between National OMCs and Multinational Oil Companies 
remained static since 2001.   
 In the changing market scenario and due to mergers and acquisitions, the 
Committee feel this list should be amended and regularly updated, thereby providing an 
authentic base for locating appropriate seller. The Committee would therefore, 
recommend Ministr y of Petroleum and Natural Gas to revise this list immediately and 
also regularly review the MNC list in future in accordance with developments in the 
international oil market.   

17 
 
16. In response  to recommendations No.5 and 6 , the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has submitted the following reply: 
“The extant policy guidelines to be followed by the oil PSUs with regard to import 
of crude oil were issued by MOP& NG on 21.05.2001. According to the policy, all 
possible efforts should be made to first maximize term volumes with NOCs on 
OSP as pricing basis. Thereafter, attempts should be made to finalize term 
contracts with NOCs not having OSP and then with the short  listed crude 
exporting MNCs.  
 
A proposal for amending the said policy guidelines was submitted by BPC to 
MoP&NG on 27.02.2013, which in turn was circulated by MoP&NG on 
11.03.2013 to all the other oil PSUs seeking comments. Upon receiving the 
comments, M oP&NG has on 11.06.2013 directed IndianOil to constitute an 
Industry Working Group (IWG) comprising IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL and MRPL to 
deliberate on the issue of amendments to crude oil import policy.  Appropriate 
action would be taken on receipt of the IWG report”. 
17. The Committee had recommended for reviewing the more than a decade old 
extant policy guidelines pertaining to import of crude oil issued by MoP&NG in 
May, 2001 .  W ith the advent  of time and fastly changing oil industry, the 
Committee had noted that  the policy guidelines needed an updation to maintain 
the requisite pace and in their recommendations no. 5 and 6 respectively had 
touched upon various aspects of the policy requiring an urgent make over.  The 
ATR of MoP&NG have however informed tha t MoP&NG has already initiated the 
process and in this regard has constituted an Industry Working Group  (IWG) and 
is awaiting report to deliberate upon the issue.  The Committee desire that the 
terms of reference and time frame by which the IWG to complete their work may 
be informed to the Committee .  They further desire for a prompt action on the 
recommendations of the IWG for obviating further delays. The Committee may 
also be informed about the recommendations of IWG and action taken by 
MoP&NG.   
Recommendation SL.No /Para No. 7 
PURCHASE OF DISTRESS CARGOES 
18. The Committee note that OMCs normally source their crude oil requirements 
through Term Contracts and Spot purchases to suit their refinery configuration.  The 
Committee have been informed that there are opportunities that exist in the international 

18 
 
oil market when sale of distress cargoes takes place at lower than market prices.   
However, the MoPNG guidelines does not permit OMCs to buy crude oil from distress 
cargoes.  
 The Committee are of  the view, that in these days of high oil prices, any 
opportunity to procure crude oil at lesser prices should be made use of as it will reduce 
the cost of purchase and benefit OMCs to improve gross refining margins.  The 
Committee therefore, recommend tha t MoPNG should allow OMCs to procure certain 
percentage of their annual crude requirement through distress sale route and review the 
experience after reasonable period. 
 Also the Committee have been given to understand that if an NOC is not able to 
supply adequate quantity of a crude at OSP, oil companies can buy such crud e from 
NOCs or specified MNCs other than OSP.  However, it is necessary that such crude is 
seller's own equity crude or swapped with their own equity crude.   The Committee have 
come to know that oil companies are losing the opportunity of procuring cheaper crudes 
because they are not swapped.  The Committee feel that the guidelines should permit 
the OMCs to procure the required type of crude at cheaper cost with transparent 
procedure.  Hen ce the Ministry should look at the present procedure and modify it so 
that different types of crude may be brought from different players in case the required 
quantity is not supplied by NOCs. 
19. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following:  
“A cargo becomes „distressed‟ when the seller is close to the delivery date and 
due to some reason the cargo is not getting sold.  If prospective buyers become 
aware that a seller has a 'distressed cargo', the buyers will try to procure it at a 
cheap price.  As distressed cargoes are generally available only on very prompt 
basis, chartering a tanker at short notice for lifting distressed cargoes on FOB 
basis would be diffic ult as well as costly on account of higher freight, and hence 
may not be viable. Moreover, it is very likely that on most of the occasions, 
distress cargoes may have already been loaded on vessels, and hence can be 
procured only on CFR basis. In order to d erive the maximum advantage while 
procuring distress cargoes, it is necessary that the oil PSUs are permitted to 
procure distress cargoes on FOB as well as CFR basis. However, the present 
guidelines of the Ministry of Shipping do not permit the oil PSUs to  source cargo 
on CFR basis. Therefore, in order to consider procurement of distressed 
cargoes, it is essential that oil PSUs are permitted to import crude oil on FOB as 

19 
 
well as CFR basis.  MoP&NG has been taking up this matter with Ministry of 
Shipping from time-to-time. 
As regards the modification in the present procedure to procure the crude oil, as 
has been mentioned earlier, MoP&NG has directed Indian Oil to constitute an 
Industry Working Group (IWG) comprising IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL and MRPL to 
deliberate on the issue of amendmen t to crude oil import policy. Appropriate 
action would be taken after IWG recommendations are received”. 
20. The Committee  in their report  had recommended that OMCs should be 
allowed to procure the crude available in international market as distress cargoes 
as per their requirements at sufficiently cheaper price. It had wanted MoP&NG to 
look at the present procedure and modify it  accordingly to enable OMCs to 
procure different types of crude  from different players  and also through 
purchase of distress cargoes. The MoPNG in  their Action Taken  Reply have 
intimated that OMCs are not able to purchase distress cargoes  due to Ministry of 
Shipping directions permitting import only on FoB basis , whereas Distress 
cargoes are available only on CFR basis. It has been stated that the MoP&NG has 
been regularly taking up this matter with Ministry of Shipping and impress the 
benefits that can occur to OMCs to buy distress cargoes of crude at CFR basis.  
An Industry Working Group has also been constituted t o deliberate on related  
issues. The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the progress made by the 
IWG in  finding out a solution to this problem .   
Recommendation SL.No /Para No. 9 
  CRUDE OIL IMPORT ON CFR/FOB BASIS 
21. The Committee note that crude oil purchased from various countries are 
transported on cargo ships.  The Committee further note that there are different models 
of booking the cargo like FOB basis where the buyer arranges the ship and insurance to 
cover loss or damage to the goods, whereas in CIF the seller bears costs, freight and 
insurance and CFR includes Cost and Freight.  The Committee further note that the 
guidelines issued by Ministry of Shipping provides that  OMCs can source their crude oil 
on FOB basis only, which the OMC‟s have informed would increase transportation costs 
to them.  This policy, however, also adversely affects the opportunities of OMCs to 
purchase those grades of crude oil which are available solely on CIF/CFR basis and 
many a times at considerably cheaper rates. The Committee have also been informed 

20 
 
that these shipping guidelines are relaxable and crude oil allowed to be purchased on 
CIF/CFR on case to case basis after approval by Ministry of Shipping.  The Committee 
have been inform ed that international oil companies also prefer to supply crude oil on 
CFR basis only.   
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas may seek the power to approve import of crude oil on CFR/CIF basis by OMCs to 
itself from Ministry of Shipping.  The Committee also desire Ministry to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Shipping for relaxing the guidelines to enable OMCs to 
purchase on CIF/CFR basis so as to benefit from the opportunities in the market and for 
doing away with the need of approval of Ministry of Shipping in every case. 
22.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
submitted as below:- 
“MoP&NG has been taking up the matter with Ministry of Shipping (MoS) for 
permitting Oil PSUs to import crude oil on FOB as well as CFR basis.  In response, 
MoS had in January 2013 conveyed that the oil PSUs may approach MoS for grant 
of No Objection Certificate for CFR imports on a case-to-case basis. 
 
The MoS stand of allowing CFR impor ts on case-to-case basis does not, however, 
address the issue because obtaining permission on a case -to-case basis will be 
cumbersome and time consuming, and in all probability by the time such permission 
is received from the MoS, the opportunity would als o have been lost. The stand of 
MoS, therefore, continues to be an impediment in the crude oil procurement 
process of the oil PSUs. 
Therefore, MoP&NG has again requested MoS to allow oil PSUs to import crude oil 
on both CFR as well as FOB basis”.  
23.    The Committee had recommended to MoP&NG to take up with M inistry of 
Shipping the matter of  allowing import of crude oil on FoB as well CFR basis .  
The reply of the Ministry states that  the Ministry of Shipping have reiterated their 
earlier stand of granting NoCs to OMCs for CFR imports  only on case to case 
basis.  The Committee however desire MoPNG to be persistent in their efforts and 
must not rest their case of seeking relaxation in the crude oil purchase guidelines 
from Ministry of Shipping.  In Committee’s view the MoPNG must seek a reasoned 
reply from MoS for granting it only on case to case basis. Nonetheless, the prices 
of Crude oil directly impact the financials of OMCs  and thus the relaxation in 
guidelines may prove to be beneficial for company’s financial health by cashing 

21 
 
in on the  valuable o pportunities of purchasing  crude oil  and transporting it  at 
cheaper rates, arising in international market. 
Recommendation SL.No /Para No. 11 
INFRASTRUCTURAL CONSTRAINTS 
24. The Committee have learnt that OMCs are incurring huge expenditure on 
account of demurrage costs on domestic ports due to lack of requisite infrastructure.  
The Committee have been informed that IOCL had incurr ed huge demurrage cost of 
Rs.328.58 cr, Rs.120.55 cr, Rs.98.02 crore for the years 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 2011 -
12, BPCL had incurred Rs.32,  24,  21 crore and HPCL had spent Rs.8.41, 20.59, 16.30 
crore respectively during the same period.  The Committee have  been informed that 
IOCL is facing multiple constraints at Chennai port major being the lack of berthing 
facility for Very Large Crude Carriers (VLCC).  Similarly, Jawahar Dweep Port at 
Mumbai receiving crude oil supplies for BPCL and HPCL is also ridden w ith constraints 
due to draft limitations, as the port has only Jetty no. IV which is very old and only 
capable Jetty for receiving larger parcel sizes.  This Jetty IV also needs urgent repairs 
for continuous safe operations.  Due to these draft limitations , HPCL and BPCL are 
incurring additional freight of 35% for each unloading tanker due to which OMCs incur 
huge demurrage costs.  However, the Committee have been informed that the matter 
had been taken up with Mumbai Port Trust by HPCL and BPCL for constru ction of an 
additional jetty V which unfortunately got shelved earlier. 
 The Committee strongly feel that the huge demurrage cost amounting to about 
Rs.665 crores during the three year period incurred by OMCs are totally avoidable and 
not due to uncontrollable factors. The Committee also deplore the slackness on the part 
of concerned officials of OMCs/MoPNG over the years for not pursuing the matter with 
due seriousness.  The Committee are also unhappy that Port Trust authorities have not 
been responsive to  the infrastructure requirements for import of crude oil which is an 
indispensable activity for the development of the Country.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend MoPNG/OMCs to intensify their efforts in pursuing the matter with 
concerned authorities for getting required infrastructure at various Ports handling crude 
oil imports. 

22 
 
25.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
submitted as below:- 
“Indian Oil is not facing any significant infrastructural constraints at its main crude 
oil discharge ports at Vadinar and Mundra on the West Coast and Paradip on the 
East Coast, as all these ports have installed Single Point Mooring (SPM) systems 
and are able to berth and receive crude oil through VLCCs (160,000 – 320,000 
DWT). However, IndianOil does face some constraints at Chennai, Karaikal and 
Chidambarnar ports due to limited draft availability. While the draft at Chennai 
port is limited to Suezmax (80,000 – 160,000 DWT) berthing, Karaikal can only 
handle vessels up to LR -1 (45,000 – 80,000 DWT) and Chidambarnar only up to 
MR tanker (25,000 – 45,000 DWT).  In -principle approval from Indian  Oil Board 
for construction of a SPM system at Ennore port (near Chennai) along with the 
associated facilities, has been obtained in Septembe r 2008. The pre -project 
activities have since been completed and DFR has been prepared. Form -1 has 
been submitted to Coastal Regulatory Zone Authority for obtaining clearance for 
the project after which environmental clearance shall be obtained. With the 
commissioning of the SPM, the existing constraint at Chennai port will be 
mitigated.  
As regards infrastructural constraints at the Mumbai Port, OMC Members are 
continuously following up with Mumbai Port Trust Authorities (MPT) regarding the 
demurrage/dead freight cost besides delay in crude receipt (at refineries) being 
incurred by the Oil Industry due to these constraints. On 14 th May 2013, during 
the interactive meeting between Oil Industry Members and Chairman, Mumbai 
Port Trust, it was decided to review  urgently the proposal for construction of 
additional Jetty/SBM at Mumbai, and accordingly a committee of oil Companies 
& MPT has been formed to look into all the issues. 
BPC and HPC have also approached Engineers India Limited, New Delhi to carry 
out a DFR Study for the construction of a New Jetty or SBM at Mumbai Port, for 
independent crude oil loading/unloading operations thru: 
o Fully loaded Suez Max Tankers of 140 TMT capacity 
o Fully loaded VLCCs at an SBM outside Mumbai Port limit or Partly  loaded 
VLCC within harbor limits.  
HPCL have also approached ONGC to explore possibility to utilize their spare 
capacity of SBMs at Mumbai High for the purpose of Crude Oil Unloading to 
HPC/BPC Refineries for which feedback from ONGC is awaited”. 
26.  In view of the high demurrage costs  being incurred by OMCs  due to 
infrastructure constraints  at various ports , the Committee had recommended 
MoPNG/OMCs to intensify their efforts in pursuing the matter with concerned 
authorities for getting required infrastructure at var ious Ports handling crude oil 
imports. As per information fur nished in reply of MOPNG , the efforts are  
underway to establish required infrastructure to mitigate the  draft limitations at 

23 
 
Chennai and Mumbai  port. Meanwhile as an intermediate measure , BPCL and 
HPCL have approached ONGC to permit them to use  ONGC's spare SBM capacity 
at Mumbai High for unloading crude oil supplies and in this regard awaiting 
ONGC’s response. While the Committee are satisfied with the efforts of HPCL and 
BPCL, desires that the y should diligently pursue the matter for creating required 
infrastructure at Mumbai port. The Committee wish to be informed regularly about 
the progress made in this regard. 
Recommendation SL.No /Para No.14 
FUNDS FOR CRUDE OIL FILLING IN STRATEGIC CAVERNS 
27. The Committee are given to understand that in line with the increase in the 
average price of Indian basket of crude oil, the cost of filling of crude oil in three caverns 
has also shot up to Rs.23,477 crore from Rs.8870 crore, registering an increase of 165 
percent since 2005.  The Committee are constrained to point out that the huge funding 
needed for filling the caverns with crude oil is yet to be arranged as till now no funds 
have been allocated for the purpose.  With an almost completed cavern at V izag and 
other two at Mangalore and Padur nearing completion, the delay in arranging finances 
for crude oil filling is a matter of serious concern for the Committee pointing towards 
lack of adequate seriousness of authorities towards the project.  The Comm ittee, 
strongly recommend for an immediate action by MoPNG/ISPRL regarding the matter of 
allocation of adequate funds to fill the storage cavern with crude oil and desire to be 
apprised soon of the progress made. 
28. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural G as submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
 “As regards the filling of crude oil in the strategic caverns, Rs.4948.00 crore has 
been allocated by the Planning Commission as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) 
for 12th Five Year Plan.  Various options are being examined to assess whether 
part of the crude cost can be financed on PPP basis”. 
29. The Committee noted that there had been 165% cost  escalation in the 
expenditure of filling crude oil in the strateg ic ca vern si nce the year 2005, 
therefore, had raised concern on the delay at part of MoP&NG/ISPRL in arranging 
the wherewithal for the purpose.  On per usal of the Action Taken Reply  of 

24 
 
MoP&NG, it has been observed that out of the total sum of Rs. 23477 crore 
needed for filling the crude oil , only Rs. 4948 crores i.e. 21% of required amount 
has been allocated by Planning Commission as gross budgetary support towards 
this purpose. Though the Ministry  is striving hard to arrange funds on PPP basis 
along with other options, the Committee are concerned to note that there is still 
considerable shortfall and this calls for an urgent action and multi -pronged 
efforts on the part of Government , for raising funds for the project and must not  
therefore leave any stone unturned to arrange finances at the earliest. The 
Committee wish to be kept informed of the development in the matter.     
  

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
DIVERSIFICATION OF SOURCES OF OIL SUPPLYING COUNTRIES 
  
The Committee note that crude oil refining capacity of the country of both public 
sector and private sector is 213 MMTPA. The Companies procure bulk of their crude oil  
requirements from oil exporting countries depending upon the specification of their 
Refineries. The Committee further note that during 2011 -12, out of 171.73 MMT of 
crude oil, 69% was imported from Middle East, imports from Africa accounted for 18% 
while South America accounted for 8%. The Committee note that OMCs are working 
towards diversifying their crude oil sources to effectively tackle any possible supply 
disruption.  
  
But surprisingly, the planned crude oil purchase of OMCs for the year 2012 -13 
from the middle east countries has again been scaled up to 79% against the smaller 
quantities of 5% from the West Africa and  7%, proposed to be purchased from other 
countries.  The Committee have been informed that this is due to geographical proximity 
as we ll as due to type of crude required for the refineries.  The Committee while 
appreciating the economic compulsions of importing from a neighboring region would 
caution the MoPNG/PSUs from excessive dependence on any one region for their 
procurement.  The C ommittee therefore recommend that the concerted efforts should 
be made by MoPNG and PSUs to minimize the dependence on any single country or 
region to ensure that the country's crude oil supplies do not get adversely affected in 
case of geopolitical proble ms in any region and should plan accordingly for diversifying 
geographical sources. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
India (specifically PSU OMCs) is heavily dependent on supplies of crude oil from 
Middle East Gulf considering its proximity.  However, Oil companie s are constantly 
trying to diversify their supply sources based on suitability and economics. Besides, Oil 
PSU‟s continuously evaluate the technical feasibility of processing crude oils from 
various geographical regions. Once a crude is found technically/financially acceptable in 
the refinery system, quantities under the term contracts are suitably adjusted with a 
view to diversify the sources of supply to the extent possible in order to ensure security 
of supply.   
 
Procurement of crude from spot market is  against tenders floated for a type of 
crude namely, Low Sulphur or High Sulphur irrespective of any particular geographical 
region.  In order to diversify the sources, attempts are also made to purchase 
opportunity crudes in smaller parcels sizes for processing along with other regular crude 
oils. 
 

26 
 
IndianOil‟s new grassroot refinery of 15.0 MMTPA capacity being put up at 
Paradip will have the capability to process up to 6 MMTPA of heavy sour crude oil 
besides processing regular HS crude from Middle East re gion.  IndianOil is planning to 
source heavy crude oil for this refinery from Latin American countries, which would help 
in increasing the sourcing from this region, which has been very limited so far.  Efforts 
are also being made on a continuous basis to enlarge the crude oil import basket.  
During 2012-13, 33 new crude oil grades were included in IOC‟s crude oil import basket, 
based on requirement and technical acceptability. 
BPCL has taken up projects for bottoms up -gradation and related processes at 
Kochi as a part of its Refinery expansion plans that would enable processing of heavier 
crudes available from various geographical regions. 
 
HPCL has also plans to put up bottoms up -gradation and new plants to enable 
processing of heavier crudes available from Latin America, Russia etc. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
 
Recommendation No.12 
STRATEGIC CAVERNS  
  
 The Committee note that work towards establishing the three strategic caverns at 
Vizag, Mangalore  and Padur having cumulative capacity of 5 MMT i.e. 1.33 MMT, 1.5 
MMT and 2.5 MMT respectively is progressing.  The Integrated Energy Policy 
recommends for cr eation of reserve equivalent to 90 days of crude oil import latest by 
2012-13. The current tapable storage capacity for holding commercial stock is around 
22.20 MMT and it is estimated that by 2014 an additional capacity of 8.62 MMT would 
also be established cumulatively creating a capacity of 30.82 MMT, sufficient to provide 
cover for 70 days.  However, for the remaining coverage of 20 days, phase II strategic 
storage projects have been approved by MoPNG for generating an additional capacity 
of 12.5 MMT by  establishing four caverns at Bikaner, Rajkot, Padur and Chandikhol. 
The preparation of Detailed Feasibility Report (DFRs) for these projects are also 
underway by Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) through their 
consultant, EIL.  However, the Committee have come to know that certain issues have 
impeded the progress of phase II project at Padur due to involvement of  large number 
of Project Displaced Families (PDF) and therefore, the capacity of Padur Cavern has 
been reduced from 5 to 2.5 MMT to minimize its impact on local population.   
  
Given the large requirement of funds needed for construction of caverns and to 
buy oil to store in these caverns and also taking into account the issues relating to 
project displaced families, the Committee  would advise the Ministry to revisit the 
strategy of underground storage caverns and study various other options like floating 
barges, identifying proven and extractable oil wells and declaring them as strategic 
reserve, etc.   
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The cost of constructing rock caverns is lower than other options like floating 
barges.  ISPRL caverns are being constructed at only $ 19 per barrel (even if the 

27 
 
revised costs are considered) which is very low by international standards. Also floating 
barges are more susceptible to external threats like war, and sabotage.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
FUNDING FOR CONSTRUCTION OF CAVERNS   
The Committee note that Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) is financing the 
construction of caverns which are built by ISPRL, a wholly owned subsidiary and special 
purpose vehicle launched by MoP&NG for establishing strategic storage caverns in the 
country.  The Committee have been informed that the construction cost of these 
caverns was estimated to be Rs.11267 crore in the year 2005 as per then market 
prices, comprising therein of Rs.2397 crore as the construction cost and Rs.8870 crore 
for filling the  crude oil in these strategic caverns. The Committee have been further 
informed  that the costs for these projects have now been revised and the capital costs 
stand at Rs.3958 crore for three storage caverns and the crude filling cost at Rs.23477 
crore assuming an average crude oil price US$115 per barrel at the rate of Rs.55.40 per 
dollar.     
The Committee desire that OIDB rendering financial assistance to these caverns 
and concurrently serving many other commitments, must not suffer fund crunch in order 
to ensure unhindered and timely completion of the projects.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to MoPNG that it should highlight the need for adequate funds for its 
strategic storage activities and impress upon Ministry of Finance to increase the fund 
availability to OIDB.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
With respect to the time and cost overrun, a Standing Committee was constituted 
to consider the time and cost overrun of Mangalore and Padur projects, etc. under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoP&NG.  The committee inter -alia approved 
Revised Cost Estimate (RCE) of Rs.1227 crore for the  Mangalore project compared to 
the original cost estimate of Rs.732 crore and RCE of Rs.1693 crore for the Padur 
Project compared to the original cost estimate of Rs.993 crore.  Now, the matter will be 
placed before the Department Expenditure Finance Commi ttee (EFC) after funds are 
tied up.  In view of fund constraint with OIDB, Ministry of Finance has been requested to 
provide additional funds to cover the RCE. 
 
As regards the filling of crude oil in the strategic caverns, Rs.4948.00 crore has 
been allocated by the Planning Commission as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for 12 th 
Five Year Plan.  Various options are being examined to assess whether part of the 
crude cost can be financed on PPP basis. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
  
Recommendation No.15 
SAFETY OF CAVERNS 
 The Committee note that ISPRL is constructing underground strategic caverns in 
the country for the first time.  The Caverns are of different types namely concrete 
caverns, salt caverns and rock caverns.  This implies different technology for each type 

28 
 
of the cavern.  However, the Committee note that all the three caverns that are under 
construction are of rock type cavern.  The Committee have been informed that a 
rockslide accident occurred at construction site of Vizag cavern in one of its galleries 
after completion of 98 percent of excavation work causing delay in the project by 24 
months. The Committee have also been informed that underground excavation works 
are filled with geographical surprises at every step and ISPRL is taking requisite 
remedial measu res to avoid recurrence of such accident. The Committee therefore, 
desire ISPRL to take utmost care while executing their operations and must take 
necessary precautions for their forthcoming projects to ensure safe construction and 
operations of the project.                              
 The Committee note that some of these strategic caverns are located near sea 
and hence there is a need to protect aquatic life from any harm due to leakages from 
the caverns.  The Committee, have however, been informed that adequate studies have 
been done and measures taken to protect the aquatic life and also prevent any 
leakages from cavern. 
 Keeping this in view, the Committee recommend that ISPRL should factor all 
possible risks and damages in the neighborhood due to any  untoward incidents like 
leakages, fire etc. to the environment and take all necessary preventive steps. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The design of the caverns is such that the crude oil is contained in the cavern 
compartments because of the hydro geological c ontainment principle. Water curtain 
galleries have been provided above the caverns and these galleries ensure that the 
rock is always saturated with water. The depth of the caverns are such that the pressure 
of water in the surrounding rock is always highe r than the pressure of the crude oil in 
the caverns. As a result of this, although rock is a permeable media, it will not be 
possible for crude oil to seep out of the caverns. The water level in the galleries is also 
monitored continuously. As the caverns are located near the sea, the water table in the 
area is stable. This will ensure that there is no risk of leakage from the caverns and 
there is no risk to the aquatic life in the region.  
ISPRL is adopting the best safety practices for its facilities. The  facilities will be 
audited by the Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), before they are commissioned.  
ISPRL is also complying with the conditions imposed by Ministry of Environment and 
Forest and the State Pollution Control Boards. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE 
Recommendation No.8 
PURCHASE OF CRUDE THROUGH LONG TERM CONTRACTS 
  
 The Committee find that oil PSUs purchase about 80% of their requirements by 
term contracts with NOCs and 20% through spot purchase.  The Committee have been 
informed that heavy crude (high sulphur) are purchased through Term Contracts.  Even 
though 34% of  global oil production is sweet crude (low sulphur), they are mostly 
consumed by the countries themselves and hence it is difficult to procure through term 
contract.  Hence the OMCs buy low sulphur grade variety through Spot Tenders to suit 
their refinery configuration and also to improve the yield in the refinery.  
  
The Committee have been informed that OMCs are trying to enter into Term 
Contract for purchase of low sulphur grades for its refineries which have not yielded 
results.  The Committee are of th e view that such issues should not be rest at PSUs 
level and need intervention and backing of the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should take up the matter at the highest political 
level and matters should be pursued regularly at diplomatic level also.  
  
The Committee have been informed that OVL has been acquiring overseas 
assets and production from these assets amounts to 8.75 MMTOE during 2011 -12 
some of which are sweet crude.  The Committee note that OVL ha s regularly sold 
significant quantities to MRPL, an ONGC group company.  Since the other OMCs are 
also in need of sweet crude for their refineries they may also be supplied by OVL.  The 
Committee desire that OVL and other PSUs having overseas assets should  give first 
priority to Indian refiners to meet their crude oil requirements before they sells their 
crude in the international market.         
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The extant policy guidelines to be followed by the oil PSUs with regard to import 
of cru de oil were issued by MOP&NG on 21.05.2001. According to the policy, all 
possible efforts should be made to first maximize term volumes with NOCs on OSP as 
pricing basis.  As and when any problem arises, MoP&NG is always willing to pursue 
the matter at the highest level with their counterpart in the concerned country.   
 
Also, ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) has equity sweet crude in Sakhalin -1 and 
Imperial, Russia, Sudan (North and South), Brazil, Syria, and Azerbaijan. Besides 
these, OVL has equity sour and hea vy crude from Colombia and Venezuela, and small 
quantities of condensate from Vietnam. OVL at present offers spot cargoes to Indian 
OMCs and subsequently tenders to International buyers when no interest is shown by 
Indian OMCs. OVL would be willing to offer these cargoes to Indian OMCs, through long 
term contracts. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
  

30 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
ALTERNATIVE PLAN FOR TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL 
  
 The Committee note that the country imports its crude oil requirements from 
different countries and regions like Middle East, Africa, Asia, South and North America, 
Eurasia, Europe etc. and that the crude oil is transported by cargo ships from these 
countries by using many important sea rout es.  The Committee are concerned with 
political turmoil and unrest in many regions of the world which may cause supply 
disruptions to the country. 
  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the MoPNG/OMCs should keep a 
watch on the geo political situation a long the sea routes used by ships which transport 
crude oil to the country and keep alternative plans ready in case such need arises so 
that the country does not suffer the supply crunch. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Committee‟s recommendation is noted.  In the event of any unforeseen 
event affecting the situation along the critical sea routes, efforts would be made to 
obtain crude oil from alternative sources in Latin America, West Africa and South East 
Asia. 
 
2. A  Memorandum of Understanding has been si gned in October 2011 between 
MoP&NG and International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris for co -operation on oil & 
gas security, in pursuance of the which, a joint India/ IEA Emergency Response 
Exercise (ERE) was conducted in May‟12 at New Delhi. The major objecti ves of 
the ERE are: 
i. Assist in identifying and improving understanding of near term oil & gas 
security risks for Indian Govt. and the industry in a global context. 
ii. Test & review national oil & gas supply disruption response procedures in 
India. 
iii. Assist the I ndian administration in the development of contingency plans 
for supply disruption response. 
iv. Strengthen bilateral cooperation between MoP&NG and IEA in oil & gas 
security and emergency preparedness. 
A follow-up meeting for detailed discussions on certain m ajor issues between the 
key stakeholders viz. MoP&NG, the Indian oil industry and the IEA, was held in 
New Delhi in June 2013.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No.1  
MINIMIZING DEPENDENCE OVER CRUDE OIL  
  
The Committee note that the Indian crude oil imports have been steadily 
increasing and the country imported 159 M MT in 2009, 163.6 MMT in 2010 and 171.7 
MMT in 2011. In the global scenario, the country is 6th largest importer of crude oil and it 
constituted 9.1 percent of total crude oil imports in 2011 increasing from 8.4 percent in 
2009.  The Committee find that though India is deficient in crude oil and importing 80 
percent of its requirements, the energy m ix of the country is predominantly skewed 
towards crude oil for its energy requirements.   
 Since natural gas has emerged as an important fuel worldwide because of 
inherent advantages over other fuels by being more fuel efficient and environment 
friendly, the Committee would like the Government to shift decisively to gas based 
consumption in preference to oil by increasing the percentage of gas imports in the 
overall import basket.  Since, the discovery of huge deposits of shale gas worldwide has 
spawned of f new hope in meeting future energy requirements, the Committee 
recommend that India should also take advantage of this development and promote use 
of gas in meeting its energy requirements so that dependency on crude oil could be 
brought down.  The Committee therefore desire that MoPNG should prepare a strategic 
plan in this regard to consciously shift the energy consumption pattern.             
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.         As per the XII Plan document of Planning Commission, the share of oil in tot al 
commercial energy consumption in India is expected to decline from 31.5 per cent in 
2011–12 to 23.3 per cent in 2021 –22 and the share of natural gas and liquefied natural 
gas (LNG) is projected to rise from 10.3 per cent to 13 per cent in the same period. 
  
2.         The natural gas production in the country during the last three years (2010 -11 to 
2012-13) is as under: 
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         (In MMSCMD) 
Company/Regime 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
ONGC 63.3 63.9 64.52 
OIL 6.4 7.2 7.2 
PSC 73.4 59.2 39.70 
Total 143.1 130.3 111.4 
(MMSCMD – Million Standard Cubic Meters per Day) 
 
 
It may be seen that the gas production by ONGC and OIL over the last three 
years has remained almost constant or has marginally increased. However, during the 

32 
 
same period, the gas production under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime 
has decreased drastically, mainly due to fall in gas production from KG -DWN-98/3 (KG-
D6) block. 
 3.         The Government has taken several steps to increase the natural gas production 
in the country to encourage use of this clean and green fuel. Apart from exploration and 
production of conventional gas, various unconventional sources of gas are being 
pursued. The details are as under: 
i.            In order to accelerate exploration and production of oil/gas, so far 254 
exploration blocks have been awarded under nine rounds of New Exploration 
Licensing Policy (NELP). A total of 124 discoveries have been made under NELP 
till date in 41 blocks of which 78 are gas discoveries, including major gas 
discoveries in East Coast. Under NELP In-place gas volume of about 704 Billion 
Cubic Meters  (BCM) has been established as on 01.04.2013. Current gas 
production from NELP blocks is about 14 MMSCMD. 
ii.          As far as unconventional energy source of natural gas is concerned, so far 33 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) blocks have been awarded through nomination as well 
as four bidding rounds. In -Place CBM volume to the tune of 9.9 Trillion Cubic 
Feet (TCF) has been established so far in 8 blocks. Commercial CBM production 
had commenced from one blo ck in West Bengal in 2007. Development activities 
are currently in progress in another 6 CBM blocks. It is estimated that the current 
CBM production of 0.38 MMSCMD is likely to increase to about 4 MMSCMD by 
2016-17. 
iii.         The presence of gas hydrate s have been established in Krishna Godavari, 
Mahanadi and Andaman offshore areas during “Expedition -01” carried out in 
2006. It is planned to undertake “Expedition -02” in future to carry out drilling and 
coring activities in identified locations in offshor e, subject to the approval of the 
Steering Committee of National Gas Hydrate Programme(NGHP). Currently, 
there is no technology available for commercial production of gas from gas 
hydrates, which are mostly under R & D stage. 
iv.          Resource estimati on for shale gas /shale oil have been taken up by several 
agencies in selected basins/sub -basins  in India, such as Cambay, Cauvery 
onland, KG onland, Ganga, Gondwana and Assam -Arakan etc. GoI has 
formulated a draft Shale gas/Shale oil Policy which is curr ently under final 
approval process. Further, MoP&NG has entered into MoU with Department of 
State, USA for co-operation in various areas related to Shale Oil/Shale Gas. 
 4.         The projected natural gas production in the country during the current year  and 
next three years (2013-14 to 2016-17) is as under: 
                                                                                                          (In MMSCMD) 
Company/Regime 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
ONGC 64.2 73.0 77.3 105.9 
OIL 7.5 10.9 11.2 11.5 
PSC 33.6 34.6 38.4 45.2 
Total 105.3   118.5 126.9  162.6 
  
(The above projections are based on estimates of domestic gas production in XII Plan 
Document and data submitted by ONGC & OIL to DGH subsequently) 
  

33 
 
5.         National Oil Companies have been employing the best in class technologies for 
pursuing the objective of improving production from their oil fields/wells.   These 
measures include application of state -of-art and fit for purpose technologies suited for 
western offshore re servoirs. ONGC has adopted the latest technologies in the area of 
Drilling operations, Well completion, Stimulation, Work over Operations, Artificial Lift, 
Water Injection, Offshore Production facilities and remote monitoring/control of 
operations and production optimization. 
  
6.       The Government has appointed a Committee on “Roadmap for Enhancing 
Domestic Oil & Gas Production and Sustainable Reduction in Import Dependency by 
2030”, Chaired by Dr. Vijay Kelkar with various Terms of Reference (ToRs)   including “ 
Steps to be taken for enhancing domestic Oil and Gas production from the 
Unconventional as well as Conventional Energy Sources”. The Committee is to submit 
the report within six months. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.2  
 
NEED FOR A JOINT VENTURE COMPANY  
  
 The Committee note that the total crude oil import for 2012 -13 by PSU oil 
companies is estimated at 120 MMT.  Among these PSUs, import by IOC is placed at 
66.3 MMT, BPCL at 22.80 MMT, HPCL at 17 MMT and MRPL at 14.40 MMT.   
  
The Committee note that till July 1998, the entire requirement of crude oil imports 
was canalized through Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), the sole canalizing agency. 
Thereafter the crude oil import was decanalized and private and joint sector refineries 
were allowed to procure their own requirement of crude oil.  Import of crude oil was 
further decanalized from April 2002,  with all PSU oil companies being permitted to 
import crude oil independently to meet their refinery configuration through term 
contracts and spot tenders in accordance with the guidelines issued by MoPNG. The 
Committee, however, note that purchase of crud e oil is a complex process which 
involves negotiations of contract with NOCs or floating of tenders, shipping 
arrangements, unloading at ports, transporting to refineries etc. are to be made by the 
OMCs. The Committee also note that private refiners are ab le to procure crude oil at 
lower prices.   
  
The Committee are of the view that lot of resources of OMCs are spent on this 
activity. Instead of all oil  PSU's carrying out  purchase of crude oil, the Committee 
recommend for the formation of a joint venture company promoted by all interested 
PSUs and  entrusted with the work of importing of crude oil required for them in line with 
their refining specifications.  The Committee desire that this company may be given 
enough flexibility as enjoyed by private sector refineries to carry out their operations 

34 
 
including price negotiation, hiring of ships and negotiate better terms on freight etc. 
which will help PSUs save lot of work relating to imports. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4. In August 1979, based on a Cabinet decision, the Empowered Standing 
Committee (ESC) comprising Chairman, IndianOil, Joint Secretary, MoP&NG, 
Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor, MoP&NG and Joint Secretary,  Department of 
Economic Affairs was formed as a response to the second crude oil shock, in 
order to enhance flexibility and quick deci sion making. The ESC, as per the 
formation directive, was required to deal with organizing adequate import of crude 
oil & petroleum products through bilateral negotiations with National Oil 
Companies (NOCs) as well as purchase the same from the spot market. 
 
5. Till July 1998, the entire requirement of crude oil import was canalized through 
IndianOil. With deregulation of the Indian refining sector, effective from 01.04.1998, 
there was a need to decanalize crude oil import for the private and joint sector 
refineries and accordingly crude oil imports were decanalized w.e.f. July 1998.  
Subsequently, the Cabinet, in its meeting held on 13.03.2001, allowed the other oil 
PSUs to import their own crude oil requirement in a phased manner.  The Cabinet 
also decided th at the procurement of crude oil through the tender route be 
continued through company specific ESCs constituted on the lines of the ESC of 
IndianOil. Accordingly, effective April 2002, separate ESCs were constituted for 
HPCL and BPCL, and in July 2003 for MRPL. 
 
6. Setting up a JV for procurement of crude oil may not be appropriate for the 
following reasons: 
 
3(i)  Individual PSUs have distinct and unique requirements which would be difficult to 
aggregate through a JV, as indicated below: 
 
 Varying configuration of refineries govern the crude diet of the particular 
refinery. 
 Continuously changing refinery economics due to changing market 
fundamentals. 
 Varying levels of requirement of each refinery based on economics, market 
demand, environmental norms, etc. 
 Technical factors specific to a particular refinery, infrastructural constraints, 
shutdowns – planned & unplanned, etc. 
 
3(ii)   Crude oil procurement process, within an individual company involves, very close 
coordination between its various refin eries, procurement group, commercial/ 
shipping and operations groups. It would not be feasible for the JV company to 
undertake this coordination on behalf of individual CPSUs, given the size and 
scale of operations.  Separating the procurement function fro m the associated 
functions, which are refinery specific, may lead to complications and become 
counter-productive. 
3(iii) Creation of a separate JV Company exclusively for procurement of crude oil may 
result in the creation of an additional establishment wi th associated costs, which 

35 
 
may or may not deliver commensurate benefits and may curtail the flexibility 
currently available to the refiners. 
3(iv) Procurement of crude oil through a JV Company could possibly result in tax 
implications to the partner oil PSUs, as given below: 
c. Procurement of crude oil through another entity like the JV Company will 
have sales tax implication. In order to avoid sales tax implications, the JV 
Company could act as a canalizing agency whereby the contract for 
purchase of crude oil could be entered into between the overseas supplier 
and the respective oil PSU and the bill(s) of lading could be prepared in the 
name of the oil PSU. Even in this case, the commission charged by the JV 
Company for its services would attract service ta x. Therefore, importing 
crude oil through a JV Company will increase to some extent the cost of 
procurement due to tax implications. Besides, it is very likely that some of 
the suppliers may not agree for these kinds of arrangements. 
d. The other option is fo r the JV Company to not act as an agent but to import 
crude oil in its own name and then transfer the title of the goods as high sea 
sales i.e. transfer of goods before entering the Indian customs area to the 
respective oil PSU. While in such transaction t here would be no service tax 
implication, however, there have been in the past issues with tax authorities 
due to lack of clarity relating to sales tax implications, which have not yet 
been resolved.  
    
4. Since OMCs are different entities competing in t he market for selling their 
products, hence centralization of crude oil procurement may affect the competitiveness 
in market and may result in conflict of interest.  
 
5. In view of above, creation of a separate joint venture company exclusively for the 
procurement of crude oil may lead to creation of an additional establishment with 
associated costs but with no commensurate benefits and is also likely to curtail the 
flexibility currently available to refiners to process certain mix of crude as per their 
processing plan.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.3  
COOPERATION AMONG OIL IMPORTING COUNTRIES 
  
The Committee note that high volatility in crude oil prices which has fluctuated 
from $ 25 per barrel to $110 per barrel during the past decade has greatly impacted 
finances of developing countries like India which is required to import 80% of crude oil 
to meet its energy requirements.  The Committee have been informed that if the price of 
crude oil increases by one dollar the country has to bear an extra burden of Rs 4000 cr. 
Though hardening in crude oil prices is largely due to increase in its  demand, t he 

36 
 
Committee feel  that extraneous factors including speculation, strategic cut down  in 
production by oil exporting countries, geo -political factors like instability in oil producing 
regions  etc. could also be reasons for higher prices of crude oil rathe r than supply -
demand  mismatch.   
  
The Committee feel such high crude oil prices would be a burden on the finances 
of any country especially developing countries like India  as it will restrict the allocation 
of funds for other social programmes like education, health and irrigation etc.  While the 
Committee understand the need for price discovery in the market place in a free market 
scenario, it could not ignore the fact that this has led to huge volatility and one sided 
increase in prices has drained  away precious resources from many developing 
countries like India. 
  
The Committee learn that more than 90% of crude oil is imported by six 
countries/regions which also includes three Asian countries namely, China, India and 
Japan.  Needless to say that d emand in these countries have a bearing on the crude oil 
prices. The Committee however, note that though there are bodies like International 
Energy Agency (IEA) for enhancing the cooperation amongst various players in the 
global energy market, there is no forum for oil importing countries to strategize on the 
fluctuations in the international price of crude oil.   
  
The Committee further note that the OMCs enter into contracts for supply of 
crude oil with National Oil Companies of oil exporting countries.  As per the standard 
international practices, these contracts are guided by the General terms and conditions 
which are common to all buyers.  The Committee have however, been informed that the 
terms of sale are predominantly in favour of NOCs.     
  
In view of the above, the Committee would like to emphasize that fair price for 
crude oil is an imperative for equity and justice to global human community and  
therefore, recommend  that MoPNG/Government should coordinate with other importing 
countries and take up the issue of fair prices for crude oil through international 
institutions. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Crude oil resources are not uniformly spread in the world and only limited 
number of countries are significant producers of crude oil. This clearly divi des the world 
into oil exporting and oil importing nations. India is the fourth largest oil consumer in the 
world after the United States, China, and Japan.  India depends heavily on imported 
crude oil, mostly from the Middle East.  The majority of Organiz ation for Economic Co -
operation and Development (OECD) countries are also net importers of crude oil and 
their economics would also struggle without global security in the oil export market. 
 
Following points are worthy of mention where appropriate action is being taken or 
could be taken in line with the recommendations of the Standing Committee:- 
 
e. International Energy Forum (IEF), Riyadh is a body which provides a common 
platform for both crude oil consumers as well as producers for fair energy trade, 

37 
 
and international cooperation. India, along with other major crude oil importing 
countries, can use this body to take up the matter regarding crude oil price 
volatility and fair price through dialogues with major oil exporting countries. 
 
f. India is developing i ts Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR).  These strategic oil 
reserves could help in stabilizing oil prices since they can be utilized, whenever 
there is increase in prices due to any supply disruption caused by disruptive 
events like force majeure, politica l unrest in crude oil supply region or shipping 
route.  Potentiality of SPR could be enlarged in collaboration with other large 
importers of the region.  
 
g. India, in collaboration with other major crude oil importing countries of the region, 
may acquire more and more crude oil producing assets overseas to secure crude 
oil supplies, thereby reducing dependence on oil exporting nations.   
 
h. To ensure security of  demand for crude oil exporting countries and security of 
supplies for crude oil consuming countries, the exporting and the consuming 
countries could work together through criss -cross investment.  India could, 
therefore, look for long term crude oil supply  contracts with crude oil exporting 
countries with tie -up of crude oil volumes along -with investment by such 
countries in Indian refineries and other areas of the downstream sector. There 
could also be collaboration in projects like construction of transna tional pipelines 
for bringing in the crude oil from land locked and isolated oil rich countries to the 
nearby sea ports. 
 
As regards the concern of the Standing Committee that the oil PSUs enter into 
contracts for supply of crude oil with NOCs of oil expor ting countries, wherein the terms 
of sale are predominantly in favor of the supplier NOCs, these NOCs sell their crude oil 
at Official Selling Price (OSP), which is uniformly applicable to all the buyers of a 
particular region, irrespective of the quantities procured by them. These crude oil supply 
contracts are guided by the General Terms & Conditions of the seller, which are not 
only as per the standard international practices but are also uniformly applicable to all 
buyers.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.9  
CRUDE OIL IMPORT ON CFR/FOB BASIS 
  
 The Committee note that crude oil purchased from various countries are 
transported on cargo ships.  The Committee further note that there are different models 
of booking the cargo like FOB basis where the buyer arranges the ship and insurance to 
cover loss or damage to the goods, whereas in CIF the seller bears costs, freight and 
insurance and CFR includes Cost and Freight.  The Committee further note that the 

38 
 
guidelines issued by Ministry of Shipping provides that  OMCs can source their crude oil 
on FOB basis only, which the OMC‟s have informed would increase transportation costs 
to them.  This policy, however, also adversely affects the opportunities of OMCs to 
purchase those grades of crude oil which are available solely on CIF/CFR basis and 
many a times at considerably cheaper rates. The Committee have also been informed 
that these shipping guidelines are relaxable and crude oil allowed to be purchased on 
CIF/CFR on case to case basis after approval by Ministry of Shipping.  The Committee 
have been inform ed that international oil companies also prefer to supply crude oil on 
CFR basis only.   
  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas may seek the power to approve import of crude oil on CFR/CIF basis by OMCs to 
itself from Ministry of Shipping.  The Committee also desire Ministry to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Shipping for relaxing the guidelines to enable OMCs to 
purchase on CIF/CFR basis so as to benefit from the opportunities in the market and for 
doing away with the need of approval of Ministry of Shipping in every case. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
MoP&NG has been taking up the matter with Ministry of Shipping (MoS) for 
permitting Oil PSUs to import crude oil on FOB as well as CFR basis.  In response, MoS 
had in January 2013 conveyed that the oil PSUs may approach MoS for grant of No 
Objection Certificate for CFR imports on a case-to-case basis. 
The MoS stand of allowing CFR imports on case -to-case basis does not, 
however, address the issue because obta ining permission on a case -to-case basis will 
be cumbersome and time consuming, and in all probability by the time such permission 
is received from the MoS, the opportunity would also have been lost. The stand of MoS, 
therefore, continues to be an impediment in the crude oil procurement process of the oil 
PSUs. 
 
Therefore, MoP&NG has again requested MoS to allow oil PSUs to import crude 
oil on both CFR as well as FOB basis.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.14  
FUNDS FOR CRUDE OIL FILLING IN STRATEGIC CAVERNS 
  
The Committee are given to understand that in line with the increase in the 
average price of Indian basket of crude oil, the cost of filling of crude oil in three caverns 
has also shot up to Rs.23,477 crore from Rs.8870 crore, registering an increase of 16 5 
percent since 2005.  The Committee are constrained to point out that the huge funding 
needed for filling the caverns with crude oil is yet to be arranged as till now no funds 
have been allocated for the purpose.  With an almost completed cavern at Vizag and 

39 
 
other two at Mangalore and Padur nearing completion, the delay in arranging finances 
for crude oil filling is a matter of serious concern for the Committee pointing towards 
lack of adequate seriousness of authorities towards the project.  The Committee , 
strongly recommend for an immediate action by MoPNG/ISPRL regarding the matter of 
allocation of adequate funds to fill the storage cavern with crude oil and desire to be 
apprised soon of the progress made. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As regards the filling of crude oil in the strategic caverns, Rs.4948.00 crore has 
been allocated by the Planning Commission as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for 12 th 
Five Year Plan.  Various options are being examined to assess whether part of the 
crude cost can be financed on PPP basis. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINALREPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation NO.5 
REVIEW OF GUIDELINES 
  
The Committee note that the guidelines laid down by the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas to be followed by PSU OMC‟s with regard to import  of crude oil had been 
last revised in 2001 and no changes have been made in the past 12 years.   
  
The Committee note that these guidelines lays down the procedure to be 
followed by OMCs to enter into Term Contracts with NOCs and also provides a list of 
MNCs which can be approached for sourcing the crude oil re quirements. The guidelines 
also specify the powers of Empowered Standing Committee of OMCs and that of 
Ministry in approval of these contracts.     
  
The Committee are of view that  these guidelines should enable the OMC‟s to 
follow  a transparent and effi cient  procedure to import crude oil and should not place 
any hurdle in  availing any opportunity to buy required type of crude oil at lower prices.  
The Committee feel that the guidelines has to reflect  the present structure of the 
international oil mark et which has undergone lot of changes since 2001 and therefore 
recommend MoP&NG to review the guidelines  in consultation with OMC‟s to widen 
their purchase opportunities by simultaneously providing for necessary  safeguards and 
monitoring mechanisms to bring about transparency and accountability .   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The extant policy guidelines to be followed by the oil PSUs with regard to import 
of crude oil were issued by MOP& NG on 21.05.2001. According to the policy, all 
possible efforts should be made to first maximize term volumes with NOCs on OSP as 
pricing basis.  Thereafter, attempts should be made to finalize term contracts with NOCs 
not having OSP and then with the short listed crude exporting MNCs.  
 
A proposal for amending the said policy guidelines was submitted by BPC to 
MoP&NG on 27.02.2013, which in turn was circulated by MoP&NG on 11.03.2013 to all 
the other oil PSUs seeking comments. Upon receiving the comments, MoP&NG has on 
11.06.2013 directed IndianOil to constitute an Industry Working Group (IWG) 
comprising IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL and MRPL to deliberate on the issue of 
amendments to crude oil import policy.  Appropriate action would be taken after receipt 
of IWG recommendations. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I) 
  

41 
 
 
Recommendation NO.6 
 
REVISION OF LIST OF MNCs IN THE GUIDELINES 
 
 The Committee observe that Public Sector Oil Companies enter into contract with 
National Oil Companies (NOC‟s) of oil exporting nations having surplus quantities of 
crude oil, which may or may not have Official Selling Price (OSP).  This is in accordance 
with the guidelines issued by MoPNG in 2001. Besides, MNCs mentioned in the list as 
part of guidelines, may also be approached by OMCs for sourcing the crude oil 
requirements. The Committee note that this list which forms the basis of crude oil 
agreements e ntered between National OMCs and Multinational Oil Companies 
remained static since 2001.   
  
In the changing market scenario and due to mergers and acquisitions, the 
Committee feel this list should be amended and regularly updated, thereby providing an 
authentic base for locating appropriate seller. The Committee would therefore, 
recommend Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to revise this list immediately and 
also regularly review the MNC list in future in accordance with developments in the 
international oil market.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The extant policy guidelines to be followed by the oil PSUs with regard to import 
of crude oil were issued by MOP& NG on 21.05.2001. According to the policy, all 
possible efforts should be made to first maximize term volumes with NOCs on OSP as 
pricing basis. Thereafter, attempts should be made to finalize term contracts with NOCs 
not having OSP and then with the short listed crude exporting MNCs.  
 
A proposal for amending the said policy guidelines was submitted by BPC to 
MoP&NG on 27.02.2013, which in turn was circulated by MoP&NG on 11.03.2013 to all 
the other oil PSUs seeking comments. Upon receiving the comments, M oP&NG has on 
11.06.2013 directed IndianOil to constitute an Industry Working Group (IWG) 
comprising IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL and MRPL to deliberate on the issue of 
amendments to crude oil import policy.  Appropriate action would be taken on receipt of 
the IWG report. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

42 
 
Recommendation NO.7 
 
PURCHASE OF DISTRESS CARGOES 
  
The Committee note that OMCs normally source their crude oil requirements 
through Term Contracts and Spot purchases to suit their refinery configuration.  The 
Committee have been informed that there are opportunities that exist in the international 
oil mar ket when sale of distress cargoes takes place at lower than market prices.   
However, the MoPNG guidelines does not permit OMCs to buy crude oil from distress 
cargoes.  
 The Committee are of the view, that in these days of high oil prices, any 
opportunity to procure crude oil at lesser prices should be made use of as it will reduce 
the cost of purchase and benefit OMCs to improve gross refining margins.  The 
Committee therefore, recommend that MoPNG should allow OMCs to procure certain 
percentage of their annual crude requirement through distress sale route and review the 
experience after reasonable period. 
 Also the Committee have been given to understand that if an NOC is not able to 
supply adequate quantity of a crude at OSP, oil companies can buy such crude from 
NOCs or specified MNCs at other than OSP.  However, it is necessary that such crude 
is seller's own equity crude or swapped with their own equity crude.   The Committee 
have come to know that oil companies are losing the opportunity of procuring  cheaper 
crudes because they are not swapped.  The Committee feel that the guidelines should 
permit the OMCs to procure the required type of crude at cheaper cost with transparent 
procedure.  Hence the Ministry should look at the present procedure and modi fy it so 
that different types of crude may be brought from different players in case the required 
quantity is not supplied by NOCs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A cargo becomes „distressed‟ when the seller is close to the delivery date and 
due to some reason t he cargo is not getting sold.  If prospective buyers become aware 
that a seller has a 'distressed cargo', the buyers will try to procure it at a cheap price.  
As distressed cargoes are generally available only on very prompt basis, chartering a 
tanker at s hort notice for lifting distressed cargoes on FOB basis would be difficult as 
well as costly on account of higher freight, and hence may not be viable. Moreover, it is 
very likely that on most of the occasions, distress cargoes may have already been 
loaded on vessels, and hence can be procured only on CFR basis. In order to derive the 
maximum advantage while procuring distress cargoes, it is necessary that the oil PSUs 
are permitted to procure distress cargoes on FOB as well as CFR basis. However, the 
present guidelines of the Ministry of Shipping do not permit the oil PSUs to source cargo 
on CFR basis. Therefore, in order to consider procurement of distressed cargoes, it is 
essential that oil PSUs are permitted to import crude oil on FOB as well as CFR basi s.  
MoP&NG has been taking up this matter with Ministry of Shipping from time-to-time. 
 
As regards the modification in the present procedure to procure the crude oil, as 
has been mentioned earlier, MoP&NG has directed Indian Oil to constitute an Industry 
Working Group (IWG) comprising IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL and MRPL to deliberate on 

43 
 
the issue of amendment to crude oil import policy.   Appropriate action would be taken 
after IWG recommendations are received. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation NO.11 
 
INFRASTRUCTURAL CONSTRAINTS 
 
 The Committee have learnt that OMCs are incurring huge expenditure on 
account of demurrage costs on domestic  ports due to lack of requisite infrastructure.  
The Committee have been informed that IOCL had incurred huge demurrage cost of 
Rs.328.58 cr, Rs.120.55 cr, Rs.98.02 crore for the years 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 2011 -
12, BPCL had incurred Rs.32,  24,  21 crore and HPCL had spent Rs.8.41, 20.59, 16.30 
crore respectively during the same period.  The Committee have been informed that 
IOCL is facing multiple constraints at Chennai port major being the lack of berthing 
facility for Very Large Crude Carriers (VLCC).  S imilarly, Jawahar Dweep Port at 
Mumbai receiving crude oil supplies for BPCL and HPCL is also ridden with constraints 
due to draft limitations, as the port has only Jetty no. IV which is very old and only 
capable Jetty for receiving larger parcel sizes.  T his Jetty IV also needs urgent repairs 
for continuous safe operations.  Due to these draft limitations, HPCL and BPCL are 
incurring additional freight of 35% for each unloading tanker due to which OMCs incur 
huge demurrage costs.  However, the Committee ha ve been informed that the matter 
had been taken up with Mumbai Port Trust by HPCL and BPCL for construction of an 
additional jetty V which unfortunately got shelved earlier. 
  
The Committee strongly feel that the huge demurrage cost amounting to about 
Rs.665 crores during the three year period incurred by OMCs are totally avoidable and 
not due to uncontrollable factors. The Committee also deplore the slackness on the part 
of concerned officials of OMCs/MoPNG over the years for not pursuing the matter with 
due seriousness.  The Committee are also unhappy that Port Trust authorities have not 
been responsive to the infrastructure requirements for import of crude oil which is an 
indispensable activity for the development of the Country.  The Committee therefore,  
recommend MoPNG/OMCs to intensify their efforts in pursuing the matter with 
concerned authorities for getting required infrastructure at various Ports handling crude 
oil imports. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Indian Oil is not facing any significant infrastructural constraints at its main crude 
oil discharge ports at Vadinar and Mundra on the West Coast and Paradip on the East 
Coast, as all these ports have installed Single Point Mooring (SPM) systems and are 
able to berth and receive crude oil through VLCCs (160,000 – 320,000 DWT). However, 
IndianOil does face some constraints at Chennai, Karaikal and Chidambarnar ports due 

44 
 
to limited draft availability. While the draft at Chennai port is limited to Suezmax (80 ,000 
– 160,000 DWT) berthing, Karaikal can only handle vessels up to LR -1 (45,000 – 
80,000 DWT) and Chidambarnar only up to MR tanker (25,000 – 45,000 DWT).  In -
principle approval from IndianOil Board for construction of a SPM system at Ennore port 
(near C hennai) along with the associated facilities, has been obtained in September 
2008. The pre -project activities have since been completed and DFR has been 
prepared. Form -1 has been submitted to Coastal Regulatory Zone Authority for 
obtaining clearance for th e project after which environmental clearance shall be 
obtained. With the commissioning of the SPM, the existing constraint at Chennai port 
will be mitigated.  
 
As regards infrastructural constraints at the Mumbai Port, OMC Members are 
continuously followi ng up with Mumbai Port Trust Authorities (MPT) regarding the 
demurrage/dead freight cost besides delay in crude receipt (at refineries) being incurred 
by the Oil Industry due to these constraints. On 14 th May 2013, during the interactive 
meeting between Oi l Industry Members and Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust, it was 
decided to review urgently the proposal for construction of additional Jetty/SBM at 
Mumbai, and accordingly a committee of oil Companies & MPT has been formed to look 
into all the issues. 
 
BPC and HPC have also approached Engineers India Limited, New Delhi to carry 
out a DFR Study for the construction of a New Jetty or SBM at Mumbai Port, for 
independent crude oil loading/unloading operations thru: 
 
o Fully loaded Suez Max Tankers of 140 TMT capacity 
o Fully loaded VLCCs at an SBM outside Mumbai Port limit or Partly  loaded 
VLCC within harbor limits.  
 
HPCL have also approached ONGC to explore possibility to utilize their spare 
capacity of SBMs at Mumbai High for the purpose of Crude Oil Unloading to HPC/ BPC 
Refineries for which feedback from ONGC is awaited. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.P-24012/3/2012-Sup.(Vol.-IV) dated 06.9.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 
12 February,  2014 
 23 Magha ,1935 (Saka)     
 
ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
Chairman,                                                    
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

45 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
 
EIGHTH SITTING 
(12.02.2014) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday the 12 th February, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Room No. ‘113’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Dr. Mehboob Beg 
4 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
6 Shri Ram Sundar Das 
7 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
8 Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9 Dr. Manda Jagannath 
10 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
11 Shri Somabhai Gandalal Koli Patel 
12 Shri Rao Saheb Danve Patil 
13 Shri P.L.Punia 
14 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
15 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
16 Smt. Kusum Rai 
17 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
18 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
19 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
20 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
     
  

46 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.         Shri A.K.Singh                                 -           Joint Secretary 
2.         Smt. Anita Jain                                 -           Director 
3.         Shri H. Ram Prakash                      -           Deputy Secretary 
2.         At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members.   The Committee then 
considered the following draft Reports: 
(i)         Action Taken Report on the subject „Long Term Purchase Policy and 
Strategic Storage of Crude Oil‟ 
            (ii)       ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****  ***** ***** ***** 
3.         The Committee adopted the above Reports and authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the Reports and present/lay the above Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
  
 
 
*Matter not related to the subject 

47 
 
Annexure II 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2013-14) ON ‘LONG TERM PURCHASE POLICY AND STRATEGIC STORAGE 
OF CRUDE OIL’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4,12,13 and 15) 
 4 
 Percentage to Total 27% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 8 and 10) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 13% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,9 and 14) 
 
5 
 Percentage of Total 33% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5,6,7and 11)  
4 
 Percentage of Total 27% 
 
 