21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report   
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2012-13)] 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2013/  Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 


2 
 
  
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the         
Sixteenth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2012-13)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/      Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14)……………………………..             (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..             (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report 
………………………………………………….                       
                   4 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government ……………………………       
                   
                      31 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………     
                    
                      87 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
                        88 
CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
                      113 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
Crude Oil Refined in Refineries and Capacity 
Utilization 
 
                      116 
II. 
Minutes of the First sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2013 -
14) held on 3.10.2013   
                      
                      117 
III. 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2012-13) on `Demands for Grants (2013 -14) 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’ 
                      120 

4 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2012-13) on „Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟, 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.04.2013. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in r espect of all the 
31 Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have be en accepted by the 
Government: SI. Nos. 7,8,9,10,13,14,15,17,18,19,20,21,22,24,25,26,27,28, 
29,30 (Total 20) 
               (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies SI. Nos.- Nil 
               (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - SI. No. 
1,2,3,4,5,6,11,12,23,31 and   (Total 10)     
   
               (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - SI. Nos. 16 (Total 1)                
(Chapter-V) 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final Replies in 
respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government (included in Chapter-V), should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  

5 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Plan and Non-Plan Schemes of MoP&NG 
 
5 The Committee note that the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas contains funds for plan schemes at Rs. 42 crores and Non -Plan Scheme at 
Rs. 65145.41 crore. The plan scheme are three namely (i) Establishment of RGIPT (II) 
Scheme for LPG connections to BPL families and (iii) Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves 
Ltd. (ISPRL). The Committee note further that the funds under non -plan schemes are 
mostly reimbursement of subsidy and the major component is compensation to OMCs for 
under recoveries, subsidies for PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG, subsidy to oil companies 
for supply of Natural Gas to N – E region etc. and the non-plan expenditure during 2013-14 
has been budgeted at Rs. 65145.41 crore.  
 The Committee note that the though the Minist ry has plan schemes namely RGIPT, 
ISPRL and the scheme for LPG connections to BPL families, they are shocked to observe 
that they have not seen any fund outgo last year.  It appears that the MoP&NG does not 
have any interest in implementation of plan schem es.  The Committee recommend that the 
plan schemes needs to be implemented by the Ministry with due seriousness coupled with 
regular monitoring at higher levels. 
 The Committee are of the view that energy mix is still predominantly in favour of oil 
and hence conservation of oil and gas, increased use of ethanol blended petrol, bio -diesel, 
PNG coverage to lower strata of society are some of the issues which need to be 
promoted.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that MoPNG should take the initiative to 
launch more plan schemes and seek funds to execute them.” 
 
6.  The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
“1. Fund outgo for the Existing Plan Schemes 
 
A. ISPRL : 
 
In the Annual Plan for 2012 -13, a token amount of  Rs.1 crore was shown against  
“Strategic Storage Programme for Storage of Crude Oil” for filling of the crude oil.  For 
filling the Strategic Reserves being constructed at 3 locations, i.e. Vishakhapatnam,  
Mangalore and Padur,  an amount of over Rs.23,500 crores is required during a 
period of four years, starting from the time the first cavern facility at Visakhapatnam is 
ready.   
 

6 
 
The physical and financial progress at the three locations as on 31.3.2013 is given in 
the table below:  
 Cumulative Physical 
Progress 
Cumulative Financial Progress*  
(Rs Cr) 
 Target Actual Target Actual 
Visakhapatnam 100 92*1 
997.99 873.24*1 
Mangalore 72.9 77.7 559.43 607.95 
Padur 74.9 77.1 
818.84 842.03 
*1 Shortfall  because of the poor geology encountered in one of the cavern galleries 
Since the first cavern at Vishakhapatnam is yet to be physically completed, therefore 
it was not possible to use any plan fund, that was earmarked for filling up of crude.  
This cavern is likely to be completed during the current financial year.  At that time, 
request will be made to Ministry of Finance for additional allocation.  The next cavern 
is due for completion only in 2014-15.  
B. RGIPT : 
The fund outgo in respect of RGIPT was af fected during  2012 -13 due to the failure 
of the Contractor to achieve progress in Civil Structural work at Jais as per the 
agreed schedule. Further, despite committing to catch -up plans to clear the backlog 
and despite follow up made by EIL, there was no significant improvement in 
performance at site and the Contractor failed to complete the work even within the 
revised time schedule.   Now, action has been taken by RGIPT to invite fresh tender 
for completion of the works.  
C. SCHEME FOR LPG CONNECTION TO BPL FAMILIES : 
 This scheme is being funded through CSR funds of oil CPSUs.  It has been 
decided not to utilize Plan funds for this purpose. 
Use of Ethanol Blended Petrol :  
1. The Government has decided  that 5% mandatory ethanol blending with 
petrol should be implemented across the country (excluding North -Eastern States, 
J&K, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep) by October, 2013.  Ethanol would be 
sourced only from domestic producers and not through imports.  
2. OMCs have already contracted about 40 crore liters of ethanol from domestic 
producers for supply during 2013-14.  Further tenders are also proposed to be 
issued.  
 
 

7 
 
Conservation of Oil and Gas  
1. MoPNG had set up the Petroleum Conservation Research Association 
(PCRA) as a registered society in 1978 to promote conservation of petroleum 
products in  major sectors of the economy like transport, industry, households and 
agriculture through direct techn ical assistance, R&D educational and training 
programmes and mass awareness campaigns.  PCRA‟s activities cover 
conservation of all energy sources, promotion of energy efficient equipment and 
additives, popularizing alternative fuels, environment protection etc.  
2. PCRA helps the government in finalizing policies and strategies for petroleum 
conservation, aimed at reducing excessive dependence of the country on oil and 
gas.  Funds for PCRA are provided by OIDB and hence no allocation of plan funds 
has been made. 
 
PNG COVERAGE OF THE ECONOMICALLY WEAKER STRATA OF SOCIETY  
As regards PNG coverage of the economically weaker strata of society, PNGRB 
grants authorization for development of city gas networks through bidding process 
under the provisions of the PNG RB Act, 2006 and the Regulations notified 
thereunder. The authorized entities supply PNG as part of the CGD network 
development in the respective authorized geographical areas.  
7. The Committee note that the action taken reply of the Ministry is silent on the 
specific recommendation of the Committee for launch of more plan schemes and for 
regular monitoring of the progress achieved in existing schemes.  The Committee 
are not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for nil fund outgo in the 
existing plan schemes namely ISPRL, RGIPT and the scheme for LPG connections to 
BPL families and feel that the primary reasons for this were lack of monitoring and 
timely intervention by Ministry/PSUs.    
 Since the MoPNG has hardly any plan scheme worth its name covering 
economically weaker sections of society,  the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and strongly urge the Ministry to take initiative for launch of more 
plan schemes by formulating programmes to expand the reach of cleaner fuels like 
CNG and PNG to rural areas as it will be the right step in the direction of inclusive 
development of the country and desire that the Ministry should seek plan funds for 
the schemes.  
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation No.  2 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
 
8. The Committee note that RGIPT is being set up at Jais, UP with the objective of 
creating an Institute of Excellence in the petroleum sector to cater to the educational and 
training requirements in India and globally.  The Committee however, constrained to note 
that the Institute which was scheduled for completion during the 11 th Plan has faced 
considerable delay and has now spilled over to 12 th Plan.  The academic activities  of the 
Institute which commenced in 2008 is currently functioning from a temporary campus.   
 The Committee note that land acquisition process for RGIPT has been considerably 
delayed for various reasons. Phase – I of the construction activity for the main  campus of 
the Institute on 47.8 acres of land, already in possession of RGIPT, started in August, 2010 
with completion target of two years.  The Committee are constrained to note that the work 
did not progress as per schedule due to poor performance of th e contractor and therefore, 
the completion schedule has been revised to June, 2014 with downsized commitments of 
contractor for completion of only six buildings out of 19 buildings on priority.  This has 
resulted in surrender of total allocated funds of Rs . 39 crores during 2011 -12 and Rs. 41 
crores in 2012-13.  
 The Committee are unhappy at the delay in execution of such prestigious project 
which reflects poor monitoring on the part of the Ministry as well as the consultant of the 
project, Engineers India Limited (EIL), which has expertise of executing large proje cts of 
international standards.  The Committee would like to advice the Ministry to look into the 
causes for delay and fix responsibility accordingly.  Penalty may also be imposed on 
contractor if provided in the contract.  Since the project has already be en much delayed, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry and consultant EIL should ensure that June, 
2014 deadline is strictly adhered to.  In the meantime, action be taken to complete the 
remaining buildings also in a definite time frame.  
 
9. The Minis try of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
“The main reasons for the delay in construction of RGIPT Campus at Jais and 
consequently not being able to complete the same within the 11 th Plan period are as 
follows: 
a) In view of the very slow progress and continual delay in acquisition of the required 
land (95 acres), by UPSIDC, RGIPT was not able to start the campus construction 
work as per the Master Plan. 
b) Work on the Jais campus was then taken up in the available 47. 8 acres of plot of 
land and the contract for Civil Structural work was awarded in June 2010. However, 
the   Contractor failed to   achieve the work progress as per the agreed schedule.  

9 
 
Though the Contractor submitted successive catch -up plans and even agr eed to 
complete 6 buildings on priority basis, their performance at site did not improve. 
Hence, it was decided to offload the balance un -executed work and float a fresh 
tender.  Meanwhile, the contractor served Arbitration notice and started litigation  i n 
Court. RGIPT, in order to recover the penalty and pursue other claims as per the 
contract has been contesting the case and the Arbitration process.  This 
development would affect the timeline of the project; however, necessary action is 
on-hand by EIL an d RGIPT to complete the campus buildings expeditiously.  The 
time frame will be fixed after the new contract is finalized”. 
 
  
10. The Committee had recommended that the RGIPT project which has been 
inordinately delayed due to poor performance of the contr actor be monitored closely 
by the Ministry and the consultant EIL to ensure that the revised deadline of June 
2014 for completion of six buildings  of the project  is strictly adhered to. The 
Committee are however constrained to note from the Action Taken R eply that due to 
the contractor not been able to improve the performance, a fresh tender is being 
floated which would further delay the project as a fresh timeline will be fixed after the 
new contract is finalized. While expressing their strong disapproval at the repeated 
shifting of the deadline for completion of this prestigious project, the Committee 
recommend that its completion should be given top priority and  all out efforts be 
made for  early completion and under no circumstances, the project be dela yed 
beyond June 2014. The Committee further urge the Ministry that action must be 
initiated for completion of the remaining 13 buildings expeditiously  within a definite 
time frame while the work related to the six priority buildings goes on. 
Recommendation No.  3 
LPG scheme for BPL families 
 
11. The Committee note that a token provision of Rs. 1 crore has been provided in 
2013-14 under the plan scheme „LPG Scheme for BPL Families‟ to provide one time 
assistance of Rs. 1600/ - per connection to BPL families t owards security deposit for the 
LPG cylinder and regulator. It is proposed to cover 70 lakh BPL families under the scheme. 
Though the scheme is envisaged as a plan scheme, it is being implemented as a CSR 
initiative by PSU oil companies and funds amounting  to Rs. 509.17 crore has been created 
from the contribution of these oil companies out of their CSR commitments. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that only Rs. 16.35 crore has since been utilized and 
only 169200 connections has been released so far. 

10 
 
 The Committee have been informed that release of lesser LPG connections under 
the scheme has been due to delay in authentication of the lists of BPL applicants submitted 
by the distributors to the local authorities. While expressing dissatisfactio n at the slow 
progress of the scheme, the Committee desires that the Ministry should be pro -active with 
State Governments/ local authorities in creating awareness about the scheme and sensitize 
them to give timely authentication of BPL list. The Committee fear that failing to do so may 
result in the scheme languishing without achieving the objectives. 
 The Committee also note that the implementation of the scheme is dependent upon 
the actual commissioning of RGGLVY distributorship. So far against a target o f 5578 
RGGLVYs, only 1740 have been commissioned and selection is in progress for the rest. 
The Committee express dismay over the lack of initiative for progress of scheme and 
henceforth desire that the Ministry should pursue the implementation of the sche me in a 
time bound manner and fix responsibility in case of delays. While emphasizing the early 
commissioning of remaining RGGLVYs. The Committee would recommend the 
implementation of the scheme through existing distributors as well so that the scheme take  
off smoothly in areas wherever the RGGLVs commissioning has not taken place. 
 The Committee also note that the scheme has not been widely publicized either by 
the Ministry or OMCs and so eligible persons are not aware of the scheme. The Committee 
feel that the scheme is well intentioned and to cover 70 lakh connections it needs proper 
publicity to create awareness among the eligible section of population. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should give wide publicity about the details of t his 
Scheme through popular mass media including newspapers, television etc. so that the 
eligible applicants can come forward for availing the benefits of this scheme. 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"LPG scheme for BPL families : 
 
A scheme for providing one time grant to BPL families in the rural areas for release 
of new domestic LPG connection under Rajiv Gandhi  Gramin LPG Vitaran Yojana 
(RGGLVY) is in operation. As per the scheme,  the security deposit for the domestic 
LPG cylinder and pressure regulator is  paid from a fund created through 
contributions from the Corporate Social  Responsibility (CSR) funds of ONGC, OIL, 
GAIL, BPCL, HPCL and IOC.  
Under the above mentioned scheme, the BPL ca rd holder can register with the 
distributor for release of a new LPG connection. The same is sent by distributor to 
local administration for authentication. Intimation letters are sent to the BPL card 
holders after receipt of authenticated list from local administration. 
Apart from the above, in recent past, Delhi Government has announced a scheme 
called „Kerosene Free Dilli” to make NCT Delhi Kerosene free. New domestic LPG 
connections are issued free of cost to BPL / AAY & JRC Card holders of Delhi who 

11 
 
were getting PDS Kerosene. In case of BPL/AAY Card holders, 50% of Security 
deposit of Cylinder & Pressure Regulator is borne by Delhi Government, remaining 
50% is met by OMCs through CSR Fund. For JRC(Jhuggi Resettlement Colonies), 
entire amount of Security  deposit Cylinder & Pressure Regulator is borne by Delhi 
Government.  In addition a 2 Burner Hotplate, Suraksha Hose, DGCC Book & 
Installation Charges are also provided by the Delhi Government to the beneficiaries 
under this scheme.  
As on 01.04.2013, total 2,54,773 nos. of new LPG connections (including  71410 
nos  of connections under Kerosene Free Dilli Scheme) have been  released to BPL 
families under the scheme by the OMCs and a sum of Rs.32.94 Crores has been 
spent in providing one time grant to BPL families. 
Release of connections under the CSR scheme is gaining pace with commissioning 
of more nos. of RGGLVs by OMCs. As on 01.04.13, 2055  nos. of RGGLVs have 
been commissioned by OMCs and have targeted issuance of 1637 number of LoIs 
for commissioning of RGGLVs during the year 2013-14. Number of LPG connections 
issued to BPL families through CSR is expected to rise with commissioning of these 
RGGLVs. 
In implementation of the CSR scheme, generally there is delay on part of the local 
administration in aut henticating the lists submitted by the distributor. OMCs 
vigorously pursue for authentication of the lists by local administration to speed up 
the process of release of connection to BPL families.   
Instructions are being issued to OMCs to undertake wider publicity of the scheme in 
various media in pursuance of the suggestions of the committee.  
  
 Moreover, OMCs are taking following steps to popularize the scheme :- 
(i)  RGGLVs have already been instructed to distribute leaflets, display  posters 
 etc and put up notice board at the distributorships to spread awareness 
 regarding the CSR scheme. 
 
  (ii) At the time to commissioning, training is being imparted to RGGLVs on the 
  procedure to be followed for enrolling BPL customers against CSR  fund. " 
 
13. The Committee note that the scheme for LPG connections to BPL families is 
being funded through the CSR funds of oil PSUs and  as on 1.4.2013, a total of  2.5 
lakh  LPG connections have been released to BPL families under the scheme against 
the  target of 70 lakh BPL families. The Committee express their displeasure over the 
slow progress and feel that in order to have desired focus for this scheme having 
large requirement of funds, it should be implemented by the Central Government 
rather than OMCs.  Since the scheme is getting  delayed due to v arious procedural 

12 
 
issues e.g.  authentication of BPL list by the state/local authorities, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry can handle such issues more effectively by coordinating wi th 
various agencies involved t o achieve speedy implementation. Since a major portion 
of the BPL population  remains to be covered by the scheme, the Committee 
reiterate that the Ministry should be proactive with the State Government and Local 
authorities and sensitize them to give early authentication of the list of BPL families.   
 The Committee have also observed that the scheme is being implemented 
through the RGGLVY distributorships only. Sin ce the RGGLVY network is not 
present uniformly across the country, many deserving individuals/families are being 
denied the benefit under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that the 
scheme must be implemented through Regular LPG distributorships also. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidies 
14. The Committee note that the Government has launched two schemes namely the 
"Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Scheme (DBTL)” and “Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy on 
PDS kerosene (DTCK)” for which pilot projects are being conducted at Mysore and 
Kotkasim Tahsi l, Alwar district (Rajasthan) respectively.  The scheme envisages that 
amount of subsidy is transferred to consumer‟s bank account and he can buy the products 
at market price. The Ministry has launched these initiatives in order to reform the current 
system of delivery of subsidized products.  The Committee welcome these schemes and 
hope that it will substantially reduce the diversion of subsidized LPG domestic cylinder and 
PDS kerosene and the resultant subsidy burden of the Government.    
The Committee note that to benefit from the above schemes, a consumer must have 
an AADHAR card linked with bank account. The Committee have been informed that the 
scheme can be launched only in those districts where AADHAR cards have been issued to 
at least 80% of the peo ple.  However, in the districts where the schemes have been 
launched on a pilot basis,  it has been found that the linkage between AADHAR number & 
bank account is only about 20% and only about 20 to 25 percent of the consumers are 
ready to receive the money directly through bank transfers. 
The Committee observe that a majority of population in India reside in rural areas where 
proper access to financial services is not available. The first step towards the 
implementation of this scheme requires financial inclusion of this rural population. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should impress upon Ministry of 
Finance & Reserve Bank of India for  extension of financial services to the rural areas. Post 
offices and co-operative banks may also be included for providing direct benefit of subsidy 
in cash to the public at large.   The Committee also desire that the Government should 

13 
 
organize financial literacy campaigns to familiarize public at large. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry s hould give wide publicity about  the direct benefit transfer 
scheme to create awareness so that people come forward to actively participate in the 
schemes by understanding the long -term benefits.  Therefore, the Committee is of the firm 
opinion that withou t attaining complete financial inclusion of the entire population by 
banking services as well as AADHAR cards, any move  by the Government to implement 
Direct Cash Transfer of Subsidies scheme should not exclude genuinely entitled population 
from the subsidy.  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
 "Ensuring access to and usage of quality financial services by all strata of the 
society, particularly the poor and those living in the rural areas, is an imp ortant 
priority of the Government of India.   The objective of Financial Inclusion is to extend 
financial services to the large hitherto un -served population of the country to unlock 
its growth potential.  In addition, it strives towards a more inclusive growth by making 
financing available to the poor in particular. 
2.    As per Census 2011, 58.7% households are availing banking services in the 
country.  This is a quantum jump from the earlier Census figures of 2001 where only 
35.5% of the households were r eported to be availing banking services in the 
country. There are 102,343 branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in the 
country as on 31st March 2013,   out of which   37,953 (37%) bank branches are in 
the rural areas and 27,219 (26%) in semi-urban areas, constituting 63 per cent of the 
total numbers of branches in semi -urban and ruralareas of the country. However, a 
significant proportion of the households, especially in rural areas, are still outside the 
formal fold of the banking system. To extend t he reach of banking to those  
outside the formal banking system, Government and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
are taking various initiatives from time to time. 
3. Under the Financial Inclusion Campaign - "Swabhimaan", to  
extend banking services to habitations  of 2000 or more population,  
banks have extended banking services to over 74,000 such habitations,  
primarily through Business Correspondent Agents (BCAs). BCAs have been  
engaged by Banks at other locations, both in rural and urban areas, as  
well. 
4.        Banks have now also been advised to ensure extension of banking facilities 
in the uncovered areas through Business Correspondent Agents (BCAs) / Common 
Service Centres (CSCs) on priority in all the districts identified for the Direct Benefit  
Transfer Scheme. 
5.    Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with the objective of increasing penetration and 
financial inclusion rapidly, had advised banks in July 2011 that while preparing their 

14 
 
Annual Branch Expansion Plan (ABEP), they should allocate at least 25 per cent of 
total number of branches proposed to be opened during the year in unbanked rural  
(Tier 5 and Tier 6) (population upto 9999)   centres. To facilitate speedier branch 
expansion in unbanked rural centres for ensuring seamless roll out of Direct Benefit 
Transfer Scheme of the Government of India, scheduled commercial banks have 
now been advised by RBI in May, 2013 that they may consider front loading 
(prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a 3 years cycle 
co-terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plan (2013-16). 
6. The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) so far has issued Aadhaar 
card to 35 crore residents of India.  The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is the 
implementing Ministry for Direct Benefit Transfer of LP G Scheme. It takes take 
necessary steps for mobilisation of LPF consumers for enrolment, Aadhaar seeding 
with LPG as well as with Banks. As per the reports, the percentage of Aadhaar 
generated in the 20 districts is 90.9%. 
7. The steps taken by UIDAI to facilitate DBT  are as follows. 
(i) Fast tracking of enrolment and Aadhaar generation for beneficiaries in Pilot 
 Districts. 
(ii) On-line monitoring portal for enrolment. 
(iii) Remote Aadhaar Seeding Framework (RASF) deployment. 
(iv) E-Aadhaar facility. 
(v) EID/UID mapping facility. 
 
16. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance has launched "Swabhiman" 
campaign to extend banking services in all the identified districts  on priority for 
implementation of the Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme.  Though action has been 
initiated by Ministry of Finance and UIDAI, the Committee  are concerned to note that 
the complete coverage of entire population by banking services and Aadhaar 
numbers will take time to be achieved. The Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should direct OMCs for carrying out the seeding of bank 
account and Aadhaar number details in their customer database at a faster pace. 
 The Committee are concerned that without ensuring complete financial 
inclusion and issue of Aadhaar cards t o entire population, implementation of the 
scheme may lead to exclusion of deserving individuals/families from subsidy 
domain. The Committee are of firm opinion that instead of completely switching over 
to the direct benefit transfer scheme (DBTL) as the o nly mode for availing LPG 
subsidy, the Ministry should  make the DBTL scheme voluntary and prevailing 
system of transfer of LPG subsidy should be continued until the financial inclusion 

15 
 
and Aadhaar card coverage of major chunk of population is completed. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that any step taken 
towards implementation of the scheme should not deny the benefits of LPG subsidy 
to any individual/family unit. 
Recommendation No.  5 
 
Under-recoveries of Petroleum Products 
 
17. The Committee in their recommendation had inter -alia stated that dual pricing of 
diesel has been introduced by OMCs to bulk consumers. This will entitle OMCs to sell 
diesel to bulk consumers at a non -subsidized market determined price. The Committee 
further note that 17.8% of the diesel was sold directly to large consumer segments like 
Defence, Railways, State Transport Undertaking, Power, Cement Manufactures etc. The 
Committee are of the view that the decision to sell higher priced diesel to Railways & STU s 
will have adverse effect on these agencies and consumers. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that these two segments may be exempted from dual pricing of diesel.  
18.     The Ministry of  Petroleum  and  Natural  Gas  submitted  following  reply to the  
above recommendation: 
 "As regards the exemption  from  dual  pricing  of  Diesel  to  Railways  and STUs, it 
 is mentioned that i n order to reduce under recovery of the Public Sector Oil 
 Marketing Companies (OMCs), the Government on 17 th January, 2013 
 authorized the OMCs to (a) increase the retail selling price of Diesel in the  range of 
 40 paisa to 50 paisa per litre per month (excluding VAT as applicable in different 
 State/Union Territories) until further orders; and (b) sell Diesel to all consumers  
 taking bulk supplies directly from the installations of the OMCs at the non -subsidized 
 market determined price effective 18 th January, 2013.  The Government has 
 received representations from various State Governments highlighting the difficulties 
 being faced by the STUs on purchase of Diesel at non -subsidized market 
 determined price.  However, it is within the domain of the State Governments to 
 provide appropriate relief to the STUs.  
  
 
19. The Committee had inter-alia recommended that Railways and State Transport 
Undertakings (STUs) may be exempted from  dual -pricing of diesel. The Committee 
have been informed that representations have been received from various State 
Governments highlightin g the difficulties being faced by the STUs on purchase of 
Diesel at non -subsidized market determined price. However, the Ministry has stated 
that the issue of providing appropriate relief to STUs falls within the domain of the 
State Governments.  The Commi ttee deplore the attempt made by the Ministry  to 
mislead the Committee as the decision to implement the Dual Pricing of Diesel was 

16 
 
taken by the Ministry/Central Government and State Governments do not have any 
role in this regard. The Committee, therefore , reiterate their earlier recommendation 
for exemption of Railways and State Transport Undertakings from  dual -pricing of 
diesel and urge the Government to take urgent action in order to avoid any adverse 
effect on the public at large. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Supply of subsidized domestic LPG cylinders 
20. The Committee note that a significant portion of the subsidy is incurred in supply of 
subsidized LPG cylinders to domestic consumers. The Committee also note that in order to 
reduce the subsidy burden on thi s account, the Government has taken a decision in 
September 2012 to limit the number of subsidized LPG cylinders to 9 per households in a 
year. In this regard, the Ministry has informed that his measure would result in a saving of 
Rs. 4274 crore per annum in the subsidy burden at current rate of subsidy of Rs. 461.58 
per cylinder. 
  To target the subsidized LPG cylinders to bonafide customers, the Committee note 
that OMCs have started implementation of Know Your Customer (KYC) norms to collect 
details about  their customers. The Committed have been informed that only new, 
deactivated, transfer connections are being subjected to KYC norm and existing customers 
have not been covered so far. The Committee wish to point out that removal of fake/ghost 
customers, e limination of customers with multiple connections is a must and for such 
issues, OMCs should create a robust and update customer database. Hence , the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry/OMCs should ensure that the KYC norms are 
implemented for the existi ng customers as well within the next one year and the database 
should be purified so as to reflect the real customers accurately. 
 The Committee further desire that the customer should be asked to fill in more 
information such as AADHAR number, bank account details and their income data under 
KYC norms since this will help in early implementation of the direct benefit transfer scheme. 
21. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
 "KYC form was designed to  ensure that standardised information is collected 
from all LPG consumers. The form is mandatory for all new connections. In so far as 
old connections are concerned, it is felt that the KYC compliance will have to be 
done in a phased manner due to the dela ys/ queing/ law and order problems in case 
all the consumers are asked to submit the form at once. Thus, the KYC drive was 
first limited to suspect duplicate customers.  
 
 The KYC collection drive for suspect duplicate 2.56 crore customers 
commenced in Sep tember 2012 and was brought to a close on 31st December 

17 
 
2012. On an average 6000 distributors collected 1500 KYCs each during the period. 
Even during this limited exercise of KYC, following difficulties were faced :-  
 
 As the KYC, Proof of Identity (PoI) a nd Proof of Address (PoA) verification at the 
LPG distributorship was a time consuming process, customer queues were 
witnessed, leading to occasional law and order problems. 
 For just the 15% KYCs that were collected during the period, the process took 
around 4-5 months time, thus a full scale operation would have to be spread out 
in terms of time.  
 Some of the State Governments requested to extend the period of collection and 
even not to pursue the KYC formalities due to local problems/ representations. 
 
In view of the above experience, it is expected that a full fledged KYC exercise can 
only be completed in a phased manner. KYC is anyway being insisted for all new 
connections. Detection of suspect duplicate/ ghost connections is an ongoing 
exercise  and currently KYC is being done for these connections. 
 
In so far as bank account is concerned, it has been included as an optional field in 
KYC. During Mysore pilot of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBTL) the customers were 
asked to provide bank account details. OMC e xperience suggests that most 
customers did not provide the same as they deemed it to be sensitive financial 
information and were not willing to part with it to the LPG distributors. Aadhar is also 
a field in the KYC form but cannot be made mandatory at thi s stage due to low 
penetration in many parts of the Country. 
 
The DBTL scheme (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG scheme) has already been 
launched in 18 districts on 01.06.2013."  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
22. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry/OMCs should ensure that 
the KYC norms are implemented for the existing customers also alongwith the new 
connections within the next one year and the database should be purified so as to 
reflect the real customers accurately. 
 The Committee note  that the KYC exercise on suspect duplicate 2.56 crore 
connections resulted in blocking of 63.5 lakh connections i.e. almost one -fourth of 
the total suspect connections . However, the Committee have been  informed that 
many difficulties are being faced in the implementation of KYC such as long 
customer queues, law and order problems, requests by State Governments to 
discontinue the KYC exercise due to local problems/representations etc. and hence 
a full-fledged KYC exercise can  be completed in a phased manner only. 
 

18 
 
 Since the KYC exercise can effectively reduce the leakage of subsidy, t he 
Committee desire that the OMCs/Ministry should make concerted efforts in 
coordination with State Governments to overco me the above stated difficulties in 
implementation of KYC and complete this activity in a time bound manner. 
 
Recommendation No.  11 
Shortfall in drilling targets 
 
23. The Committee are concerned to note the under achievements in the drilling targets 
of ONGC and Oil India Ltd(OIL).  The Committee observe that though ONGC has 
performed well in developmental drilling, it has not been able to achieve its targets in 
exploratory drilling.  ONGC has drilled only 135 exploratory wells as against the target of 
158 wells during the year 2011 -12.  As far as, the performance of OIL in 2011 -12 is 
concerned, against a set target of 34 exploratory wells only 16 wells have been drilled 
whereas in case of developmental drilling only 22 wells have been drilled against a target of 
34 wells. 
 
 In view of the need to explore more domestic hydrocarbon resources, the Committee 
feel that shortfalls in the exploratory and developing drilling targets will seriously impact the 
programme.  Therefore, the Committee are of the view tha t the Ministry/DGH should take 
necessary steps to ensure that the upstream companies abide by their exploration targets 
and make sincere efforts towards completing at least the minimum work programme 
(MWP) assigned to them. 
 
24. The Ministry of Petroleum a nd Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
“ONGC 
ONGC is carrying out exploratory drilling in its awarded blocks adhering to PSC 
stipulations to meet the MWP commitments of drilling.  With exploratory efforts 
spreading towards complex areas of deepwaters and with targeting of deeper -high 
temperature-high pressure plays, the associated risk of drilling complications are 
encountered from time to time, resulting in drilling delays. 
The  shortfall in exploratory targets in terms of number o f wells completed against 
the target can be attributed to many reasons. 
One of the main technical reasons is down -hole well complications. To overcome 
down-hole complications, more and more state -of-art technologies are being used in 
ONGC. The use of synthetic oil base mud systems (SOBM) and other high tech mud 
systems are being introduced to drill exploratory wells. In addition to above ONGC 

19 
 
has started using latest technologies like  MWD/LWD, independent drive system, top 
drive system, use of high perform ance advanced technology bit on consignment 
basis etc. Rigs are also periodically subjected to refurbishment & upgradation 
wherein all statutory requirements are complied with and this reduces repair time 
considerably which is another factor for loss of va luable rig months leading to 
shortfall in achieving target. 
Sectoral Drilling Heads regularly co -ordinate with Assets/ Basins for timely 
availability of ready sites, locations and statutory clearances. Putting these together,  
constitutes a key factor responsible for shortfall in exploratory well drilling target.  
In addition to this, deep wells which are more prone to down hole complications are 
being religiously monitored round the clock by senior officers and also advice of 
Institute of Drilling Technology (IDT) is sought for liquidation of complications as and 
when required 
OIL 
Shortfall in drilling targets :  
As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, OIL‟s drilling plan during the year 
2011-12 was affected due to various reasons shown under : 
States No. of Wells 
Target Actual 
Exploratory : 
Assam 19 14 
NEF Project 6 - 
Rajasthan 8 2 
KG Basin 1 2 
Gabon 1 1 
Development : 
Assam 31 22 
Rajasthan 3 - 
Reasons : 
Assam : 
 Frequent bandh and blockades in fields disrupted / slowed down the drilling 
preparatory work. 
 Land acquisition is a prolonged process with number of social resistances 
which led to delay in acquisition process. 
 
 
 

20 
 
NEF Project : 
 Drilling plan in the 3rd location at Amguri delayed due to expiry of PEL. 
 One Loc. In Dibrugarh Block is  found to be Elephant Corridor in Reserve forest 
area – permission declined by Forest Authority, Assam. 
 Logistically  difficult area  of Karbi Anglong & Mizoram delayed exploration 
progress in 2011-12. 
Rajasthan : 
 Prospectivity of the exploration Block (RJ -ONN-2004/3) reassessed and 
decided to relinquish and plan got upset. 
 The only rig got engaged in exploratory work in priority NELP Block and 
development plan suffered. 
KG Basin : 
 Location preparatory work got delayed due to difficult logistics. 
 
OIL is making all out sincere efforts towards fulfilling the Minimum Work Programme 
(MWP) assigned to it. Out of the 14 NELP (3 blocks under relinquishment process) 
blocks under its operation currently, most of the Seismic Data Acquisition MWP 
commitments have been completed and preparation for drilling of wells in the current 
and coming few years (depending on block validity period) is going on. For the three 
NELP IX blocks, preliminary activities are currently undertaken. 
In OIL operated NELP blocks upto NELP VI II, most of the Seismic Data Acquisition 
MWP commitments have been completed and preparation for drilling of wells in the 
current and coming few years is going on. For the three NELP IX blocks, preliminary 
activities are currently undertaken. 
DGH 
Under the  Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, the reasons for non -
completion of Minimum Work Programme (MWP) by ONGC & OIL are due to 
reasons like drilling difficulties on account of geographical conditions / logistics or 
geological problems or non -availability of required permissions or clearances by the 
Govt. agencies like MOD, MOEF, DRDO, SEZ etc.  
Under the PSC regime, all the operators, including National Oil Companies (NOC) 
viz ONGC and OIL, endeavor to complete at least the Minimum Work Programme 
(MWP). Despite the challenges, it is the persistent effort on part of MoPNG/DGH to 
persuade the operators to complete at least the MWP. Further, the contractors are 
required to complete the MWP in the awarded blocks within the timelines specified in 
the PSC and in accordance with extant Government policies/guidelines on 
extension. Penalties are payable, based on the PSC provisions and other guidelines, 
in case of non-fulfillment of MWP”. 
 

21 
 
25. Considering the shortfall in the drilling targets , the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry for taking necessary steps to ensure that the National 
upstream companies abide by their exploration targets and the Minimum Work 
Programme (MWP) assigned to them. 
 The Committee note from the action taken reply that the under-achievement in 
drilling targets and MWP of ONGC and OIL  is mainly due to difficulties faced on the 
account of geographical conditions/non -availability of required permissions and 
clearances by the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Environment  and Forests, DRDO 
etc. The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ministry/ONGC/OIL shou ld 
rigorously pursue the matter of obtaining permissions/ clearances from the 
concerned authorities to seek early action for timely achievements of exploration 
targets.     
Recommendation No.  12 
Rigs  availability 
 
26. The Committee note that ONGC has a total of 81 rigs for onshore operations and 40 
rigs for offshore operations.  Out of the offshore rigs 31 are charter hired rigs and only 9 are 
owned rigs of ONGC.  The on land rigs of ONGC comprise of 68 owned rigs and 13 charter 
hired rigs.  Oil India Ltd. (OIL) in total has 16 rigs out of which 11 are owned and 5 are hired 
rigs.  The Committee take a serious note that in the offshore operations, ONGC is fulfilling 
its 77% of the rig requirement by hiring.  The Committee observe that the amount spent by 
ONGC on hiring and leasing of Rigs during 2010 -11 and 2011-12 is Rs. 8682 crore and Rs. 
8633 crore respectively which is around 31% and 30% of the actual expenditure out of 
annual budget outlay of the ONGC.    
 It is seen that ONGC and OIL are always making consistent efforts for acquiring new 
blocks in various rounds of NELP and consequently the need for drilling activities 
increases, the Committee desires that NOCs s hould analyze as to go for purchase of rigs 
instead of hiring rigs at high costs and by this initiative, major expenditure can be saved 
which can be utilized for exploratory activities of the Company. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that ONGC and OIL ca n explore forming a consortium for acquire and 
utilization of rigs through purchase instead of hiring charter rigs. 
 The Committee further note with serious concern that the idle time is high for the 
charter Hired rigs of ONGC and the main reason for the i dling of rigs is the unplanned 
capital repair (both onshore and offshore), waiting time for men and material, etc. The 
Committee note that penalties beyond a permissible limit of rig down time is incorporated in 
the contracts and would like the penal provi sions should be strictly enforced as it not only 
causes financial loss but delays the exploration activities. Besides penalizing contractors 

22 
 
for idling of rigs, the officers of the company should also be held accountable for any 
lethargy on their part.  
 The Committee recommends that the NOCs take suitable corrective measures for 
efficient utilization of rigs in order to minimize the idle time of rigs and consequent wasteful 
financial expenditure. 
27. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
“ONGC 
The process of acquisition of drilling rigs both for Onshore and offshore is under 
process. 
In Onshore, LOI has already been placed on M/s BHEL for supply of 6 nos of 2000 
HP, VFD rigs. The first rig is expected to be delivered by July, 2013 followed by one 
rig after each month. The process for acquisition of another 5 nos of 1000 HP mobile 
rigs is under progress. 
Also, in offshore, action for construction of 4 nos of Jack-Up rigs is in progress. 
All efforts have been m ade to reduce rig idle time owing to various reasons to bare 
minimum thereby increasing rig utilization time.  
CH rigs responsible for rig idle time are suitably pe nalized to discourage such idle 
time.     
OIL 
Rigs Availability :  
(i) As far as Oil India L imited (OIL) is concerned, the present status of drilling 
rigs (owned & hired) deployed by OIL is tabulated below: 
Rigs 
Deployment Area of Operation 
No. of Rigs Total No. 
of Rigs Owned Hired 
Drilling Assam + Arunachal 
Pradesh 11 5 16 
(ii) As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, OIL‟s current drilling operations 
in its traditional basin of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh (AP) are optimally 
managed by the fleet of existing 16 nos. drilling rigs (11 nos. in -house + 5 no. 
Charter hired). OIL is at pr esent, in the process of procuring 2 nos. new in -
house drilling rigs as replacement of old vintage retired rigs. 

23 
 
(iii) OIL has utilized In-House Rigs for Drilling in NELP Blocks located in Assam & 
AP, Mahanadi Basin & Rajasthan. However, for NELP operation s outside 
Assam and AP, and other locations where moving In -House rigs is 
uneconomical, OIL used to charter hire drilling rig on as and when required 
basis as per procedures laid down in the Production Sharing Contracts. 
(iv) For the drilling in the NELP VIII Cauvery Offshore block CY-OSN-2009/2, OIL 
is in regular discussion with M/s ONGC”. 
 
28. The Committee ha d observed that every year , huge expenditure  was being 
incurred on hiring of charter rigs which could have  been saved with the better 
coordination of national oil companies for efficient rig utilization. In its action taken 
reply, the MoPNG has stated   that ONGC and OIL are in the process of buying own 
rigs and LoIs have already been placed in order to reduce the excessive expenditure 
incurred on hiring of charter hired rigs. However, the specific recommendation of the 
Committee  to form a consortium for acquisition  and utilization of rigs instead of 
hiring rigs from outside private agencies at exorbitant rates and  imposition of 
penalty on the contractors for idling of rigs have not been addressed by the Ministry. 
 Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
that the Public Sector Upstream Companies  should coordinate for forming a 
consortium for rig utilization for exploratory programmes.    
 
Recommendation No.  16 
Reduction of output By KG D6 Block 
29. The Committee are concerned to note that the actual production of Natural Gas by 
private/joint ven ture companies from KG D6 block has been declining for the past three 
years i.e. 2010 -11, 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 at 21017MMSCM, 16245MMSCM and 
8893MMSCM (upto Jan. 2013) respectively. From a peak of 80 MMSCMD, the gas 
production from KG D6 has gone down to 16  MMSCMD.  The Committee have not been 
informed of any valid reason by the Ministry for lower production of gas in DG -D6 block by 
the operator M/s Reliance Industries Ltd.  In this regard, the Committee have also taken 
note of the fact that M/s Reliance Ind ustries is seeking higher price for natural gas before 
the expiry of the term of the current pricing regime. 
 The Committee have been informed that as part of corrective measures, the 
Contractor has been asked by DGH to drill more wells, install a compressor to increase the 
gas recovery and the revision of the field development plan.  The Committee would be 

24 
 
keen to know the progress achieved through these measures by the company to increase 
production. 
 The Committee have however, also been informed that there are estimations of 
availability of gas at ultra deep levels in KG -D6 basin and for the extraction of this gas, 
requisite technology is not available with the Indian Companies and a global oil giant 
namely BP is planning to invest US$5bn in KG D6 basin by buying stakes from M/s 
Reliance Industries. 
 The Committee would strongly urge the Ministry to adequately s atisfy itself and 
convince the nation that the fall in the production of natural gas in KG D6 block is not due to 
commercial consideration or price at which the gas is to be sold. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should seriously look at the fall in production of natural gas in 
KG D6 basin and take urgent step to increase the projected production in coordination with 
DGH. The Committee also expect the Ministry to apply the provisions of PSC with the 
contractor strictly in letter and spi rit in respect of later‟s failure to deliver committed 
production of natural gas from KG D6. 
30. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"Performance of D1&D3 gas fields of KG -DWN-98/3 block is not as per the  
production profile envisaged in the MC approved Addendum to Initial Development 
Plan (AIDP). 
 In this regard, the Contractor was advised repeatedly to drill and put on 
stream more number of wells in the D1 & D3 fields, as per approved AIDP, so as to 
achieve the envisaged Gas production rate. In response to above, RIL has 
submitted the following: 
 Substantial variance in Reservoir Behavior and Character has been observed 
vis-à-vis the prediction, and there seems to be reservoir constraints in achieving 
the gas production rates. 
 Pressure decline is several times higher than originally envisaged. 
 Early water production in some of the wells was not predicted in initial reservoir 
simulations, though overall field water production is small. 
 Better than expected re servoir continuity / connectivity and uniform depletion 
throughout the reservoir with very high degree of interference in the producing 
wells. Good connectivity was not envisaged in the static model at FDP stage and 
therefore the provision for more wells w as kept in the FDP to cater to this 
uncertainty. 
 
 Since, the Contractor failed to adhere to the approved AIDP in terms of 
drilling and putting on stream number of wells and the Gas Production rate, even 
after repeated reminders. GOI, in May 2012, had issu ed notice for proportionate 

25 
 
disallowance of Cost of production facilities amounting to US $ 1.005 Billon. 
Subsequent to the above notice, RIL invoked arbitration for settlement of the dispute 
and appointed their arbitrator. Government of India also appoint ed its arbitrator. The 
matter is pending under arbitration. 
 The Contractor subsequently on 28.08.2012 had submitted Revised Field 
Development Plan (RFDP) for D1 & D3 fields for downward revision of reserves and 
the associated production profile. Clarifica tions have been sought from RIL, and the 
same are awaited. 
 Government of India in July, 2011 has approved the assignment of 30% of 
Participating Interest (PI) by Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) to BP Exploration 
(Alpha) Ltd in KG -DWN-98/3 block. Present  PI of consortium partners in KG -DWN-
98/3 block is as follows, RIL 60%, BPEAL: 30% and NIKO (NECO) 10 %. 
Subsequently, the Operator has submitted proposals relating to augmentation of gas 
from D1D3, MA and OFDP of four satellite gas fields and D-34 FDP. 
  Following steps have been taken to increase the gas production  from KG 
 DWN-98/3 block: 
i. The Contractor has been asked to drill, complete and connect more producer 
 wells and undertake appropriate remedial measures to revive the sick wells in 
 D1, D3 and MA fields in this block.   
ii. The Contractor‟s proposal to install compressor at Onshore Terminal (OT) to 
 increase gas recovery from D1 & D3 fields has been approved by the 
 Management Committee (MC). Contract for Front End Engineering Design 
 (FEED) for OT Booster compression has been awarded by the contractor and 
 work is under way. 
iii. Revised Field Development Plan (RFDP) of MA field has been approved by 
 the MC.  
iv. The Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) of another 4 gas discoveries 
 (D-2, 6, 19 & 22) has been approved by MC. 
v. The Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) of gas discoveries D -34 has also 
 been approved by MC. 
  
 The Contractor has undertaken development activities related to 4 satellite 
gas discoveries (D2, 6, 19 & 22) and drilling of on e gas well in MA field as approved 
above by the MC. Further, the FDP of D -34 gas discovery has been submitted by 
the Contractor. Once the above activities are completed, the outcome in terms of 
increase in gas production will be known. 
 
 
 

26 
 
31. Taking serious note of the fall in KG D 6 production, the Committee had  asked 
the Ministry to look into the reasons for the decline in  production from the basin,   
for taking urgent steps to augment the falling natural gas production in the KG D6 
block and for applying the provisions of PSC with the contractor in letter and spirit. 
 
 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry, that though various steps 
had been initiated in accordance with approved Addendum to Initial Development 
Plan (AIDP) by the contractor such as drilling of more wells and revival of sick wells 
in D1,D3 and MA fields in the KG D6   block, the final outcome of these activities in 
terms of increase in gas production is still awaited.  The Committee are further 
disappointed to note that the cl arifications sought from RIL on the revised field 
development plan for D1 and D3 fields for downward revision of reserves and its 
associated produc tion profile are still awaited and the penalty imposed on RIL 
amounting to US $ 1.005 billion has not yet bee n recovered due to the pendency of 
matter under arbitration. 
 The Committee take a serious view of the fact  that the production  of natural 
gas from KG D6 block has not been in tandem with prognosticated reserve potential  
and has f allen to such an extent th at various sectors of the economy which were 
banking on the natural gas are suffering. Further, there is still ambiguity regarding 
the actual reasons for decline in production. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry/DGH should seriously look into the reasons for decline 
in production and closely monitor the measures applied by the contractor for 
improvement of production from KG D6 block and the penalty provisions under the 
PSC should be strictly enforced on the contractor.  
 
Recommendation No. 23 
Delay in ONGC Petro Additions Ltd (OPaL) 
32. The Committee note that the commissioning of ONGC Petro Additions Ltd (OPal), a 
joint venture company of ONGC, GAIL and GSPC project for setting up of a grass root 
integrated petrochemical complex at Dahej, Gujarat with an investment of Rs 21000 crore 
has been delayed considerably and is expected to be completed in January 2014.the delay 
has resulted in non -utilisation of C2 -C3 plant of ONGC Ltd. which has been completed on 
schedule.  C2-C3 plant which has to provided feedstock to OPaL project plant is being filled 
with inert gas thus entailing additional expenditure.  Another major issue noted by the 
Committee is that even when the OPaL project gets completed as per revised schedule, 
there is no availability of natural gas to the project. 

27 
 
  The Committee take a serious view of the lack of foresight on the part of 
Ministry/ONGC/GAIL that such huge investment has been made without proper planning, 
causing loss to the exchequer. The committee, therefore , strongly recommend that the 
ministry should closely monitor the progress of the project for its completion and use the time 
available to ensure gas to facilitate commissioning of the project. 
33.  The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the f ollowing reply in 
this regard: 
I. "With the award of cracker unit in December 2008 and the downstream 
 polymer units in June 2011, the completion schedule of OPaL was planned as 
 October 2013. However, with the addition of Captive Power Plant Package, 
 the schedule has been delayed to January 2014 
 
 
II.  C2-C3 Extraction Plant is mechanically complete along with the interim 
 products off take arrangements since Feb 2011. The products were 
 envisaged to be supplied to Oil Marketing companies(OMCs) and IPCL during 
 the interim period i.e till OPaL comes on stream 
 
III. However, the plant has not been commissioned due to non - allocation of 
 domestic gas.  The viability of C2+ extraction plant as well as that of the 
 petrochemical complex of OPaL would be severely straine d if the extracted 
 C2+ component is to be replenished by buying LNG from international 
 market. Accordingly, ONGC envisaged replenishment of LNG consumed in 
 the extraction process through a SWAP mechanism in which it would supply 
 the equivalent domestic gas from its marginal fields. However, gas allocation 
 to ONGC for above SWAP has not been finalized due to EGoM Policy on 
 allocation priority to various consumer sectors." 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
34. The Committee have been informed that  the OPaL project  has not been 
commissioned due to non -availability of domestic gas  to the project. It has further 
been stated that the viability of the C2+ extraction plant as well as the petrochemical 
plant of OPaL would be severely strained if LNG procured from international market 
is used. ONGC had envisaged replenishment of LNG for the plant through the SWAP 
mechanism for supply of domestic gas from its marginal fie lds; however, the gas 
allocation for above SWAP has not been finalized due to EGo M policy on gas 
allocation priority to various consumer sectors. 
 The Committee take a serious note that huge investments of Rs. 21,000 crore 
have been made  without ensuring the source of supply of natural gas leading to 
uncertainty over its commissioning which points out lapses on the part of 

28 
 
ONGC/Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should hold 
an enquiry for overlooking such an important aspect in  the implementation of the 
project and fix responsibility accordingly. T he Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry/ONGC should make a representation to EGoM for con sideration of OPaL as 
a special case for allocation of domestic gas. 
Recommendation No.  31 
Release of Funds to OIDB 
35. The Committee note that OIDB was established under an Act of Parliament for 
promotion of activities related to the development of oil sector in the country such as 
prospecting, refining, transportation and storage by rendering financial assistance to 
various projects and as per provision, the board was to be funded through cess levied on 
crude oil and Natural Gas. A part of this cess is given to OIDB for funding its project 
requirements after due appropriation by the parliament. The Committee are given to 
understand that the total cess that has been collected by Central Government upto 
31/12/2012 is of the order of Rs. 1,14,986 crore, out of which OIDB has received only Rs. 
902 crore.  
 The Committee have observed that OIDB is funding annual requirements of various 
projects of DGH, OISD , PPAC, CHT and PCRA apart from funding various plan schemes 
such as RGIPT and ISPRL. Since OIDB is also working on number of important projects 
including the National Gas Hydrates Programme, ISPRL, etc., the Committee feel th at 
OIDB should be supported with more funds to prevent delays. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the MOP&NG should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance with all 
seriousness and pursue for increased allocation of funds to OIDB out of the cess c ollected 
by the Central Government.  
 
36. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides for levy and collection of cess, on the 
indigenous crude oil. The cess proceeds ar e to be utilized for development of oil 
industry either directly by Central Government or through OIDB.  Since the inception 
of the Act, the OIDB has received an amount of Rs. 902.40 crores out of total 
proceeds of about Rs. 1.15 lakh crore up to 31.12.201 2 collected by the Central 
Government.  No cess has been transferred to OIDB since 1991-92. 
 
The other source of funds for OIDB is by way of interest earned on loans provided 
by it to oil Industries. The amount of cess (Rs. 902 crores) together with intern al 
receipts generated as interest income has increase the corpus of OIDB to Rs. 10726 
crores (Provisional) as on 31 st March, 2013, the major part of which has been 
deployed as under:- 

29 
 
1. Loans to Oil industries Rs. 7725.48  crores.  
2. Investment in ISPRL (against equity) Rs. 1969.27 crores. 
Rs. 374.40 crores advance against equity. 
3. Equity in Biecco Lawrie Rs. 50.34 crores. 
4. Fixed Assets Rs. 145.65 crores.        
Thus there is very low liquidity with the OIDB which will affect lending capacity and 
ultimately reduce interest income which at present is the main source of funds.  The 
major portion of the funds generated by OIDB  (up to 31.03.2013) are  utilized for :- 
a. Cumulative release of grants in aid (from inception to 31.03.2013) to the 
tune of Rs. 1861.01 crores comprising of : 
i) Rs. 1398.36 crores Grants to Regular Grantee Institutes viz.  CHT, 
DGH, PCRA, OISD and PPAC. 
ii) Rs. 229.59 crores for Research and Development and  
iii) Rs. 233.06 crores for other projects  from 1974-75 to 31.03.2013 
b.  Cumulative payment of royalty Payment to State Governments– Rs. 
405.20 cores (up to 31.03.2013) 
The  matter for transfer of annual Cess to OIDB was pursued with Ministry of  
Finance. Ministry of Finance  has not yet agreed to the proposal of this Ministr y for 
transfer of Cess collected to OIDB."  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
37. The Committee have noted from the action taken reply of the Ministry that  the 
matter for transfer of annual cess to OIDB was pursued with Ministry of Finance. 
However, MoF has not yet agreed  to the proposal. The Committee further note that 
the cess collected by the Central Government is added to Consolidated Fund of India 
from which the parts of it can be transferred t o OIDB for expansion of oil and gas 
sector after due appropriation by the Parliament as it may think fit. The Committee 
also note that Section 18 (1) of the OIDB Act stipulates for existence of the Oil 
Industry Development Fund, to be utilized for function ing  of the board and its 
various activities such as rendering financial assistance to Oil Industry by way of 
loans and grants for activities such as prospecting, refining, processing, 
transportation, storage, handling and marketing of mineral oil etc.  Th e Committee 
are,  however, surprised to note that out of the total cess of about Rs.1.15 lakh crore 
collected  upto 31.12.2012 by the Central Government, only Rs. 902.40 crore have 
been transferred to OIDB and since 1991 -1992, no cess has been received by the 
OIDB. The Committee feel that such funds collected from the annual cess on 
Petroleum Products are  totally allocated by the Ministry of Finance which is a clear 

30 
 
violation of OIDB Act in letter and spirit which should not continue. Also, the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is made to request for funds from MoF for the 
development of petroleum sector which is the main objective of OIDB Act.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoPNG should pursue the matter with 
Ministry of Finance for  priority in allocation of more funds on regular basis to OIDB 
out of the cess collected by the Central Government for funding various activities of 
the Petroleum sector.   
  

31 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Exclusion of higher income group from subsidy domain 
The Committee in their 8th and 11th report had recommended that the Ministry should 
do away with providing the subsidized LPG to the higher income group. However, it is seen 
that the Ministry has not made any progress in this dire ction. It has been informed by the 
Ministry that the major constraint being faced in implementation of this move is that the 
income wise data is not available with the Ministry. The Committee have been further 
stated that it will be difficult to match the income data of IT department with the customer 
database as LPG connections are provided per household and the Income data is for an 
individual. The Committee are not satisfied with the contentions of the Ministry and feel that 
the Ministry instead of equiv ocating over the issue should work towards devising a 
mechanism for implementation of this measure. 
In this regard, the Committee would like to point out that a few years back the 
Income Tax Department has brought out 1/6 scheme where anybody who falls und er even 
on one of the criteria need to file an IT return. The Committee want the Ministry/ OMCs 
should devise some criteria to determine families/ households whose income is above Rs. 
6 lakh per annum. In view of the above, the Committee reiterate its earl ier recommendation 
to devise schemes so that the subsidy on LPG connections to the customers earning more 
than Rs. 6  Lac per annum will be done away with. 
Despite the fact that such income details will be of individual and not of the complete 
household, it will help to eliminate large number of households where a family or individual 
is earning more than Rs. 6 lakh per annum, out of the domain of subsidy provision, thereby 
resulting in reduction in the subsidy burden on the Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The feasibility of income based targeting has been evaluated and it is felt that there 
are several operational problems that are not easy to overcome.  
The income data base of LPG customers is not available with OMCs and is difficult 
to collect in an authe ntic and voluntary manner. LPG connection is for a household but 
formal income assessment by IT department is for individuals. Thus any exercise to map 
individuals to a household and then further mapping to LPG connection would be very 
difficult in absence  of common household identifier. For example, wife may have an LPG 
connection but not be an assessee while the husband may be an Income Tax assessee. 
Similarly, if more than one family member is receiving income; then it would be difficult to 
aggregate them and then map into household income. Further, PAN data may not be made 
available to OMCs. Electronic mapping of LPG data base & PAN database is also nearly 
impossible due to lack of common identifier. Further, income is dynamic and it will not be 
possible to update this regularly. The only alternative to PAN  based income data could be 
to seek self declaration of income, but even that is fraught with lack of capacity at OMCs to 
verify such data, update it and enter it in a manner that it is not manipulated.  
However, idea of targeted subsidy for the poor is laudable and was also part of the 
recommendation of the Task force headed by Chairman, UID. The DBTL scheme based on 
Aadhar has already been launched in 18 districts and is the first step towards achievi ng the 
goal of a targeted subsidy scheme. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  8 
Exploration in Northern Area 
The Committee note that the exploration activities in the Northern India have not 
been carried out to the extent it has taken place in other parts of tile country. In the states 
of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir only 4078 GLK,  4250 GLK and 2 563 
GLK of 2D seismic  data has been acquired since 1957 which has not established the 
presence of  hydrocarbons.  
The committee have observed that Ministry has not pursued the exploration activity 

33 
 
seriously in the Northern states as major part of work was  carried out almost two decades 
back. At present no exploration activity is proposed to be undertaken in the 12th Plan 
except in the state of Himachal Pradesh. Since these states lie in the hydrocarbon rich 
geographical belt of the world, the Committee rec ommended that the Ministry should 
intensify the exploratory efforts in the Northern states more seriously with the application of 
latest technologies like 3D surveys in order to explore the presence of Hydrocarbons. 
REPLY 
ONGC: 
ONGC is carrying out explora tion activities in acreages awarded to it as an operator 
in the Northern States of India. Presently, as on 01.04.2013, ONGC is holding only one 
nomination PEL (Kangra Mandi) in Himachal Pradesh State. ONGC is not having any 
acreage in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir States.  
During XII Plan Period, ONGC has planned to acquire 500 GLK 2D seismic data 
along with drilling of one exploratory well in the Himalayan Foothills PEL areas falling in the 
state of Himachal Pradesh.  
Recently a deep exploratory well Kasauli -1 was drilled in the NELP Block HF -ONN-
2001/1 in Nahan -Solan area in Himachal Pradesh which was dry and abandoned.  
Similarly, two exploratory wells, JMI -8 and JMI -9 drilled during 2009 -10 and 2012 -13 
respectively, were found to be dry in Kangra -Mandi nomination PEL and one exploratory 
location R-JMI-A1 is available for drilling in 2014-15. 
As far as exploratory activities carried out in Ganga Basin are concerned, it includes 
Aeromagnetic surveys (1,30,700 KM 2), Gravity -Magnetic surveys (76,000 stations), M T 
surveys (250 stations), 2D seismic survey(>41000 LKM), 3D seismic survey (263 SKM), 
Geochemical surveys (>15 nos.), Exploratory wells (15) and Structural wells (4).                 
At present, exploration activities are going on in two NELP blocks, GV -ONN-2004/1 and 
GV-ONN-2005/3 in Ganga Basin. 
It is pertinent to mention that in 2010 ONGC had put up a proposal to DGH for 
carrying out hydrocarbon exploration in Himalayan Foothills and Punjab Plains with 
envisaged work programme of 2D seismic API (1200 LKM ), 2D seismic reprocessing (225 
LKM) and one R&D well, with a request for consideration for award of 20,128 sq.km. area, 

34 
 
falling in the states of Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir under special provision or OALP to 
carry out exploration for assessment and hydrocarbon evaluation of the identified area for a 
period of initially five years.  ONGC would consider bidding or taking up exploration in these 
areas as and when blocks are offered by GoI either under NELP or under OALP.  
DGH 
DGH has conducted aero -magnetic surveys in Himalayan foreland (2003 -05) and 
Punjab & foothills of Himalayas (2005-06). 
The sedimentary basins identified in the states of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and 
Jammu & Kashmir are classified under Category –III and IV basins where, Basins are 
having hydrocarbon shows that are considered geologically prospective, without known 
accumulation of hydrocarbons or commercial production as yet. Hydrocarbon exploration in 
these areas had been taken up by NOCs earlier and certain areas are yet to be proved as 
prospective. 
Since the advent of New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP), areas in these 
category basins have been time and again offered for bidding, but there has been 
lukewarm response from operators as they have not been proved prospective as of now. 
Additionally, some of the areas are in logistically difficult terrains for carrying out 
geophysical and other surveys. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  9 
Exploration in Kerala-Konkan Basin 
The committee note that ONGC holds two exploratory blocks (deep -water offshore) 
in the Kerala -Konkan offshore awarded under NELP rounds.  As on 01.03.2013, ONGC 
has acquired 127134 LKM of 2D and 8799 Sq.Km of 3D (1422 Sq.Km in shallow a nd 7377 
Sq.Km in deep waters) seismic data in Kerala -Konkan offshore. 14 exploratory wells have 
been drilled in this Basin, 9 in shallow waters and 5 in deep -water.  However, so far 
presence of hydrocarbons has not been established in the basin.  The Commi ttee observe 
that in spite of intensive exploratory efforts in the Kerala-Konkan basin for the last 35 years, 
discoveries of Oil and Gas have not been made.  During the XI Plan (2007 -12) the two 
exploratory wells were drilled both of which were proved to b e dry.  The private players 

35 
 
carrying out exploratory activities in the Kerala -Konkan basin have also not achieved any 
success so far. 
 
Since the investments made by ONGC in the Kerala-Konkan basin has not produced 
any return so far and the presence of hydr ocarbons has not yet been established in the 
basin, the committee are of the view that the Ministry/DGH should seriously review the 
rationale of exploration activities for more than 3 decades in the basin vis -à-vis investments 
made and take a considered view on continuation of the exploration activities. 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
ONGC has acquired 127134 LKM of 2D, 8880 SKM of 3D seismic data till 
01.04.2013 in Kerala-Konkan Basin.  
During XI Plan Period (2007-2012), ONGC drilled two wells in shallow water and two 
wells in deep water areas and all the wells were proved to be dry. It has become imperative 
to revisit the available G&G data and reassess the prospectivity of the blocks available with 
it before going  further drilling activity. ONGC is holding two deep water N ELP acreages as 
operator. It acquired 80.8 SKM of 3D seismic data in deep water block KK -DWN-2005/2 
during the month of March‟13. ONGC is making all possible efforts to register exploratory 
success in Kerala - Konkan Offshore basin. Recently acquired seismi c data is being 
assessed to evaluate the prospectivity of the blocks and to identify prospects for drilling.  
As far as rationale for exploration activities by ONGC are concerned, it is carrying 
out exploration in Kerala -Konkan offshore since 1977. Based o n G&G data, 660 
MMtoePrognosticated resources have been estimated in Kerala -Konkan Basin. Initially, 
ONGC was targeting the Tertiary sediments with exception of a couple of wells probing 
Mesozoic sediments. Over the period, 15 exploratory wells were drille d by ONGC in this 
basin. However, commercial hydrocarbon strike has eluded in spite of a few wells like CSP -
1 & KK-DW-A-1 giving hydrocarbon indications. Prospectivity of the Tertiary sediments was 
concluded as moderate to poor and higher for Mesozoic sedi ments as per regional studies 
conducted by ONGC and consultants. Basin architecture and configuration of Mesozoic 
sediments remains largely unknown and needs a thorough understanding before any 
hydrocarbon exploration is attempted for the region. Explorati on in deeper Mesozoic has 

36 
 
been inadequate till recent past, principally due to non -availability of suitable technology for 
sub-trappean seismic imaging. Recent use of state -of-art seismic technologies like “Over 
and Under” and “GXT” has shown improvement i n imaging and have given indication of 
considerable thickness of Mesozoic sediments and existence of features which possibly 
can entrap hydrocarbons. Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) technology has also been 
recently used and the seepage data used to assess the possibility of hydrocarbon 
accumulations in Kerala-Konkan.   
 During the year 2012 -13, ONGC has acquired 3041 LKM of 2D Seismic/SBN data in 
deep water block, KK -DWN-2002/2 and 371 SKM 3D seismic data in KK -DWN-2005/2 
deep water block. ONGC has planned to drill one exploratory well during 2013-14. 
DGH 
Accessing the subsurface structures with geophysical methods can be time taking 
and prospect identification in Kerala -Konkan basin requires more expertise and experience 
and hence can take more time than an ticipated. Though the basin has been explored to a 
substantial extent in the Tertiary section, several structural and stratigraphic plays are 
expected in the deeper Mesozoic section, based on the G&G evaluation of available 
seismic data. Efforts are on to probe these sections, which have now been believed to have 
good source rock presence. Detailed laboratory analysis of the samples and G& G studies 
are in progress. 
Hence, DGH is of the view that this area is still prospective from the hydrocarbon 
view point and exploratory efforts should continue in this basin. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  10 
Allocation of blocks rejected by CCEA 
The Committee note that during the ninth round of NELP, 33 blocks were offered out 
of which the production sharing contracts have already been signed for 19 block and 
another two blocks are yet to be signed.  It has been informed to the Committee that the 
Bids for the remaining 11 blocks have been reje cted by the CCEA due to poor fiscal 
package offered by the bidders in respect of the percentage share of the profit petroleum.  
The Committee are of the view that the decision of CCEA is almost 2 years after the bids 

37 
 
are invited which is invaluable time lo st. Instead of rejecting the bids at later stage due to 
lesser revenue offered to the Government, the Committee desire that MoP&NG should 
include in the offer documents about details specifying the minimum revenue which needs 
to be shared with the Government under the Production Sharing Contract.  
The Committee further observe that the offering of blocks under tenth NELP round 
has also been delayed. As the 11 blocks for which the bids have been rejected are also 
pending,  the Committee are of the view that the Government should speed up the process 
of offering of exploration blocks under the next round of NELP including these 11 blocks so 
as to give an early start to the exploration activity. 
 
REPLY 
Terms and conditions for NELP -X are yet to be finalized. Th e matter regarding 
minimum share to be offered by bidders to the Government of India will be examined for 
inclusion in the bidding round for NELP-X. 
Blocks have been carved out for next bidding round NELP -X and inter -ministerial 
clearances are being sought . Out of the 11 blocks which were rejected earlier by CCEA 
during NELP-IX, 10 blocks which are rejected due to poor fiscal package offered by bidders 
will be reoffered under NELP -X, while the remaining 1 block has excessive urban areas 
and hence is not considered for offer. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
 
Recommendation No.  13 
New Discoveries 
The committee note that under NELP regime, a total of 53 discoveries (29 oil&  24 
Gas) have been made by oil PSUs.  The committee note with serious concern that the 
discoveries made by ONGC in the Nomination blocks have reduced over the last five years 
whereas the demand for Oil & gas has risen.  As the country looks upon NOC‟s for 
achieving success in meeting the country‟s hydrocarbon requirement, the NOC‟s should 
show greater commitment and achieve creditable results and fulfill the expectations placed 
on them.  The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry/DGH should monitor  the 

38 
 
progress in various exploration blocks to check the timely achievement of the targets for 
different activities. 
REPLY 
ONGC 
As far as reduction in number of discoveries made by ONGC in nomination blocks is 
concerned, it is stated that the exploration a ctivities were being carried out in nomination 
blocks for a longer period of time compared to NELP blocks.  The discoveries in these 
blocks have resulted in part area of the blocks being converted to ML resulting in reduction 
of the area.  Moreover, as the  prospects were being discovered it was becoming more and 
more difficult to make discoveries.  It is also to be stated that, as a result of entering into 
NELP regime, there was a gradual reduction in the number of nomination blocks which can 
be seen from the table below.   
Summary of year-wise discoveries made by ONGC in nomination acreages 
Year No. of Nomination 
acreages 
Discoveries in Nomination acreages 
2008-09 79 24 
2009-10 62 21 
2010-11 40 19 
2011-12 29 15 
2012-13 16 13 
Total   92 
 
 
DGH 
Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC), MoPNG/DGH monitors the progress 
of exploration of NOC blocks through Management Committee (MC) and Technical 
Committee Meetings. As regards, nomination regime, DGH has been monitoring the 
Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) activities of NOCs. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
 

39 
 
Recommendation No.  14 
National Data Repository 
The Committee note that the DGH/MoP&NG had initiated the process of establishing 
a National Data Repository which was meant for storing and maintaining exploration and 
production data in a safe and reusable manner for providing access to all stakeholders.  
The Committee are happy to note that the legal hurdles in the tendering process of  the 
project has now been resolved and DGH is continuously pursuing the matter for the timely 
completion of the repository.  The Committee have been informed that the site requirement 
has been already completed and the selection of project management consu ltant is under 
discussion. 
 Since the National Data Repository will provide all the exploration and production 
related data at a single place, the Committee desire that the Ministry/DGH should complete 
the tendering process for the site preparation in a ti me bound manner and should earnestly 
pursue the National Data Repository for ensuring its timely completion.  
REPLY 
Actions have been taken by DGH/ MoPNG to appoint Engineers India Ltd. (EIL) as 
Project Management Consultant (PMC) for National Data Repository (NDR) project. 
Finalization of NDR Tender is in progress. After due approval, a Global Open Tender 
to build, populate and operate NDR, on a turnkey basis, under two -bid system will be 
floated. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  15 
Production of crude oil and natural gas 
The Committee note that the domestic production of crude oil is 37.68 MMT in 2010 -
11 and 38.09 MMT in 2011 -12 while the production of natural gas is placed at 52219 
MMSCM in 2010 -11 and 47559 MMSCM in 2011 -12 during which has shown stagnant or 
declining trend and the projected target for next few years does not show any significant 
increase.  The committee note that most of the producing fields are from nominated blocks 
and very little from NELP fields even though blocks have been awarded under NELP more 

40 
 
than 10 year ago.  Similarly the lower gas production has been attributed due to decline in 
natural gas output from Panna-Mukta-Tapti(PMT) fields, KD-D6 basin etc. 
 
The Committee however, note that the PSUs like ONGC have been claiming new 
discoveries and ad ding reserves.  The committee also understand that IOR/EOR 
programmes have been undertaken during the last many years at significant investments to 
boost the crude oil production.  The Committee find that even though Ministry/Oil PSUs 
have claimed success in exploration and production activities, the actual production data 
does not justify this.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the MoP&NG should 
critically review the E&P strategy afresh and take corrective steps to increase the crude oil 
and natural gas production. 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
Reserves added through discoveries by ONGC has helped in arresting the decline 
and in increasing the production of oil and gas.  ONGC has made 35 discoveries so far in 
NELP acreages and accreted 511.59 MMtoe In -Place Hydrocarbon Volume and 72.42 
MMtoe Ultimate Reserves as on 01.04.2013.  Production from NELP discoveries will 
commence adhering to PSC stipulations. 
Majority of the recent discoveries by ONGC, in NELP as well as nomination blocks, 
are from  deeper and more  complex geological areas away from the existing fields/ 
infrastructure. The varying lead time of onland to offshore fields from discovery to 
production is because of the following reasons.  
 The deepwater discoveries (primarily from NELP blocks) require fi rming up of 
minimum threshold volume of reserves and well deliverability for establishing 
infrastructure for production commencement. The appraisal programme is underway 
before firming up the field development plan. 
 Some discoveries which cannot sustain independent development, needs to be tied -
up with upcoming upside potential prospects. 
 The exploitation of isolated structures/prospects, both onland and offshore, 
sometimes fall short of standalone durability of the profile. 
 

41 
 
 Development of new discoveries,  if complex in nature, is initially in production cum 
assessment phases thereby exhibiting production buildup/maintenance in cycles, 
before embarking on full-fledged development scheme. 
 A campaign by ONGC is already under implementation for production from  marginal 
fields of Western Offshore through cluster development. These fields, once put on 
production, will help in augmenting production levels. 
 
The development studies for preparing the exploitation of the recent discovery of oil 
in D-1 field in Wester n Offshore are ongoing on fast track. Meanwhile, suitable locations 
from existing available slots have also been studied with the objective of quick monetization 
of this discovery. Studies for working out production profile/projection of NELP blocks viz 
Vadatal, Nadiad, Aliabet have been undertaken which will be part of the development 
programme to be prepared for these blocks as per NELP timelines. 
IOR/EOR projects executed by ONGC : 
ONGC formulated Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) / Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) 
schemes in the year 2000-01 in its 15 major fields which have contributed about 75% of total 
oil production of ONGC in 2008 -09. These fields are Mumbai High, Neelam and Heera in 
Western Offshore; Gandhar, Kalol, North Kadi, Sanand, Santhal, Balol, Sobhasan, Jotana 
and Lanwa in Western Onshore and Lakwa-Lakhmani, Geleki and Rudrasagar in Assam.  
16 of the 24 IOR/EOR schemes have been completed. Presently eight schemes - 
Geleki, Rudrasag ar, Lakwa -Lakhmani, MHN Redevelopment Ph -II, MHS Redevelopment 
Ph-II, HeeraS.Heera Redevelopment Ph-II, B-173A and development of Western Periphery 
of MH Southare in progress.  Total incremental gain from IOR/EOR schemes till FY 13 is 
79.94 MMT. 
The fields mentioned above are mature/ brownfields which are on production for the 
last 15 to 30 years. The reason of decline in production in these fields is natural 
phenomenon as the fields are ageing. This process cannot be arrested completely but can 
be delayed through suitable corrective measures. The IOR/EOR schemes aimed in this 
direction have not only helped to arrest the declining trend of oil production, but also have 
led to augmentation in oil production.  

42 
 
The contribution of IOR/EOR schemes in augmenting oil production is depicted 
below: 
 
 
Mumbai High being the giant field and the largest contributor to oil production has 
been covered through rolling development plans. Post completion of the IOR schemes in 
Mumbai High field, the second phase of Redevelopment plan (IOR-Phase-II) was formulated 
and the same is under implementation. Meanwhile the IOR phase -III is being formulated for 
Mumbai High field. Similarly, redevelopment plan has been formulated for Heera field 
including Panna pay and is approved for implementation. 
 
 ONGC Board has already approved various marginal field development projects to 
augment crude oil and natural gas production. Three projects namely development of D1 
field, Vasai East and Vasai West (SB -11) projects have already been complet ed. 
Development of C -24 Cluster, B -46 Cluster, B -22 Cluster, B -193, Additional development 
of D-1 Field, Cluster -7, WO-16 Cluster,     C -26 Cluster, B -127 Cluster, B -173A,  BHE & 
BH-35, SB-14  and North Tapti fields in Western Offshore and integrated devel opment of 
G-1 & GS-15 in Eastern Offshore are under various stages of implementation.   
 In addition to above, ONGC has taken/is taking various actions for 
maintaining/augmenting the crude oil and natural gas production.  Apart from focus on 
artificial lif t, additional perforation/re -perforation, work -over/stimulation of wells, efforts 
were/are planned for enhancing the oil/gas production.  
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1995-96
1996-97
1997-98
1998-99
1999-00
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
2004-05
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
Annual Oil MMt
Contribution of IOR/EOR schemes in Major Fields 
Contribution of 
IOR/EOR Programme
Case with natural decline

43 
 
Crude oil and natural Gas production during last 3 years is as given below: 
 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
Crude Oil (MMT) 24.419 23.712 22.562 
Natural Gas (BCM) 23.095 23.316 23.549 
Note: Production from ONGC operated fields. 
OIL 
Production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas : 
i)   As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, the target and actual of production of 
crude oil and natural gas production by OIL during last three year are as under : 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Target Actual Target Actual Target Actual 
Crude Oil Production  
(MMT) 3.570 3.572 3.70 3.586 3.76 3.847 
Natural Gas Production  
(BCM) 2.528 2.416 2.621 2.353 2.633 2.633 
ii) OIL‟s domestic crude oil and natural gas production target for the next three years 
are as under : 
 2013-14  2014-15 2015-16 
Crude Oil Production (MMT) 3.85 (BE) /3.95 (MoU) 4.06 4.16 
Natural Gas Production (BCM) 2.740 (BE/MoU) 4.00 4.10 
    
  iii)  OIL‟s Reserve Replacement Ratio (RRR) under 2P category since last three (3) years 
are as under: 
Year 
Reserve Replacement Ratio 
(2P) 
2009-10 1.74 
2010-11 1.50 
2011-12 1.37 
  
   iv) OIL‟s exploration and production efforts in North East : 
Oil India Ltd (OIL) is continuing exploration activities in North -East (NE) mostly in 
mature and ageing fields, OIL has achieved an exploratory success ratio of about 65% all 
throughout. The major exploratory efforts has been put in logistical ly difficult and 

44 
 
geologically complex and challenging areas in the NE and its areas of operation in NE 
India.  A few of the major thrust on Exploration & Development activities in north -east 
includes exploring subtle and strati -structural plays, Improved O il Recovery (IOR), 
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR), effective reservoir monitoring and tapping of attic oil etc. 
Petroleum System Modeling through the proper integration of Geological, Geophysical and 
Geochemical data and induction of new & advanced technologi es are some other 
initiatives. The introduction of horizontal drilling, J -bend drilling, ERD and other technology 
intensive measures in the OIL,s operational areas in NE. are some of the significant efforts 
being made towards the sustainability of production.  
  v) OIL‟s participation in NELP: 
OIL has participated in  all the NELP bidding rounds upto the end of NELP – IX. So 
far, OIL has been awarded a total of 40 nos. NELP blocks since inception out of which 6 
nos. blocks have been relinquished till date. Presently, OIL is pursuing exploratory work in 
the remaining 34 nos. blocks  spread out in various states of the country out of which is OIL 
is operating in 14 nos. blocks and joint operator in 1 no. block. For the rest of the 19 blocks, 
OIL is non -operator and has participating interest ranging from 10% to 50 % with other 
consortium partners. 
DGH 
Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, the crude oil production 
consists of production from small and medium sized fields awarded by Government of In dia 
(GOI) as well as production from new discoveries made in pre -NELP and New Exploration 
Licensing Policy (NELP) blocks/fields. 
Crude oil production under PSC regime has increased from a level of 9.68 Million 
Metric Tons (MMT) in 2010 -11 to 10.53 MMT in 2011-12 and to 11.64 MMT in 2012 -13. 
The gas production was 26.77 BCM in 2010 -11, 21.61 BCM in 2011 -12 and 14.49 BCM in 
2012-13, which has shown a declining trend. 
Some of the fields are matured and ageing like Panna Mukta, Ravva, CB -OS/2, 
while some are s mall and marginal in nature, which do not have a good sustained plateau 
production and others have shown geological / reservoir surprises. Further, the production 
of crude oil and gas, being a natural resource, is dependent upon the size of oil reservoirs 

45 
 
and its geological complexities. However, the contractors under PSC regime make all 
efforts to increase production from their areas of operation and improve the economic value 
of their assets. 
The following steps are taken by the contractors under PSC regi me to improve the 
crude oil production from the fields under their operations: 
 Improved reservoir characterization 
 Infill drilling and horizontal wells to tap bypassed oil 
 Workover and stimulation of sick wells 
 Water injection to maintain reservoir pressure  
 
Further the performance of the fields under PSC regime is deliberated in Technical 
Committee Meetings (TCM) and Management Committee Meetings (MCM). Various 
suggestions are offered in these meetings for improvement of field performance.  The 
decision o f the contractor for technological or well inputs is taken by him, based on the 
techno-economic considerations. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL) 
The committee notes that OVL is acquiring Oil and Gas blocks abroad in order to 
augment India‟s equity oil for enhancing the energy security of the country. The Committee 
have further been informed that OVL has produced about 8.753 MMT of Oil and Oil 
equivalent Gas during the year 2011 -12 from its assets in Sudan, Vietnam, Venezuela, 
Russia, Syria, Brazil and Colombia. OVL has also entered into one of the world‟s largest 
estimated Oil field in Kazakhstan which will add 1.0 MMT/annum to the Crude Oil 
production of OVL.  However, the estimated Oil and Gas production for the year 2012 -13 
has declined to about 6.865 MMT due to geo political problem in South Sudan and Syria.  
 
The Committee would like to observe that the increase in the price of crude oil has 
made the acquisition of oil and gas assets very expensive. Since OVL is making huge 
investments to get access to equity oil and gas abroad, the Committee would suggest that 
while making such investment, MoP&NG/ONGC/OVL should accord due weightage to the 

46 
 
political stability of a country, as recent political problems in Syria and Sudan, have resulted 
in indirect losses to the nation. 
 
The Committee are further constrained to note that the returns from Imperial Energy 
Corporation (IEC), Russia have not been commensurate with the investment made and 
OVL had to make a provision for impairment of Rs 1953 Crores for IEC due to lower 
performance of the asset against the estimate and reduction in „value in use‟. The 
committee desire that the Ministry should look into the entire gamut of events leading to the 
acquisition of IEC. Since such huge investments are neither adding significant oil rese rves 
nor providing any returns on the investment, the committee, therefore, recommend that in 
the wake of IEL experience, the Ministry should tighten its own due diligence before making 
such huge investments so that the country is able to reap the benefits  out of overseas 
assets.  
REPLY 
Currently, OVL has oil and gas production from 11 Assets in 9 countries, namely, 
Russia,Vietnam , Colombia, Sudan, South Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, Brazil and Azerbaijan. 
Actual oil and gas production was 7.26 MMTOE for the year 2012-13. There was deferment 
of oil and gas production to the tune of 1.43 MMTOE due to geo political condition in South 
Sudan and force majeure situation in Syria. 
 
The suggestions made by the Committee  have been noted. It is submitted that OVL 
is awa re of the volatile nature of the oil prices and its impact on the acquisitions. For 
acquiring  asset overseas, due diligence is carried out on all aspects of technical, 
commercial, Legal, tax & accounting parameters including political stability of the hos t 
country. While entering in a new country for the first time, clearance from MEA is always 
sought. Geopolitical risk is given due weightage in the valuations. The assets in the two 
countries referred to, viz. Syria and Sudan have performed exceedingly wel l Investment 
payback has already been achieved and the pay -back period has been shorter than 
envisaged at the time of approval. It is unfortunate that the two countries ran into 
geopolitical turmoil which could not have been foreseen at the time of acquisition. 
 
The acquisition process followed in OVL is very stringent, strewn with a number of 
approval stage gates of internal approvals. OVL appoints various consultants such as 
technical, financial, legal and tax & accounting consultants who are firms of int ernational 

47 
 
repute, to advise on the acquisition. Before the investment is committed, the project is 
scrutinized  by OVL‟s Project Appraisal Committee of the Board, OVL‟s Board, Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries where Secretaries of the Government of India  participate and 
finally the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. Recently, OVL has started the practice 
of „zero based risk review (ZBRR)‟ wherein all significant risks are analyzed along with 
possible mitigating factors. However, it may be mentioned th at things can go wrong or turn 
out differently in comparison to what was estimated earlier despite the best of due diligence 
in view of inherent nature of the E&P industry. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  18  
LNG Terminals in India  
The Committee note that the Ministry is establishing LNG terminals in various parts 
of the country and the present capacity of the LNG terminals in the country stand at 19.8 
MMSCMD which is further planned to increase to 50 MMSCMD by the end of 12 th plan.  
The LNG terminal at Kochi promoted by Petronet LNG Ltd. with a capacity of 5 MMSCMD 
is also progressing towards mechanical completion.  The Committee are however, 
constrained to note that due consi deration has not been given to the readiness of forward 
linkages and transportation of re -gasified LNG to the consumers.  The Committee feel that 
the laying of infrastructure and supply related works should go hand in hand to avoid idling 
of the infrastruc ture.  The Committee feel that the Ministry should ensure that various 
forward linkages such as prospective buyers, transportation pipelines and other 
infrastructure etc. are progressing in tandem to the progress of the main project plant.  
The Committee have also noted that the PLL has entered into an agreement with the 
Australian Natural Gas Company GORGON for supply of 1.44 MMTPA at a rate of 14 to 
15% of the FoB price of crude oil for the next 20 years.  
The Committee would like to point out that there is a view that since gas discoveries 
have increased all around the globe, the gas prices are likely to remain under pressure due 
to large discoveries whereas crude oil prices are likely to harden.  Hence, the Committee 
are not sure whether it is prudent to  link the gas prices to crude oil prices in long term 
agreements. Therefore, the Committee desire that PSU companies should have options 

48 
 
open to bargain for lower prices in case of decrease in gas prices in future while negotiating 
long term supply agreements.    
REPLY 
As of now, there are three LNG terminals operating in the country viz Dahej (PLL), 
Hazira (Shell) and Dabhol (RGPPL).  The total R -LNG capacity of these terminals is 14.8 
MMTPA. All the three terminals are well connected through pipeline networks, which ha ve 
adequate capacity to evacuate complete RLNG from the respective terminal.   
For the pipeline connectivity for evacuating gas from PLL‟s Kochi terminal, GAIL has 
already completed  Phase -1 of the pipeline network in and around Kochi city  ahead of the 
completion of RLNG terminal by PLL. However, for laying of the Phase -2 of the Kochi -
Koottanad-Mangalore-Bangalore pipeline network, severe resistance is being faced by 
GAIL in the states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala for opening the Right of Usage (ROU).  
Despite having mobilised the contractors, heavy machines and equipment, the pipeline 
laying work is at stand still in the said states for last several months. 
 
GAIL takes the following actions for ensuring forward linkages for transportation of 
R-LNG/NG to customers: 
i) Mapping of all potential customers en -route any proposed Natural Gas pipeline in 
 the Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR). 
ii) During conceptualization stage of pipeline, Heads of Agreement/ MoU is executed 
 with potential customers, based upon which the de cision for laying of pipeline is 
 taken. 
iii) Majority of the potential customers considered as anchor load customers on the 
 pipeline belong to Fertiliser and Power Sector and the  execution of their projects 
 depends on the policies of Government. 
iv) During the pipeline construction phase, GAIL engages in discussions with the 
 potential customers for executing of Gas Transportation Agreement (GTA) and/or 
 Gas Sales Agreement (GSA).   
The above actions by GAIL ensure higher utilization of pipeline capacity thereby  
preventing idling of infrastructure, especially in the initial ramp-up period. 

49 
 
PLL‟s Kochi terminal was proposed to be connected with three pipelines viz. Kochi -
Managalore, Kochi -Bangalore and local network of Kochi area. Out of these only local 
network of Kochi pipeline is connected. Regarding the long term supply agreement of 1.44 
MMTPA LNG entered into between PLL and Mobil Australia Resources Company Pty. Ltd. 
from Gorgon project in Australia, the entire volume has been sold by PLL on a back to back 
basis to the offtakers viz. GAIL, IOC and BPCL. The supply is likely to commence by 2015. 
In view of the perceived possibility of gas prices coming under pressure, in respect 
of long term contracts for import of LNG based on crude oil linked basket such as J CC, 
GAIL has already started insisting on a possible price review clause while negotiating such 
LNG purchase contracts.  The same has already been incorporated by GAIL in one of the 
contracts concluded recently. Further, in order to de -risk the price volat ility, GAIL 
endeavours to create a diversified LNG supply portfolio with different price indices. GAIL‟s 
recent tie-up for import of LNG from USA are linked to the Henry Hub.  
However, LNG market is still perceived as Sellers Market and hence the suppliers  
are reluctant to incorporate price revision provisions in their term sheet or draft agreement.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  19 
Capacity Utilization of Gas Pipelines 
The Com mittee note that the Government/GAIL is committed to increase the 
network of natural gas pipeline in the country.  The Committee also note that the capacity 
utilization for various gas pipelines ranges from 1.91% in case of Chhainsa -Jhajjar-Hissar 
pipeline to 86% in case of Mumbai regional network.  In this regard, the Committee have 
been informed that the main reason for non -utilization of the full capacity is due to non -
availability of Natural Gas for supplying these pipelines as the domestic production i s 
decreasing.  
The Committee note with the serious concern that the objective of laying gas 
pipeline is not fulfilled when the pipeline infrastructure is lying idle due to shortage of gas.  
Therefore, the Committee are of the view that while planning and l aying of gas pipelines, 
the Ministry/GAIL should endavour to tie up for supply of natural gas for a particular 
pipeline or else investments of funds in these projects will not bring in favourable results.  

50 
 
The Committee would suggest GAIL to explore the po ssibility of supplying natural gas by 
import of LNG whenever the Capacity Utilization is low and future does not seem to be 
promising.  
REPLY 
PNGRB grants authorization for laying of natural gas pipelines through bidding 
process under the provisions of the PNGRB Act, 2006 and the Regulations notified 
thereunder. The entity bidding must have a credible plan for utilization of capacity in the 
proposed natural gas pipeline.  
The capacity utilization of the Chhainsa-Jhajar-Hissar pipeline (based on the present 
P/L capacity) has improved to 15%, as against 1.91% earlier.  Major consumers on the 
Chainsa- Jajjhar P/L were SEZ as  planned by RIL at Gurga on, Power plant by Tata Power 
at Hissar and a power plant at Jajjhar by Jindal group.  However, these projects have not 
come up and, therefore, GAIL is now pursuing with new consumers along the Chainsa - 
Jhajjar Pipeline. 
To bridge the gap between the decre asing domestic gas availability and the 
demand, GAIL has sourced LNG from international suppliers on spot, mid -term and long 
term basis. 
  To meet the shortfall of domestic gas to power plants in A.P., GAIL has supplied 
RLNG on spot basis through swapping mechanism which has helped the power producers 
in AP to meet the power requirement. 
  Though R-LNG could be made available on a continuous basis to meet the shortfall 
of domestic gas, price affordability by the consumers is an area of concern.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
Diversion of APM Gas 
The Committee are however, constrained to note the increasing occurrences of the 
diversion of APM gas to non -deserving participants. It has been found that the APM gas 
used by the fertilizer companies for manufacture of urea has also produced various non -
fertilizer products and profited from it. The Committee have been informed that there is no 

51 
 
mechanism with Ministry/GAIL to ensure the  purpose for which the APM gas has been 
utilized. Similarly the Committee has also been informed that power generated with the use 
of APM gas was sold to consumers at commercial rates. 
The Committee understand that the priority for gas allocation has been arrived at 
after considering the need for the various competing sectors for the low cost natural gas 
since these sectors are directly or indirectly fulfilling the requirements of production of 
essential agricultural inputs namely fertilizer. As the domesti c production of natural gas has 
been very low and many industries are lying idle or working at lower capacity due to lack of 
allocation of APM gas, the Committee take serious note of such lapses of the use of 
domestically produced natural gas for commercial and profit making motives. Therefore the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should seriously monitor the diversion of APM gas 
by inspection of production records or such suitable measures and penal action may be 
initiated against the entities which are found guilty in this regard. 
As per the gas allocation policy, gas is allocated to various sectors on priority basis 
to urea based fertilizers plants followed by LPG, Power, CGD sector and then to others. 
Considering the fact that fertilizers can be impo rted whereas power has to be produced 
locally, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should reconsider the gas allocation 
policy of the Government and give power at least the same priority as fertilizer which will 
speed up the industrialization and thus the economic growth of the country.  
REPLY 
To keep a check that APM gas at APM price is supplied to entitled customers, 
MoP&NG has issued directions/clarification to GAIL & NOCs as indicated below: 
(i) Vide letter dated 27.06.2006, MoP&NG had clarified to GA IL that APM price would 
be applicable for only those quantities of gas which are used for generating electricity 
which is supplied to grid for distribution to the consumers through the public utilities/ 
licensed Distribution Companies. GAIL was also direct ed to charge market price for 
those quantities of APM gas which are being supplied by CGD entities to its Industrial & 
Commercial consumers. 
(ii) Vide letter dated 10.07.2006, MoP&NG had directed GAIL to charge market price for 
such quantities of gas used by fe rtilizer plants for manufacturing of products other than 
fertilizers. From 01.01.2009 the same is being charged from fertilizer units. GAIL had 

52 
 
also been directed to collect the details of such quantities of gas used by fertilizer plants 
for manufacturing of products other than fertilizer. Despite repeated follow up the data in 
this regard for the period 10.07.2006 to 31.12.2008 has not been provided by fertilizer 
units and the matter has been taken up with Department of Fertilizers. However, the 
requisite information is yet to be received. 
As regards according high priority to the power sector in allocation of gas, the matter 
is being placed before the Empowered Group of Ministers for a decision.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
Utilization of Budget Outlays by PSUs  
 
The Committee notes that there is skewed utilization of budget outlays by various 
oil PSUs during the previous financial years. In some of the PSUs, there is huge 
variation in the budget estimates and the revised estimates and it is further observed 
that there is under -utilization of the revised budget estimates too. 
 
On perusal of the expenditure made by BPCL it is observed that BE in 2010 -11 for 
fuel quality upgradation at Mumbai refinery was Rs.33 crores and RE was proposed at Rs. 
20 crores whereas the actual expenditure was Rs.5.32 crore. Similarly, the Committee 
have observed that in capacity expansion cum modernization programme - Kochi refinery, 
the BE during 2010 -11 was Rs. 1200 crores and the RE was Rs.750 crores whereas 
the actual was Rs. 650.98 crores and the project has been commissioned. The 
Committee note t hat HPCL during 2011 -12 had an BE of Rs.4003 crores and RE of 
Rs.2828 crores whereas actual expenditure was Rs.2584 crores. The BE of 2012 -13 was 
fixed at Rs.3467.43 crores. The Committee would like to observe that the BE and the 
actual have wide variance and even the RE which is generally arrived at during the 
course of the year has also seen significant variation with the actual figure .in most of the 
years in the case of PSUs. The Committee, therefore, would like to conclude that 
the PSUs are not taking their budgetary preparations with seriousness it deserves. 
 
To have realistic budget estimates, the Committee desire that while 
planning the budget estimates for a financial year, the revised estimates of the previous 

53 
 
year should be taken into consideration. Possible measures should also be adopted 
for speeding up the projects undertaken by various oil PSUs so that the budget 
earmarked for a project within a year is fully utilized. The Committee also desire that 
while a ssessing the fund requirement for a particular project, proper analysis should 
be made in order to avoid downward revision as happened in case of fuel quality 
upgradation at Mumbai refinery of BPCL. 
REPLY 
The Annual Plan of the oil and gas PSUs is finalised after a detailed discussion 
with concerned oil and gas PSUs on each of the new projects and the status of the 
ongoing projects. The projects are undertaken by the PSUs from their Internal & Extra 
Budgetary Resources (I&EBR). Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of projects through regular review meetings.  Companies 
are being advised to identify the major bottlenecks/impediments for time overrun and 
draw up catch -up Plans so that delays are arrested. The project Managers are to 
closely monitor achievements of targeted schedule for completion.  
The Company -wise responses to the issues raised by the Committee are as 
follows: 
BPCL : 
The outlays for the revised estimat es (RE) are worked out considering the progress 
of the projects during the year and the estimated expenditure likely to materialize by the 
end of the year.  However, at times there is shortfall in expenditure on account of delay in 
receipt of material due to which the payments get postponed. Year -wise BE, RE and actual 
expenditure during 2010-11 to 2012-13 is as follows: 
          (Rs. in crore)                                                                      
Year Budget Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
 
1. 2010-11 3022 2814 2283 
2. 2011-12 2865 2199 1566 
3. 2012-13 4479 3546 3937 
 

54 
 
In the case of project „Fuel quality upgradation at Mumbai refinery‟, the project was 
completed and units commissioned in January 2010. A provision of Rs.33 crore (later 
revised to Rs. 20 crore) was made in the outlays for pending final bills of major contracts, 
residual payment against defect liability etc. However, the actual expenditure was lower 
than the provision made. 
In the case of „Capacity Expansion c um Modernization project‟ at Kochi refinery, the 
variation seen was on account of delay in receipt of critical equipment from BHEL. Besides, 
the project was completed at a lower cost due to lower financing charges, cenvat credits 
and savings. Further, addi tional land acquisition that was earlier envisaged while working 
out the estimates, could not be done during the period.   
Due care is being exercised while preparing the budget estimates in a financial year, 
considering the revised estimates and expenditu re materialized in the earlier year, to have 
outlays in line with the estimated expenditure. 
Rigorous follow-up is also being maintained at the highest level for expediting receipt 
of goods at site where delay is observed. The progress of implementation of  major projects 
is monitored by BPCL Board periodically. MOP&NG also reviews the progress of projects 
periodically and during the Quarterly Performance Review meetings.         
 
HPCL : 
Budget Estimates for Plan outlay on projects are prepared every year af ter thorough 
analysis and review of progress of ongoing plan projects as well as requirement for new 
plan projects during the year. Plan outlay on ongoing projects is estimated after considering 
the current status of the project and the estimated progress of the project in the Budget 
Year.  Revised Estimates of expenditure on Plan projects are made, considering the 
current status of individual projects and the possible percentage of Project progress till the 
end of year. Year -wise BE, RE and actual expendit ure during 2010 -11 to 2012 -13 is as 
follows :                                           
 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
    (Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
1. 2010-11 3924 4685 3100 
2. 2011-12 4003 2828 2585 
3. 2012-13 3467 3354 2837 
 
 HPCL have methodical process of estimates of Plan outlay. However, due to factors 
beyond control, variations do occur in BE, RE & Actual expenditure.  The major reasons for 
variation are due to: 
 Delay in clearance from statutory bodies like PNGRB which has  resulted in delay in 
commencement of the pipeline projects vis a vis originally planned. (Projects: 
Rewari-Kanpur Pipeline, Awa -Salawas Pipeline, Mangalore -Bangalore LPG 
Pipeline) 
 Delay in getting land from Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) 
and further delay in getting environmental clearance has delayed  Green R&D 
Centre Project at Bangalore 
 
 In case of Visakh/Ennore Terminal Projects, the change in scope of the project due 
to MB Lal Committee / New Oil India Safety Directorate (OISD) norm implementation 
which came into effect after BE stage necessitated revision estimate accordingly  
 In case of Exploration & Production activity, HPCL is a non -operator with minor 
share.  The expenditure is estimated based on envisaged work program by the 
Operator.  However, the actual expenditure is incurred as per the cash calls basis 
actual physical progress made by the operator, which was affected by delay in 
getting Statutory and MOD clearances, shift in work program due to test flights as 
per requ irements of MOD, weather windows, availability of rigs and agencies to 
execute the job.  Also, in some cases the outcome of a work program of a particular 
stage may substantially affect the work program of subsequent stage. 

56 
 
 Delay in execution of Diesel Hyd ro-treater Projects at both Mumbai & Visakh 
Refineries was mainly due to delay by Lump Sum Turn Key Contractor (LSTK) 
Contractor and other major contractors. 
  As can be seen, the major reasons for variations are delay in approvals by statutory 
authorities which is beyond the control of Corporation.  With respect to delay due to other 
reasons, steps have already been taken to prepare a Catch up Plan to expedite the 
projects.  Also, expediting Meetings are held regularly with Project Management Committee  
(PMC) and top management of the contractors to speed up the work,  to enhance the 
resources deployed in order  to achieve the planned progress and thereby the utilisation of 
the capital outlay.  
IOCL :  
Indian Oil has made an expenditure of Rs.48654.78 crore i n the 11 th Plan period 
(2007-2012) against approved Budget of Rs.45430.28 crore. This was Rs.3224.50 crore 
more than the target & was 107.10 % of the original outlay. Year -wise BE, RE and actual 
expenditure during 2010-11 to 2012-13 is as follows:-   
(Rs. in crore)                                                                    
Year Budget 
Estimate (BE) 
Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
1. 2010-11 12825 12000 9831 
2. 2011-12 14500 11000 11073 
3. 2012-13 10000 10000 9378 
 
Preparation of BE / RE is a structured, stringent exercise in Indian Oil. At the 
divisional level, Project wise / month wise details are made by analyzing all the major 
contracts / expenditures planned under various heads in the Project. For ongoing Projects 
Budget estimation is done based on contractual commitments, job in progress & completed 
jobs. For new projects, anticipation of the expected approval time, expenditure etc. is done 
for allotting the expenditure required in pre - project stages. 
Pursuant to the above, the propose d expenditure is further checked at the corporate 
level before the management approval of the budget. 

57 
 
The approval process is also multi -tier & the budgets are approved by Divisional 
Project Heads/  Finance heads & subsequently Director. Corporate Office does the analysis 
over and above done already at divisional level & the comprehensive proposal for Indian 
Oil is thus put to approval of Director (Finance) & Chairman. Various steps are taken and 
stringent & threadbare analysis is done while making the BE /  RE as realistic as possible & 
to avoid wide variance.  
ONGC: 
The plan outlay of ONGC for RE and BE of the respective year is firmed up 
considering the optimum level of physical activity (Survey Exploratory and Development 
Drilling and Capital Schemes).  The actual and revised estimates of the previous year are 
also considered while firming up the plan outlay.  Year -wise BE, RE and actual expenditure 
during 2010-11 to 2012-13 is as follows: 
(Rs. in crore)                                                                     
Year Budget 
Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
1. 2010-11 26523.02 29203.80 28275.54 
2. 2011-12 30040.02 31316.00 29246.55 
3. 2012-13 33065.31 33577.00 29503.21 
 
To ensure optimum utilization of budget for 2013 -14, work-centres have been 
requested to continuously monitor the progress of activities and take corrective measures 
required so that full utilization of budget is ensured. 
ONGC Videsh (OVL): 
OVL operates mainly as minority partner in several overseas projects. The Budget 
exercise of OVL is based on firm budget as proposed by Operators on calendar year basis 
which is reclassified / extrapolated to match with financial year Budget process of OVL . 
While preparing the Budget estimates, due care is taken to consider the Revised Estimates 
for the previous year to arrive at the Budget estimates for the next year.  
 

58 
 
 
The following reasons can impact a full utilization of Budget: 
 Some of OVL‟s projects are in exploration areas where investment decision is based 
on certain other development which cannot be known in advance. However to 
mitigate this, OVL estimates the budget outlays based on firm and contingent basis. 
 The budget provision for activities re lating to acquisition of oil & gas assets hinges 
upon availability of opportunities, sound economics and timely approvals, and it does 
not follow an annual cycle which leads to sudden spurt or dips in budget utilization 
towards new acquisitions. 
 Force majeure conditions due to Geo -political developments in a few projects have 
led to curtailment of work programme leading to underutilization of Budget. 
 In a few projects, the projects are implemented with substantial involvement of host 
government companies ( e.g. in Venezuela). Challenges are being faced here due to 
delay in timely availability of Environmental and other statutory clearances; 
availability of quality equipment at cost appropriate rates, trained local manpower; 
compliance of Local content requir ement; acute shortage of offshore rigs in these 
countries. 
 
In spite of the above challenges, OVL has been endeavoring to achieve plan 
expenditure utilisation to the fullest extent possible. This is reflected in the steady 
improvement in its plan expenditure utilisation trend over the years as seen below:                                                                  
            (Rs. in crore) 
Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
(Provisional) 
Budget Estimate (BE) 8,663 8,687 7,910 
Revised Estimate (RE) 6,621 8,619 13,140 
Actual utilization 5,650 8,000 10,678 
 
 
 

59 
 
Oil India Ltd. (OIL): 
The details of Plan Outlay and its utilization by OIL during the years 2011-12 & 2012-13 are 
as under : 
          (Rs. in crore) 
Item 2010-11 2011-12 
 
2012-13 
Budget Estimate (BE) 4464.98 3,180.33 3,378.29 
Revised Estimate (RE) 4212.99 2,262.68 3,069.52 
Actual Expenditure 1742.76 2,049.67 2,890.03 
 
From the above, it may be seen that OIL has achieved 90.59% of the RE Plan 
Outlay Target for FY 2011 -12 and 94.15% of the RE Plan Outlay Target for FY 2012 -13.  
This has been possible with  continuous monitoring of the progress of the Plan Activities by 
the top management throughout the year. 
OIL follows a realistic and scientific process for preparing the Budget Estimates for 
Plan Expenditure, both BE & RE and actual progress of the activities till the time of 
preparation of the Plan Expenditure targets are considered while preparing the BE & RE 
targets.  Accordingly, OIL had submitted Plan Expenditure (BE)  target for FY 2013 -14 at 
Rs. 3,275.24 crore, considering the estimated level of expenditure in FY 2012 -13 and 
activities planned in FY 2013 -14.  However, while approving the Plan Outlay for FY 2013 -
14, the Planning Commission has increased the Plan Outlay  target (BE) for FY 2013 -14 
upward to Rs. 3,580.99 crore. 
GAIL (India) Limited: 
During 11th Plan (2007 -2012) GAIL incurred total Actual expenditure of Rs.19789 
crore against BE Rs.11944 crore.  The details of Capital expenditure incurred during last 
three years by GAIL are as follows. 
 
 

60 
 
  (Rs. in core) 
Financial Year BE  RE Actual  
2010-11 5510 5765 5200 
2011-12 5150 6880 6752 
2012-13 9447 6739 5962 
 
  In GAIL, the Capital expenditure is monitored / reviewed by our Management every 
month and we take corrctive measures as and when required. The expenditure against 
budget outlays in case of GAIL projects depends mainly on external factors such as 
availability of land / right of user / various statutory permissions for projects, which are 
beyond control of GAIL. However, within these constraints, GAIL is able to achieve around 
90% of budget outlays (RE) on consistent basis.  
Further, part of the apparent und er performance against budget outlays is due to 
savings GAIL is able to achieve in the project cost through some of the best procurement 
practises as well as penalties on account of delayed performance i.e. GAIL is able to 
achieve envisaged work output at a lower cost than estimated cost and hence the same 
may not be considered as under performance as far as utilization of budget outlays is 
concerned. 
Budget exercises in GAIL are carried out with utmost care and expenditures are 
reviewed every month through structured meetings. Necessary corrective actions are taken 
to remain aligned with approved budgets to the extent possible. Also, GAIL, at its level, is 
taking all measures and putting best efforts to ensure that projects are executed as per 
schedule. How ever, for reasons beyond control of GAIL, such as constraints in timely 
availability of RoU, Land & Statutory permissions etc., the project schedules defer which 
leads to downward revision of budget outlays.    
In 2012 -13, BE of Rs.9447 crore had to be rev ised to Rs.6739 crore. Actual 
spending was Rs.5962 crore due to following reasons:-  
 
 

61 
 
Major Pipeline Projects:-  
 Kochi-Kottanand P/L:-(a) Pre-ponement of line pipe delivery and payment made in 
2011-12.(b)Stiff resistance from farmers and land owners towards RoU acquisition in 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. 
 Dabhol Banglore P/L: -The variation is due to preponement of laying works which 
effected the payment released.   
 BNPL P/L: - Delay in execution of laying works because of RoU issues &delay in  
permission from MOEF  
 Vijaipur Kota Spur lines : - Non execution of laying works because of lack of 
permission and non -availability of RoU in section C, D & E. Bills for works that has 
been completed is yet to be received from Contractor. 
 Jagdishpur -Haldia P/L :- There is no  fresh activities, progress linked with gas tie up. 
E & P: - In Block MN-OSN-2000/2 two wells have been drilled   Payments expected 
during 2013-14 as queries are pending with Operator.  Drilling of wells in Golaghat 
deferred to 2013-14.    
 RGPPL & JV: - Equity payments are linked with demand.  
 Wind Energy Project:- Closure bills under process for payment.    
 M & A Projects:-GAIL during FY 2012 -13 acquired 2.3mtpa liquefaction capacity in 
Cove Point LNG terminal in USA as part of its overseas energy acquisition efforts. 
The acquisition would help GAIL to source LNG to meet energy demand of Indian 
market as well as  meet its growth aspirations.  No investment was made for 
acquisition of the terminal capacity.  
 MRPL: 
 
As far as MRPL is concerned, the details of budget outlays viz BE, RE & Actual for last 
three years are given here below for ready reference.  
              (Rs in crore) 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2010-11 3156.00 3671.00 3989.68 
2011-12 5164.00 4223.60 3915.42 
2012-13 6817.26   2847.47 2115.55 
 

62 
 
The reasons for downward revision of Budget Estimate and under utilization of 
Revised Estimate are as under: 
 
During the year 2010-11, there is no under utilization of Budget resources during the 
year. However, it may be seen table above that during the year 2011 -12, the RE was 
lower than the BE as:  (a) BE was made basis approve d project cost, which included 
contingencies also. Since the cost commitment based on the projected pert charts was 
observed to be less, it was revised downwards and (b) there was minor (7%) under 
utilization of RE due to the extended monsoon which delayed  the field work and the 
vendors were unable to claim the targeted billing/amount. Also one of the project units 
Polypropylene Unit, could not be commenced as unencumbered land was not available 
and re-engineering was to be done for relocation of the unit. 
 
During the year 2012 -13 the State Govt. in April -2012, had stopped MRPL from 
pumping water from its raw water (river water source) for two weeks which led to abrupt 
stoppage of all project related construction work apart from closure of refinery operation s. 
Besides, due to delay by BHEL in execution of co -generation power plant (now expected 
to be completed by end of 2013), commissioning activity of various units had to be 
postponed. Due to such postponement, the stage payment by vendors could not be 
claimed. Also, the SPM work included on -shore work of underground pipe line to be 
executed by ISPRL which is delayed. Further, we had provided for probable equity 
contribution to an Aromatic complex unit which was jointly floated by ONGC & MRPL. The 
issue of fu nd raising through equity was reviewed by the Board of OMPL (aromatic 
complex) and it was decided to appoint equity advisors to suggest the ways & means of 
funding equity contribution to this project.  In view of this decision, we revised our Budget 
estimate. The (MRPL) Board, accordingly while approving RE 2012 -13 did not consider 
the equity contribution during 2012-13. 
 
The main reason for under utilization of revised estimate in 2012 -13 has been the 
delay by BHEL in execution of co -generation power plant  which in turn had cascading 
impact on pre -commissioning & commissioning activity of other units & facilities which 
were otherwise mechanically complete. Besides, the work of Poly Propylene unit could not 
be undertaken for want of environment clearance due  to its revised location.  Hence, the 
expenditure was lower. 
 

63 
 
CPCL: 
The BE, RE and actual plan expenditure for 2010-11 to 2012-13 is as under: 
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2010-11 1079 867 675 
2011-12 1054 373 490 
2012-13 786 279 261 
 
 
 CPCL takes into careful consideration all factors for making realistic BE and RE. The 
variation between BE and RE for the year 2012 -13 is mainly on account of delay in 
obtaining Environmental clearance from the Ministry of Environment & Forest for Resid 
Upgradation Project and non receipt of Coastal Regulatory Zone clearance for Crude Oil 
Pipeline Project. 
 However, CPCL is taking budgetary preparations with all seriousness it deserves 
and would continue to endeavour to make realistic budgetary estimates. 
NRL:  
 Currently, the only major Plan project under implementation by NRL is the „Wax 
Project‟. The other Plan projects of NRL are either under feasibility study stage or are „line -
entries‟. The Wax project is being implemented by NRL with an approved project cos t of 
Rs. 577 crore.  
The BE, RE and actual plan expenditure for 2010-11 to 2012-13 is as under:                                                                          
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2010-11 234.24 158.51 139.24 
2011-12 100.47 90.17 83.87 
2012-13 272.00 225.00 160.15 

64 
 
 
Overall progress of the project as on 31 st March, 2013 reached 68.5% and all 
measures are being taken for achieving mechanical completion by December 2013, as 
scheduled. Actual expenditure against the project during 2013 -14 is projected to be in line 
with the approved BE of Rs.280 crore.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No. 22  
 
Cost Escalation on various Projects 
 
The Committee note with serious concern the upward revision occurring in the cost 
estimations of various projects of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. As 
informed by the Ministry, there are 10 projects costing above Rs. 1000 crore where cost 
escalation has occurred which include 8 projects of ONGC and one project ea ch of BPCL 
and IOCL. The Committee understand that the delays occur mainly due to awaited 
clearances from Ministry of Environment & Forests, Local bandhs, natural calamities 
such as rock slide etc. 
 
However, the cost escalation is even 30% of the approved costs of the 
projects as observed in the cases of Mumbai High South redevelopment project 
(ONGC), development of cluster -VII field at Mumbai Offshore (ONGC), integrated 
development of G -1 and GS -15 ( ONGC), hydrocracker revamp and setting up new 
continuous catalytic regeneration reformer (BPCL). Though, the approvals for 
revising the cost of the project are sought from the competent authorities, the 
Committee feel that the cost escalations are imposing undue burden on the 
Government. 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive 
measures so as to ensure that there should be no cost escalation and the projects are 
completed at the approved cost only. 
 
 
 

65 
 
 
REPLY 
Out of 40 projects presently implemented by the Oil PSUs costing Rs.1000 crore 
and above, there is cost escalation in  13 projects and in 5 projects it is estimated that total 
cost will be less than the original approved cost. The cost escalation in the 13 projects was 
primarily due to reasons like change in scope of the project or specific unforeseen factors 
during execution. In order to restrict further escalation, such projects are being closely 
monitored on monthly and quarterly basis. There is all out effort to maintain expenditure 
well within the approved project cost. Company -wise reasons for exceeding projected cost 
and action taken is as follows: 
ONGC: 
Project monitoring is under continuous focus of ONGC management and various 
corrective measures are undertaken to address the issues related to projects including cost 
escalation and delays in project execution. Apart from close monitoring at various levels, 
the projects are also being critically reviewed by top management at regular intervals. The 
three referred projects where cost escalation is on higher side was on account of 
unavoidable circumstances as briefed under:- 
RDP-II, MH South Project:  
Feasibility Report of the project was approved on October 03, 2007 at project cost of 
Rs. 6339.20 crore (@ FE rate of Rs.41/$) revised cost estimate (RCE) was prepared due to 
reasons like: re-scheduling of inputs, change in scope of work, increase in FE rate from Rs. 
41/$ in FR to Rs. 50/$, revision in facility cost (due to increase in barge rates, steel & 
fabrication rates, change in material cost, mob -demob of marine spread and structural 
tonnage cost etc) and  Increase in drilling cost  (due to increase in day rig rate). 
The RCE was approved by the Board on May 05, 2009 at a total revised cost of Rs 
8813.41 Cr for the project. As per current status, all facilities envisaged in the project have 
been implemented and 69 redevelopment wells have been drilled against the plan of 75.  
 
 

66 
 
 
Development of Cluster-7 project:  
Feasibility Report was approved by the board  on 25.03.2010 at project cost of Rs. 
3241.03 Cr and FPSO hiring cost of 1309.37 Cr for five years of primary contract period. 
RCE was necessitated due to revision of project schedule, facility cost & FPSO 
hiring cost after award. RCE has been approved by the Board on April 30, 2013 at project 
cost of Rs 2613.58 crore for facilities and drilling & completion of wells and opex of Rs 
4025.36 crore for FPSO hiring for nine years. Increase in primary contract period from five 
years to nine years is considering significant implication of duration of primary contract 
period of hiring FPSO on the day rate and inclusion of cost of flexible pipelines (PLEM to 
FPSO) into the FPSO cost. Facility tender for installation of four well platforms has been 
completed and pipe line tender is nearing completion. FPSO tender has been awarded on 
16-02-2013. Drilling rigs have been deployed on B-192-1, B-192-5 and B-192-8 platforms.  
G-1 and GS-15 Development Project: 
The scheme, developed using in -house expertise, “Integrated Devel opment of G -1 
and   GS -15 fields in K.G. Offshore” was approved by ONGC Board on 22.04.03 at a 
preliminary estimated capital cost of Rs. 429.82 crore and completion schedule of 24 
months from the date of approval. Later a supplementary FR to include G -1-10 & G1-11 
wells of southern segment of G -1 field for development along with the earlier approved 
scheme with an additional estimated cost of Rs. 80.55 crore bringing the overall project 
cost to Rs 510.37 crore and overall completion period of 29 months was approved by the 
Board in its meeting held on 26.3.04. 
On 30.11.2004 ONGC Board accorded approval to implement the project “Integrated 
Development of G-1 & GS-15 fields in KG offshore”, based on actual quoted price of the by 
the successful bidder. An additi onal sanction of Rs. 752.56 crore was accorded for the 
scheme at a total capital cost of Rs. 1,262.93 crore and completion by April 2006. Further it 
is estimated that an additional sanction of Rs 701.25 crore would be required and RCE 
based on updated cost  works out to Rs 3,436.90 crore. The proposal for approval of 
Revised Cost had been put up to Board and it is decided that an analysis/ audit of project 

67 
 
cost/ time over runs be carried out by some external/ 3rd party. This is currently in progress 
by Deloitte. 
The project has been suffering setbacks due to various unprecedented challenges 
mostly beyond the control of ONGC. The first one, which can be called the trigger for all the 
subsequent challenges, was unprecedented steep hike in the oil prices. Had th is not been 
there, the project probably could have been completed within schedule and within the cost 
revised in April 2007. Termination of the contract of  M/s Clough Engineering Limited 
(CEL), Australia midway and taking over of all half completed activi ties by ONGC resulted 
in delay up to 2011 and thereafter natural calamity, the harsh sea conditions, limited 
working weather window, technical challenges facing the subsea industry etc. continued to 
delay the project and add to the cost. 
Nevertheless, Eastern Offshore Asset (EOA) has been making all serious efforts to 
overcome these challenges and put the fields on production as soon as possible. The     
GS-15-1 shallow water platform has been put on production since 31st August 2011 and 
production from G1 to commence this year. 
Further Action taken by ONGC:  
To address the issues related to the present way of project execution ONGC has 
migrated to stage gate project management process (Approved by EC on 28th Nov/ 3rd 
Dec 2012). The stage -gate process is the  framework for implementing a structured project 
management process. The stage -gate process defines a sequence of phases and gates 
that each project must pass through, providing a roadmap for the consistent, successful 
execution of projects.   Each stage ha s an objective statement, a set of required tasks and 
deliverable.  
It is considered that implementation of the process in future will help in avoiding cost 
escalation due to technical uncertainties.  This will also minimize the cost escalation 
occurring due to change in FE rates as the date of project approval will be closer in time to 
the date of award. 
 
 

68 
 
BPCL: 
The scope of the project „Hydrocracker revamp and new Continuous Catalytic 
regeneration Reformer (CCR)‟ at Mumbai refinery was revised considering  long term auto 
fuel requirements and availability of additional Naphtha from the refinery, post natural gas 
scenario.  
It was decided to enhance the capacity of CCR from 0.9 MMTPA to 1.2 MMTPA. In 
view of the increase in CCR capacity, a need for a new Naphtha Hydro -treater unit was felt 
against originally envisaged revamp of Naphtha Hydro -de-sulphurisation unit. The increase 
in capacity of CCR also required a pressure Swing Absorber as a process requirement.  
Thus, taking into consideration the design requirements and operational need as 
stated above, the project cost was revised to Rs.1827 crore.  
While all care is taken t o complete the projects within the approved cost, at times, 
the scope of project also needs revision due to change in various factors during execution.   
IOCL:  
Following Projects costing Rs.1000 crore & above (listed below) in the last three 
years in Indian Oil have been completed within approved cost / permissible limit of +/-10%: 
Sl. 
No. 
Projects Completed 
Year of 
Commissioning 
Approved 
cost (Rs. in 
crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Rs. in crore) 
upto 
30.04.2013) 
% 
Deviation 
1.   Naphtha Cracker  at Panipat 2010-11 14439 13895.79 -3.76% 
2.   Residue Upgradation and 
MS/HSD Quality Upgradation 
Project at Gujarat Refinery 
2010-11 6898 6400.87 -7.21% 
3.   Panipat Refinery Additional 
Expansion Project from 12 to 15 
MMTPA 
  
2010-11 1007.83 991.89 -1.58% 
4.   MS Quality Upgradation Project 
at Barauni 2010-11 1492 1403.41 -5.94% 
5.   DHDT, Bongaigaon 2011-12 1646.39 1707.55 3.71% 
6.   Integrated Offshore Crude Oil 
Handling facilities at Paradip 
2012-13 1492.33 1448.6 -2.93% 
 

69 
 
Ongoing projects > Rs.1000 crore 
Sl.No. Name of Projects Approved cost 
(Rs. in crore) 
Remarks 
1.  Paradip-Raipur-Ranchi Pipeline 1793.00 No cost escalation is 
envisaged 
2.  Debottlenecking of Salaya-Mathura 
Pipeline  
1584.00 No cost escalation is 
envisaged 
3.  FCCU Revamp at Mathura Refinery  1000.00 No cost escalation is 
envisaged 
4.  Paradip Refinery 29777.00 Project got delayed but the 
cost escalation is envisaged 
to be within + 10 % of 
approved cost. 
 
Indian Oil is taking the following measures to speed up the Projects so that budget 
earmarked is fully utilized without any cost overrun  
 Suitable number of manpower is posted at Project sites for day to day monitoring of 
the Project & to identify / remove  bottlenecks & put additional resources (if required) 
which ensure that the projects are completed in time. 
 Regular reporting of all the Projects is done & a consolidated report is sent upto the 
Senior Management level on physical as well as financial Prog ress. Periodical 
exception reports are generated for each of the project indicating physical and 
financial trend of the project and impediments being faced with proposed solution.  
 A report is also submitted to the Indian Oil Board for all major projects c osting Rs. 
150.00 crore and above on monthly basis.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  24 
Capacity Utilisation of Refineries 
The Committee note that the present refining capacity  of the country stands at 
215.06 MMT out of which 120.06 MMTPA is in public sector. Also various public sector 
refineries are planning capacity expansion during the Twelfth Plan which will increase the 
refinery capacity from 120.06 MMTPA to 194.366 MMTPA .  The Committee however, note 
that there is an under -utilization of existing capacity due to non -availability of the requisite 
grade of crude for processing in the refineries. 

70 
 
 The Committee understand that the refineries are producing various petroleum 
products which are exported thereby earning foreign exchange and the refinery expansion 
plans will also help India emerge as a refining hub in Asia. The Committee, however, desire 
that while going in for refinery expansion plans, the Ministry should ensure the availability of 
requisite grade of crude oil for its PSU refineries in order to achieve full capacity utilization. 
The Committee further desire that Ministry /OMCs should do a study before making huge 
investments in refinery expansion plans taking into account the returns that are expected to 
accrue therefrom. 
REPLY 
 The total refining capacity of oil refineries in the country as on date is 215.066 Million 
Metric Tonnes Per Annum (MMTPA). Out of this, 120.066 MMTPA capacity is in the public 
sector refineries. 
  The refinery-wise quantum of crude oil refined in the PSU refineries and the capacity 
utilization during each of the last five years is given in Annexure. 
 
 The overall capacity utilization of public sector refineries in the last 5 years is as under : 
As can be seen from the above table, the overall capacity utilization of PSU 
refineries has been in line with the installed capacity. 
Further, in a de-licensed refinery sector, the setting up of a refinery and its operation 
is a commercial decision of a pu blic/ private sector enterprise based on techno -commercial 
Year Installed 
Capacity 
( MMTPA) 
Actual Crude 
Throughput ( MMT) 
Capacity 
Utilisation (%) 
2008-09 105.456 112.255 106.4 
2009-10 108.598 112.186 103.3 
2010-11 116.898 114.984 98.4 
2011-12 116.886 120.608 103.2 
2012-13 120.066 120.311 100.2 

71 
 
considerations. Refinery expansion plans are taken up for implementation by OMCs only 
after ensuring the technical feasibility and economic viability of the projects.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
Recommendation No. 25  
Fuel  Loss suffered by refineries 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that the fuel loss suffered by various public 
sector refineries has increased substantially over the past few years which is affecting the 
gross refinery margins and ultimately the efficiencies of the refineries .  The Com mittee 
wish to point out that in some of the refineries, fuel loss is as high as 10% of the total crude 
throughput. In IOCL‟s Guwahati refinery the situation is more serious as the fuel loss is of 
the order of 12.9%. The Committee understand that some of r efineries in India were 
designed in the 1970‟s and energy efficiency measures have not been carried out in these 
refineries. The Committee further note that the various improvement techniques to 
minimize the hydrocarbon losses adopted by some refineries have given positive results.  
 The Committee are of the opinion that fuel loss in a refinery is an avoidable loss and 
all efforts to reduce it should be pursued by OMCs/ Ministry. Such efforts will save large 
amounts and will add to the earnings of the refin eries . Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry/PSU should monitor the implementation of measures taken in order to 
reduce the fuel loss of refineries. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should study 
the methods adopted globally by refin eries and adopt required techniques for reduction of 
fuel loss. 
REPLY 
 The Fuel  Loss in a refinery is the difference between the crude processed and the total 
products produced by the refinery. Refinery configuration and complexity, product slate and 
specifications, severity of operation, operational flexibility envisaged, state of Process 
Technology employed, Steam & power balance, Captive Power plant configuration are major 
contributing factors towards energy consumption. The overall complexity of the re finery is 
measured in terms of Energy Factor.In order to compare the energy efficiency of the different 
refineries with different processing capacity and plant complexity, Specific Energy 

72 
 
Consumption (in terms of Million BTU per barrel of crude processed p er Energy Factor called 
MBN) rather than Fuel  Loss is a better indicator of overall energy efficiency of the refinery. 
 Over the years, the PSU refineries in India have adopted and implemented number of 
energy conservation measures to reduce the Energy Consumption as summarised below : 
 Equipment oriented approach 
 Efficiency improvement of Heaters: 
- Replacement of old, low efficiency Furnaces with high efficiency Furnaces 
with Air Pre-Heaters (APH), improved Control Systems & Burner Designs    
- Installation of on -line O 2 analyzers for combustion air, Auto -Combustion 
Control System and Burner Management System for optimum firing 
- Installation of variable frequency drives (VFDs) in FD fan motor of APH & H2 
unit Reformers for better energy management 
- Installation of sonic soot blower for efficient soot blowing in convection bank 
- Implementation of pass balancing in heaters thru advanced process control 
 Heat exchanger performance improvement: 
- Heat exchanger train optimization using pinch technology 
- Installation of plate heat exchanger for better heat recovery 
- Turbulence promoter for high viscous fluid for increased savings 
- Use of high flux tubes for improved heat transfer 
- Use of anti-foulants for better heat recovery 
- Heat integration through global pinch analysis 
 Distillation column performance improvement: 
- High efficiency/low pressure drop packings for lower energy consumption 
- Application of dry vacuum system in vacuum column (vacuum pump)  
- Optimization of column pressure & over-flash minimization   
- Low level heat recovery from column overhead vapour& hot well off gas 
 Air Fan coolers performance efficiency improvement: 
- Implementation of variable speed drivers or installation of multi -speed         
motors to regulate air flow depending on ambient temperature. 
- Installation of low weight FRP blades to reduce power consumption 

73 
 
 Captive Power Plant efficiency improvement 
- Installation of Gas Turbine Generator (GTG) & Heat Recovery 
SteamGenerator (HRSG) 
- Installation of high efficiency Boilers 
- Running the power plant on co -generation & combined cycle mode for 
efficiencies up to 90% from 30% for conventional boiler based power plant 
- Minimization of PRDS operation  
 General approach: 
 Modeling & optimization of Steam System 
 Proper insulation of Steam Network & Minimizing Steam venting 
 Efficient use of Steam-traps & Condensate Recovery System 
 Recovery of LP steam by flashing HP/MP Condensate 
 Proper selection & maintenance of Steam users 
 Installation of temperature controller on tank heating coil 
 Optimizing hydrogen management through pinch approach 
 Installation of RO of correct size in snuffing/purging Steam & gland sealing lines 
 Regular Steam trap audit 
 Balance Pressure Thermostatic (BPT) traps on open -ended copper tube tracing, 
Steam line to pump seal quench, etc. 
 Overall site -pinch analysis for optimizing utility system, tapping low -level heat 
recovery potential and achieving better inter -unit heat integration and better 
energy optimization 
 Installation of auto -sampler on crude receiving line for accurate measurement of 
BS&W 
 Installation of proper desalting facilities in CDU for knocking out water  
 Hot feed maximization with proper coordination with other units 
 Fugitive emissions survey by GMI Gas -surveyor, V -pac survey for passing of 
PSVs and control valves and Trap -man survey f or steam trap monitoring on 
regular basis 
 Provision of flare meters in major units for better management of flare loss 
 Provision of double seal in floating roof tanks for reducing fugitive emissions 

74 
 
 Provision of mass flow meters in fuel oil line of heaters  for accurate 
measurement 
  
Others measures  
 Quarterly Performance Review : Centre for High Technology (CHT), under Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas, regularly monitors the energy performance of the 
refineries in terms of Fuel & Loss and Specific Energy Consumption (MBN) and is 
also reviewed by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) in the 
Quarterly Performance Review of PSU refineries. 
 Institution of Awards: In order to encourage energy conservation and motivate the 
refineries, MoP&NG has instituted following two annual awards: 
 Jawaharlal Nehru Centenary Awards for Energy Performance of Refineries – 
CHT monitors and evaluates the annual energy performance of refineries for 
finalizing these awards. 
 Oil & Gas Conservation Fortnight (OGCF) Awards in the areas of “Furnace/Boiler 
Insulation Effectiveness and Furnace/Boiler Efficiency” and “Steam Leak” – the 
award is based on the survey conducted by CHT during the OGCF in the 2 nd 
fortnight of January every year.  
 Joint Energy Audit (JEA) of refineries 
 Joint Energy Audits (JEAs), were initiated in 1991 -92 and thereafter conducted 
regularly at refineries by CHT -led teams. They offer an excellent opportunity in a 
limited time frame to further supplement energy conservation efforts already being 
practised. JEAs involve active participation from refineries and are conducted in the 
spirit of self-audit with the benefit of collective wisdom of all participating refineries to 
clearly identify the scope of Energy Savings in each refinery for structured adoption. 
 The main purpose of JEA is to utilize the operating / design expertise available with 
the members from Refineries, EIL & CHT, through design/operating data analysis, 
lateral interaction, for recommending practicable schemes that include both sho rt 
term (with / without investment i.e. to optimize energy through fine tuning of 

75 
 
operation, better controls, best operating practices, ideas, thoughts, thumb -rules, 
optimization achieved in process units, etc.), mid-term/long term solutions.   
On account of the various efforts taken by the industry and CHT, the overall PSU 
refineries‟ average Specific Energy Consumption (in terms of MBN) has  come down 
substantially from 81 in 2004-05 to 63 in 2011-12.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  26 
Ethanol Blended Petrol : 
The Committee note that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs have made it 
mandatory on part of OMCs to blend 5% ethanol with petrol.  The Committee have also 
been i nformed that the OMCs have been allowed to import ethanol in case of non -
availability in domestic market, thereby removing any ambiguity arising out of the supply 
related issues of Ethanol.  The Committee welcome this move as it will put the EBP 
Programme in firm footing.  It will possibly reduce the fuel import bill and lower nation‟s 
dependence on fossil fuels which will also help in promotion of cleaner environment.  The 
Committee desire that the Government should monitor the progress of 5% mandatory 
blending with ethanol in the whole country and take all steps that are required so that within 
the specified time frame i.e. 30.06.2013, the 5% ethanol blended petrol should be available 
in the country.   
The Committee are aware that the next step in the EBP Programme will be to 
increase the usage of 10% Ethanol Blended Petrol.  Therefore, the Committee desire that 
the Ministry should make sincere efforts towards making the programme of 5% blending of 
Ethanol with petrol successful.     
REPLY 
In pursuance of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) decision taken in 
its meeting held on 22.11.2012, MoPNG issued a Notification on 2.1.2013 directing Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) to sell Ethanol blended petrol with percentage of ethanol up 
to 10% as per BIS Specification to achieve 5% ethanol blending across the country as a 
whole.   

76 
 
OMCs floated tender on 29 December, 2012 for their requirement of 140.4 cr litres of 
ethanol for 10% blending in 6 States  and 5% blending in remaining 14 States &  4 UTs.  
Against the said tender, total quantity of 55 crore litres of ethanol was offered by the 
bidders (both within benchmark price and above benchmark price + 10%).  A total quantity 
of 40 crore litres has been finalized for procurement within the benc hmark price + 10%.   
OMCs have so far issued 218 LOIs for 32.56 crore litres and 119 Purchase Orders have 
been placed for 22.42 crore litres, out of which 0.9417 crore litres of ethanol has been 
received by OMCs as on 05.07.2013.  A fresh domestic tender i s being planned to coincide 
with next sugar year. 
A global tender was also floated by OMCs on 18.01.2013 for the requirement of 
82.03 crore litres of ethanol, which has been cancelled due to high prices quoted by the 
vendors. 
In its subsequent meeting held  on 3.7.2013,  CCEA has decided that OMCs will 
procure ethanol (produced from molasses route only) from domestic sources to achieve the 
mandatory requirement of 5% ethanol blending with petrol by October 2013 in areas/parts 
of the country where sufficient quantity of ethanol is available.  In other parts of the country, 
blending of ethanol may be increased progressively depending upon the availability of 
ethanol to reach the 5%  mandatory level.  OMCs and Sugar Industry Associations may 
interact with each other on a regular basis to achieve the target. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
Coal Bed Methane 
The Committee note that India, having 3 rd largest proven coal reserves and being 
the 4 th largest coal producer in the world, holds significant prospects for commercial 
recovery of Coal Bed Methane(CBM).  The prognosticated CBM reserves in the country 
have been estimated to be around 4.6 TCM.  The  Committee further observe that though 
33 CBM blocks have been awarded by the Government so far, the Commercial production 
has started from only one block namely, Raniganj  which now contributed 0.28 MMSCMD 
of CBM production. 
 

77 
 
The committee are given to understand that seven more blocks are expected to start 
commercial production in the near future and the total CBM production by the end of 
Twelfth Plan is expected to be around 4 MMSCMD.  The committee note that the increase 
in CBM production during the cur rent year is only 0.04 MMSCMD.  The Committee are 
skeptical about the target to be achieved by the end of 12 th plan, with such meager annual 
increase in production of CBM during the past years. 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should intensify the exploration and 
production of Coal Bede Methane for timely achievement  of the set targets of production in 
view of the growing demand of hydrocarbon resources. 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
ONGC is presently operating in 4 Blocks viz. Jharia, Bokaro, North Karanpura and 
Raniganj. All the blocks are running under Phase-III. The Development Plans for all the four 
blocks has been submitted and GOI approval is awaited. 
The Commercial CBM production in ONGC blocks is yet to start. As per permission 
granted by GoI, ONGC started  to sell the incidentally produced CBM from already drilled 
wells at Parbatpur of Jharia Block at an approved price of $5.1 per MMBTU i.e. Rs. 9.75 
per SCM approx. The cumulative gas sale as on 01.04.2013 is 8033372 SCM. 
Commercial CBM Production can be realized (as per CBM Policy and Contract) only 
after initiation of  Phase -III i.e. Development Phase after completion of activities in Phase -I 
& II. The duration of Phase -I and Phase-II together spans from 6 -7 years. This implies that 
Phase-III in these Bloc ks can be initiated 6 -7 years from 2003 i.ew.e.f 2009 -2010. 
However, in none of the ONGC Blocks Phase -III has started due to various constraints as 
mentioned below. 
 Allocation of Coal Mining Block overlapping CBM Block  
 Allocation of Area for Airport Project overlapping CBM Block 
 Difficulties in Land acquisition 
 Procedure of PEL and Mining lease In Jharkhand 
 Delay in Environment Clearance 

78 
 
Efforts are on to address these difficulties as surface mining of coal prior to CBM 
extraction will result in loss of CBM resources. 
 Additionally, ONGC is planning to farm -in experienced global CBM players to bring 
in new technology and expedite monetization. 
OIL 
Coal Bed Methane : 
As far as OIL is concerned it is a consortium partner (40% PI) in one of the CBM 
blocks AS -CBM-2008/IV along with M/s Dart Energy (Pte) Ltd (now Dart Energy 
Ltd), Australia, which holds 60% PI and is operator of the block. The block was 
awarded to the consortium in the fourth round of CBM bidding on 13.07.2010.  
The various milestones pertaining to this CBM block are as under :- 
 The contract was signed between GOI, Dart Energy Ltd & Oil India Ltd on 
29.07.2010.  
 As per the committed work program, JV has pla nned to drill 15 no. of core 
holes and the tentative locations for all these core holes have been stacked in 
the field and civil constructions for two locations have been completed. The 
contracts for drilling, logging and testing services in all the 15 cor e holes have 
been awarded. 
 The PEL deed was executed on 27th April, 2012. 
 The financial commitment made by the consortium partners at the time of 
bidding for the Phase -I & II exploration period is of the order of US $ 26.43 
million. 
  The Environmental Clearance was granted on 05.09.2012. The CTE (Consent 
to Establish) was granted 0n 10.10.2012. However, the consortium is waiting 
for the grant of the Consent to Operate (CTO), to start the drilling activities. 
 
 
 

79 
 
DGH 
DGH / MoPNG is pursuing with the Coal Bed Methane (CBM) block operators to 
aggressively enhance the potential and production of CBM in the country through regular 
Steering Committee meetings / Technical Committee Meetings. 
With the ongoing developmental activities in the area of CBM, it is expecte d that the 
plan of achieving 4 MMSCMD of CBM by end of 12th plan may be achieved. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  28 
Shale Gas Exploration 
The Committee note that India is known  to hold significant deposits of Shale gas.  
The Committee note that the major basins in India such a Cambay (Gujarat), Assam -
Arakan in North -east and Krishna -Godavari in Andhra Pradesh, Cauvery onshore and the 
Indo-Gangetic basin etc. hold potential prosp ects of shale gas reserves.  The Committee 
have observed that in some countries including US and Canada, the large discoveries of 
shale gas have been made which has transformed the energy landscape.  Since the 
availability of shale gas reserves in the coun try will boost in diversifications of fuel 
resources, India should also look forward to search new avenues in the exploration of shale 
gas. 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is also formulating a National 
Policy on Shale gas.  Therefore, t he Committee are of the view that the Ministry should 
finalize and notify the National Policy on Shale gas without delay and offering of blocks may 
be done at a faster pace in coordination with DGH. The Committee also recommend that 
the Ministry may consid er collaboration with foreign countries which have a robust 
programme in shale gas exploration for technology transfer. 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
ONGC has signed a MOU with M/s ConocoPhillips of USA, an active player in shale 
gas exploration in North America and othe r parts of world for co -operation in the field of 
shale gas exploration in Indian Basins. M/s ConocoPhillips have carried study of G&G data 
of four basins namely, Cambay, KG, Cauvery and Damodar to assess their shale gas 
potential and have agreed to provide technical assistance to ONGC for carrying out a shale 
gas exploration programme in Cambay basins for limited number of wells. ONGC has 
made an application to the MoP&NG for grant of permission to carry out the pilot in 
Cambay basin with the technical ass istance of M/s ConocoPhillips to take benefit of their 
offer. It is hoped that shale gas pilot programme envisaged in Cambay basin would provide 
good leads and help in establishing shale gas/ oil potential in the country.   
DGH 
MoPNG has taken the following steps for shale gas/oil: 
 MoPNG/DGH have given special technical studies to ONGC and Central Mine 
Planning & Design Institute (CMPDI), Ranchi for assessing the prospectivity of shale 
oil & gas in selected basins by analyzing the data gathered during explo ration and 
exploitation of conventional oil and gas. 
 The draft policy on shale gas & oil was put up in public domain for comments. The 
comments have been received from various stakeholders and formulation of a 
suitable policy to tap shale gas/oil is under way.  
 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed between Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) with Department of State (DoS), USA in the 
field of shale gas/oil for resource assessment, regulatory consultations and 
investment promotion. Under this MoU, resources assessment has been carried out 
by US Geological Survey (USGS) for 3 basins and further studies are in progress. 
Indian delegations have visited US shale gas sites and held discussion with various 
US agencies for regulatory, environmen t and other related issues concerning shale 
oil / gas. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
Recommendation No.  29 
Gas Hydrates 
The Committee note that India is known to have massive deposits of gas hydrates.  
In view of this, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas formulated the National Gas 
Hydrate Programme (NGHP) in 1997 which is being coordinated by DGH.  
Reconnaissance surveys carried out by DGH in the East Coast and Andaman Deep -water 
areas in  1997 has established the presence of Gas Hydrates in numerous complex 
geological settings including Krishna-Godavari basin, Mahanadi basin of the Bay of Bengal 
and Andaman Islands and collected a number of gas hydrate cores from 21 sites and 39 
holes.  The total prognosticated gas resource from the gas hydrates in the country is placed 
at 1894 TCM.  In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee that technology for extraction of gas hydrates at R & D stage all over the w orld 
and U.S. and Japan are the two pioneer countries in this field. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of the programme due to the fact 
that since the inception of the National Gas Hydrate programme in 1997, no substantial 
progress has been  achieved in exploration, extraction and commercial production of gas 
hydrates.  The Committee also note that the Government do not seem to have a clear -cut 
roadmap with a stipulated time frame to achieve progress in this field.  Since India is 
endeavouring to attain self -sufficiency in energy resource, the Committee feel that 
commercial exploitation of Gas Hydrates can prove to be a boon in the growing demand 
scenario of hydrocarbons. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Government should speed up t he 
National Gas Hydrate Programme and efforts should be made to step up the R&D 
activities. A National R&D center should be set up in India with facilities for testing of 
samples obtained from various sites. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
endeavor to train human resources and participate in various international collaborations to 
get acquainted with new technologies in this field. 
REPLY 
Subsequent to initiation of Gas Hydrate activities in the country in 1997, a successful 
Expedition-01 was carried out in 2006 where presence of gas hydrates was established in 
Krishna-Godavari (KG), Mahanadi and Andaman basins, with the drilling of 39 holes at 21 

82 
 
sites. This was followed by an international conference in 2008, wherein the results of 
Expedition-01 were deliberated. Now the National Gas Hydrate Program (NGHP) is in the 
final phase of identifying locations for drilling in Expedition -02, which will be followed by 
pilot testing under Expedition-03. 
On the establishment of national R&D center, discuss ions are in progress at the 
Steering Committee level as well as the Technical Committee level and decision would be 
taken appropriately depending upon the status of gas hydrate development in the country.  
As regards collaboration with other countries, Ind ia has Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with various agencies of USA, Germany and Japan in the field of gas 
hydrates. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Recommendation No.  30 
Under utilization of CSR Funds 
 
The Committee have learnt that as per the existing guidelines of Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE), a mandatory provision of 0.5% to 2% of PAT (Profit After Tax) of 
previous year is to be spent on social welfare activities by the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).  However, the 
Committee are unhappy to note that major oil companies such as IOCL, BPCL and ONGC 
has spent only 51.41%, 22.24% and 26.52% respectively of their earmarked CSR  funds 
thus not meeting the statutory provisions during the financial year 2011-12. 
The Committee opine that CSR is a noble initiative on the part of PSUs and 
therefore its funds must be utilized for welfare and community development activities 
without fai l.  Accordingly, the Committee recommend the Ministry to prevail upon the oil 
companies to ensure the full utilization of the earmarked funds. 
REPLY 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL)  
    
BPCL have  informed  that  allocated 1% PAT (Profit After Tax ) of previous financial 
year towards CSR activities. The net profit of BPCL for the financial year 2011 -12 was 

83 
 
Rs.1311.27 crores and  expenditure  towards CSR for the  financial year 2012 -13 was Rs. 
17.88 crores. 
  
BPCL  has ensured  that  from the current  financial year i.e. 2013 -14,  they  would 
utilize their  100% allocated budget towards CSR, fully. 
 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited  
 
 CPCL has been allocating  budget for CSR activities in  line with DPE guidelines and 
has achieved more than 90% utilization of  the allocated budget during the last three years 
as per details given below: 
(Amount in Rs. Lakhs) 
Financial 
year 
Previous 
year Net 
Profit 
% of Net 
profit to 
be spent 
on CSR 
activities 
as per  
DPE 
guidelines 
Budget Allocated 
 
Actual Spent 
Amount  % of 
previous 
year Net 
profit  
Amount  % of 
Utilization of 
fund 
2009-10 (-)39728 NA 169.78 NA 169.72 99.96 
2010-11 60322 0.5%-2% 380.44 0.63 368.51 96.86 
2011-12 51152 0.5%-2% 408.73 0.80 372.62 91.17 
 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited  
Indian Oil CSR fund allocation and utilization during FY 2011-12 is as  under: 
        (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
year PAT of 
Previou
s yr 
 
Retained 
Profit (RP) 
of 
previous 
yr 
Amount earmarked/ expenditure incurred 
under CSR 
Allocation Spent 
Amount As% of 
PAT 
Amount As % of 
PAT 
2011-
12 
7445 4780 95.60* 1.28 82.73 1.11 
*excluding  carry forward of Rs. 2.69 crore from  previous year. 
  
 As per CSR & Sustainability guidelines   for  CPSEs released by DPE on 31.12.2012  
which will be effective from FY 2013 -14), 1-2% of Net  Profit of the previous year needs to 

84 
 
be spent on CSR & Sustainability ( for CPSEs with  Net Profit of more than Rs. 500 crore). 
Indian Oil is committed to fulfill its CSR responsibilities.  
Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals Limited(MRPL) 
 
 
 MRPL has utilized the earmarked funds for the welfare and community development  
activities to the maximum extent possible and details of the  funds utilized  for the year 
2011-12 & 2012-13 is as under: 
 
 Including Rs. 1.31 crore worth of projects which are in final stage of completion. 
Hence c/f for the year 2013-14 would  be Rs. 1,29 crore. 
 
 
Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC)  
 
 During  2011-12. ONGC made a total expenditure of  Rs.121.08 Crore toward CSR 
activities which works out to 26.52% of the allocation (i.e.,2% of previous year‟s 
PAT).ONGC is making all efforts to increase its CSR expenditure.  During 2012 -13, ONGC 
made a total expenditure of Rs.263.43 Crore towards CSR commitments i.e.,52.43% of the 
allocation which works out to Rs. 502.43 Crore.  Details in this regard are given below: 
Unaudited CSR Expenditure 2012-13                                                   In Rupees 
Focus areawise Expenditure 
Education including Vocational courses 39,10,76,127 
Entrepreneurship (self  help and liveliho 1,07,90,402 
Environment, ecological conservation,pr 4,73,71,390 
Grant of Financial aid/assistance 2,92,23,335 
Ground water management including rechar 1,09,23,853 
Health Care 9,82,62,026 
Infrastructural support  near our operati 1,77,15,82,054 
Initiatives for physically and mentally 3,03,83,613 
Promoting  sports/sportspersons support 2,90,84,178 
Promotion of artisans craftsmen,musici 5,12,92,212 
Society of petroleum Geophysists 12,46,075 
Financial 
year 
 Net profit 
of  the 
PSU( after 
tax) Rs. In 
crores 
Budgetary 
provision 
for  CSR 
activities 
Rs. In 
crores-
.5% of the 
PAT 
Actual  
Expenditure 
on CSR 
activities 
Rs. In 
crores 
% age 
utilization 
out of 
budgetary  
provision 
for CSR 
C/F 
amount 
2011-12 1176.63 5.97 3.27 55% 2.70 
2012-13 908.58 4.54 4.64 102% 2.60* 

85 
 
Sponsorship of media/culture/sports 4,13,57,791 
Sponsorship of seminars,conferences,wo 11,42,30,660 
Women‟s empowerment, girl child develop 74,41,807 
Grand Total 2,63,42,65,523 
 
 ONGC is  pursuing some  major  projects like setting  up of Educational Institutes, 
Hospitals, Wind Energy farm, etc. which would enable ONGC to meet the CSR expenditure 
targets in 2012-13 as well the carry-toward CSR budget amount of earlier years.  
ONGC Videsh Limited  
 
 OVL had been undertaking CSR activities as per its policy which was formulated on 
the basis of DPE Guidelines issued in 2010. During 2011 -2012 and 2012 -2013, actual 
expenditure on CST is more than allocated budgetary provision (0.5% of previous years net 
profit) as per details given below:- 
          (Rs. In Million) 
Financial 
year 
Net profit of 
OVL (after 
tax) 
Budgetory 
provision for 
CSR 
Actual 
expenditure 
% age 
utilization out 
of budgetary 
provision 
2011-12 27212 134.53 239.41 178% 
2012-13 39291 136.06 208.27 153% 
 
Balmer Lawrie &co.Ltd.  
 
  During  the year 2011/2012, Balmer Lawrie have spent an amount of Rs. 256.65 
Lakhs on various CSR initiatives which represent 2.12% of PAT Rs. 121.09 Crores. 
 
GAIL (India) Limited  
 
  During  the financial year 2011 -12 , an allocation of 2% of PAT of the previous 
financial year, which was Rs. 71.22 Crores, was made toward CSR activities of the 
Company.  This amount, along with the carry forward of unutilized CSR budget of the 
previous F/Y, as per Government  guidelines, amounted to a total of Rs. 82.77 Crores. 
 
  Against the amount available for the year, specific projects/ activities of a value of 
Rs. 75.65 Crores were taken up during the course of the year.  In addition, a  provision was 
also made towards providing relief under natural calamities, as provided for in the  Board 
approved CSR policy. 

86 
 
  The actual  spends/ utilization against CSR allocatio n for the year 2011 -12 was Rs. 
56.36 Crores, which amounts to 1.58 % of the PAT of previous F/Y or 79%  of Rs. 71.22 
Crores (2%of PAT). 
 
 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited(NRL)  
   
  Numaligarh Refinery Limited  has been complying with  DPE guidelines on allocation 
of CSR budget. Further , NRL‟s CSR expenditure during 2011-12 and 2012-13 were both in  
line with the CSR budget for respective years.  NRL‟s CSR expenditure allocation during  
2011-12 and 2012-13 as follows: 
  2012-12 2012-13 
CSR Budget (Rs.Crore) 5.58 5.58 
CSR Expenditure (Rs. Crore) 5.58 5.51 
 
Engineers India Limited(EIL)     
EIL have informed  that  the  amount spent vis -à-vis earmarked funds on Corporate Social  
Responsibility (CSR) activities during  FY 2011 -12 with respect to Engineers India  Limited 
are as  follows: 
Percentage of PAT ( Profit After Tax) 
of previous year earmarked for CSR 
activities of FY 2011-12 
Amount 
Spent  
Percentage Spent 
2% (Rs 1045 Lakhs) Rs.942.45 
Lakhs 
90.2% 
 
Hindustan  Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL)  
 
HPCL‟s  details  of CSR funds earmarked for the financial year 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 are  
given below : 
              Rs. in  crores 
 
Sr. No. Year  Total 
funds 
allocated 
for CSR 
Brought 
forward 
from 
previous 
year  
 
Percentage 
of PAT of 
previous 
year 
Funds 
utilized 
for CSR  
Carry 
forward 
1 2011-12 30.78 Nil 2.00% 26.54 4.24 
2 2012-13 18.23 4.24 2.00% 21.76 0.71 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
  

87 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
  

88 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1  
 
Plan and Non-Plan Schemes of MoP&NG 
[ 
 The Committee note that the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas contains funds for plan schemes at Rs. 42 crores and Non -Plan Scheme at 
Rs. 65145.41 crore. The plan scheme are three namely (i) Establishment of RGIPT (II) 
Scheme for LPG connections to BPL families and (iii) Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves 
Ltd. (ISPRL). The Committee note further that the funds under non -plan schemes are 
mostly reimbursement of subsidy and the major component is compensation to OMCs for 
under recoveries, subsidies for PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG, subsidy to oil companies 
for supply of Natural Gas to N – E region etc. and the non-plan expenditure during 2013-14 
has been budgeted at Rs. 65145.41 crore.  
 The Committee note that the though the Minist ry has plan schemes namely RGIPT, 
ISPRL and the scheme for LPG connections to BPL families, they are shocked to observe 
that they have not seen any fund outgo last year.  It appears that the MoP&NG does not 
have any interest in implementation of plan schem es.  The Committee recommend that the 
plan schemes needs to be implemented by the Ministry with due seriousness coupled with 
regular monitoring at higher levels. 
 The Committee are of the view that energy mix is still predominantly in favour of oil 
and hence conservation of oil and gas, increased use of ethanol blended petrol, bio -diesel, 
PNG coverage to lower strata of society are some of the issues which need to be 
promoted.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that MoPNG should take the initiative to 
launch more plan schemes and seek funds to execute them.” 
REPLY 
1. Fund outgo for the Existing Plan Schemes 
A. ISPRL : 
 
In the Annual Plan for 2012 -13, a token amount of  Rs.1 crore was shown against  
“Strategic Storage Programme for Storage of Crude Oil” for filling of the crude oil.  For filling 
the Strategic Reserves being constructed at 3 locations, i.e. Vishakhapatnam,  Mangalore 
and Padur,  an amount of over Rs.23,500 crores is required during a period of four years, 
starting from the time the first cavern facility at Visakhapatnam is ready.   
 

89 
 
The physical and financial progress at the three locations as on 31.3.2013 i s given in the 
table below:  
 Cumulative Physical 
Progress 
Cumulative Financial Progress*  
(Rs Cr) 
 Target Actual Target Actual 
Visakhapatnam 100 92*1 
997.99 873.24*1 
Mangalore 72.9 77.7 559.43 607.95 
Padur 74.9 77.1 
818.84 842.03 
*1 Shortfall  because of the poor geology encountered in one of the cavern galleries 
Since the first cavern at Vishakhapatnam is yet to be physically completed, therefore it was 
not possible to use any plan fund, that was earmarked for filling up of crude.  This cavern is 
likely to be completed during the current financial year.  At that t ime, request will be made 
to Ministry of Finance for additional allocation.  The next cavern is due for completion only 
in 2014-15.  
B. RGIPT : 
The fund outgo in respect of RGIPT was affected during  2012 -13 due to the failure of the 
Contractor to achieve progress in Civil Structural work at Jais as per the agreed schedule. 
Further, despite committing to catch -up plans to clear the backlog and despite follow up 
made by EIL, there was no significant improvement in performance at site and the 
Contractor failed to complete the work even within the revised time schedule.   Now, action 
has been taken by RGIPT to invite fresh tender for completion of the works.  
C. SCHEME FOR LPG CONNECTION TO BPL FAMILIES : 
 This scheme is being funded through CSR funds of oil CPSUs.  It has been decided 
not to utilize Plan funds for this purpose. 
Use of Ethanol Blended Petrol :  
1. The Government has decided  that 5% mandatory ethanol blending with petrol 
should be implemented across the country (excluding North-Eastern States, J&K, Andaman 
& Nicobar and Lakshadweep) by October, 2013.  Ethanol would be sourced only from 
domestic producers and not through imports.  
2. OMCs have already contracted about 40 crore liters of ethanol from domestic 
producers for supply during 2013-14.  Further tenders are also proposed to be issued.  
 
 
 

90 
 
Conservation of Oil and Gas  
1. MoPNG had set up the Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA) as a 
registered society in 1978 to promote conservation of petroleum products in  major sectors 
of the economy like transport, industry, households and agriculture through direct technical 
assistance, R&D educational and training programmes and mass awareness campaigns.  
PCRA‟s activities cover conservation of all energy sources, promotion of energy efficient 
equipment and additives, popularizing alternative fuels, environment protection etc.  
 
2. PCRA helps the government in finalizing policies and strategies for petroleum 
conservation, aimed at reducing excessive dependence of the country on oil and gas.  
Funds for PCRA are provided by OIDB and hence no allocation of plan funds has been 
made. 
 
PNG COVERAGE OF THE ECONOMICALLY WEAKER STRATA OF SOCIETY  
 As regards PNG coverage of the economically weaker strata of society, PNGRB 
grants authorization for development of city gas networks through bidding process under 
the provisions of th e PNGRB Act, 2006 and the Regulations notified thereunder. The 
authorized entities supply PNG as part of the CGD network development in the respective 
authorized geographical areas.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.  2 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
 The Committee note that RGIPT is being set up at Jais, UP with the objective of 
creating an Institute of Excellence in the petroleum sector to cater to the educational and 
training requirements in India and globally.  The Committee however, constrained to note 
that the Institute which was scheduled for completion during the 11 th Plan has faced 
considerable delay and has now spilled over to 12 th Plan.  The academic activities of the 
Institute which commenced in 2008 is currently functioning from a temporary campus.   
 The Committee note that land acquisition process for RGIPT has been considerably 
delayed for various reasons. Phase – I of the construction activity for the main campus of 
the Institute on 47.8 acres of land, already in possession of RGIPT, started in August, 2010 
with completion target of two years.  The Committee are constrained to note that t he work 
did not progress as per schedule due to poor performance of the contractor and therefore, 

91 
 
the completion schedule has been revised to June, 2014 with downsized commitments of 
contractor for completion of only six buildings out of 19 buildings on pr iority.  This has 
resulted in surrender of total allocated funds of Rs. 39 crores during 2011 -12 and Rs. 41 
crores in 2012-13.  
 The Committee are unhappy at the delay in execution of such prestigious project 
which reflects poor monitoring on the part of t he Ministry as well as the consultant of the 
project, Engineers India Limited (EIL), which has expertise of executing large projects of 
international standards.  The Committee would like to advice the Ministry to look into the 
causes for delay and fix resp onsibility accordingly.  Penalty may also be imposed on 
contractor if provided in the contract.  Since the project has already been much delayed, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry and consultant EIL should ensure that June, 
2014 deadline is strictl y adhered to.  In the meantime, action be taken to complete the 
remaining buildings also in a definite time frame.  
 
REPLY 
 
The main reasons for the delay in construction of RGIPT Campus at Jais and consequently 
not being able to complete the same within the 11th Plan period are as follows: 
a) In view of the very slow progress and continual delay in acquisition of the required land 
(95 acres), by UPSIDC, RGIPT was not able to start the campus construction work as per 
the Master Plan. 
b) Work on the Jais ca mpus was then taken up in the available 47.8 acres of plot of land 
and the contract for Civil Structural work was awarded in June 2010. However, the   
Contractor failed to   achieve the work progress as per the agreed schedule.  
Though the Contractor submi tted successive catch-up plans and even agreed to complete 
6 buildings on priority basis, their performance at site did not improve. Hence, it was 
decided to offload the balance un -executed work and float a fresh tender.  Meanwhile, the 
contractor served A rbitration notice and started litigation  in Court. RGIPT, in order to 
recover the penalty and pursue other claims as per the contract has been contesting the 
case and the Arbitration process.  This development would affect the timeline of the project; 
however, necessary action is on-hand by EIL and RGIPT to complete the campus buildings 
expeditiously.  The time frame will be fixed after the new contract is finalized. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 

92 
 
Recommendation No.  3 
LPG scheme for BPL families 
 
 The Committee note that a token provision of Rs. 1 crore has been provided in 
2013-14 under the plan scheme „LPG Scheme for BPL Families‟ to provide one time 
assistance of Rs. 1600/ - per connection to BPL families towards security deposit for the 
LPG cylinder and regulator. It is proposed to cover 70 lakh BPL families under the scheme. 
Though the scheme is envisaged as a plan schem e, it is being implemented as a CSR 
initiative by PSU oil companies and funds amounting to Rs. 509.17 crore has been created 
from the contribution of these oil companies out of their CSR commitments. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that only  Rs. 16.35 crore has since been utilized and 
only 169200 connections has been released so far. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that release of lesser LPG connections under 
the scheme has been due to delay in authentication of the lists of BPL applicants  submitted 
by the distributors to the local authorities. While expressing dissatisfaction at the slow 
progress of the scheme, the Committee desires that the Ministry should be pro -active with 
State Governments/ local authorities in creating awareness about the scheme and sensitize 
them to give timely authentication of BPL list. The Committee fear that failing to do so may 
result in the scheme languishing without achieving the objectives.  
 
 The Committee also note that the implementation of the scheme is de pendent upon 
the actual commissioning of RGGLVY distributorship. So far against a target of 5578 
RGGLVYs, only 1740 have been commissioned and selection is in progress for the rest. 
The Committee express dismay over the lack of initiative for progress of s cheme and 
henceforth desire that the Ministry should pursue the implementation of the scheme in a 
time bound manner and fix responsibility in case of delays. While emphasizing the early 
commissioning of remaining RGGLVYs. The Committee would recommend the 
implementation of the scheme through existing distributors as well so that the scheme take 
off smoothly in areas wherever the RGGLVs commissioning has not taken place. 
 The Committee also note that the scheme has not been widely publicized either by 
the Ministry or OMCs and so eligible persons are not aware of the scheme. The Committee 
feel that the scheme is well intentioned and to cover 70 lakh connections it needs proper 
publicity to create awareness among the eligible section of population. The Committe e 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should give wide publicity about the details of this 
Scheme through popular mass media including newspapers, television etc. so that the 
eligible applicants can come forward for availing the benefits of this scheme. 
 
 

93 
 
REPLY 
LPG scheme for BPL families : 
 
 A scheme for providing one time grant to BPL families in the rural areas for release 
of new domestic LPG connection under Rajiv Gandhi Gramin LPG Vitaran Yojana 
(RGGLVY) is in operation. As per the scheme, the security deposit for the domestic LPG 
cylinder and pressure regulator is paid from a fund created through contributions from the 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds of ONGC, OIL, GAIL, BPCL, HPCL and IOC.  
 Under the above mentioned scheme, the BPL card holder can register with the 
distributor for release of a new LPG connection. The same is sent by distributor to local 
administration for authentication. Intimation letters are sent to the BPL card holders after 
receipt of authenticated list from local administration. 
 Apart from the above, in r ecent past, Delhi Government has announced a scheme 
called „Kerosene Free Dilli” to make NCT Delhi Kerosene free. New domestic LPG 
connections are issued free of cost to BPL / AAY & JRC Card holders of Delhi who were 
getting PDS Kerosene. In case of BPL/AA Y Card holders, 50% of Security deposit of 
Cylinder & Pressure Regulator is borne by Delhi Government, remaining 50% is met by 
OMCs through CSR Fund. For JRC (Jhuggi Resettlement Colonies), entire amount of 
Security deposit Cylinder & Pressure Regulator is  borne by Delhi Government.  In addition 
a 2 Burner Hotplate, Suraksha Hose, DGCC Book & Installation Charges are also provided 
by the Delhi Government to the beneficiaries under this scheme.  
 As on 01.04.2013, total 2,54,773 nos. of new LPG connections ( including 71410 nos 
of connections under Kerosene Free Dilli Scheme) have been released to BPL families 
under the scheme by the OMCs and a sum of Rs.32.94 Crores has been spent in providing 
one time grant to BPL families. 
 Release of connections under the CSR scheme is gaining pace with commissioning 
of more nos. of RGGLVs by OMCs. As on 01.04.13, 2055 nos. of RGGLVs have been 
commissioned by OMCs and have targeted issuance of 1637 number of LoIs for 
commissioning of RGGLVs during the year 2013-14. Number of LPG connections issued to 
BPL families through CSR is expected to rise with commissioning of these RGGLVs. 
 In implementation of the CSR scheme, generally there is delay on part of the local 
administration in authenticating the lists submitted by the dis tributor. OMCs vigorously 
pursue for authentication of the lists by local administration to speed up the process of 
release of connection to BPL families.   
 Instructions are being issued to OMCs to undertake wider publicity of the scheme in 
various media in pursuance of the suggestions of the committee.  
 
 
 

94 
 
 
Moreover, OMCs are taking following steps to popularize the scheme :- 
 
(i)  RGGLVs have already been instructed to distribute leaflets, display posters etc and 
put up notice board at the distributorshi ps to spread awareness regarding the CSR 
scheme. 
 (ii) At the time to commissioning, training is being imparted to RGGLVs on the 
procedure to be followed for enrolling BPL customers against CSR fund.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 4  
 
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidies 
 The Committee note that the Government has launched two schemes namely the 
"Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Scheme (DBTL)" and "Direct  
Transfer of Cash Subsidy on PDS kerosene (DTCK)" for which pilot  
projects are being conducted at Mysore and Kotkasim Tahsil, Alwar  
district (Rajasthan) respectively. The scheme envisages that amount of  
subsidy is transferred to consumer‟s bank account and he can buy the  
products at market price. The Ministry has launched these initiatives  
in order to reform the current system of delivery of subsidized  
products. The Committee welcome these schemes and hope that it w ill 
substantially reduce the diversion of subsidized LPG domestic cylinder  
and PDS kerosene and the resultant subsidy burden of the Government. 
 
 The Committee note that to benefit from the above schemes, a consumer  
must have an AADHAR card linked with ban k account. The Committee have  
been informed that the scheme can be launched only in those districts  
where AADHAR cards have been issued to at least 80% of the people.  
However, in the districts where the schemes have been launched on a  
pilot basis, it has b een found that the linkage between AADHAR number  
& bank account is only about 20% and only about 20 to 25 percent of  
the consumers are ready to receive the money directly through bank  
transfers. 
 
 The Committee observe that a majority of population in Indi a reside in  
rural areas where proper access to financial services is not  

95 
 
available. The first step towards the implementation of this scheme  
requires financial inclusion of this rural population. Therefore, the  
Committee are of the view that the Ministry s hould impress upon  
Ministry of Finance & Reserve Bank of India for extension of financial  
services to the rural areas. Post offices and co -operative banks may  
also be included for providing direct benefit of subsidy in cash to  
the public at large. The Comm ittee also desire that the Government  
should organize financial literacy campaigns to familiarize public at  
large. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should give wide  
publicity about the direct benefit transfer scheme to create awareness  
so that peo ple come forward to actively participate in the schemes by  
understanding the long -term benefits. Therefore, the Committee is of  
the firm opinion that without attaining complete financial inclusion  
of the entire population by banking services as well as AAD HAR cards,  
any move by the Government to implement Direct Cash Transfer of  
Subsidies scheme should not exclude genuinely entitled population from  
the subsidy. 
Action Taken Report 
 
Ensuring access to and usage of quality financial services by all strata of the society, 
particularly the poor and those living in the rural areas, is an important priority of the 
Government of India.  The objective of Financial Inclusion is to extend financial services to 
the large hitherto un -served population of the country to unlock its growth potential.   In 
addition, it strives towards a more inclusive growth by making financing available to the 
poor in particular. 
2.    As per Census 2011, 58.7% households are availing banking services in the 
country.  This is a quantum jump from the earlier Census figures of 2001 where only 35.5% 
of the households were reported to be availing banking services in the country. There are 
102,343 branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in the country as on 31st 
March 2013,  out of which  37,953 (37%) bank branches are in the rural areas and 27,219 
(26%) in semi -urban areas, constituting 63 per cent of the total numbers of branches in 
semi-urban and ruralareas of the country. However, a significant proportion of the 
households, especially in rural areas, are still outside the formal fold of the banking system. 
To extend the reach of banking to those  
outside the formal banking system, Government and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are 
taking various initiatives from time to time. 
3. Under the Finan cial Inclusion Campaign - "Swabhimaan", to  
extend banking services to habitations of 2000 or more population,  
banks have extended banking services to over 74,000 such habitations,  
primarily through Business Correspondent Agents (BCAs). BCAs have been  
engaged by Banks at other locations, both in rural and urban areas, as  
well. 
 

96 
 
 
4.      Banks have now also been advised to ensure extension of banking facilities in the 
uncovered areas through Business Correspondent Agents (BCAs) / Common Service 
Centres (CSCs)  on priority in all the districts identified for the Direct Benefit  
Transfer Scheme. 
5.    Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with the objective of increasing penetration and financial 
inclusion rapidly, had advised banks in July 2011 that while preparing their A nnual Branch 
Expansion Plan (ABEP), they should allocate at least 25 per cent of total number of 
branches proposed to be opened during the year in unbanked rural  
(Tier 5 and Tier 6) (population upto 9999)   centres. To facilitate speedier branch expansion 
in unbanked rural centres for ensuring seamless roll out of Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme 
of the Government of India, scheduled commercial banks have now been advised by RBI in 
May, 2013 that they may consider front loading (prioritizing) the opening of br anches in 
unbanked rural centres over a 3 years cycle co -terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plan 
(2013-16). 
6. The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) so far has issued Aadhaar card 
to 35 crore residents of India.  The Ministry of Petrole um and Natural Gas is the 
implementing Ministry for Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Scheme. It takes take necessary 
steps for mobilisation of LPF consumers for enrolment, Aadhaar seeding with LPG as well 
as with Banks. As per the reports, the percentage of Aadhaar generated in the 20 districts 
is 90.9%. 
7. The steps taken by UIDAI to facilitate DBT  are as follows. 
(vi) Fast tracking of enrolment and Aadhaar generation for beneficiaries in Pilot 
Districts. 
(vii) On-line monitoring portal for enrolment. 
(viii) Remote Aadhaar Seeding Framework (RASF) deployment. 
(ix) E-Aadhaar facility. 
(x) EID/UID mapping facility. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 

97 
 
 
Recommendation No.  5 
 
Under-recoveries of Petroleum Products 
 The Committee note that one of the most important issue faced by the MoPNG and 
the Government as well as the issue of under -recoveries incurred by OMCs on the sale of 
sensitive petroleum produc ts. The products for which Government provides subsidies are 
PDS kerosene, subsidized domestic LPG cylinders and Diesel for retail customers. The 
total amount of the under -recoveries during the years 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 2012 -13 are 
Rs.78,190, Rs.1,38,541 and Rs.1,24,854 crore respectively. The figure for 2013 -14 is 
projected at Rs.1,57,000crore. 
 The under recoveries is met by burden sharing mechanism amongst upstream 
companies, Government and OMCs. The upstream companies shared 35 to 40% of under -
recoveries during 2010 -11, 2011 -12 and has shared 36.8% (upto January, 2013). The 
Committee further note that ONGC and OIL are producing 20% of the crude oil requirement 
from the nominated blocks where cost of production is $50 to $55 per barrel (including 15% 
returns) which is much less than the international crude oil prices of $100 to $105 per 
barrel. T he upstream oil companies offer discounts in purchase of crude oil by OMCs, 
which is of the order of $56 per barrel. The Committee are of the view that discounts are 
provided in lieu of low cost of production from the nominated blocks and hence terming the  
discounts as burden sharing by the upstream companies is not justified. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the discounts given by the upstream companies for indigenous oil 
products should not be shown in the calculation of under recoveries which would 
substantially bring down the under recoveries figure of the OMCs.  
 The Committee in their 9 th Report (15 thLokSabha) had recommended that refinery 
gate prices of petroleum products should be based on FOB price instead of import parity 
price. In this connection, the Committee note that the Ministry of Finance has also recently 
suggested to compute the pricing of diesel and PDS kerosene on the basis of Export 
Parity Price (EPP) and the pricing of domestic LPG on the basis of a mixture of 40% 
Import Parity Pri ce (IPP) and 60% of Export Parity Price (EPP). If this methodology is 
adopted, the estimated under recoveries for the year 2012 -13 would be reduced from 
Rs.1,61,260crore to Rs.1,43,694 crore. The Committee desire the Government to take a 
considered view on  Ministry of Finance‟s suggestion and also this Committee‟s 
recommendation to determine the refinery gate price of petroleum products. 
 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry/OMCs that due to problem of 
under recoveries and the compensation paid by the Government as subsidy at the later 
part of the year affects the financial health thereby indirectly the investments of the 
companies. The Committee agree with this view and therefore, recommend that in order to 
reduce the hardships faced by OMCs due  to under-recoveries, MoP&NG should seek ¼ of 
the estimated amount of annual subsidy to be paid every quarter to the OMCs.  
 

98 
 
 The Committee further note that a huge subsidy burden of Rs.29,997crore in     
2011-12 due to sale of subsidized LPG is being incu rred. The Committee note that out of 
15350 MT of domestic consumption, about 7335 MT is being produced out of crude oil and 
2213 MT is produced from natural gas. The balance 5084 MT is being imported. The 
Committee further find that against the FOB price of LPG of around Rs.50,000/MT, the cost 
production of LPG from natural gas has been only around Rs.20,000/MT, based on 47% of 
APM gas and 53% of other sources. Since around 15% of the LPG consumption is 
produced from low cost APM and other gases, the Commit tee recommend that this factor 
should be taken into account while calculating under -recoveries due to sale of domestic 
LPG cylinder which will bring down the total under-recoveries due to some extent. 
 
 The Committee note that dual pricing of diesel has been introduced by OMCs to bulk 
consumers. This will entitle OMCs to sell diesel to bulk consumers at a non -subsidized 
market determined price. The Committee further note that 17.8% of the diesel was sold 
directly to large consumer segments like Defence, Rai lways, State Transport Undertaking, 
Power, Cement Manufactures etc. The Committee are of the view that the decision to sell 
higher priced diesel to Railways & STUs will have adverse effect on these agencies and 
consumers. Therefore, the Committee recommend  that these two segments may be 
exempted from dual pricing of diesel.  
 
 The Committee feel that the following steps can go a long way in reducing/ 
controlling the subsidy burden on Kerosene, Diesel and Domestic LPG. 
 
 
i. Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Scheme  (DBTL) and Direct Transfer of Cash 
 Subsidy on PDS Kerosene (DTCK) 
ii. More CGD Projects in cities where LPG customers are high 
iii. Ethanol Blended Petrol and Bio-Diesel 
iv. Know Your Customer (KYC) implementation 
  
 Each of the above measures can contribute the redu ction of subsidy on its own way 
and hence, the committee recommend that all the above schemes should be rolled out 
effectively from the angle of savings on subsidy burden. 
 
REPLY 
 
i. During 1976 – 2002, based on the recommendation of Expert committees, the 
Government pursued Administrative Pricing Mechanism (APM) regime under which  the 
price of indigenous crude oil and petroleum products were fixed on cost plus return basis 
and the oil producers, refineries and marketing companies were compensated actual cos t 
plus post tax return on investment. However, as APM was found to be increasingly 
unsuitable for the long term growth and efficiency of oil industry, the government 
dismantled the APM effective 1.4.2002 and replaced cost -plus pricing of crude oil and 
petroleum products by Import Parity Pricing (IPP). Since dismantling of APM, the prices of 
Indigenous crude oil are determined on the basis of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA) 

99 
 
between the oil producers and refineries by benchmarking various indigenous crude oi ls to 
equivalent International Crude oils. 
 
ii. The under -recovery represents the difference between the required selling price 
based on TPP/ IPP and the actual selling price realized by the OMCs. The discount given 
by the upstream companies is not taken into account for calculating the under -recovery of 
OMCs. The gross under -recovery so calculated is partially compensated by the 
Government through cash assistance and upstream oil companies through discount on 
crude oil and petroleum products.  
 
iii. The Government has evolved a Burden Sharing Mechanism since 2003 -04 to 
ensure that the burden of under -recoveries incurred by OMCs is shared by all the 
stakeholders; namely the Government, the Public Sector Oil Companies and the 
consumers in the following manner:  
 Government through issue of Oil Bonds/Cash Subsidy;  
 Domestic upstream oil companies through price discounts to OMCs;  
 OMCs to bear a portion of the under recoveries; and  
 Consumers to bear some price increases.  
The general criteria adopted to distribute the un der-recoveries among the stakeholders has 
been as follows:  
 The upstream PSU oil and gas companies will bear around one -third of the total 
under-recoveries;  
 The remaining will be apportioned between the Government and the OMCs 
depending on the feasibility  of the Government to allocate funds from budgetary sources 
and capacity of the OMCs to absorb a part of their under-recoveries. 
iv. As explained earlier, at the time of dismantling of APM in April 2002, the Refining 
Transfer Price (RTP) for sensitive petroleu m products continued to be fixed based on the 
import parity prices (IPP).  A modification to this principle was brought about in June 2006 
with the introduction of Trade Parity Prices (TPP) as per the recommendations of the Dr. 
Rangarajan Committee for the pricing of Diesel & Petrol. Since then the pricing of Diesel & 
Petrol continued on TPP basis (80% IPP and 20% EPP) and for PDS Kerosene & Domestic 
LPG on IPP basis.  
 
v. Since more than 90% of the cost of a Refining Company is based on imports with 
linkage t o the price for crude oil in the international oil market, the price for the finished 
products at the Refinery Gate is also required to be determined on the principles of import 
parity with linkage to the price for the respective product in the internation al oil market 
(including all elements which would be incurred during actual import of products.). Further, 
since various costs are incurred on import of crude oil, which is ultimately refined and sold 
as petroleum products, there is rationale for including the similar levies in the Refinery Gate 
Price of these products.  
 

100 
 
vi. Refineries pay Import parity price for the crude oil imported and  Indigenous crude oil 
is also priced on Import Party basis.  When the primary raw material itself is charged on 
Import Parity basis, export parity pricing for the products would not be fair to the refineries.  
Any pricing methodology that does not factor in freight cost of crude oil / POL products 
would be wholly unsuitable to the country, especially since more than 80% of  the country‟s 
crude oil requirement is imported. 
 
vii. Further, the current price build -up does not recognize several other costs being 
incurred by PSU refining and marketing companies which are adversely impacting the 
profitability of both refining and market ing businesses of the PSU oil companies. Various 
costs incurred by the refineries are illustrated hereunder: 
 
 Infrastructure investments on quality improvements (EURO grades) and dilution 
losses 
 Foreign exchange fluctuation losses 
 Demurrage / Operating losses 
 Higher requirement of crude inventory due to high dependence on imports which 
increases inventory costs 
 
viii. The refinery gate price based on only EPP price would not cover the above costs 
incurred by the PSU Oil companies. In view of the above, it is not advisable to fix the RGP 
of petroleum products at Export Parity Prices (EPP).  
 
ix. However, MoP&NG vide its letter ref. F. No. P -20012/2/2013-PP dated 12 th June, 
2013 has constituted an expert group under the chairmanship of Dr. Kirit S. Parikh, Former 
Member, Planning Commission to, inter alia , revisit the current pricing methodology of 
petroleum products and suggest a suitable pricing mechanism for sale of these products. 
 
x. As regards the recommendation of the Standing Committee to provide 1/4 th of the 
estimated amount of annual subsidy on quarterly basis to the OMCs, MoP&NG has been 
taking up the matter of payment of cash assistance to OMCs with Ministry of Finance from  
time to time to ensure that the cash assistance is received by the OMCs on a regular basis.  
 
xi.  The primary objective behind the pricing reforms undertaken by the Government is the 
growing imperative for fiscal consolidation, the need for reducing the subsidy burden on 
petroleum products so as to allocate more funds to social sector schemes  for the common 
man and for ensuring country‟s energy security in the long term. 
 
xii.  As regards the exemption from dual pricing of Diesel to Railways and STUs, it is 
mentioned that in order to reduce under recovery of the Public Sector Oil  
 Marketing Companies (OMCs), the Government on 17 th January, 2013 has 
authorized the OMCs to (a) increase the retail selling price of Diesel in the range of 40 
paisa to 50 paisa per litre per month (excluding VAT as applicable in different State/Union 
Territories) un til further orders; and (b) sell Diesel to all consumers taking bulk supplies 
directly from the installations of the OMCs at the non -subsidized market determined price 

101 
 
effective 18 th January, 2013.  The Government has received representations from various 
State Governments highlighting the difficulties being faced by the STUs on purchase of 
Diesel at non-subsidized market determined price.  However, it is within the domain of the 
State Governments to provide appropriate relief to the STUs.  
 
Implementation of direct transfer of cash subsidy on Kerosene (DTCK) : 
Consequent to the interim recommendations of the Task Force constituted by the 
Government under the Chairmanship of  the Chairman, UIDAI on the issue of Direct 
Transfer of Cash Subsidy on PDS Kerosene  (DTCK)  and „in principle‟ approval of EGoM 
thereon (dated 8 th August, 2011), process for implementing the Scheme was started.  
Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure) decided to fix a lump -sum one time grant of Rs.100 
crore for each State, joining the Sche me prior to 31.03.2012.  State Governments/UTs 
were accordingly requested to consider joining the Scheme for undertaking  DTCK.  
2.  11 States/UTs (namely  Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, 
Andman & Nicobar Islands, Jharkhand, Himachal Prades h, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa & 
Andhra Pradesh) confirmed their participation in the Scheme within the stipulated period.  
In view of this, it was felt necessary to formulate guidelines for proper implementation of the 
DTCK Scheme.  Accordingly, DTCK guideli nes (Direct Transfer of cash subsidy on PDS 
Kerosene Scheme, 2012) have been prepared in consultation with the Ministry of Finance 
(D/o Expenditure)  and sent to these 11 States/UTs for necessary action. A pilot project for 
direct transfer of cash subsidy is being conducted in Kotkasim Tehsil of Alwar District 
(Rajasthan) from December 2011.   
 
3. Three States i.e. Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa have confirmed to implement 
DTCK in the selected districts during 2013-14 as per detail given below : 
Sr. No. State Districts in which DTCK is to be 
implemented 
1. Rajasthan 1. Alwar 
2. Ajmer 
3. Udaipur 
2. Maharashtra 1. Nandurbar 
2. Wardha 
3. Amravati 
3. Goa                     North Goa 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
 
Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Scheme (DBTL) :-  
 
 Consequent to the interim recommendations of the Task Force constituted by the 
Government under the Chairmanship of the Chairman, UIDAI on the issues of DBTL 
scheme (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG scheme), the Government has launched DBTL in 
18 High Aadha ar coverage identified districts of the country on 01.06.2013 and in Mysore 
on 01.07.2013. 
 
 The details of the Districts in which DBTL has been launched is given below :-  
 
Sr. No. State District Date of 
implementation 
1. Andhra Pradesh Anantpur 01.06.2013 
2. Andhra Pradesh Chittoor 01.06.2013 
3. Andhra Pradesh East Godavari 01.06.2013 
4. Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad 01.06.2013 
5. Andhra Pradesh Ranga Reddy 01.06.2013 
6. Daman and Diu Diu 01.06.2013 
7. Goa North Goa 01.06.2013 
8. Himachal Pradesh Bilaspur 01.06.2013 
9. Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur 01.06.2013 
10. Himachal Pradesh Una 01.06.2013 
11. Karnataka Tumkur 01.06.2013 
12. Karnataka Mysore 01.07.2013 
13 Kerala Pathanamthitta 01.06.2013 
14. Kerala Wayanad 01.06.2013 
15. Maharashtra Wardha 01.06.2013 
16. Puducherry Puducherry 01.06.2013 
17. Punjab SBS Nagar/ 
Nawanshahar 
01.06.2013 
18. Madhya Pradesh East Nimar (Khandwa) 01.06.2013 
19. Madhya Pradesh Harda 01.06.2013 
 
 Under this scheme, the LPG consumers who have linked their Aadhaar number to 
their LPG consumer number and to their bank accounts, will get all domestic LPG cylinders 
(subsidized as well as non subsidized cylinder) at market price and subsidy for domestic 
subsidized cylinders as per their entitlement would be transferred to their bank accounts.  
 
 So far (as on 1.7.2013),  0.8 million domestic LPG consumers have been provided 
permanent advance amounting to Rs.31.8 crores and  0.6 million consumers have been  
provided subsidy on refills  amounting to Rs. 21.2 crores. 
  

103 
 
Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP)  Programme : 
1. The Government has decided   that 5% mandatory ethanol blending with petrol 
should be implemented across the country (excluding North-Eastern States, J&K, Andaman 
& Nicobar and Lakshadweep) by October, 2013.  Ethanol would be sourced only from 
domestic producers and not through imports.  
2. OMCs have already contracted about 40 crore liters of ethanol from domestic 
producers for supply during 2013-14.  Further tenders are also proposed to be issued.  
Implementation of Know Your Customer (KYC) :  
 
 KYC form was designed to ensure that standardised information is collected from all 
LPG consumers. The form is mandatory for all new /transfer connections. In  so far as old 
connections are concerned, it is felt that the KYC compliance will have to be done in a 
phased manner due to the delays/ queing/ law and order problems in case all the 
consumers are asked to submit the form at once. Thus, the KYC drive has b een limited to 
suspect duplicate customers.  
 
 The KYC collection drive for suspect duplicate 2.56 crore customers commenced in 
September 2012 and was brought to a close on 31st December 2012. On an average 6000 
distributors collected 1500 KYCs each during the period. So far 6387269 connections have 
been blocked after KYC.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Supply of subsidized domestic LPG cylinders 
 The Committee note that a significant portion of the subsidy is incurred in supply of 
subsidized LPG cylinders to domestic consumers. The Committee also note that in order to 
reduce the subsidy burden on this account, the Government has taken a decision in 
September 2012 to limit the number of subsidized LPG cylinders to 9 per households in a 
year. In this regard, the Ministry has informed that his measure would result in a saving of 
Rs. 4274 crore per annum in the subsidy burden at current rate of subsidy of R s. 461.58 
per cylinder. 
 To target the subsidized LPG cylinders to bonafide customers, the Committee note 
that OMCs have started implementation of Know Your Customer (KYC) norms to collect 
details about their customers. The Committed have been informed tha t only new, 
deactivated, transfer connections are being subjected to KYC norm and existing customers 

104 
 
have not been covered so far. The Committee wish to point out that removal of fake/ghost 
customers, elimination of customers with multiple connections is a  must and for such 
issues, OMCs should create a robust and update customer database. Hence the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry/OMCs should ensure that the KYC norms are 
implemented for the existing customers as well within the next one year and the d atabase 
should be purified so as to reflect the real customers accurately. 
 The Committee further desire that the customer should be asked to fill in more 
information such as AADHAR number, bank account details and their income data under 
KYC norms since this will help in early implementation of the direct benefit transfer scheme. 
 
REPLY 
 
 KYC form was designed to ensure that standardised information is collected from all 
LPG consumers. The form is mandatory for all new connections. In so far as old 
connections are concerned, it is felt that the KYC compliance will have to be done in a 
phased manner due to the delays/ queing/ law and order problems in case all the 
consumers are asked to submit the form at once. Thus, the KYC drive was first limited to 
suspect duplicate customers.  
 
 The KYC collection drive for suspect duplicate 2.56 crore cu stomers commenced in 
September 2012 and was brought to a close on 31st December 2012. On an average 6000 
distributors collected 1500 KYCs each during the period. Even during this limited exercise 
of KYC, following difficulties were faced :-  
 
 As the KYC, Proof of Identity (PoI) and Proof of Address (PoA) verification at the 
LPG distributorship was a time consuming process, customer queues were witnessed, 
leading to occasional law and order problems. 
 For just the 15% KYCs that were collected during the peri od, the process took 
around 4-5 months time, thus a full scale operation would have to be spread out in terms of 
time.  
 Some of the State Governments requested to extend the period of collection and 
even not to pursue the KYC formalities due to local problems/ representations. 
 
In view of the above experience, it is expected that a full fledged KYC exercise can only be 
completed in a phased manner. KYC is anyway being insisted for all new connections. 
Detection of suspect duplicate/ ghost connections is an ongoing exercise  and currently 
KYC is being done for these connections. 
 
 In so far as bank account is concerned, it has been included as an optional field in 
KYC. During Mysore pilot of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBTL) the customers were asked to 
provide b ank account details. OMC experience suggests that most customers did not 
provide the same as they deemed it to be sensitive financial information and were not 
willing to part with it to the LPG distributors. Aadhar is also a field in the KYC form but 

105 
 
cannot be made mandatory at this stage due to low penetration in many parts of the 
Country. 
 
 The DBTL scheme (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG scheme) has already been 
launched in 18 districts on 01.06.2013.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.  11 
 
Shortfall in drilling targets 
 The Committee are concerned to note the under achievements in the drilling targets 
of ONGC and Oil India Ltd(OIL).  The Committee observe that though ONGC has 
performed well in developmental drilling, it has not been able to achieve its targets in 
exploratory drilling.  ONGC has drilled only 135 exploratory wells as against the target of 
158 wells d uring the year 2011 -12.  As far as, the performance of OIL in 2011 -12 is 
concerned, against a set target of 34 exploratory wells only 16 wells have been drilled 
whereas in case of developmental drilling only 22 wells have been drilled against a target of 
34 wells. 
 
 In view of the need to explore more domestic hydrocarbon resources, the Committee 
feel that shortfalls in the exploratory and developing drilling targets will seriously impact the 
programme.  Therefore, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry/DGH should take 
necessary steps to ensure that the upstream companies abide by their exploration targets 
and make sincere efforts towards completing at least the minimum work programme 
(MWP) assigned to them. 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
 ONGC is carrying out exploratory drilling in its awarded blocks adhering to PSC 
stipulations to meet the MWP commitments of drilling.  With exploratory efforts spreading 
towards complex areas of deepwaters and with targeting of deeper -high temperature-high 
pressure plays, the associated risk of drilling complications are encountered from time to 
time, resulting in drilling delays. 
 The  shortfall in exploratory targets in terms of number of wells completed against 
the target can be attributed to many reasons. 

106 
 
 One of the main t echnical reasons is down -hole well complications. To overcome 
down-hole complications, more and more state -of-art technologies are being used in 
ONGC. The use of synthetic oil base mud systems (SOBM) and other high tech mud 
systems are being introduced to drill exploratory wells. In addition to above ONGC has 
started using latest technologies like  MWD/LWD, independent drive system, top drive 
system, use of high performance advanced technology bit on consignment basis etc. Rigs 
are also periodically subject ed to refurbishment & upgradation wherein all statutory 
requirements are complied with and this reduces repair time considerably which is another 
factor for loss of valuable rig months leading to shortfall in achieving target. 
 Sectoral Drilling Heads regu larly co -ordinate with Assets/ Basins for timely 
availability of ready sites, locations and statutory clearances. Putting these together,  
constitutes a key factor responsible for shortfall in exploratory well drilling target.  
 In addition to this, deep w ells which are more prone to down hole complications are 
being religiously monitored round the clock by senior officers and also advice of Institute of 
Drilling Technology (IDT) is sought for liquidation of complications as and when required 
OIL 
Shortfall in drilling targets :  
As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, OIL‟s drilling plan during the year 2011 -12 
was affected due to various reasons shown under : 
States No. of Wells 
Target Actual 
Exploratory : 
Assam 19 14 
NEF Project 6 - 
Rajasthan 8 2 
KG Basin 1 2 
Gabon 1 1 
Development : 
Assam 31 22 
Rajasthan 3 - 
 
Reasons : 
Assam : 
 Frequent bandh and blockades in fields disrupted / slowed down the drilling 
preparatory work. 
 Land acquisition is a prolonged process with number of social resistances which led to 
delay in acquisition process. 
 
 

107 
 
 
NEF Project : 
 Drilling plan in the 3rd location at Amguri delayed due to expiry of PEL. 
 One Loc. In Dibrugarh Block is found to be Elephant Corridor in Reserve forest area – 
permission declined by Forest Authority, Assam. 
 Logistically  difficult area  of Karbi Anglong & Mizoram delayed exploration progress in 
2011-12. 
 
 
Rajasthan : 
 Prospectivity of the exploration Block (RJ -ONN-2004/3) reassessed and decided to 
relinquish and plan got upset. 
 The only rig got engaged in exploratory work in priority NELP Block and development 
plan suffered. 
 
KG Basin : 
 Location preparatory work got delayed due to difficult logistics. 
 
OIL is making all out sincere efforts towards fulfilling the Minimum Work Programme 
(MWP) assigned to it. Out of the 14 NELP (3 blocks under relinquishment process) blocks 
under its operation currently, most of the Seismic Data Acquisition MWP commitments 
have been completed and preparation for drilling of wells in the current and coming few 
years (depending on block validity period) is going on. For the three NELP IX blocks, 
preliminary activities are currently undertaken. 
 In OIL operated NELP blocks upto NELP VIII, most of the Seismic Data Acquisition 
MWP commitments have been completed and preparation for drilling of wells in the current 
and coming few years is going on. For the three NELP IX blocks, preliminary activities are 
currently undertaken. 
DGH 
 Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, the reasons for non -
completion of Minimum Work Programme (MWP) by ONGC & OIL are due to reasons like 
drilling difficulties on account of geographical conditions / logistics or geological problems 
or non-availability of required permissions or clearances by the Govt. agencies like MOD, 
MOEF, DRDO, SEZ etc.  
 Under the PSC regime, all the operators, including National Oil Companies (NOC) 
viz ONGC and OIL, endeavor to complete at least the Minimum Work Programme (MWP). 
Despite the challenges, it is the persistent effort on part of MoPNG/DGH to persuade the 
operators to complete at least the MWP. Further, the contractors are required to complete 
the MWP in the awarded blocks within the timelines specified in the PSC and in 
accordance with extant Government policies/guidelines on extension. Pen alties are 

108 
 
payable, based on the PSC provisions and other guidelines, in case of non -fulfillment of 
MWP. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.  12 
Rigs  availability 
 
 The Committee note that ONGC has a total of 81 rigs for onshore operations and 40 
rigs for offshore operations.  Out of the offshore rigs 31 are charter hired rigs and only 9 are 
owned rigs of ONGC.  The on land rigs of ONGC comprise of 68 owned rigs and 13 charter 
hired rigs.  Oil India Ltd. (OIL) in total has 16 rigs out of which 11 are owned and 5 are hired 
rigs.  The Committee take a serious note that in the offshore operations, ONGC is fulfilling 
its 77% of the rig requirement by hiring.  The Committee observe that the amount spent by 
ONGC on hiring and leasing of Rigs during 2010-11 and 2011-12 is Rs. 8682 crore and Rs. 
8633 crore respectively which is around 31% and 30% of the actual expenditure out of  
annual budget outlay of the ONGC. 
 It is seen that ONGC and OIL are always making consistent efforts for acquiring new 
blocks in various rounds of NELP and consequently the need for drilling activities 
increases, the Committee desires that NOCs should ana lyze as to go for purchase of rigs 
instead of hiring rigs at high costs and by this initiative, major expenditure can be saved 
which can be utilized for exploratory activities of the Company. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that ONGC and OIL can explore  forming a consortium for acquire and 
utilization of rigs through purchase instead of hiring charter rigs. 
 The Committee further note with serious concern that the idle time is high for the 
charter Hired rigs of ONGC and the main reason for the idling of rigs is the unplanned 
capital repair (both onshore and offshore), waiting time for men and material, etc. The 
Committee note that penalties beyond a permissible limit of rig down time is incorporated in 
the contracts and would like the penal provisions sho uld be strictly enforced as it not only 
causes financial loss but delays the exploration activities. Besides penalizing contractors 
for idling of rigs, the officers of the company should also be held accountable for any 
lethargy on their part.  
 The Commit tee recommends that the NOCs take suitable corrective measures for 
efficient utilization of rigs in order to minimize the idle time of rigs and consequent wasteful 
financial expenditure. 

109 
 
REPLY 
ONGC 
 The process of acquisition of drilling rigs both for Onshore and offshore is under 
process. 
 In Onshore, LOI has already been placed on M/s BHEL for supply of 6 nos of 2000 
HP, VFD rigs. The first rig is expected to be delivered by July, 2013 followed by one rig 
after each month. The process for acquisition of another 5 nos of 1000 HP mobile rigs is 
under progress. 
 Also, in offshore, action for construction of 4 nos of Jack-Up rigs is in progress. 
 All efforts have been made to reduce rig idle time owing to various reasons to bare 
minimum thereby increasing rig utilization time.  
 CH rigs responsible for rig idle time are suitably penalized to discourage such idle 
time.     
OIL 
Rigs Availability :  
 
(i) As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, the present status of drilling rigs 
(owned & hired) deployed by OIL is tabulated below: 
 
Rigs 
Deployment Area of Operation 
No. of Rigs Total No. 
of Rigs Owned Hired 
Drilling Assam + Arunachal 
Pradesh 11 5 16 
 
(ii) As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned , OIL‟s current drilling operations in its 
traditional basin of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh (AP) are optimally managed by the fleet 
of existing 16 nos. drilling rigs (11 nos. in -house + 5 no. Charter hired). OIL is at present, in 
the process of procuring 2 nos. new in -house drilling rigs as replace ment of old vintage 
retired rigs. 
(iii) OIL has utilized In -House Rigs for Drilling in NELP Blocks located in Assam & AP, 
Mahanadi Basin & Rajasthan. However, for NELP operations outside Assam and AP, and 
other locations where moving In -House rigs is uneco nomical, OIL used to charter hire 
drilling rig on as and when required basis as per procedures laid down in the Production 
Sharing Contracts. 

110 
 
 
(iv) For the drilling in the NELP VIII Cauvery Offshore block CY -OSN-2009/2, OIL is in 
regular discussion with M/s ONGC. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
Delay in ONGC Petro Additions Ltd(Opal) 
 
 The Committee note that the  commissioning of ONGC Petro Additions Ltd (OPal), a 
joint venture company of ONGC, GAIL and GSPC project for setting up of a grass root 
integrated petrochemical complex at Dahej, Gujarat with an investment of Rs 21000 crore 
has been delayed considerably a nd is expected to be completed in January 2014.the delay 
has resulted in non -utilisation of C2 -C3 plant of ONGC Ltd. which has been completed on 
schedule.  C2-C3 plant which has to provided feedstock to OPaL project plant is being filled 
with inert gas thu s entailing additional expenditure.  Another major issue noted by the 
Committee is that even when the OPaL project gets completed as per revised schedule, 
there is no availability of natural gas to the project. 
 
  The Committee take a serious view of the l ack of foresight on the part of 
Ministry/ONGC/GAIL that such huge investment has been made without proper planning, 
causing loss to the exchequer. The committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
ministry should closely monitor the progress of the project for its completion and use the time 
available to ensure gas to facilitate commissioning of the project. 
REPLY 
 
I. With the award of cracker unit in December 2008 and the downstream polymer units 
 in June 2011, the completion schedule of OPaL was planned as October 2013. 
 However, with the addition of Captive Power Plant Package, the schedule has been 
 delayed to January 2014. 
 
II.  C2-C3 Extraction Plant is mechanically complete along with the inte rim products off 
 take arrangements since Feb 2011. The products were envisaged to be supplied to 
 Oil Marketing companies(OMCs) and IPCL during the interim period i.e till OPaL 
 comes on stream 

111 
 
III. However, the plant has not been commissioned due to non - allocation of domestic 
 gas.  The viability of C2+ extraction plant as well as that of the petrochemical 
 complex of OPaL would be severely strained if the extracted C2+ component is to be 
 replenished by buying LNG from international market. Accordingly,  ONGC 
 envisaged replenishment of LNG consumed in the extraction process through a 
 SWAP mechanism in which it would supply the equivalent domestic gas from its 
 marginal fields. However, gas allocation to ONGC for above SWAP has not been 
 finalized due to EGoM Policy on allocation priority to various consumer sectors. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.  31 
Release of Funds to OIDB 
 The Committee note that OIDB was established under an Act of Parliament for 
promotion of activities related to the development of oil sector in the country such as 
prospecting, refining, transportation and storage by rendering financial assi stance to 
various projects and as per provision, the board was to be funded through cess levied on 
crude oil and Natural Gas. A part of this cess is given to OIDB for funding its project 
requirements after due appropriation by the parliament. The Committee  are given to 
understand that the total cess that has been collected by Central Government upto 
31/12/2012 is of the order of Rs. 1,14,986 crore, out of which OIDB has received only Rs. 
902 crore.  
 
 The Committee have observed that OIDB is funding annual requirements of various 
projects of DGH, OISD , PPAC, CHT and PCRA apart from funding various plan schemes 
such as RGIPT and ISPRL. Since OIDB is also working on number of important projects 
including the National Gas Hydrates Programme, ISPRL, etc., the C ommittee feel that 
OIDB should be supported with more funds to prevent delays. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the MOP&NG should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance with all 
seriousness and pursue for increased allocation of funds to OIDB o ut of the cess collected 
by the Central Government.  
REPLY 
 Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides for levy and collection of cess, on the 
indigenous crude oil. The cess proceeds are to be utilized for development of oil industry 
either directly by Central Government or through OIDB.  Since the inception of the Act, the 
OIDB has received an amount of Rs. 902.40 crores out of total proceeds of about Rs. 1.15 

112 
 
lakh crore up to 31.12.2012 collected by the Central Government.  No cess has been 
transferred to OIDB since 1991-92. 
 The other source of funds for OIDB is by way of interest earned on loans provided 
by it to oil Industries. The amount of cess (Rs. 902 crores) together with internal receipts 
generated as interest income has increase the corpus of OID B to Rs. 10726 crores 
(Provisional) as on 31st March, 2013, the major part of which has been deployed as under:- 
5. Loans to Oil industries Rs. 7725.48  crores.  
6. Investment in ISPRL (against equity) Rs. 1969.27 crores. 
Rs. 374.40 crores advance against equity. 
7. Equity in Biecco Lawrie Rs. 50.34 crores. 
8. Fixed Assets Rs. 145.65 crores.        
  
 Thus there is very low liquidity with the OIDB which will affect lending capacity and 
ultimately reduce interest income which at present is the main source of funds.  The  major 
portion of the funds generated by OIDB  (up to 31.03.2013) are  utilized for :- 
a. Cumulative release of grants in aid (from inception to 31.03.2013) to the tune 
of Rs. 1861.01 crores comprising of : 
i) Rs. 1398.36 crores Grants to Regular Grantee Institutes viz. CHT , DGH, PCRA, 
OISD and PPAC. 
ii) Rs. 229.59 crores for Research and Development and  
iii) Rs. 233.06 crores for other projects  from 1974-75 to 31.03.2013 
           b)  Cumulative payment of royalty Payment to State Governments     – Rs. 
405.20 cores (up to 31.03.2013) 
 The  matter for transfer of annual Cess to OIDB was pursued with Ministry of  
Finance. Ministry of Finance  has not yet agreed to the proposal of this Ministry for transfer 
of Cess collected to OIDB.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated   23rd July, 2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter-I) 
  

113 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.  16 
 
Reduction of output By KG D6 Block 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the actual production of Natural Gas by 
private/joint venture companies from KG D6 block has been declining for the past three 
years i.e. 2010 -11, 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 at 21017MMSCM, 16245MMSCM and 
8893MMSCM (upto Jan. 2013) respectively. From a peak of 80 MMSCMD, the gas 
production from KG D6 has gone down to 16 MMSCMD.  The Committee have not been 
informed of any valid reason by the Ministry for lower prod uction of gas in DG -D6 block by 
the operator M/s Reliance Industries Ltd.  In this regard, the Committee have also taken 
note of the fact that M/s Reliance Industries is seeking higher price for natural gas before 
the expiry of the term of the current pricing regime. 
 The Committee have been informed that as part of corrective measures, the 
Contractor has been asked by DGH to drill more wells, install a compressor to increase the 
gas recovery and the revision of the field development plan.  The Committee wo uld be 
keen to know the progress achieved through these measures by the company to increase 
production. 
 The Committee have however, also been informed that there are estimations of 
availability of gas at ultra deep levels in KG -D6 basin and for the extrac tion of this gas, 
requisite technology is not available with the Indian Companies and a global oil giant 
namely BP is planning to invest US$5bn in KG D6 basin by buying stakes from M/s 
Reliance Industries. 
 The Committee would strongly urge the Ministry to  adequately satisfy itself and 
convince the nation that the fall in the production of natural gas in KG D6 block is not due to 
commercial consideration or price at which the gas is to be sold. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should se riously look at the fall in production of natural gas in 
KG D6 basin and take urgent step to increase the projected production in coordination with 
DGH. The Committee also expect the Ministry to apply the provisions of PSC with the 
contractor strictly in l etter and spirit in respect of later‟s failure to deliver committed 
production of natural gas from KG D6. 
 

114 
 
REPLY 
 
 Performance of D1&D3 gas fields of KG -DWN-98/3 block is not as per the 
production profile envisaged in the MC approved Addendum to Initial Development Plan 
(AIDP). 
 In this regard, the Contractor was advised repeatedly to drill and put on stream more 
number of wells in the D1 & D3 fields, as per approved AIDP, so as to achieve the 
envisaged Gas production rate. In response to above, RIL has submitted the following: 
 Substantial variance in Reservoir Behavior and Character has been observed 
vis-à-vis the prediction, and there seems to be reservoir constraints in achieving 
the gas production rates. 
 Pressure decline is several times higher than originally envisaged. 
 Early water production in some of the wells was not predicted in initial reservoir 
simulations, though overall field water production is small. 
 Better than expected reservoir continuity / connectivity and uniform depletion 
throughout th e reservoir with very high degree of interference in the producing 
wells. Good connectivity was not envisaged in the static model at FDP stage and 
therefore the provision for more wells was kept in the FDP to cater to this 
uncertainty. 
 
 Since, the Contrac tor failed to adhere to the approved AIDP in terms of drilling and 
putting on stream number of wells and the Gas Production rate, even after repeated 
reminders. GOI, in May 2012, had issued notice for proportionate disallowance of Cost of 
production facilities amounting to US $ 1.005 Billon. Subsequent to the above notice, RIL 
invoked arbitration for settlement of the dispute and appointed their arbitrator. Government 
of India also appointed its arbitrator. The matter is pending under arbitration. 
 The Cont ractor subsequently on 28.08.2012 had submitted Revised Field 
Development Plan (RFDP) for D1 & D3 fields for downward revision of reserves and the 
associated production profile. Clarifications have been sought from RIL, and the same are 
awaited. 
 Government of India in July, 2011 has approved the assignment of 30% of 
Participating Interest (PI) by Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) to BP Exploration (Alpha) Ltd 
in KG -DWN-98/3 block. Present PI of consortium partners in KG -DWN-98/3 block is as 
follows, RIL 60 %, BPEAL: 30% and NIKO (NECO) 10 %. Subsequently, the Operator has 
submitted proposals relating to augmentation of gas from D1D3, MA and OFDP of four 
satellite gas fields and D-34 FDP. 
  
 
 

115 
 
Following steps have been taken to increase the gas production from KG-DWN-98/3 block: 
I. The Contractor has been asked to drill, complete and connect more producer wells 
 and undertake appropriate remedial measures to revive the sick wells in D1, D3 and 
 MA fields in this block.   
II. The Contractor‟s proposal to install  compressor at Onshore Terminal (OT) to 
 increase gas recovery from D1 & D3 fields has been approved by the Management 
 Committee (MC). Contract for Front End Engineering Design (FEED) for OT Booster 
 compression has been awarded by the contractor and work is under way. 
III. Revised Field Development Plan (RFDP) of MA field has been approved by the 
 MC.  
IV. The Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) of another 4 gas discoveries (D -2, 
 6, 19 & 22) has been approved by MC. 
V. The Declaration of Commercialit y (DoC) of gas discoveries D -34 has also been 
 approved by MC. 
 The Contractor has undertaken development activities related to 4 satellite gas 
discoveries (D2, 6, 19 & 22) and drilling of one gas well in MA field as approved above by 
the MC. Further, the FDP of D -34 gas discovery has been submitted by the Contractor. 
Once the above activities are completed, the outcome in terms of increase in gas 
production will be known. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-25015/3/2013-Fin.I Dated  23rd  July, 2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                Dr. Prabha Thakur 
December,  2013                                             Acting Chairperson, 
Agrahayana,1935 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on        
        Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

116 
 
 
  


117 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
 
FIRST SITTING 
(03.10.2013) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday the 03 rd October, 2013 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Prabha Thakur  - Acting Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Mehboob Beg 
3 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4 Shri Baliram Jhadhav 
5 Shri Manda Jagannath 
6 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
7 Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
8 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
9 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
                RAJYA SABHA 
10 Shri Sabir Ali 
11 Smt. Kusum Rai 
12 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
13 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
14 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Deputy Secretary 

118 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
1. Shri Vivek Rae - Secretary 
2. Shri Rajive Kumar - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Singh - Joint Secretary  
 
Representatives of Public Sector Organisations/Other agencies. 
 
1. Shri M. Nene - Director, IOCL 
2. Shri K.K. Gupta - Director, BPCL 
3. Shri H.C. Mehta - ED, HPCL 
 
2.   In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Dr. Prabha Thakur to chair 
the sitting under rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha.  
3. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the 
Committee and congratulated them on their nomination to the Committee.  The 
Chairperson then briefly apprised the Members of the functions of the Committee and also 
of the work done by the previous Committee  during the year 2012-13. 
 
4. *****  *****  *****  *****  *****  ***** 
5. The Committee then considered the draft Action Taken Report on 'Demands for 
Grants (2013-14)' of MoPNG and adopted the same with modifications suggested by the 
Members. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to final ize the report and 
present/lay it in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6. *****  *****  *****  *****  *****  ***** 
 
7. *****  *****  *****  *****  *****  ***** 

119 
 
8.   *****  *****  *****  *****  *****  *****   
 
9.  *****  *****  *****  *****  *****  *****   
 
10.   Verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*****Matters not related to the subject 

120 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT  (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2012 -13) ON ‘ DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2013-14) OF THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 31 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
7,8,9,10,13,14,15,17,18,19,20,21,22,24,25,26,27,28, 29,30) 
 20 
 Percentage to Total 64.51% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,11,12,23,31) 
 
10 
 Percentage of Total 32.25% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No.  16)  
1 
 Percentage of Total 3.22% 
 
 
 