14 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
CHALLENGES OF UNDER-RECOVERIES OF PETROLEUM 
PRODUCTS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report   (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2011-12)] 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012/ Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka) 
 


 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
CHALLENGES OF UNDER-RECOVERIES OF PETROLEUM 
PRODUCTS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the         Ninth  
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2011-12)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2012  
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.8.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012/ Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka) 


 
 
Contents 
Page
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)………………………                     (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………                     (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies 
…………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12) held on 
27.08.2012   
 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12) on `Challenges of 
Under-recoveries of Petroleum Products‟ 
 

 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli            -             Chairman 
 
              Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam Ahir 
3 Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
4 Shri Ramesh Bais 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
8 Shri Raosaheb Dadarao Danve 
9 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
10 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
11 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
12 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
14 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
15 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
16 Shri C.L. Ruala 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20 Shri C. Sivasami 
21 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
23 Shri Ahmed Patel 
24 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
25 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
26 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
27 Shri Sabir Ali 
28 Shri Pankaj Bora 
29 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
30 Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
31 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash  - Deputy Secretary  

 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fourteenth Report on Action Taken b y the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Challenges 
of Under-recoveries of Petroleum Products‟.  
 
 
2. The Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2011 . The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report were received 
on 23 March, 2012. 
 
 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2011-12) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27 August, 2012.   
 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
27  August,  2012                                                               Chairman, 
5 Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka)        Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.

 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2011 -2012) on „ Challenges of Under -recoveries of Petroleum Products ‟, which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011. 
 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Go vernment in respect of all 
the 17  Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accept ed by the 
Government:- SI.Nos. 1, 5, 7, 10, 12, 13 ,15 and 17. 
         (Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies SI. Nos.- 16 .  
         (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- SI.No.       2, 3, 
8 and 14.        
         (Chapter-IV) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : - SI. Nos. 4 ,6, 9 and 11 . 
 
               (Chapter-V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 
 

 
A. Refinery Gate Price-APM prices Vs. TPP/IPP.  
  
Recommendation  (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.2) 
 
5. The Committee note d that during 1976 -2002, pricing of sensitive petroleum  
products was based on Admin istrative Pricing Mechanism (APM). Under APM, cost of 
Crude oil processed by Refineries was fixed taking into account the delivered cost of 
crude oil and the normative refining cost. Further, besides normative marketing and 
distribution costs, Oil Marketin g Companies (OMCs) were also allowed 12% post -tax 
returns. The Committee had  been informed that the APM was reported to be 
increasingly unsuitable for the long term growth and efficiency of oil industry due to 
lack of adequate financial resource generation  and incentives for investment in 
technological upgradations or cost minimization and for achieving consumer friendly 
and competitive vibrant petroleum sector. As such APM was fully dismantled with effect 
from 1 st April 2002 and since then refinery gate pr ices of four sensitive petroleum 
products viz. petrol, diesel, LPG and kerosene are being governed by IPP/TPP which 
includes beside FOB price of petroleum products in the Arab Gulf, other components 
namely ocean freight, custom duty, insurance charges etc.  in case of IPP and advance 
licensing benefits in case of EPP. 
  While going into merits of cost plus mechanism and TPP/IPP mechanism, the 
Committee were informed that actual cost of refinery/production of individual product 
was not identifiable separately due to operational procedures and TPP/IPP mechanism 
based on widely traded and international market price reflect the competitive conditions 
and help refineries to optimize turnover and over and above cost. The Committee while 
accepting the contentions of  the Ministry fo r going in TPP/IPP mechanism were , 
however, of the view that when the refinery gate prices has been aligned to 
international market prices there is no justification of including other costs in TPP/IPP 
on the reasons that these costs have be en incurred by refineries while importing crude 
oil.  
 Moreover the value of these components is less than 2% of the finished product 
cost and the refineries will not be much affected on exclusion of these components 
from the refinery gate prices.  
 The Co mmittee, therefore, strongly recommend ed that the components other 
than FOB price of petroleum products at Arab Gulf should not be included in the 
refinery gate price which will bring down the cost of petroleum products and 
consequently reduce the under recoveries of OMCs. 
 

 
6. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted as below:-  
 “As per the current pricing mechanism, the Refinery Gate Price (RGP) of 
Petrol and Diesel is determined based on Trade Parity Price (as per the 
recommendations of Rangarajan Committee Report) whereas the RGP of PDS 
Kerosene and Domestic LPG is determined based on Import Parity Price. Based 
on the RGP effective 16 th January 2012 for Petrol and Diesel and 1 st January 
2012 for PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG, th e impact of elements of customs 
duty, ocean freight, insurance charges, ocean loss, LC Charges and port dues 
etc. included in RGPs at Mumbai is given below 
(Rs. / KL) 
 
  
Petrol 
 
Diesel 
PDS 
Kerosene 
Domestic 
LPG 
 
Elements included in 
RGP 
 
1,097 
 
1,219 
 
222 
 
306 
 
RGP 
 
39,710 
 
44,633 
 
40,641 
 
43,819 
 
% 
 
2.76% 
 
2.73% 
 
0.55% 
 
0.70% 
 
 As may be seen from the above table, with the gradual reduction in the 
customs duty on crude and POL products, the current impact of elements 
(other than FOB) in the RGP is only  around 0.5% to 2.8%. This ensures that 
refineries recover their cost of imports of raw material and also various other 
levies i.e. octroi, entry tax etc. on the refineries. 
 
 Hence RGP based on FOB would not cover the cost of refining crude oil 
particularly by the existing older refineries of PSU OMCs and would not be 
adequate to meet their CAPEX requirements towards capacity addition, quality 
up-gradation, etc. 
 
 In view of the above, it is not advisable to fix the RGP of petroleum 
products at FOB price”. 
 
7. As the Government have moved away from the cost plus regime and the 
Refinery Gate Price of petroleum products have been aligned to international 
market prices, the Committee had found no justification in including the 
components other than FOB price o f petroleum products at Arab Gulf on the 
reasons that these costs have been incurred by refineries while importing crude 
oil.   
The Ministry in its action taken reply have stated that the current impact of 
components other than FOB  price  in the RGP is onl y 0.5% to 2.8% which 
ensures that refineries recover their cost of imports and various other levies 
such as o ctroi , entry tax etc.  Hence RGP based on FOB  would not cover the 
cost of refining crude oil particularly by the older refineries  of PSU OMCs and 
would not be adequate to meet their CAPEX requirements towards capacity 
addition, Quality up-gradation, etc. 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken reply of the Ministry . 
The switch over from cost-plus mechanism to TPP-IPP mechanism was to reflect 

 
the competitive condition s and help refine ries to optimize turnover and  bring 
efficiency in their operations.  The Committee are of the opinion that by adding 
other costs to FOB which are notional, will defeat this objective besides inflating 
the r efinery gate price . The Committee, therefore, rei terate its earlier 
recommendation to exclude components other than FOB from refinery gate price 
which will bring down the cost of petroleum products and reduce the under-
recoveries of OMCs. 
 
B. Operating efficiencies of refineries.  
  
Recommendation  (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
 
8. The Committee noted that the petroleum products prices in the international 
market do not always move in tandem with the crude oil prices but depend on the 
demand and supply constrain ts, seasonal fluctuations etc. The Committee ha d also 
been informed that out of 9 to 10 products that are produced from crude oil, three 
products are priced above crude oil prices and  rest are traded below the crude prices.
 Moreover, there is around 10% f uel loss in processing of  crude oil which 
increases the cost price of the finished products. 
 
On consideration of the material submitted and deposition by representatives, 
the Committee were convinced that in current international marketing scenario where  
there are narrow margins, the Indian refineries have to         be very efficient in order 
to compete and be viable and profitable.  The Committee, however, f ound that the 
public sector refineries are  mostly  of   small capacity and suffer from inherent 
disadvantages like locational disadvantages, old technologies  which has adversely 
affected the GRM of the refineries. 
 
The Committee were further informed that BPCL, Mumbai are paying 3%  octroi 
to BMC for bringing crude oil to refinery.  So far Rs.1140 c rore are being paid annually 
on this account which has denied the profitability of the company. 
 
The Committee recommended that expert group be constituted to evaluate the 
performance of each refinery taking into account various constraints faced by them 
and take effective steps to make them more efficient, viable and profitable. 
 
 
9. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted as below:-  
“The Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary action”. 
 

 
 
10. The Committee had observed  that in the current international market 
scenario where there are narrow margins ,  the Indian refineries have to be very 
efficient in order to compete and be viable and profitable .  The Committee had 
further observed that the public sector ref ineries are mostly of small capacity 
and suffer from factors like locational disadvantages, old technologies which 
has adversely affected the GRM of the refineries. The Committee, therefore , had 
recommended that an  expert group should be constituted to ev aluate the 
performance of each refinery taking into account the constraints faced by them 
and to take effective steps to make them more efficient and profitable. 
  
The Ministry in this regard has stated that recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted for necessary action. However, The Committee have 
not been informed of the action taken in this regard as no details regarding the 
steps taken by the Ministry has been spelt out.     
    
While expressing their displeasure at the casual reply of the Govern ment, 
the Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation and desire the 
Ministry to constitute an expert group at the earliest to study various constraints 
faced by each refinery and take steps to make them more effecient.  
 
C. Transportation through VLCC  
 
Recommendation  (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 
11. The  Committee noted  with  concern  that  although  shipping strategy of  oil 
companies has always been to maximize transportation of i mported crude oil in Very 
Large Crude Carriers (VLCC) there   are   infrastruct ure constraints like draft 
restrictions and port jetty limitations at Mumbai port which do not allow VLCCs to 
berth in Mumbai.   Hence, refineries in Mumbai are constrained to import crude oil 
through smaller size of vessels.  The Comm ittee ha d also been informed that at 
Visakhapatnam, the Single Point Mooring (SPM) system, which is going to start soon 
will enable receipt of crude oil through VLCC‟s. Considering  the facts that Very Large 
Crude Carriers (VLCC), a widely used crude oil c arrier that can carry about  270 TMT 
of crude oil and will be more economical in regard to volume of transporting imported   
crude,   the  Committee  fel t  that  infrastructure  constraints  like  draft restrictions 
and port jetty limitations at Mumbai Port  should have been addressed on urgent 
basis. The Committee, urged the  Ministry to take up the matter with the appropriate 

 
authorities to ensure that the required infrastructure to handle VLCC be built at all the 
ports off-loading crude oil at the earliest. 
 
 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard:-  
“Upgrading infrastructure facilities for imports is a continuous process and is 
being   pursued  keenly by all stakeholders. Presently,following actions have 
been taken/ are being taken in this regard: 
 
(i) Single Point Mooring (SPM) facility at Visakhapatnam Refinery of HPCL has 
been commissioned in February, 2011. 
 
(ii) SPM facility off Mangalore Coast and other auxiliary facilities including 
Buoy, Sub-sea pipeline, Booster pumping station and pipelines to refinery from 
the Strategic Storage facility is under construction at Mangalore and from 
booster pumping station to MRPL Coastal terminal, the mechanical completion 
shall be achieved by the end of 2012. 
 
(iii) Integrated Offshore Crude handling facilities project at Parad eep shall be 
completed by the end of 2012, ahead to completion of Paradeep Refinery. 
 
(iv) Crude Oil import infrastructure at West Coast by IOCL is under review”. 
 
 
13. The Committee had noted with concern, the infrastructural constraints 
faced by OMCs in maximizing the transportation of imported crude oil in very 
large crude carriers (VLCC) in Mumbai and had  urged the Ministry to take up the 
matter with the appropriate authorities to ensur e that the required infrastructure 
to handle VLCC be built at all the ports off-loading crude oil, at the earliest.   
  
The Ministry, in its reply have informed the s tatus of upgrading 
infrastructure facilities at Visakhapatnam and Mangalore  coast. In regard to the 
constraints at the Mumbai port, the Ministry have stated that the crude oil import 
infrastructure at the West Coast by IOCL is under review. 
  
The Committee feel that there in an urgent need to address  the 
infrastructural constraints like draft r estrictions and port jett y limitations at 
Mumbai port  as the port handles crude oil  imports to  some major refineries . 
Therefore, the Committee desire that the aforesaid review of West Coast by IOCL 
be expedited and urgent steps be taken to upgrade infrastructural facilities at the 
Mumbai Port.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
D. Custom duty on Petroleum Product 
 
Recommendation  (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
 
14. The  custom duty levied  on  the  petroleum products which  was 7.5% and 
subsequently revised to 2.5% in June, 2011 does not actual ly add to the revenues of 
the Government as product imports are almost nil owing to surplus refining capacity 
in the Country.  Instead, the Committee understood that it goes in to the calculation of 
fixing the import parity prices of these products at inte rnational level which in turn 
increases consumer price.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the custom 
duties on petroleum products especially that on petrol and diesel be brought down to 
Nil from the present level of 2.5% to make it at par with th e custom duty on crude oil 
which at present is Nil leaving no room for calculation of Refinery Gate price which is 
the average of 80% of Import  Parity Price (IPP) and 20% of Export Parity Price 
(EPP).  The Committee asked to be apprised in cost reduction of petroleum products 
at refinery level after recent decision of the  Government to remove the entire custom 
duty on crude oil and how this would help in bringing down the refinery gate price. 
 
15. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted as below:-  
 “The effective rate of protection on Petrol and Diesel has come down 
from 10% in 2002 to 2.5% currently.  In fact, the Customs Duty on other major 
petroleum products  namely  PDS  Kerosene,  Domestic  LPG  and  ATF  is  
NIL.Thus,  the remaining small effective rate of protection available is  essential 
to provide some level of protection to refineries most of which are in operation 
for a long period. 
 
 The  refineries  also  incur  irrecoverable  taxes  imposed  by  various  
State Governments which are offset by the effective rate of protection to ensure 
viability in refinery operations. 
 
 As regards the impact of recent reduction in Customs Duty on crude oil 
and petroleum products in June 2011 on Refinery gate price of the Petroleum 
products, the reduction in Refinery Gate Price is Rs.1.75 per litre on Petrol and 
Rs.1.87 per litre on Diesel at Mumbai. 
  
 Further, reduction in Customs Duty on crude oil and petroleum products 
in June 2011 has adversely affected the profitability of four No rth East 
refineries.  This is due to the fact that the North East refineries do not process 
imported crude oil. Therefore, crude procurement cost for  the  North East 
refineries does not reduce corresponding to reduction in Customs Duty on 
crude  oil. On t he other hand, reduction in Customs Duty on products has 
brought down the Refinery Gate Prices leading to lesser sales realization.  
Hence any further reduction in Customs Duty on petroleum products, especially 
petrol and diesel would further worsen the deteriorating financial situation of the 
North East refineries that had arisen after duty restructuring in June, 2011. 
  

 
 It is also added that a 2.5% differential between basic Customs Duty on 
crude oil and  petroleum products, is based on the recommendatio n of the 
Rangarajan Committee on pricing  and Taxation of Petroleum, to provide a 
viable margin to domestic refineries”. 
 
16. As custom duty levied on petroleum products does not add to the 
revenues of the Government and only increase the refinery gate pri ce of the 
petroleum products, the Committee had recommended that custom duties on 
petroleum products especially on petroleum and diesel be brought down to Nil 
from present level of 2.5%.   
  
The Ministry in its reply had stated  that the 2.5% custom duty is  essential 
to provide some level of protection to refineries which are in operation for a long 
period.  It has also stated that the refineries also incur irrecoverable taxes 
imposed by various State Governments which are offset by the effective rate of 
protection to ensure viability in sitting operations.   The Ministry have further 
stated that reduction in custom duty would worsen the deteriorating financial 
position of the North-East refineries. 
 
 The Committee are however, not convinced by the reply of th e Ministry.  
Though some refineries particularly in the North -East are facing operational 
constraints affecting their financial health, the Committee feel that it should not 
be the ground for levying custom duty on petroleum products for all the 
refineries so as to increase their refinery gate prices .   In regard to need for 
providing protection to some refineries t he Committee desire, as also 
recommended in the earlier para that  an expert group be constituted to go into 
the constraints faced by these refin eries and suitable incentives be provided to 
these refineries to overcome these constraints. As regards to the taxes imposed 
by State Governments, the Committee would like the Government to take up the 
matter with State Governments to rationalize various t axes imposed on these 
refineries. 
   
The Committee, t herefore, while reiterating their earlier  recommendation 
would like the Government to remove custom duty on petroleum products 
especially for petrol and diesel so as to reduce t he refinery gate prices of  these 
products.  
 
 

 
E.  Revenue from Oil Sector  and Differential State Taxes    
 
 
Recommendation  (SI. No. 6 and 9, Para No. 2.6 and 2.9) 
 
17. The Committee in their recommendation no. 6 noted that contribution to Central 
Exchequer from petroleum sector h as steadily increased from Rs.93513 crore in 
2008-09 to Rs.111779 crore in 2009 -10 to Rs.136497 in 2010 -11 while to State 
exchequer it has increased from Rs.68285 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs.72082 crore in 
2009-10 to Rs.88997 in 2010 -11. Against the above reven ues  generated, the pay 
back by Central Government to OMCs has been inconsistent at Rs.74002 crore in 
2008-09 Rs.28792 crore in 2009 -10 and Rs.43926 crore in 2010 -11 i.e. the payback 
was of the order of 79%, 26%  and 32%. With the rationalization of taxatio n effective 
from June 2011 wherein the Government has eliminated 5% custom duty on crude oil 
and reduced excise duty on diesel from Rs.4.60 per litre to Rs.2 per litre, the revenues 
of Central Government from oil sector is expected to decline sharply.  In this 
connection the Committee were informed  that  Central  Government  has  sacrificied  
Rs.50,000  crore  of  the  total revenue from this sector and the total revenue for 2011-
12 is expected to be around Rs.86,000 crore. However, the revenue of State 
Government which do not  share any burden will continue to further rise.  The 
Committee fe lt that both Centre and State have tendency to bank heavily on this 
sector to mobilize revenues.  However, given the inflationary impact of rise in prices 
on petroleum p roducts, the Committee were happy at the reduction of taxes and 
duties by the Central Government as it has  positive impact on reducing under - 
recoveries and help in increasing profitability of oil  companies  and also bring the 
prices  of  petroleum  products  within  a  reasonable  limit. In the  same  way  the 
Committee had expected State Government to follow suit and give relief, to common 
man by bringing down the taxation and forgo some of the revenues. 
 
18. The Committee in their recommendation no. 9 had observed that high State 
levies are also responsible  for high and varied   retail selling prices of different 
petroleum products across the country. Th e   Committee also  note d that  the   
Government   have requested  the  State Governments  to  rationa lize  their  taxes  on  
sensitive  petroleum  products  namely petrol, diesel,  PDS kerosene and domestic 
LPG and also to  shift from the ad - valorem tax rates to specific tax component for 
providing relief to the consumers and as a result, the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi has reduced the VAT rate on diesel from 20% to 12.5% w.e.f. 20 th 
July 2010.  Other States like Bihar,  Goa , Tamilnadu  and  West  Bengal  have  also  

 
reduced  Sales  Tax  on  various petroleum  products.  However,  the  Committee  feel  
that  still  there  is  need  to substantially reduce the rates of sales tax on petroleum 
products and these should be made  uniform across the country not only to ensure 
that consumers get these products at a uniform price but also to c ontain black 
marketing in the neighboring areas where different retail pricing of  petroleum products 
exist. The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that Union Government should  
seriously pursue the matter with the State authorities at appropriate level and  a 
consensus should be brought to reduce sales tax to a uniform level. 
 
19. In response to the above recommendations,  the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas has submitted as below:-  
 
 “All the State Governments have been requested from time to time to re duce 
the State taxes on sensitive Petroleum products and to give relief to the 
common man.  In response, 17   States /UT have reduced the rate of VAT 
in the respective States”. 
 
20. The Committee in their recommendations had pointed out that the revenue 
to state Governments has increased from Rs.68285 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs.72082 
crore i n 2009 -10 to Rs.88997  crore in 2010 -11 and had desired the  State 
Governments to bring down taxation and forgo some of the revenues so as to 
bring down the prices of petroleum products.   
 
The Committee had also desired that Government should pursue with 
State Governments to reduce their taxes on petroleum products so as to bring 
the tax structure in different states to a uniform level.  
 
The Ministry in its reply  to the above recommendations has stated that all 
the State Governments have been requested from time to time to reduce the 
State taxes on sensitive Petroleum products and to give relief to the common 
man. In response, 17   States /UT have reduced the rate of VAT in th e respective 
States. 
 
The Committee while appreciating that 17 States/UTs which have reduced 
the rate of VAT  on petroleum products would  urge the Ministry that the 
remaining states should also be persuaded to reduce their taxes with the twin 
objectives of reducing the prices of petroleum products and to bring parity in the 
tax structure of different states. 
 

 
F. Burden Sharing Mechanism and Impact of Under recoveries on financial 
health of OMCs. 
 
Recommendation   (SI. No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
 
21. The Committee noted that total burden of under-recovery of OMC‟s is presently 
being shared 33% by upstream companies via offering discount in crude oil prices 
and the remaining burden is apportioned between the Government and the OMCs 
depending on the feasibility of t he  Government to allocate funds from budgetary 
sources  and  capacity  of  the  OMCs  to  absorb  a  part  of  their  under -recoveries. 
Therefore, the actual burden sharing ratio between the Government and the OMCs 
varies from year to year on this account . The Committee note d the percentage of 
under-recoveries born by OMCs was 9% during 2006 -07, 21% in 2007 -08, Nil in 
2008-09, 12% in 2009 -10 and 22% in 2010 -11.  The Committee were constrained to 
note that not  only there is any fixed criteria followed by t he Government on the 
sharing of under –recoveries to the OMCs and the compensation of under -recoveries 
is  also  not  being received  by the  companies  on  time,  therefore,  their quarterly 
financial results show very inconsistent results.  The Committee  had further been 
informed that the OMCs‟ mounting under -recoveries have compelled them to borrow 
heavily, to meet their cash flow requirements and the total borrowings of Rs. 67,332 
crore as of March 2008 has ballooned to Rs. 85,933 crore as on 30th  June, 2010. The 
Committee also observed that the combined interest burden of the OMCs during 
2009-10 was Rs. 3,441 crore which has also resulted in deteriorating debt equity 
ratios of OMCs.  The Committee, therefore, desire d that cash assistance to the 
OMCs on account of under -recoveries  should be transferred at regular intervals on 
pre- determined basis enabling them to overcome the problems leading to imposition 
of interest and  penalty by tax authoritie s. The Committee  recommended  that  the 
Government should evolve a clear and fixed policy to fund under -recovery of OMCs 
so  that  estimates  of  profits  of  these  listed  companies  where  stakes  of  various 
investors are also involved, would be properly indicated in the year. 
 
22. The Ministry of Petrole um & Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard:-  
 
“The amount of under recovery depends on a variety of factors, such as, 
prices of  crude  oil  and  petroleum  products  in  international  market,  
domestic  market conditions, etc.  So , it is difficult to evolve a fixed policy to 
compensate the under - recoveries of OMCs.  However, every effort is being 
made to evolve a stable policy to  fund  under -recoveries of  OMCs by the  
Government to ensure that the  cash assistance is received by  the OMCs on a 
regular basis”. 

 
 
23. The Committee had observed that there is no fixed criteria followed by the 
Government on the sharing of under -recoveries of the OMCs which impact the 
financial health of the OMCs and had recommended that Government shoul d 
evolve a clear and fixed policy to fund under-recoveries of OMCs. 
 The Ministry in its reply have informed that  under recoveries depend on 
variety of fact ors such as prices of crude oil and  petroleum products in 
international market, dome stic market con ditions etc and i t becomes difficult to 
formulate a fixed policy to compensate the under-recoveries of OMCs.  
 The Committee are not convinced of the reply of the Ministry.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise difficulties being faced by the 
Ministry in formulating a fixed policy to compensate the under -recoveries of the 
OMCs on regular periodic intervals. 
  
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the rising trend of under recoveries of 
OMCs in the  last few years due to high volatility of crude oil price in international 
market. Since domestic prices  of petroleum products are linked with international 
crude oil prices which is steadily increasing and  the Government does not permit 
passing the impact of full cost of imports on domestic consumers, under recoveries 
of OMCs have increased from Rs.20,146 crore in 2004-05 to Rs.78190 crore  in 
2010-11 and is projected to  be as high as Rs.1,32,016 crore in 2011-12. 
 
Though  the  Committee  understand  that  under  recoveries  do  not  always 
signify  losses  to  OMCs,  they  have  put  a  major  dent  on  the  profitability  of  the 
companies which in turn  have  adversely affected their healthy growth  and also 
harmed interests of investors of the company.  The rising trend of under recoveries 
has also posed a major challenge to the Government, who have to on the one hand, 
see that OMCs work in a competitive atmosphere for healthy growth of this important 
sector and on the other ensure that common man is not unduly  burdened due to 
inflationary impact of increase in prices of sensitive petroleum products. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that Government to tread cautiously in the 
matter and  taking into due consideration of all the stakeholders, devise ways for 
protecting the interests of the common man. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The government is committed to the twin objective of protecting the interest of 
common man particularly the vulnerable section of the society and also to protect the 
financial health of the Public sector Oil Marketing Companies (PSU OMCs). 
 
In-spite of  the extreme  volatility in  the  prices of  crude oil and petroleum 
products in  the  international market, in order to protect the consumers from the 
inflationary impact of high  oil prices, the government has fully removed Customs 
Duty on crude oil and reduced the Customs Duty on Petrol and Diesel from 7.5% to 
2.5% and reduced Excise duty on Diesel from Rs. 4.60/ltr. to Rs. 2.00/ltr with effect 
from 25th  June  2011. Further, the Government passed on minimal burden of high 
prices of crude and petroleum products to the consumers through increase in Retail 
Selling Price (RSP) of Diesel by Rs. 3/ltr., PDS Kerosene by Rs. 2/ltr. and Domestic 
LPG by Rs. 50/ Cylinder effective 25th June 2011. Since then there has not been any 
increase in RSP of these products in the country. 
 

 
The government is committed to not only protect the interest of common man 
but also to make available petroleum products of right quality at reasonable prices to 
the consumers. At the  same  time, it needs to be appreciated that country‟s long 
term energy security depends on the financial health of the OMCs. If their financial 
health  deteriorates  on  account  of  the  prices   under-recoveries,  their  ability  to 
discharge their assigned task of supplying the entire country with petroleum products 
would suffer. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)
 Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 5, Para No. 2.5) 
 
The Committee note that expert group constituted under the chairmanship of 
Dr.  Kirit  Parikh  on  current  pricing policy  of  4  sensitive  petroleum  products  had 
recommended  deregulation of petrol and diesel at both RGP and RSP stage and 
increase in SKD kerosene and LPG prices. 
 
 
Further,  the  Committee  have  been  informed  that  in  consideration  of 
recommendations made by the Export Group, the Government has deregulated the 
price of petrol and increased the prices of Diesel, Domestic LPG and PDS kerosene 
with effect from 26th June 2010 which has helped in moderating the under recoveries 
of OMCs.  In this connection the Committee observe from the material furnished by 
the Ministry that in most of the countries the prices of petroleum products are being 
regulated to contain the inflationary impact of high oil prices and give relief to their 
people.  The Committee are, therefore, of the view that in our country which still is a 
growing  economy  it  will  not  be  prudent  to  deregulate  the  prices  of  sensitive 
petroleum products as it can aggravate  inflation and adversely affect the common 
man.  At the same time, the Committee also understand that the under recoveries 
incurred  by  the  OMCs  has  detrimental  effect  on  the  financial  health  of  these 
companies and for the robust development of oil sector it is essential for these 
companies to be able to compete and function in a free and liberalized atmosphere. 
The   Committee,   therefore,  desire  that  the  Government  while  refraining  from 
complete  deregulation  of sensitive petroleum products, should  continue with the 
current policy of  compensating OMCs for their under-recovery. The Committee 
further desire that the Government set up a Study Group to look into the entire 
gamut of  under-recoveries of OMCs and based on which a suitable and clear cut 
policy should be chalked out so as to timely compensate the OMCs for any losses 
incurred on this account. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
With regard to committee‟s recommendation to set up a study group to look 
into the issue  of under-recoveries, it may be mentioned that the Government had 
already constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit S. Parikh to 
examine the current pricing policy of the four sensitive petroleum products namely 
Petrol, Diesel, PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG and make recommendations for a 
viable and sustainable pricing policy for these products.  The Committee submitted 
its report on 3rd February 2010. 
 
 

 
Based on the recommendations of the committee and decisions taken in the 
meeting  of   the   Empowered  Group  on  Ministers  (EGoM)  on  25.06.2010,  the 
Government has already decontrolled the prices of Petrol effective 26th June 2010. 
 
With regard to other sensitive petroleum products, Government is revising the 
prices  periodically to avoid any heavy burden on the consumers and the common 
man. 
 
The under-recoveries incurred by the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) on 
sale of  sensitive  petroleum products are being compensated  under the „Burden 
Sharing Mechanism‟  approved by the Government. Under the „Burden Sharing 
Mechanism‟, the Central Government is providing cash assistance to the OMCs in 
addition to the discounts provided by the upstream Oil Companies viz. ONGC, OIL 
and GAIL. Also, a part of the  under-recoveries are being borne by the OMCs 
themselves.  The cash assistance and rate of upstream discounts are being finalized 
by the Ministry of Finance. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)
 Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7, Para No. 2.7) 
 
From the material furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that level of 
taxation on petroleum products in India vis-à-vis other countries is much lower.  In 
case of petrol it is higher  only in respect of countries USA, Canada and Pakistan 
while in case of diesel, it is the lowest among all countries.  In case of PDS kerosene 
and Domestic LPG, the retail selling price in India is very much lower than all the 
neighbouring countries.  The Committee desire the Government to continue with the 
existing taxation structure so that the prices of essential items like diesel,  LPG, 
kerosene do not increase to the detriment of the interest of common man. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Generally speaking, tax policy of the Government is formulated on a variety of 
considerations such as need for resources, fiscal condition, ease of administration, 
demand and supply situation, domestic prices etc.  However, Ministry of Finance has 
noted the suggestion. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)
 Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 10, Para No. 2.10) 
 
The Committee note that high level of taxes on petrol and low taxes on diesel 
with a  subsidy  of Rs.10.83 as on 23.12.2011 on sale of each litre of diesel has 
resulted in big disparity in their retail selling prices.  The Committee, however, are of 
the view that since petrol is consumed  mainly by private vehicle users and diesel 
being used mainly for mass transport system and agriculture etc. there is a merit in 
keeping the diesel prices at lower level.  The Committee note that out of the total 
consumption of diesel in the country, 15% is used by private car owners, 10% for 
industrial use and 8% is used in power generation i.e. 33% of diesel is being used by 
those  sections which are taking unfair advantage of low taxation and subsidy on 
diesel. 

 
 
 
The Committee are of the strong view that the Government should take steps 
to exclude these sectors from the net of beneficiaries of the subsidized diesel.  As 
regards 18% of diesel being used for industrial and power generation, they can be 
charged unsubsidized prices of diesel. 
 
In  regard  to  use  of  diesel  by  private  car,  the  Committee  suggest  that 
Government  to  consider  leving a  cess  on  diesel  car to  be  paid  at the time of 
purchase of diesel vehicle  and collection of cess should go for compensating the 
under-recoveries of OMCs. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 Ministry of Finance had informed that recommendations contained in Para 2.10 of 
the Committee would be examined as part of proposals for the Budget 2012-13. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) Dated: 
23.03.2012) 
Recommendation (Sl. No 12, Para No. 2.12) 
 
The Committee observe that there is a continuous decline in the percentage 
of household using kerosene but the allocation of kerosene through PDS is intact. 
Although in States like  Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Maharashtra and Karnataka, 
there has been considerable increase in LPG enrollment, the Committee do not find 
any significant decrease in allocation of kerosene through PDS to these States.  As 
the Government intend to enhance LPG coverage in remote and rural part of India 
with the launch of the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin LPG VitranYojana and Ministry allocate 
PDS kerosene to different States/UTs on quarterly basis for cooking and illumination 
only, the Committee recommend that the Union Government should have a stringent 
monitoring mechanism to control the distribution made to the States and review the 
allocations periodically so  that  purpose  of helping poor  through  PDS  would  be 
properly served. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Kerosene (SKO) is one of the items distributed through Public Distribution 
System (PDS). Allocation of PDS Kerosene is made by the Government of India to 
different States/Union  Territories (UTs) on a quarterly basis for distribution under 
PDS  for  cooking  and  illumination  only.  Further,  onward  distribution  within  the 
States/UTs  through  their  PDS  network  is  the   responsibility  of  the  concerned 
States/UTs. 
 
However, in order to rationalize the distribution of PDS Kerosene the quota 
from 1st  quarter of 2010-11 of States/ UTs was restricted on account of increase in 
Domestic  LPG   coverage  during  the  first  three  quarters  of  2009-10  (April  to 
December, 2009) and the quantity lapsed  on account of non-lifting by States/UTs 
during the first half of 2009-10.  The quota was not reduced in respect of states/UTs 
having  Domestic  LPG  coverage  below  the  national   average  namely,  Bihar, 
Chattishgarh,  Jharkhand,  Madhya  Pradesh,  Orissa,  Puduchery,  Rajasthan,  Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal.Besides, no reduction was made in respect of J&K, 
North East States, A&N Islands and UT of Lakshadweep in view of the logistic 
/special problems being faced by these regions. Quota lapsed during first half of 
2009-10 due to non-lifting was reduced in respect of all defaulting states/UTs. 
 

 
Further, for the year 2011-12, while allocating PDS Kerosene, factors like 
expansion in  domestic LPG penetration (during the period January to December, 
2010), lapse of quota allocated during first three quarters of 2010-11 and higher 
consumption with respect to national average were kept in view.  However, the quota 
was not reduced in respect of states/UTs having Domestic LPG coverage below the 
national average.  Besides, no reduction has been made in respect of J&K, North 
East States, A&N Islands and UT of Lakshadweep.  The quantity lapsed due to non- 
lifting was reduced in respect of all defaulting states/UTs, wherever applicable. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)Dated: 
23.03.2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 13, Para No. 2.13) 
The Committee are concerned to note that as per study of NCAER, 35% 
PDS kerosene is diverted for non PDS usage including adulteration, the Committee 
find that to contain the menace of diversion/black marketing of Superior Kerosene 
Oil (SKO) distributed under PDS and to ensure that PDS SKO reaches the bonafide 
beneficiaries, a pilot project on biometric Smart Card based solution for distribution 
of Domestic LPG and PDS SKO has been launched in the State of Andhra Pradesh 
in  coordination  with  the  Unique  Identification  Authority of  India (UIDAI),  the Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) in the Public Sector and  the State Government.  In 
this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the UIDAI.  While appreciating the launching of a Pilot 
Project for distribution of the Domestic LPG and PDS SKO, the Committee desire 
that  the  Pilot  Project  be  completed  soon  and  the  Government  should  create 
necessary infrastructure to launch similar Projects in all the States and a time bound 
plan be prepared to implement the same.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken and progress made by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Government  has  constituted  a  Task  Force  in  February,  2011  under  the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI) to recommend and implement a solution for direct transfer of subsidies 
on PDS Kerosene, Domestic LPG and Fertilizer to the intended beneficiaries. As per 
the terms of reference of the Task Force, the Task  Force will study the present 
mechanism of transfer of subsidies on Kerosene, LPG and Fertilizer, challenges and 
problems in the governance structures and delivery system. It would examine and 
suggest an implementable solution for direct transfer of subsidies on Kerosene, LPG 
and Fertilizers to intended beneficiaries with the use of Aadhaar numbers (Unique 
Identification numbers),  Aadhaar enabled transactions and Aadhaar authentication 
infrastructure of the UIDAI. 
 
The Chairman, UIDAI has submitted the Interim Report of the Task Force on 
Direct  Transfer  of Subsidies on Kerosene, LPG and Fertilizer to Hon‟ble Finance 
Minister on 05th July, 2011. The Interim Report of the Task Force envisages phase- 
wise implementation for transfer of cash subsidy on Kerosene, LPG and Fertilizer. 
 
 
The recommendations of the Task Force for direct transfer of cash subsidy on 
PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG have been accorded „in principle‟ approval by the 
Empowered  Group  of   Ministers   (EGoM)  regarding  under  recovery  of  the  Oil 
Marketing Companies. 
 

 
Domestic LPG : 
 
The Government has taken initiatives to launch pilot studies to introduce the 
changes as  proposed in the Interim Report for direct transfer of cash subsidy for 
domestic LPG, at  Hyderabad  (Andhra Pradesh) & Mysore (Karnataka). The pilot 
study has commenced with  collecting details of  UID number and  bank account 
details of the customers for appending the OMC customer database with Aadhaar 
and bank details. So far, response  from customers has  been encouraging in 
Mysore, whereas it is quite slow in Hyderabad. The system integrator has  been 
appointed who is engaged for designing the network, software and linking of existing 
transaction software of the oil company with this system.  The pilot is executed with 
active  association  of  UIDAI  for  requisite  technical  and  specification  inputs.  The 
OMC‟s have reported that from 17.11.2011, trial for delivery of refill after successful 
authentication of UID details has been started in Mysore, and first such delivery has 
already taken place. 
 
PDS Kerosene : 
 
The Government has taken initiatives to launch pilot studies to introduce the 
changes as  proposed in the Interim Report for direct transfer of cash subsidy for 
PDS Kerosene, at Alwar (Rajasthan).  Further, this Ministry has invited suggestions 
from States/UTs Governments for initiating the process for implementing the direct 
transfer  of  subsidy  in  cash  for  Kerosene. State/UT  Governments  have  been 
requested to indicate the preparedness of the Public  Distribution System (PDS) in 
the State to undertake this transfer and proposed methodology to be  adopted for 
transferring cash equivalent of subsidy to the bonafide beneficiaries. Further, in 
order to test the procedure, State/UT Governments have been requested to run a 
pilot study in  two  districts/cities/blocks, to be identified by the respective  States, 
before April, 2012, so as to scale it up to the entire State later on. 
 
 
Ministry  of  Petroleum  &  Natural  Gas  is  progressing  in  line  with  the 
recommendations of the Task Force in a phased manner.  First Pilot Scheme for 
direct transfer of cash subsidy on PDS Kerosene has been launched in Kotkasim 
Tehsil of Alwar District (Rajasthan) w.e.f. 5th December, 2011. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)Dated: 
23.03.2012) 
Recommendation (Sl. No 15, Para No. 2.15) 
 
The Committee note that cost of production of crude/barrel by ONGC and 
OIL is  $37.87 and $33.71 per barrel.  However, the gross crude oil prices of 
crude oil has been $89.41 and $86.12/bbl.  With discount to OMC of $35.64 and 
$27.58 per barrel, the net price realised is $53.77 and $58.54 per barrel.The 
Committee therefore, observe that against the cost of production of ONGC 
$37.87, the net price realized is $53.77 per barrel i.e. the margin of profit is 
$15.90 per barrel. Similarly for OIL, against the cost of production of $33.71, 
the net price realised is $58.54 per barrel i.e. the margin of profit is $24.83 per 
barrel.  The Committee feel that given the high profits  being  earned  by  
upstream  companies,  there  is  a  good  case  of  them i ncreasing their 
contribution in burden sharing of under-recoveries at least to 40% so t hat will 
give some respite to OMCs. 
 
 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The amount of under-recovery varies from quarter to quarter as it 
depends upon a  number  of variable parameters, such as, price of crude oil 
and petroleum products in international market, domestic market scenario, etc. 
Keeping in view all such factors, upstream contribution is being decided by the 
Government. 
 
The  details  of  sharing  of   under-recoveries  between  the  
Government, U pstream companies and OMCs during last 3 years are given 
below: 
Under-Recovery Sharing   
Amount in ` crore 
 
 
 
As may be  seen from  the  above  table,  keeping in  view the  high  under- 
recovery  last  year,  the  upstream  oil  companies‟  contribution  was  increased  to 
38.75% from the normal sharing ratio of around 33%. During the current year i.e. 
2011-12, the estimated amount of under-recovery of ` 1,39,659 crore is highest so 
far, and an appropriate burden sharing mechanism is being worked out.  However, 
for the period between April  – December, 2011, upstream Oil Companies have 
provisionally shared 37.91% of the under recoveries of Public Sector OMCs. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)Dated: 
23.03.2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 17, Para No. 2.17) 
The Committee observe that there is a lot of misgivings among people over 
the pricing of  the petroleum products  due  to  elaborate  mechanism  and  lack of 
transparency  in  pricing  of  these  products. The  Committee  though  have  been 
informed that lately the Ministry has started uploading information in the this regard 
on their website but the Committee feel it is not enough and there is a greater need 
to  make  people  aware  of   mechanism  of  pricing  of  these  products  through 
newspapers and other press media.  Also a substantial amount of subsidy is being 
given on sale of three petroleum products namely diesel, kerosene and LPG for the 
targeted beneficiaries.  The Committee feel that the people in general should also be 
regularly  informed  regarding  these  subsidies  and  how  it  is  being  targeted  and 
utilized.  In this way the people would not only be made more aware but also can be 
vigilant  against  any  misuse  of  these  subsidies  by  unintended  and  undeserving 
beneficiaries 
 
 
Year 
 
Total 
U/R 
Sharing of Under-Recoveries 
Government Upstream Oil 
companies 
OMCs 
Amount % Amount % Amount % 
2008-09 103292 71292 69.02% 32000 30.98% Nil Nil 
2009-10 46051 46051 56.46% 14430 31.33% 5621 12.21% 
2010-11 78190 41000 52.44% 30297 38.75% 6893 8.82% 
Apr-Dec 
2011-12 
 
97,313  
45,000 
 
46.24% 
 
36,894 
 
37.91%  
15,418 
 
15.84% 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The following steps have already been taken to bring transparency in the 
price mechanism of the sensitive petroleum products:- 
 
1. The buildup of petrol price which has already been decontrolled, is being hosted 
by OMCs on their website with links to the websites of PPAC and MoP&NG. 
 
2. The International quotes of Crude Price (Indian Basket) and under recovery 
incurred by OMCs is hosted on the website of PPAC and is updated on daily / 
fortnightly basis. 
 
3. The Price build-up of Diesel, PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG at Delhi along 
with detailed explanation of terms considered in the price build-up is hosted on 
the website of PPAC and is updated on fortnightly / monthly basis. 
 
4.  In addition to the above, the OMCs share all information at the end of each 
quarter when financial results are announced.  Quantum of under-recoveries and 
subsidy are being communicated to the general public by OMCs through Press 
Conferences. Further, on  several  occasions, the subject of under-recovery, 
subsidy  and  pricing  philosophy  is  discussed  in  detail  in  different  forums, 
including media interactions, so that the public at large is aware of  the issues 
impacting pricing of petroleum products and Government subsidies. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)Dated: 
23.03.2012) 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 16, Para No. 2.16) 
 
The  Committee  note  with  concern  that  special  oil  bonds  issued  in  part 
compensation  of under-recoveries of the public sector Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) has to be generally  sold at a discount and can only be used for capital 
expansion plans provided there is adequate internal resources available for financial 
working capital during the intervening period.  The Committee are further surprised 
to know that although the bonds issued by the Government to OMCs are considered 
as  an  eligible  security  or  investment  by  Provident  Fund(PFs)  and  Insurance 
companies, they do not have Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) status and as a result 
banks are unwilling to buy such bonds from OMCs.  Thus, the market and appetite 
for oil bonds is limited.  In view of the forgoing, the Committee find that the special oil 
bonds issued by the Government are unable to solve cash liquidity problems which 
force the companies to borrow from  market at high rate of interest to meet their 
regular cash requirements.  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that oil 
bonds being issued by the Government should be given SLR status so that OMCs 
should not have to wait for suitable opportunity for disposal of bonds in the market 
and can sell these bonds to the banks.  The Committee also recommend that as the 
insurance  sector  is  a  good  source  of  revenue  generation  for  the  Government, 
insurance  companies may be requested to invest their surplus funds in oil bonds 
issued by the Government to fund under-recovery. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Since the Oil Bonds issued by Government to OMC‟s do not have SLR status, 
the practice of issuance of Oil Bonds under „Burden Sharing Mechanism‟ has been 
stopped and since 2009-10 only cash assistance is being provided to OMCs towards 
compensation of under-recoveries. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part)Dated: 
23.03.2012) 

 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
 BY THE COMMITTEE  
Recommendation (Sl. No 2, Para No. 2.2) 
 
The Committee note that during 1976-2002, pricing of sensitive petroleum 
products was based on Administrative Pricing Mechanism (APM).  Under APM, cost 
of Crude oil processed by Refineries was fixed taking into account the delivered cost 
of crude oil and the normative refining cost.  Further, besides normative marketing 
and distribution costs, Oil Marketing Companies  (OMCs) were also allowed 12% 
post-tax returns.  The Committee have been informed that the APM was reported to 
be increasingly unsuitable for the long term growth and efficiency of oil industry due 
to lack of adequate financial resource generation and incentives for investment in 
technological upgradations or cost minimization and for achieving consumer friendly 
and competitive vibrant petroleum sector.  As such APM was fully dismantled with 
effect  from  1st   April  2002  and  since  then  refinery  gate  prices  of  four  sensitive 
petroleum products viz. petrol, diesel, LPG and kerosene are being governed by 
IPP/TPP which includes beside FOB price of petroleum products in the Arab Gulf, 
other components namely ocean freight, custom duty, insurance charges etc. in case 
of IPP and advance licensing benefits in case of EPP. 
 
While going into merits of cost plus mechanism and TPP/IPP mechanism, the 
Committee were informed that actual cost of refinery/production of individual product 
was  not  identifiable   separately  due  to  operational  procedures  and  TPP/IPP 
mechanism  based  on  widely  traded  and  international  market  price  reflect  the 
competitive conditions and help refineries to optimize turnover and over and above 
cost. The Committee while accepting the contentions of the Ministry  for going in 
TPP/IPP mechanism are, however, of the view that when the refinery gate prices has 
been aligned to international market prices there is no justification of including other 
costs in TPP/IPP on the reasons that these costs have been incurred by refineries 
while importing crude oil. 
 
Moreover the value of these components is less than 2% of the finished 
product cost  and the refineries will not be much affected on exclusion of these 
components from the refinery gate prices. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the components other 
than FOB  price  of petroleum products at Arab Gulf should not be included in the 
refinery  gate  price  which  will  bring  down  the  cost  of  petroleum  products  and 
consequently reduce the under recoveries of OMCs. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
As per the current pricing mechanism, the Refinery Gate Price (RGP) of 
Petrol  and  Diesel  is  determined  based  on  Trade  Parity  Price  (as  per  the 
recommendations  of  Rangarajan  Committee  Report)  whereas  the  RGP  of  PDS 
 

Kerosene and Domestic LPG is determined based on Import Parity Price. 
Based on the RGP effective 16th January 2012 for Petrol and Diesel and 1st 
January 2012 for PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG, the impact of elements of 
customs duty, ocean freight, insurance charges, ocean loss, LC Charges and 
port dues etc. included in RGPs at Mumbai is given below: 
 
(Rs. / KL) 
 
As may be seen from the above table, with the gradual reduction in the 
customs duty on crude and POL products, the current impact of elements (other 
than FOB)  in the RGP is only around 0.5% to 2.8%. This ensures that 
refineries recover t heir cost of imports of raw material and also various other 
levies i.e. octroi, entry tax etc. on the refineries. 
 
Hence RGP based on FOB would not cover the cost of refining crude oil 
particularly by the existing older refineries of PSU OMCs and would not be 
adequate to meet their CAPEX requirements towards capacity addition, quality 
up-gradation, etc. 
In view of the above, it is not advisable to fix the RGP of petroleum products at 
FOB price. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) 
(Part)Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 7 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 3, Para No. 2.3) 
 
The Committee note that the petroleum products prices in the 
international market do not always move in tandem with the crude oil prices 
but depend on the demand and supply constraints, seasonal fluctuations etc. 
The Committee have also been informed that out of 9 to 10 products that are 
produced from crude oil, three products are priced above crude oil prices 
and  rest are traded below the crude prices. Moreover, there is around 10% 
fuel loss in processing of  crude oil which i ncreases the cost price of the 
finished products. 
 
On consideration of the material submitted and deposition by 
representatives, t he Committee are convinced that in current international 
marketing scenario where t here are narrow margins, the Indian refineries 
have to be very efficient in order to c ompete and be viable and profitable.  
The Committee, however, find that the public sector refineries are mostly of 
small capacity and suffer from inherent disadvantages like locational  
 
  
Petrol 
 
Diesel 
PDS 
Kerosene 
Domestic 
LPG 
 
Elements included in RGP 
 
1,097 
 
1,219 
 
222 
 
306 
 
RGP 
 
39,710 
 
44,633 
 
40,641 
 
43,819 
 
% 
 
2.76% 
 
2.73% 
 
0.55% 
 
0.70% 

 
 
 
disadvantages, old technologies  which has adversely affected the 
GRM of the refineries. 
 
 
The Committee were further informed that BPCL, Mumbai are paying 
3% octroi to BMC for bringing crude oil to refinery.  So far Rs.1140 crore are 
being paid annually on this account which has denied the profitability of the 
company. 
 
The Committee recommend that expert group be constituted to 
evaluate the performance of each refinery taking into account various 
constraints faced by them and take effective steps to  make them more 
efficient, viable and profitable. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary action. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 10 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 8, Para No. 2.8) 
The  custom duty levied  on  the  petroleum products which  was 7.5% 
and subsequently revised to 2.5% in June, 2011 does not actually add to the 
revenues of t he Government as product imports are almost nil owing to 
surplus refining capacity in the Country.  Instead, the Committee understand 
that it goes in to the calculation of fixing the import parity prices of these 
products at international level which in turn increases consumer price.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the custom duties on petroleum 
products especially that on petrol and diesel be brought down to Nil from the 
present level of 2.5% to make it at par with the custom duty on crude oil which 
at present is Nil leaving no room for calculation of Refinery Gate price which is 
the average of 80% of Import  Parity Price (IPP) and 20% of Export Parity 
Price (EPP).  The Committee would also like to be apprised in cost reduction 
of petroleum products at refinery level after recent decision of the  
Government to remove the entire custom duty on crude oil and how this would 
help in bringing down the refinery gate price. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The effective rate of protection on Petrol and Diesel has come down from 
 
10% in 2002 to 2.5% currently.  In fact, the Customs Duty on other major 
petroleum products  namely  PDS  Kerosene,  Domestic  LPG  and  ATF  is  
NIL.  

 
 
 
Thus,  the remaining small effective rate of protection available is essential 
to provide some level of protection to refineries most of which are in operation 
for a long period. 
 
The  refineries  also  incur  irrecoverable  taxes  imposed  by  various  
State G overnments which are offset by the effective rate of protection to 
ensure viability in refinery operations. 
 
As regards the impact of recent reduction in Customs Duty on crude 
oil and petroleum products in June 2011 on Refinery gate price of the 
Petroleum products, the reduction in Refinery Gate Price is Rs.1.75 per litre 
on Petrol and Rs.1.87 per litre on Diesel at Mumbai. 
 
Further, reduction in Customs Duty on crude oil and petroleum 
products in J une 2011 has adversely affected the profitability of four North 
East refineries.  This is due to the fact that the North East refineries do not 
process imported crude oil. Therefore, crude procurement cost for  the  North 
East refineries does not reduce c orresponding to reduction in Customs 
Duty on crude  oil.On the other hand, reduction in Customs Duty on 
products has brought down the Refinery Gate Prices leading to lesser sales 
realization.  Hence any further reduction in Customs Duty on petroleum 
products, especially petrol and diesel would further worsen  t he deteriorating 
financial situation of the North East refineries that had arisen after duty 
restructuring in June, 2011. 
 
It is also added that a 2.5% differential between basic Customs Duty on 
crude oil and  petroleum products, is based on the recommendation of the 
Rangarajan Committee on pricing  and Taxation of Petroleum, to provide a 
viable margin to domestic refineries. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 16 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 14, Para No. 2.14) 
 
The Committee note that total burden of under-recovery of OMC‟s is 
presently being shared 33% by upstream companies via offering discount in 
crude oil prices and the remaining burden is apportioned between the 
Government and the OMCs depending on the feasibility of the  Government 
to allocate funds from budgetary sources  and  capacity  of  the  OMCs  to  
absorb  a  part  of  their  under-recoveries. Therefore, the actual burden 
sharing ratio between the Government and the OMCs varies from year to 
year on this account.The Committee note the percentage of under-recoveries 
born by OMCs was 9% during 2006-07, 21% in 2007-08, Nil in 2008-09, 
12% in 2009-10 and 22% in 2010-11.  The Committee are constrained to 
note that not  only there is any fixed criteria followed by the Government on  

 
 
the sharing of under –recoveries to the OMCs and the compensation of 
under-recoveries is  also  not  being received  by the  companies  on  time,  
therefore,  their quarterly financial results show very inconsistent results.  
The Committee have further been informed that the OMCs‟ mounting under-
recoveries have compelled them to borrow heavily, to meet their cash flow 
requirements and the total borrowings of Rs. 67,332 crore as of March 2008 
has ballooned to Rs. 85,933 crore as on 30th  June, 2010. 
The Committee also observed that the combined interest burden of the OMCs 
during 2009-10 was Rs. 3,441 crore which has also resulted in deteriorating 
debt equity ratios of OMCs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that cash 
assistance to the OMCs on account of under-recoveries  should be 
transferred at regular intervals on pre- determined basis enabling them to 
overcome the problems leading to imposition of interest and  penalty by tax 
authorities. The  Committee  recommended  that  the G overnment should 
evolve a clear and fixed policy to fund under-recovery of OMCs so  that  
estimates  of  profits  of  these  listed  companies  where  stakes  of  various 
investors are also involved, would be properly indicated in the year. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The amount of under recovery depends on a variety of factors, such as, 
prices of  crude  oil  and  petroleum  products  in  international  market,  
domestic  market conditions, etc.  So, it is difficult to evolve a fixed policy to 
compensate the under- recoveries of OMCs.  However, every effort is being 
made to evolve a stable policy to  f und  under-recoveries of  OMCs by the  
Government to ensure that the  cash assistance is received by the OMCs on 
a regular basis. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 23 of the Chapter-I) 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINALREPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 
The  Committee noted  with  concern  that  although  shipping strategy 
of  oil c ompanies has always been to maximize transportation of imported 
crude oil in Very Large Crude Carriers(VLCC)  there are   i nfrastructure 
constraints like draft restrictions and port jetty limitations at Mumbai port 
which do not allow VLCCs to berth in Mumbai.   Hence, refineries in Mumbai 
are constrained to import crude oil through smaller size of vessels. The 
Committee have also been informed that at Visakhapatnam, the Single Point 
Mooring (SPM) system, which is going to start soon will enable receipt of 
crude oil through VLCC‟s. C onsidering  the facts that Very Large Crude 
Carriers (VLCC), a widely used crude oil carrier that can carry about 
270 TMT of crude oil and will be more economical in  regard to volume of 
transporting i mported   crude,   the  Committee  feel  that  infrastructure  
constraints  like  draft restrictions and port jetty limitations at Mumbai Port 
should have been addressed on urgent basis. The Committee, urge the  
Ministry to take up the matter with the appropriate authorities to ensure that 
the required infrastructure to handle VLCC be built at all the ports off-loading 
crude oil at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Upgrading infrastructure facilities for imports is a continuous process 
and is being  pursued  keenly by all stakeholders.Presently,following actions 
have been taken/ are being taken in this regard: 
 
(i) Single Point Mooring (SPM) facility at Visakhapatnam Refinery of 
HPCL has been commissioned in February, 2011. 
(ii) SPM facility off Mangalore Coast and other auxiliary facilities including 
Buoy, S ub-sea pipeline, Booster pumping station and pipelines to 
refinery from the St rategic Storage facility is under construction at 
Mangalore and from booster pumping station to MRPL Coastal 
terminal, the mechanical completion shall be achieved by the end of 
2012. 
(iii) Integrated Offshore Crude handling facilities project at Paradeep 
shall be c ompleted by the end of 2012, ahead to completion of 
Paradeep Refinery. 
 
(iv) Crude Oil import infrastructure at West Coast by IOCL is under review. 
 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 13 of the Chapter-I) 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 
The Committee note that contribution to Central Exchequer from 
petroleum s ector has steadily increased from Rs.93513 crore in 2008-09 to 
Rs.111779 crore in 2009-10 to Rs.136497 in 2010-11 while to State 
exchequer it has increased from Rs .68285 crore in 2008-09 to Rs.72082 
crore in 2009-10 to Rs.88997 in 2010-11. A gainst the above revenues  
generated, the pay back by Central Government to O MCs has been 
inconsistent at Rs.74002 crore in 2008-09 Rs.28792 crore in 2009-10 and 
Rs.43926 crore in 2010-11 i.e. the payback was of the order of 79%, 26% 
and 32%. With the rationalization of taxation effective from June 2011 
wherein the G overnment has eliminated 5% custom duty on crude oil and 
reduced excise duty on diesel from Rs.4.60 per litre to Rs.2 per litre, the 
revenues of Central Government from oil sector is expected to decline sharply.  
In this c onnection the Committee were i nformed  that  Central  Government  
has  sacrificied  Rs.50,000  crore  of  the  total revenue from this sector and 
the total revenue for 2011-12 is expected to be around Rs .86,000 crore. 
However, the revenue of State Government which do not  share any burden 
will continue to further rise. 
 
The Committee feel that both Centre and State have tendency to bank 
heavily on this sector to mobilize revenues.  However, given the inflationary 
impact of rise in prices on petroleum products, the Committee are happy at the 
reduction of taxes and duties by the Central Government as it has  positive 
impact on reducing under- recoveries and help in increasing profitability of 
oil  companies  and also bring the prices  of  petroleum  products  within  a  
reasonable  limit.In  the  same  way  the C ommittee would expect State 
Government to follow suit and give relief, to common man by bringing down 
the taxation and forgo some of the revenues. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
All the State Governments have been requested from time to time to 
reduce the State  taxes on sensitive Petroleum products and to give relief to 
the common man. In response, 17  States/UT have reduced the rate of VAT 
in the respective States. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 20 of the Chapter-I) 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 9, Para No. 2.9) 
 
The Committee observe that high State levies are also responsible for 
high and varied  retail selling prices of different petroleum products across 
the country. The Committee also  note that  the   G overnment   have 
requestedthe  State Governments  to  rationalize  their  taxes  on  sensitive  
petroleum  products  namely petrol, diesel,  PDS kerosene and domestic 
LPG and also to  shift from the ad- valorem tax rates to specific tax 
component for providing relief to the consumers and as a result, the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi has reduced the VAT rate 
on diesel from 20% to 12.5% w.e.f. 20th July 2010.  Other States like Bihar, 
Goa,  Tamilnadu  and  West  Bengal  have  also  reduced  Sales  Tax  on  
various petroleum  products. However,  the  Committee  feel  that  still  there  
is  need  to substantially reduce the rates of sales tax on petroleum products 
and these should be made  uniform across the country not only to ensure 
that consumers get these products at a uniform price but also to contain 
black marketing in the neighbouring areas where different retail pricing of  
petroleum products exist. The Committee, t herefore, recommend that 
Union Government should  seriously pursue the matter with the State 
authorities at appropriate level and a consensus should be brought to reduce 
sales tax to a uniform level. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
All the State Governments have been requested from time to time to 
reduce the State  taxes on sensitive Petroleum products and to give relief to 
the common man. In response, 17  States/UT have reduced the rate of VAT 
in the respective States. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 20 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 11, Para No. 2.11) 
 
The  Committee  have  been  informed  that  in  addition  to  the  
Government s ubsidy  on  domestic  LPG  and  PDS  Kerosene,  the  
Government  upstream  oil companies and OMCs are also shouldering a part 
of the subsidy by not passing the f ull impact of increase in the price of 
petroleum products to the domestic consumers. In view of the huge burden of 
subsidy, all Central duties on PDS SKO and domestic LPG  were  abolished  
since  1.3.2005. The  under  recoveries  on  PDS  SKO  and domestic  LPG  
for  the  year  2010-11  is  Rs.19,485  crore  and  Rs.21,772  crore 
respectively which is more than 50% of total under recoveries.  The 
Committee in their 8th  report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  

 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and N atural Gas have already recommended 
that to offset the huge losses made on account of subsidized domestic LPG 
cylinders, the Government may consider to do away with providing subsidized 
LPG to rich and affluent people having an income of more than Rs.6 lakh per 
annum including those holding constitutional posts, public representatives  
like  MPs,  MLAs/MLCs. T he   Committee  reiterate  its  earlier 
recommendation to address huge under recovery made on account of 
domestic LPG and  PDS  kerosene.The  Committee  would  like  to  know  the  
action  taken  by Government in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Capping of Subsidy on Domestic LPG is subject to policy approval by the 
Government. The Government is yet to take a decision in the matter. 
 
 
With respect to Kerosene, during 2011-12, PDS Kerosene quota 
for the St ates/UTs was rationalized on account of (i) increase in Domestic 
LPG coverage ( during January to December, 2010) in respect of all the 
States/UTs excluding North E ast States, island territories,  J&K and States 
having coverage of Domestic LPG below national average; (ii) PDS 
Kerosene quota lapsed (during first three quarters of 2010-11) on account of 
non-upliftmentby States/UTs;  (iii) adjustments in the quota  keeping  in  view  
higher  per  capita  allocation  of  PDS  kerosene  to  certain States/UTs during 
the previous year. Accordingly, the allocation of PDS Kerosene was  
rationalized, and the overall allocation for 2011-12 was reduced by 7.9% in 
comparison to the allocation of 2010-11. 
 
(M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas O.M. No.P-20012/11/09-PP (Vol.I) (Part) 
Dated: 23.03.2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
     August, 2012                                                                Chairman, 
    Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka)             Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
FOURTEENTH SITTING 
(27.08.2012) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday the 27th August, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
6 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
8 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
9 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
10 Shri C.L. Ruala 
11 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
12 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
13 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
15 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
16 Shri Pankaj Bora 
17 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
18 Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
19 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. 
3. 
Smt. Anita Jain 
Shri H. Ram Prakash 
- 
- 
Director 
Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2.   At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Nat ural Gas and other organizations to the sitting of 
the Committee. 
3. **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** ****  
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Action Taken 
Report on the subject „Challenges of Under -recoveries of Petrol eum Products‟ 
without any modification.  The Committee also authorized the Chairman to 
present the Report to both Houses of Parliament.  
  
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________
______ 
*Matter not related to the subjec  
 

 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TA KEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND 
NATURAL GAS (2011 -12) ON ‘ CHALLENGES OF UNDER -RECOVERIES OF 
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS’. 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 17 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 7, 10, 12, 13 
,15 and 17.) 
 
 
 8 
 Percentage to Total 47% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 16) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 6% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 8 and 14.) 
     
4 
 Percentage of Total 23.5% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 ,6, 9 and 11) 
4 
 Percentage of Total 23.5% 
 
 