 
17 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2012-13) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
SAFETY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Twelfth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2011-12)] 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 


 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2012-13) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
SAFETY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2011-12)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.05.2013  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.05.2013  
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
 

(iii) 
 
    CONTENTS     Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13)………………………      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………       (iv) 
   
 CHAPTER I   
 
Report 
………………………………………………….     
                   
 
 CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………       
               
 
 CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………             
 
 CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted                                             by the 
Committee ……………………………………                          
 
 CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited ……                        
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I. 
Status of Implementation of MB Lal Committee 
Recommendations 
 
 
II. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2012 -13) 
held on 02.05.2013   
 
 
III. 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the  Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12) on 
`Safety of Oil Installations’ 
 

 
 
(iv) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2012-13) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
4 Dr. Mehboob Beg 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
7 Shri Ram Sundar Das 
8 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav 
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath 
11 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
12 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
13 Shri Somabhai Gandalal Koli Patel 
14 Shri Rao Saheb Danve Patil 
15 Shri P.L.Punia 
16 Shri Takam Sanjoy 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
20 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
21 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Sabir Ali 
23 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
24 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
25 Shri Ahmed Patel 
26 Dr. Ram Prakash 
27 Smt. Kusum Rai 
28 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
30 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
31 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Deputy Secretary 

 
(v) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Safety of Oil 
Installations‟.  
 
2. The Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2012. The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
to all the recommendations con tained in the Twelfth Report were received on 30 th 
August, 2012. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2012 -13) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 02 May, 2013.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
06  May,  2013                                                                   Chairman,         
16 Vaishakha,1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee  on 
   Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2012-2013) on „Safety of Oil Installations‟, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
22.5.2012. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 16 Recommendations /Obser vations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- SI.Nos. SI.Nos. 1,7,8,10 and  15. 
                   (Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies SI. Nos.- 4,5,9 and 11 
          (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by  the Committee:- SI.No.       13 
and 14         
          (Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - SI. Nos. 2,3,6,12 and 16. 
 
                (Chapter-V) 
 
3. The Committee desire th at the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furni shed 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 
 

Recommendation SI. No. 2 
 
Need for Consolidation of safety legislations 
 
5. The Committee note that 9 legislations (6 for downstream companies and 3 for 
upstream companies) have been enacted to deal with the safety aspects of oil and gas 
industry.  There are 7 agencies both in Central and State Governments dealing with 
enforcement of safety standards.  The Committee note that some of the legislations like 
Explosives Act, 1884, Petroleum Act, 1934, Oil Mines Act, 1952 and Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 under ORDA Act, 1948 are very old and desire that the 
Government should re visit the safety clauses of these legislations pertaining to the oil 
and gas sector in the light of new technologies / practices evolved during the years in 
this sector.   
 
The Committee opine that multiplicity of legislations to deal with the safety of oi l and 
gas installations has made the enforcement process difficult.  The Committee 
recommend the Government to bring out an umbrella legislation for the oil and gas 
sector with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas as nodal Ministry incorporating all 
safety related provisions contained in different Acts. 
 
6. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following: 
“Ministry will review the old Acts coming under its jurisdiction by a panel / 
committee for possible amendments, if any. 
Regarding bringing in of an umbrella legislation on safety issues, since different 
Ministries are administering different acts/rules on safety, concerned Ministries 
will be consulted before a decision is made on the issue”.  
 
7. The Committee in their recommendation had pointed out that multiplicity of 
legislations to deal with the safety of oil and gas installations had made the 
enforcement process difficult.  To streamline the same, the Committee had 
desired the Government to bring out an umbrella legislation by incorporating all 
safety related provisions contained in different Acts for the oil and gas 
installations with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas as nodal Ministry.   
The Ministry in its reply to the above recommendation has stated that it 
would review the old Acts coming under its jurisdiction by a panel for possible 
amendments.  Further, it has stated that since different Ministries are 
administering different Acts/Ru les on safety, concerned Ministries would be 
consulted before a decision is made on the issue.  

 While welcoming the initiative of Ministry to review the old Acts coming 
under its jurisdiction by a panel, the Committee would like the Ministry to apprise 
them of the progress made on the issue regarding conditions, terms of reference 
and also the work done by the reviewing Panel.  Further, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should earnestly strive for a comprehensive umbrella legislation 
on safety related issues of the oil and gas installations.    
Recommendation No.3 
Need for Single Agency to Enforce Safety 
 
8. The Committee note that OISD has been functioning as the technical directorate 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and has formulated 112  safety standards. 
OISD checks the implementation of these standards through various safety inspections 
but has statutory powers to enforce these standards only for upstream offshore 
installations.  The Committee further note that PESO which is under the a dministrative 
control of Ministry of Commerce and Industry is the competent authority to administer 
Petroleum  Rules under Petroleum Act, 1934 which  inter alia refers to 6 crucial OISD 
standards pertaining to fire protection facilities for downstream oil and gas installations.  
The Committee further note that Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Labour and Employment has been vested with 
powers for enforcing safety rules for onshore oil and gas installations.  
 
The Committee have been informed that there is a proposal to transfer the PESO‟s job 
relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD.  The Committee are in agreement with this move 
and desire that the process of transfer should be completed at the earliest. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with 
appropriate authorities for the transfer of DGMS responsibilities under the Petroleum 
Rules to OISD as well.   
 
The Committee would like to point out that multiple agencies enforc ing different set of 
safety laws will lead oil industry to comply with number of authorities for safety related 
laws and regulations.  The Committee view that there will be no clear accountability on 
the part of agencies as they may blame other agencies fo r any lapses which lead to 
incidents.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that OISD should be made the nodal 
agency to formulate, monitor and enforce the OISD standards and other applicable laws 
for the entire oil and gas sector. 
 
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
 
“The proposal to transfer PESO‟s job relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD is 
being pursued by the Ministry and it has been decided to engage a reputed 
consultant to work out the manpower re quirement, financial implications, legal 

issues, etc. and the terms of reference for the consultant have been finalized by 
OISD.  
As regards transfer of responsibilities entrusted to DGMS to the OISD, it is 
mentioned that the Ministry of Labour and Employm ent had in December,2012 
moved a Cabinet proposal for amendment in the Mines Act, 1952 which would 
extend jurisdiction of the Act beyond 12 nautical miles that is up to the Exclusive 
Economic Zone and Maritime Zone of India as defined in the Territorial Wa ters 
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Maritime Zones Act, 1976. 
MoP&NG had raised strong objections since the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(Safety in Offshore Operations) Rules, 2008 notified under Section 8 of the 
Oilfields (Regulation and Deve lopment) Act, 1948, aimed at regulating the 
process of safety in offshore oil and gas activities was already in operation. It 
was explained that the proposed amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 would lead 
to duplication. The matter was referred to the Committ ee of Secretaries. After 
due deliberation, the CoS recommended that the changes proposed by the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment could be notified without effecting the existing 
Rules made by MoP&NG. The Cabinet approved this proposal to notify the 
proposed amendments over and above the Rules notified by MoP&NG. 
Similarly, if transfer of functions related to oil and gas sector is eventually 
effected from PESO to OISD, the OISD‟s jurisdiction in on -shore areas could 
continue alongside that of DGMS”. 
10. The Committee had pointed out  with concern that multiple agencies like 
PESO, OISD and DGMS enforcing different set of safety laws will lead oil industry 
to comply with number of authorities for safety related laws and regulations.  To 
ensure accountability for the lapses, the Committee recommended the Ministry to 
designate OISD as the nodal agency to formulate, monitor and enforce all OISD 
standards and other applicable laws for the entire oil and gas sector.  
The Ministry, in its reply has intimated that a proposal to transfer PESO’s 
job relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD is being pursued. In this regard, a reputed 
consultant is being engaged to workout the modalities like manpower 
requirement, financial implications, legal issues etc and the terms of reference for 
the consultant have been finalized by OISD. Further, it has been stated that if 
transfer of functions related to oil and gas sector is eventually effected from 
PESO to OISD, the OISD’s jurisdiction in onshore areas could continue alongside 
that of DGMS.   
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The 
Committee also feel that continuation of OISD’s jurisdiction in on -shore areas 
alongside that of DGMS is a clear dilution of Committee’s recommendation. The 

Committee, therefo re, reiterate that OISD should be made the nodal agency to 
formulate, monitor and enforce the OISD standards and other applicable laws for 
the entire oil and gas sector. Also, efforts must be initiated at the earliest to 
confer statutory status upon OISD. Further, the powers of DGMS must be brought 
under the functional jurisdiction of OISD for the successful implementation of MB 
Lal Committee recommendations.  
Recommendation No.6 
Safety Recommendation implementation 
 
11. The Committee note that MB Lal Committee which was constituted in the 
aftermath of the Jaipur fire accident in October, 2009, came out with a Report 
containing 113 recommendations.  The Ministry while accepting the Report specified a 
time line of 24 months  i.e.  by end of April 2012 in consultation with OMCs for the 
implementation of these recommendations. The Committee are constrained to note that 
by April, 2012, only 66 recommendations out of 113 have been implemented. The 
Committee further note that the timeline has been shifted to December, 2014 for 
implementation of some of the recommendations.  
 
The Committee are unhappy that though the initial timeline has expired, the 
recommendations especially pertaining to procurement and installation of important 
safety equipments are still pending. This reflects poorly on the managements of OMC‟s 
and their planning and implementation abilities.  The Committee strongly deprecate the 
dilatory tactics of the OMCs and inefficient supervision of the Ministry resulting in 
inexplicable delays in the implementation of safety standards.  
 
Taking into account all factors, the Committee would, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should direct the OMC‟s to fast track the procurement of safety items and 
desire that the Secre tary should monitor the progress on fortnightly basis. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation  status within a month 
 
 
 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
 
OMCs have been advis ed to expedite implementation of the MB Lal Committee 
recommendations and the same is being monitored through OISD.  
Ministry has, so far, been monitoring implementation of MB Lal Committee 
recommendations, including standards 116 & 117 through a Joint Implementation 
Committee (JIC) constituted by the Ministry. 27 meetings of the JIC have been 
held, so far. The JIC has now been abolished and the implementation of the M B 

Lal Committee recommendations are being monitored through the OISD.  The 
latest implementation status is placed at Annexure I. 
13. The Committee in their recommendation had noted with concern that only 66 
recommendations have been implemented out of 113 recommendations of 
M.B.Lal Committee.  Further the Committee deprecated the postponement of 
implementation schedule of M.B.Lal Committee recommendations from April 2012 
to December 2014.  The Committee had therefore, recommended the Ministry to 
direct the OMCs to fast-track the procurement of safety items and desired that the 
Secretary should monitor the progress of the same on fortnightly basis.   
The Ministry in this regard has stated that OMCs have been advised to 
expedite the implementation of M.B.Lal Committee recommendations and the 
same is being monitor through OISD. The Ministry has further informed that so 
far, 71 recommendations have been implemented out of 113 recommendations of 
M.B. Lal Committee.  
 While expressing the displeasure at the casual reply of the Government, 
the Committee are concerned to note that so far only 71 recommendations out of 
113 of M.B.Lal Committee have been implemented till September, 2012 which 
amounts to only 63% of the total recommendations. Further, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry has absolved its supervisory responsibilities by shifting the role 
of supervision to OISD.  The Committee, ther efore, urge the Ministry to take upon 
the implementation of M.B.Lal Committee seriously and entrust themselves with 
the work of supervising the implementation process rather than devolving the 
responsibility to OISD.      
Recommendation No.13 
14. Rim Seal Fire Detection System The Committee note that the Rim Seal Fire 
Detection System is an  the important safety equipment that needs to be installed in the 
tanks carrying hydro carbons.  The Committee note that about 618 nos. of this system 
are required invol ving an expenditure of Rs. 1125 crore for all the three oil marketing 
companies.  The Committee note it was decided on 8th October, 2010 that this item 
was to be procured on Joint Industry basis.  The Industry Working Group finalized 
tender document on 11th September, 2011.   
 
The Committee further note that as the volume of work was enormous and installation 
specific, the OMCs decided to go for individual tender basis on 8th December, 2011.  
The Committee express unhappiness at the time taken by the 3 OMCs  for finalizing the 
tender document which almost took one year and then to go for company-wise tender. 

 
The Committee are further anguished that after all the exercise Ministry has now 
informed that there is a proposal to cancel the tender since only one o ffer was received 
and the bid was also not meeting the tender criteria. Industry working group has now 
decided to revisit the Rim Seal specification. The Committee are dismayed  that an 
important recommendation of the MB Lal Committee has not progressed ev en after two 
years and the process has to start afresh. The Committee would urge the Ministry to 
relook at the decision of the OMCs as there appears to be a deliberate attempt on the 
part of OMC‟s to delay in implementing this safety recommendation. 
 
15. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following  
 
OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in 
commercial / procurement matters.  
Reasons for delay in procurement of the system have already been 
communicated to the Standing Committee. All three OMCs have informed to 
have refloated the tenders after having revised the pre -qualification criteria and 
revised specifications. 
16. The Committee in their recommendation had observed that the Rim Seal 
Fire Detection System is an important safety equipment that needs to be installed 
in the tanks storing hydrocarbons.  The Committee had expressed their 
displeasure at the OMCs for wasting one year precious time through joint 
industry and individual company tenders  to procure Rim Seal Detection 
equipment.  Further, the Committee were dismayed that an important 
recommendation of the M.B.Lal Committee had not been progressed even two 
years after the submission of the report  and the entire process of tendering had 
to be initiated afresh by the OMCs. 
The Ministry in its reply while maintaining that OMCs have Maharatna and 
Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in commercial procurement matters, 
has stated that the reasons for delaying in procurement of the system have  
already been communicated to the Committee.  Further, all the three OMCs have 
informed to have refloated the tenders after having revised the prequalification 
criteria and revised specifications. 
The Committee are not happy at the terse action taken reply  of the Ministry 
and concerned with the indifferent attitude of the Ministry to the implementation 
of MB Lal committee recommendations. The Committee are fully aware that OMCs 
have autonomy in procurement matters. However, the Committee are concerned 

with the safety of oil installations and are dismayed by the lack of attention by 
Ministry in this matter. While observing that Rim Seal Fire Detection system is a 
vital fire safety equipment to be installed in the oil and gas installations, the 
Committee expre ss their displeasure at the OMCs for wasting precious time in 
revising prequalification criteria and revised specifications for the refloated 
tenders for procuring Rim Seal Detection equipment. The Committee, therefore, 
expect the Ministry to be vigilant a nd also desire the OMCs to expedite the 
process of procurement of  Rim Seal Detection equipment at the earliest for the 
safety of oil and gas installations. 
 
Recommendation No.14 
17. Hydrocarbon Detection System The Committee note that requirement of 
Hydrocarbon Detection System was one of recommendations of MB Lal Committee.  
The Committee also note that the Industry members visited abroad to study type, 
location and usage of HC detectors in their locations and decided for liquid type 
detector.  The industry working group took more than 3 months to finalize specifications.  
The Committee further note that there are few vendors for liquid type detectors and the 
latest time line furnished by the Ministry indicate the completion time by March, 2013 to 
December, 2014.  The Committee deplore the fait accompli provided by the oil 
companies and the Ministry regarding the timeline as the original timeline have ended 
and  the revised  time line  of  December, 2014 is another 30 months away.  
The Committee desire the Ministry and OMCs to submit the explanation of the officials 
concerned on the inordinate delays in the matter and also take required measures to 
prepone the timelines for early implementation of safety standards.   
 
 
18. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following  
 
“OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in 
commercial / procurement matters. 
Instructions have been issued to the industry to expedite the procur ement 
process. All three OMCs have floated the tender for procurement of hydrocarbon 
detection system.” 
 
19. The Committee in their recommendation had observed that hydrocarbon 
detection system was one of the recommendations of M.B.Lal Committee. While 
deploring the fait accompli provided by the oil companies and the Ministry 
regarding the extended time line of December, 2014 for the procurement of 

Hydrocarbon Detection system, the Committee desired the Ministry and OMCs to 
submit an explanation of the offi cials concerned on the inordinate delay in the 
matter and also take required measures to advance the timelines for early 
implementation of safety standards. 
 The Ministry in its reply while maintaining that OMCs have Maharatna and 
Navratna status with suff icient autonomy in commercial procurement matters, 
has stated that instructions have been issued to the industry to expedite the 
procurement process and all three OMCs have floated the tender for procurement 
of hydrocarbon detection system. The reply is ho wever, silent on the reasons for 
delay in procurement measures taken to implement the safety standards. 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken replies of the 
Ministry. The Committee observe that Hydrocarbon Detection system is a  fire 
safety equipment to be installed in the oil and gas installations. The Committee 
are dismayed at the lackadais ical attitude of the Ministry for not submitting the 
explanation on the inordinate delay in the procurement of hydrocarbon detection 
equipment which is vital for the implementation of M.B. Lal recommendation and 
therefore, the Committee reiterate that Mini stry must closely monitor the 
procurement process and ensure adherence to the timeline.     
 
 
 
 
  

Chapter  II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
Safety of oil installations 
 
The Committee note that safety is a major and critical concern for oil and gas industry.   
Any laxity in upkeep/handling of highly inflammable oil and gas products can be a high 
risk to life, property and environment. In view of increasing activity in the sector and 
large number of oil and gas installations i.e. exploration sites, refineries, pipelines etc. in 
the country,  it  is imperative for the oil and gas companies to have well developed 
safety systems and practices in place and strict compliance of s afety norms by  
personnel working in the installations. The safety mechanisms of the companies are 
also required to be regularly monitored by the Ministry.  
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that despite the safety being of 
paramount concern,  the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas does not have 
implementation of safety measures as part of their mandate. To give due importance to 
the safety aspects, the Committee recommend that monitoring of safety measures in 
both public and private compani es should be included in the mandate of the Ministry.  
They further desire that the Ministry should place safety in both upstream and 
downstream companies as a thrust area of 12th Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Monitoring the safety measures in both the pu blic and private sector oil and gas 
companies is included in the mandate of the Ministry. It is under this mandate that the 
Ministry has set up a Safety Council with the Oil Industry Safety Directorate having been 
set up to assist the Safety Council. 112 s tandards have been developed by OISD, 
covering almost all aspects of the oil and gas industry. 
The deep concern of the Committee regarding safety aspects has been noted and also 
shared with the oil companies.  The Ministry will also place appropriate empha sis on 
safety during the 12th Plan. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 

Recommendation No.7 
Training for personnel of oil marketing companies  
 
The Committee note that OISD has prescribed standards for training of personnel and 
provision of personal protective equipments and lifesaving appliances at the 
installations. They are however, surprised to note that as pointed out by MB Lal 
Committee,  the personnel deployed at Jaipur IOC terminal at the time of the acci dent 
had no safety training and also Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) which is an 
important safety equipment was not available. The Committee wonders whether these 
issues were pointed out by OISD when it conducted the safety audits at this install ation. 
The Committee observe that this clearly indicates gaps in the safety preparedness to 
handle the accidents in oil and gas sector.  The Committee are constrained to note that 
M.B.Lal Committee recommendations for hands on training in firefighting has not been 
implemented even one year after the expiry of the time line set for the purpose.   
The Committee are of the opinion that training related to safety should be an integral 
part of work in the oil industry.  The Committee, therefore recommend that sa fety 
training to all employees should be made mandatory and at the same time ensuring the 
availability of personnel with protective equipments and lifesaving appliances at all oil 
and gas installations.  The committee also desire the Ministry to ensure com prehensive 
safety audits in oil installations by incorporating the aspects not already covered. The 
Committee recommend that all oil and gas installations should run mandatory disaster 
response simulations to ensure that adequate response mechanisms are in  place for 
any eventuality. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Training is a regular feature of the entire oil industry and is a continuous ongoing process. It is 
also an integral part of functional operating practices.  OMCs are regularly conducting training 
with li ve-fire fighting scenarios.  During audit, safety adequacy, training and disaster 
preparedness of the installations are verified and recommendations are made for improvement.  
The Committee‟s recommendations of safety training will be given due emphasis.  Th e concern 
of the Committee has been shared with the oil companies. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 

Recommendation No.8 
 
Accountability for safety issues 
 
The Committee note that there has been increase in the number of incidents in oil and 
gas installations during the last few years. During 2010 -11 there were a total of 84 
incidents consisting of 70 accidents and 14 relating to fire leading to a loss of Rs.34.15 
crore. The Committee find that such high numb er of incidents in a year unacceptable 
and feel that the oil companies should have zero tolerance for accidents. The 
Committee desire that all incidents including minor ones and near miss should be 
thoroughly investigated and accountability should be fixed .   The Committee suggest 
that oil and gas companies should designate the senior most official of the unit as the 
nodal officer for safety related matters to ensure closer supervision and effective 
monitoring of safety standards. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per present practice unit heads at oil installations are already in -charge of all safety 
aspects. However, the concern of the Standing Committee has also been shared with 
the oil companies. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
Outside experts in Safety Council 
 
The Committee note that the Safety Council  includes Members comprising of all Joint 
Secretaries and Advisors of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Chief Executive 
Officers of all of PSU‟s of the oil industry, Chief controller of Explosives, Advisor, Fire to 
the Govt. of India and the DG of Factory Advice, Service and Labour Institutes. The 
Committee also note that the Secretary, MOPNG is Chairman of Safety Council.  
The Committee observe from the composition of Safety Council, that it does not have 
any representation from academia or renowned experts in the field  to advise on safety 
aspects. The Committee opine that since safety in the oil industry is of vital importance, 
it is imperative that the highest decision making body in the country for safety issues 

should have inputs and contribution of experts in the field. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should appoint national and international experts including  
from other PSUs like BHEL, NTPC etc. to the Safety Council. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Safety Council already has sufficient representation of experts in the area of safety. 
In addition to the permanent members, there is also a provision for including two private 
companies for a two year duration. This brings in additional experience and expertise. 
However, the concern of the Standing Committee is noted and OISD has been advised 
to explore the possibility of including members from the academia and other  experts on 
safety in the Safety Council. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
Recommendation No.15 
Procurement of Medium Expansion Foam Generators (MEFG)  
 
The Committee note that MB Lal Committee has recommende d for provision of Medium 
Expansion Foam Generators (MEFG) at marketing locations. The Committee note that 
the Joint industry tender in this regard  was floated by IOCL on 7th July 2011.  However, 
only one offer was meeting Pre -qualification criteria and t he price quoted by the vendor 
was 400% of estimate.  The Committee have been informed that due to exorbitant rate 
quoted by vendor, the tender was cancelled and refloated by individual Oil marketing 
companies. The Committee further note that  after retende ring by individual oil 
marketing companies in the case of IOCL, two offers were received but none found 
meeting the tender criteria. Hence the tender was refloated again on 4.4.2012 with 
relaxed PQ criteria.  
The Committee are dismayed at the considerable time lost in tendering and retendering 
due to which procurement of important safety equipment has got delayed.   Though 
400% price quoted by vendor is very much on higher side, the decision to go for 
retendering was not a prudent one since the offers recei ved  have been found not 

meeting the tender criteria.  The Committee hope that relaxed PQ criteria  for the 
refloated tenders does not amount to dilution of safety standards.   
The Committee are disappointed that on one pretext or  other, the procurement o f items 
has been getting delayed. The Ministry also does not seem to take any action on 
directing the OMC‟s to adhere to the timelines committed to the  Ministry. The 
committee therefore recommend that the timelines already committed should be strictly 
adhered to. 
Reply of the Government 
 
OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in commercial / 
procurement matters. 
IOCL had initially floated a global tender on industry basis for procurement of 1388 nos. 
MEFG in July,2011. The industr y cost estimate for portable and fixed MEFG were Rs. 
33500 and Rs 35985 respectively. Only one bidder was qualified and when the price 
bids were opened on 16.12.11 the rates quoted for portable and fixed MEFG were Rs. 
225787and Rs 172125 respectively (i.e.  seven and five times higher than estimates). 
The tender was cancelled and it was decided to float tenders individually. HPCL floated 
tender for procurement of 366 MEFG. The tender was opened on 18.04.12 and the 
delivered quoted rates for portable and fixe d MEFG came down to Rs. 24609 and Rs 
29747 respectively i.e. 14% and 13% of the amount that had been quoted in the joint 
tender. Similar rates were obtained in case of BPCL and IOCL as well. 
This amply demonstrates that exercise of caution and due diligenc e, even though it led 
to delay, was justified since it resulted in a huge cost saving for the OMCs.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
 
 
 
  

Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.4 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) 
 
The Committee note that OISD carries out safety audits/inspection and conducts pre 
commissioning safety audits of PSU‟s.  The Committee note t hat these standards are 
implemented on self-regulatory basis by the industry.  
The Committee observe that 59 recommendations out of 170 in BPCL Kochi refinery 
and 14 out of 78 recommendations in CPCL -Chennai are based on the safety audits 
conducted by OISD  between January and June 2010 respectively have not been 
implemented. The Committee further note that 6 recommendations pertaining to safety 
audit conducted during June, 2005 at MRPL are still pending.  The Committee fail to 
understand the delays in imple mentation of these recommendations and emphasize 
that the recommendations made by OISD should be considered with due seriousness 
by Oil Marketing Companies and implemented in a time bound manner.  
The Committee note that OISD has not been vested with statu tory authority to penalize 
the violators of safety standards.  The Committee feel that this has rendered OISD a 
mere recommendatory body with no powers to enforce the stipulated standards. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in the oil industry, it is es sential to adhere to safety 
standards and implement safe working practices. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should confer statutory status on OISD to enable it to 
enforce the safety standards with legal authority and also to take pen al action against 
the non-compliance thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards conferring of statutory status to OISD, the suggestion is noted for further 
necessary action. The proposal to transfer PESO‟s job relating to Petroleum Rules to 
OISD is being pursued by the Ministry and it has been decided to engage a reputed 
consultant to work out the manpower requirement, financial implications, legal issues, 
etc. and the terms of reference for the consultant have been finalized by OISD.  

It has also been decided that safety related aspects would be continuously monitored by 
the Ministry during the quarterly performance review of PSUs and instructions also 
issued to all companies to regularly place safety related issues in their agenda for 
meeting of their respective Boards. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
Manpower requirements of OISD  
 
The Committee note that the total sanctioned manpower in OISD is 66 but the actual 
manpower is only 29. A large number of posts are vacant in Exploration & Production 
(E&P) side as only 6 posts are filled against the actual strength of 28 posts. The 
Committee also note that OISD draws its personnel only on deputation from public 
sector oil companies and there are no permanent staff or its own cadre.  The Committee 
understand that this is due to fact that the oil companies are not able to spare their 
officials which the Ministry has also admitted as an area of concern.  
The Committee are of the view that since OISD has no permanent cadre with less than 
half of the sanctioned manpower in place, the efficacy of the enforcement of safety 
standards is compromised . The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should urgently look into the matter and take steps to fill up the vacant posts by 
exploring the options other than deputation. The Committee further desire that the 
Ministry should consider manning O ISD with a permanent cadre of officers in a time 
bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
While some vacant posts in OSD have been filled up, further action on the remaining 
vacant posts is being taken up in consultation with OISD and public sector oil 
companies.As regards, a permanent cadre for manning OISD, the matter will be 
reviewed at the time of transfer of functions from PESO to OISD. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 

Recommendation No.9 
Private sector oil industries should also be audited  
 
The Committee note that the OISD conducts pre -commissioning safety audits for the oil 
industry. The Committee, however, observe that the pre commissioning safety audits 
are being done only for Public s ector oil companies and not for private sector oil 
companies. This is not a desirable situation as safety standards should be applied 
uniformly for both public and private sector companies.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take ste ps to bring the 
private sector oil installations under OISD for complying with pre -commissioning safety 
audit and other such safety measures applicable to the industry. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Audit of private oil companies has already been started. Durin g 2011 -12 EOL & RIL 
have been audited and this year‟s calendar includes ESA of BORL, HMEL and Petronet 
pipelines. 
However, Private oil companies will comprehensively come under the ambit of OISD 
once statutory status is accorded to OISD. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Dilution of OISD Standards 116 and 117 
 
The Committee were informed that the OISD Standards 116 and 117 relating to fire protection 
facilities in downstream companies were revised after inputs from MB Lal Committee and 
Chairmen Committee. The Committee note that the OISD and the Ministry received a number of 
representations from private companies raising some issues pertaining to revised standards.  
The Committee further not e that after receipt of the representations the issues were referred 
first to Steering Committee, then to Chairman Committee and thereafter to Technical expert 
committee and finally  certain clauses like Equivalency clause, retroactivity clause and common 
firefighting clause in OISD STD-116 and 117 have been accepted for inclusion.  
The Committee would like to point out that in the written replies of the Ministry and also during 
oral submissions before the Committee, the Secretary had maintained that there is no move to 

review or dilute the OISD standards 116/117 and the same are bein g implemented by the 
industry. The Committee  feel that this is an ambivalent stand of the Ministry since the inclusion 
of Equivalency clause, retroactivity clause and common firefighting clauses in OISD STDs 
clearly indicates dilution of the OISD standard s apart from derailing the implementation 
schedule. The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the Ministry and OMCs for misleading 
them on this important issue and would expect more diligent and responsible approach of 
officials while making submissions  before the Committee.  The Committee recommend that 
there should be no dilution in OISD safety standards 116 & 117 till the implementation of 
M.B.Lal Committee Report.   
Reply of the Government 
 
Updation of standard is a regular phenomenon as practiced through-out the world and is  done 
based on technological advances, industry experience etc. Therefore, the amendment of OISD 
STD 116&117 in the particular context of incorporating the equivalency and a common fire -
fighting clause is not in any way going t o dilute the subject standard but on the contrary would 
enhance transparency & economic viability of the procurement process without compromising 
the safety performance requirement. There is already a mention of retroactivity in the existing 
standards and the proposal on retroactivity is merely clarificatory in nature. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIS OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No.13 
Rim Seal Fire Detection System The Committee note that the Rim Seal Fire Detection System 
is an  the important safety equipment that needs to be installed in the tanks carrying hydro 
carbons.  The Committee note that about 618 nos. of this system are requi red involving an 
expenditure of Rs. 1125 crore for all the three oil marketing companies.  The Committee note it 
was decided on 8th October, 2010 that this item was to be procured on Joint Industry basis.  
The Industry Working Group finalized tender document on 11th September, 2011.   
The Committee further note that as the volume of work was enormous and installation specific, 
the OMCs decided to go for individual tender basis on 8th December, 2011.  The Committee 
express unhappiness at the time taken by th e 3 OMCs for finalizing the tender document which 
almost took one year and then to go for company-wise tender. 
The Committee are further anguished that after all the exercise Ministry has now informed that 
there is a proposal to cancel the tender since onl y one offer was received and the bid was also 
not meeting the tender criteria. Industry working group has now decided to revisit the Rim Seal 
specification. The Committee are dismayed  that an important recommendation of the MB Lal 
Committee has not progre ssed even after two years and the process has to start afresh. The 
Committee would urge the Ministry to relook at the decision of the OMCs as there appears to be 
a deliberate attempt on the part of OMC‟s to delay in implementing this safety recommendation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in commercial / 
procurement matters.  
Reasons for delay in procurement of the system have already been communicated to the 
Standing Committee. All three OMCs have in formed to have refloated the tenders after having 
revised the pre-qualification criteria and revised specifications. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I) 
 

Recommendation No.14 
Hydrocarbon Detection System  
The Committee note that requirement of Hydrocarbon Detection System was one of 
recommendations of MB Lal Committee.  The Committee also note that the Industry 
members visited abroad to study type, locati on and usage of HC detectors in their 
locations and decided for liquid type detector.  The industry working group took more 
than 3 months to finalize specifications.  The Committee further note that there are few 
vendors for liquid type detectors and the l atest time line furnished by the Ministry 
indicate the completion time by March, 2013 to December, 2014.  The Committee 
deplore the fait accompli provided by the oil companies and the Ministry regarding the 
timeline as the original timeline have ended and  the revised  time line  of  December, 
2014 is another 30 months away.  
The Committee desire the Ministry and OMCs to submit the explanation of the officials 
concerned on the inordinate delays in the matter and also take required measures to 
prepone the timelines for early implementation of safety standards.   
Reply of the Government 
 
OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in commercial / 
procurement matters. 
Instructions have been issued to the industry to expedite the procurement  process. All 
three OMCs have floated the tender for procurement of hydrocarbon detection system. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Need for Consolidation of safety legislations 
 
The Committee note that 9 legislations (6 for downstream companies and 3 for 
upstream companies) have been enacted to deal with the safety aspects of oil and gas 
industry.  There are 7 agencies both in Central and State Governments dealing with 
enforcement of safety standards.  The Committee note that some of the legislations like 
Explosives Act, 1884, Petroleum Act, 1934, Oil Mines Act, 1952 and Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 under ORDA Act, 1948 are very old and desire that the 
Government should re visit the safety clauses of these legislations pertaining to the oil 
and gas sector in the light of new technologies / practices evolved during the years in 
this sector.   
The Committee opine that multiplicity of legislations to deal with the safety of oil  and 
gas installations has made the enforcement process difficult.  The Committee 
recommend the Government to bring out an umbrella legislation for the oil and gas 
sector with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas as nodal Ministry incorporating all 
safety related provisions contained in different Acts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry will review the old Acts coming under its jurisdiction by a panel / committee for 
possible amendments, if any. 
Regarding bringing in of an umbrella legislation on safety  issues, since different 
Ministries are administering different acts/rules on safety, concerned Ministries will be 
consulted before a decision is made on the issue.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter-I) 

Recommendation No.3 
Need for Single Agency to Enforce Safety 
 
The Committee note that OISD has been functioning as the technical directorate of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and has formulated 1 12 safety standards. OISD 
checks the implementation of these standards through various safety inspections but 
has statutory powers to enforce these standards only for upstream offshore 
installations.  The Committee further note that PESO which is under the  administrative 
control of Ministry of Commerce and Industry is the competent authority to administer 
Petroleum  Rules under Petroleum Act, 1934 which  inter alia refers to 6 crucial OISD 
standards pertaining to fire protection facilities for downstream oi l and gas installations.  
The Committee further note that Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Labour and Employment has been vested with 
powers for enforcing safety rules for onshore oil and gas installations.  
The Committee have been informed that there is a proposal to transfer the PESO‟s job 
relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD.  The Committee are in agreement with this move 
and desire that the process of transfer should be completed at the earliest. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with 
appropriate authorities for the transfer of DGMS responsibilities under the Petroleum 
Rules to OISD as well.   
The Committee would like to point out that multiple agencies enforcing dif ferent set of 
safety laws will lead oil industry to comply with number of authorities for safety related 
laws and regulations.  The Committee view that there will be no clear accountability on 
the part of agencies as they may blame other agencies for any l apses which lead to 
incidents.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that OISD should be made the nodal 
agency to formulate, monitor and enforce the OISD standards and other applicable laws 
for the entire oil and gas sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The pro posal to transfer PESO‟s job relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD is being 
pursued by the Ministry and it has been decided to engage a reputed consultant to work 
out the manpower requirement, financial implications, legal issues, etc. and the terms of 
reference for the consultant have been finalized by OISD.  

As regards transfer of responsibilities entrusted to DGMS to the OISD, it is mentioned 
that the Ministry of Labour and Employment had in December,2012 moved a Cabinet 
proposal for amendment in the Mines  Act, 1952 which would extend jurisdiction of the 
Act beyond 12 nautical miles that is up to the Exclusive Economic Zone and Maritime 
Zone of India as defined in the Territorial Waters Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and Maritime Zones Act, 1976 . MoP&NG had raised strong objections since the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore Operations) Rules, 2008 notified under 
Section 8 of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948, aimed at regulating 
the process of safety in offshore oi l and gas activities was already in operation. It was 
explained that the proposed amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 would lead to 
duplication. The matter was referred to the Committee of Secretaries. After due 
deliberation, the CoS recommended that the chan ges proposed by the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment could be notified without effecting the existing Rules made by 
MoP&NG. The Cabinet approved this proposal to notify the proposed amendments over 
and above the Rules notified by MoP&NG. 
Similarly, if transfer of functions related to oil and gas sector is eventually effected from 
PESO to OISD, the OISD‟s jurisdiction in on -shore areas could continue alongside that 
of DGMS. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.6 
Safety Recommendation implementation 
 
The Committee note that MB Lal Committee which was constituted in the aftermath of 
the Jaipur fire accident in October, 2009, came out with a Report containing 113 
recommendations.  The Ministry while accepting the Report specified a time line of 24 
months i.e.  by end of April 2012 in consultation with OMCs for the implementation of 
these recommendations. The Committee are constrained to note that by April, 2012, 
only 66 recommendations out of 113 have been implemented. The Committee further 

note that the timeline has been shifted to December, 2014 for implementation of some 
of the recommendations.  
The Committee are unhappy that though the initial timeline has expired, the 
recommendations especially pertaining to procurement and installation of important 
safety equipments are still pending. This reflects poorly on the managements of OMC‟s 
and their planning and implementation abilities.  The Committee strongly deprecate the 
dilatory tactics of the OMCs and inefficient supervision of the Ministry resulting i n 
inexplicable delays in the implementation of safety standards.  
Taking into account all factors, the Committee would, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should direct the OMC‟s to fast track the procurement of safety items and 
desire that the Secretary should monitor the progress on fortnightly basis. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation  status within a month. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OMCs have been advised to expedite implementation of the MB Lal Committee 
recommendations and the same is being monitored through OISD.  
Ministry has, so far, been monitoring implementation of MB Lal Committee 
recommendations, including standards 116 & 117 through a Joint Implementation 
Committee (JIC) constituted by the Ministry. 27 meet ings of the JIC have been held, so 
far. The JIC has now been abolished and the implementation of the M B Lal Committee 
recommendations are being monitored through the OISD.  The latest implementation 
status is placed at Annexure I. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.12 
High Volume Long Range Monitors (HVLR) 
 
The Committee note that OISD Standard 117 have provided for installation of Hig h 
Volume Long Range Monitors (HVLRs) in the oil installations. The Committee note that 
the Joint Industry tender for procurement  was floated on 6th December, 2010 and the 

technical bids opened on 18th Jan, 2011 for evaluation.  However, the price bids whi ch 
were to be opened in May, 2011 could be opened  only in January, 2012.  This delay 
has been attributed to obtaining stage wise clearance from individual OMCs and 
handling of complaints from some quarters. The Committee are not convinced by 
reasons given by the oil companies.  They are unable to understand the requirement of 
stage wise clearance from individual OMCs when the Joint Industry tender has been 
floated. Though some of the delays were procedural due to handling of complaints, the 
Committee could not but come to a conclusion that the OMCs are not serious in early 
procurement of these items.   
The Committee are further constrained to note that after more than 16 months only a 
bare minimum quantity for emergency procurement has been put up for appro val.  The 
Committee deplore the kind of insensitivity shown by the oil companies in procurement 
of such a key safety equipment.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for 
making only an emergency procurement.  
The Committee note that after the techn ical bids were opened there was an unsolicited 
offer from Akron Bros whose tender was earlier rejected on technical grounds and the 
price quoted by Akron Bros was used as negotiating point with other vendors.  The 
OMCs claim that it is in accordance with CVC guidelines and purchase procedures. The 
Committee desire that the issue needs to be verified and reported upon by the Ministry 
and recommend  the matter be referred to CVC to see if there is any violation of 
guidelines in taking Akron Bros offer as negotiating point with other vendors. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Procurement of equipment is a commercial matter which is purely a function of oil 
companies. OMCs have Maharatna and Navratna status with sufficient autonomy in 
commercial / procurement matters.   
However, as suggested by the Committee, a detailed note on the procurement process 
followed by the OMCs for procurement  of HVLRs has been sent to the CVC on 10 th 
July, 2012 with a request to examine the reasonability of the procedure followed by the 
OMCs.  Reply from CVC is awaited.  The Committee shall be informed of the outcome 
after receipt of report from CVC. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
OM No. R-27011/2/2011-OR.I dated 21.08.2012 
 

Recommendation No.16 
Enquiry on delay in procurement  
 
The Committee note that the MB Lal Committee had made several recommendations 
and OISD also had revised its standards because of which the oil companies need to 
procure important safety equipments. The Ministry had consulted the OMC‟s regarding 
implementation of these recommendations and had agreed for 24 month timeline.  
Now the committee have been informed by the ministry that the OMCs have been 
facing the following important issues relating to procurement. 
i) Limited number of vendors to supply items 
ii)        High price quoted by vendors  
iii)       Lack of experience in dealing similar works 
iv)       Complaints received about the tender process 
The Committee understand that the Oil Marketing Companies are bound by their own 
procurement procedures and also CVC gu idelines. The Committee are of the view that 
the delay that has happened is inexplicable and would expect the Ministry and OMC„s 
should have shown more alertness and urgency in procurement rather than hiding 
behind procedures. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should order 
an enquiry into the entire process of procurement and delay in procurement and also 
whether the procedure followed were in conformity with the extant rules in place. The 
Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the a bove enquiry within a period of one 
month.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The detailed reasons for delay in procurement have been explained to the Committee. 
Since OISD is the coordinating agency for safety matters and is well conversant with the 
reasons for delay in procurement, ED, OISD has been entrusted with the task of 
conducting a detailed inquiry into the matter.  The inquiry is presently underway and ED, 
OISD has sought extension of time till 15 th September, 2012 for submission of his 
report.  The Comm ittee shall be apprised of the outcome of the inquiry upon receipt of 
the same from OISD. 
 
New Delhi       Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
     May 2013                      Chairman 
    Vaisakha,1935 (Saka)        Standing committee on  
Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 

Annexure -1 
 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate 
OIDB Bhawan, Noida 
 
Sub: Overall Status of Implementation of MB Lal Committee 
Recommendations 
 
(Status as on 21.08.2012) 
Total recommendations: 113 
 
Industry Status 
 
S.No. Recommendation Number Percentage 
A Recommendations 
implemented 
71 63% 
Implementation in progress 
B Recommendations under 
implementation 
42 37% 
1 Engineering related 06 05% 
2 Procurement related 10 09% 
3 Training Related 03 03% 
4 General/Policy Related 13 11% 
6 OISD Related 10 09%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
  

Engineering Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
1-3 Push buttons on  
the MOV should 
be brought just 
outside the dyke.  
Push button 
operation should 
be modified so 
that action 
required for 
opening is 
different than 
action required 
for closing (e.g. 
pull type and 
push type). The 
push button 
assembly should 
be mounted at a 
place where it is 
easily visible to 
the operator. 
 
 
 
Company Total Location Completed 
IOCL 52 52 
BPCL 21 21 
HPCL 21 21 
TOTAL 94 21 
 
 
 
100% 
implemented
. 
4-6 Lighting 
adequacy should 
be checked so 
that visibility is 
adequately 
ensured at the 
push button of 
MOV & HOV 
location)  
The pipeline 
transfer should 
preferably be 
commenced 
during day light 
hours.  
Adequate lighting 
in operational 
areas should be 
ensured 
 
Company Total 
Location 
Completed Work in 
progress 
Target 
IOCL 138 128 10 Sept’ 12   
BPCL 81 81 0 Completed 
HPCL 72 62 10 August’ 12 
TOTAL 291 271 20  
 
Completed at 93% locations. 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : September’ 2012 
 
 
 
93% 
implemented
. 
Implementatio
n was slightly 
delayed due 
to: 
1. Study on 
energy 
efficient 
light 
fittings. 
2. Lighting 
adequacy 
survey 
conducted 
at all POL 
location. 
3. Delay in 
supply due 
to limited 
availability 
of flame 
proof 
fittings. 

Engineering Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
7 Tank Dyke Valves 
should be 
provided with 
position indicator 
(open or close) in 
control room and 
necessary 
hardware and 
instrumentation 
should be 
provided for this. 
 
Company Total 
Location 
Completed Work in 
progress 
Target 
IOCL 138 138 0 Completed 
BPCL 81 81 0 Completed 
HPCL 62 12 50 August’ 12 
TOTAL 281 231 50  
 
Completed at 82% locations.  
 
Final Target Date of Completion: August’ 2012 
 
 
 
82% 
completed. 
 
Delay in 
implementation 
at HPCL was 
mainly due to 
study of 
wireless type 
transmitters. 
 
 
 
 
8 
The TFMS system 
should be 
upgraded and 
integrated with 
SAP and provision 
for recording of 
all critical events 
in SAP as well as 
TFMS (such as 
critical valves 
position, 
start/stop of 
pumps, levels in 
tanks, alarms 
etc.). 
 
Company Total 
Location 
Completed Work in 
progress 
Target 
IOCL 32 05 27 Sept’ 12 
BPCL 21 05 16 March’13 
HPCL 63 28 35 Dec’12 
TOTAL 116 38 78  
 
Completed at 33% locations. 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : March’2013 
 
 
This is a major 
job. Software 
development 
activity being 
proprietary in 
nature, 
vendors were 
initially asking 
abnormally 
high prices due 
to which 
finalization of 
order got 
delayed. 
9 The fire water 
requirement for 
terminals shall be 
based on two fire 
contingencies 
simultaneously as 
is the case in 
Refineries. 
 
Compan
y 
Total 
Locatio
n 
Complete
d 
Work in 
progres
s 
Target 
IOCL 59 Nil 59 June/Dec’1
4 
BPCL 26 Nil 26 June/Dec’1
4 
HPCL 29 5 24 June’14 
TOTAL 114 5 109  
 
Completed at 4% locations.  
 
Final Target Date of Completion : December’2014 
 
 
In progress. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procurement Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
1 Hydrocarbon (HC) 
detectors shall be 
installed near all 
potential leak 
sources of class 
‘A’ and ‘B’ 
petroleum 
products e.g. tank 
dykes, tank 
manifolds, pump 
house manifolds, 
etc. Further, HC 
detectors of 
proper type  
should be 
selected and 
should be proof 
tested and 
maintained in 
good condition. 
 
 
Company Tender 
Date 
Work / P.O 
Award Date 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 14.07.12 21.12.12 Dec’2013 
BPCL 29.06.12 15.10.12 Dec’2013 
HPCL 29.03.12 31.8.12 April’2013 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : Dec’2013 
 
 
2 Medium 
expansion foam 
generators shall 
be provided to 
arrest vapour 
cloud formation 
from spilled 
volatile 
hydrocarbons. 
Company Quantity Tender 
Date 
Work / 
P.O 
Award 
Date 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 704 April’12 25.06.12 Sept’2012 
BPCL 354 Feb’12 June’12 Jan’2013 
HPCL 330 March’12 03.07.12 Jan’2013 
Total 1388    
 
Purchased order have been placed by all the three OMCs 
Final Target Date of Completion : Januray’2013 
 
PO Placed by 
OMCs. 
 
The quoted 
price now is 
substantially 
less than the  
previous 
tender. 
 
 
3 An emergency kit 
shall be provided 
consisting of 
safety items viz. 
fire suites, 
various leak 
plugging gadgets, 
oil dispersants 
and oil 
adsorbents, lifting 
jacks (for rescue 
of trapped 
 
Company Tender Date Work / P.O 
Award 
Date 
Delivery  
date 
IOCL Part item-April’12 
For balance items-
June-August’12 
30.07.12  
July’2013 
BPCL 10.5.2012 30.09.2012 Sept’2013 
HPCL 29.03.12 31.8.12 Dec.’2012 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : September’2013 
Purchase order 
for Fire 
Proximity Suit 
& PVC Suit 
placed by IOCL 
on 30.07.2012 
 

Procurement Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
workers), high 
intensity 
intrinsically safe 
search lights for 
hazardous area, 
etc. and shall be 
readily available 
at the terminals 
 
4 Avoid hammer 
blind as an 
equipment in the 
plant design. Only 
a closed system 
design should be 
adopted. It is 
understood that 
other 
OMCs/MNC’s are 
already using 
such designs in 
their installations. 
Using a Plug 
valve or a Ball 
Valve in place of 
the Hammer Blind 
should be an 
acceptable 
option. 
 
Company Quantity Tender 
Date 
Work / 
P.O 
Award 
Date 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 742 09.12.11 15.9.12  Dec.’2013 
BPCL 579 09.12.11 15.9.12  Dec’2013 
HPCL 227 March’12 03.07.12  Jan’2013 
Total 1490    
 
Final Target Date of Completion : December’2013 
 
BPCL is the 
coordinator for 
Industry 
tender 
Technical 
Evaluation 
completed on 
10.08.12.  
Price bids 
expected to be 
opened on 
03.09.12 
 
5 The first body 
valve on the tank 
should be Remote 
Operated Shut 
Off Valve 
(ROSOV) on the 
tank nozzle inside 
the dyke with 
Remote 
Operation only 
from outside the 
dyke as well as 
from the control 
room. ROSOV 
should be fail safe 
and fire safe. It 
should have only 
‘close’ feature 
and not ‘open’ 
and ‘stop’ from 
control room. 
However, it 
should have 
‘close’, ‘open’ & 
Total No. of ROSO Valves to be procured : 1077 
 
Company Tender 
Date 
Work / P.O 
Award Date 
Delivery  
date 
IOCL 18.01.2012 30.09.12 Sept’2013 
BPCL 18.01.2012 30.09.12 Sept’2013 
HPCL 18.01.2012 30.09.12 Sept’2013 
 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : September’2013 
 
HPCL is the 
coordinator for 
Industry 
tender. 
Technical 
Evaluation 
expected to be  
completed by 
15.9.2012 

Procurement Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
‘stop’ operation 
from the panel 
located outside 
the dyke. 
6 A CCTV should be 
installed covering 
tank farm areas 
and other critical 
areas. The CCTV 
can nowadays 
provided with an 
alarm to provide 
warning in case 
of deviation from 
any normal 
situation. The 
CCTV monitoring 
station should be 
provided both in 
the control room 
as well as in the 
Security 
cabin/office. 
 
Company Total 
location 
Completed Work in 
progress 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 138 138 0 - 
BPCL 81 42 39 30.09.2012 
HPCL 83 55 28 30.09.2012 
Total 302 235   
Completed at 78% locations. 
Final Target Date of Completion : September ’2012 
Implemente
d at 78% 
locations. 
Delay in supply 
of material by 
the vendor. 
Delay in 
execution of 
the job by the 
contractor 
particularly at 
remote 
location. 
7 Wherever PLT 
transfers take 
place, to avoid 
pilferages, a Mass 
Flow Meter with 
Integrator shall 
be provided on 
delivery pipelines. 
Company Tender Date Work / P.O 
Award Date 
Expected 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 14.07.2012 31.12.12 Dec.’2013 
BPCL 29.06.2012 15.09.12 June’2013 
HPCL 30.03.2012 31.08.12 Feb.’2013 
Final Target Date of Completion : December’2013 
 
Delay due to 
finalization of 
technical 
specification.  
8 The Rim Seal fire 
detection and 
protection system 
shall be installed 
in all Class ‘A’ 
products in the 
terminal. 
 
Company Tender Date Work / P.O 
Award Date 
Expected 
Completion 
date 
IOCL 01.06.12 15.10.12 Dec.’2014 
BPCL 31.01.12 15.10.12 Dec.’2014 
HPCL * 25.05.2012 30.09.12 Oct.’2013 
*Floated tender for 30 Tanks of diameter 32m and above for 
1st Phase. Balancer tanks are under review to convert the 
same as internal floating roof tank. 
Final Target Date of Completion: December’2014 
 
Delay due to 
re-tendering. 
9 Remote operated 
long range foam 
monitors (1000 
GPM and above) 
to fight tank fires 
shall be provided 
which should be 
of variable flow 
Status (PO Placed) 
PO Placed for 174 Nos. by OMC in June’2012 with Delivery 
by June’2013. 
Company P.O. date Quantity Completion / 
Delivery date 
IOCL 18.06.2012 91 18.11.2012 
BPCL 15.06.2012 38 June’2013 
HPCL 16.06.2012 45 Nov.’12/March’13 
 
For most 
critical 
locations, 
Purchase 
order placed 
by OMCs 
total 174 

Procurement Related 
S.No
. 
Recommendation
s 
Present Status Remarks 
Total  174  
 
Balance quantity 
Compan
y 
Tender 
Date 
Quantit
y 
Work / 
P.O 
Award 
Date 
Expected 
Completio
n date 
IOCL 03.07.201
2 
175 31.12.1
2 
Dec.’2014 
BPCL 17.05.201
2 
 15.10.1
2 
Dec.’2014 
HPCL 17.05.201
2 
223 *  
*Tender under process. 
Final Target Date of Completion : December’2014 
 
nos.  
10 Wherever there is 
a cluster of 
terminals of 
different 
companies, an 
emergency 
response centre 
equipped with 
advanced 
firefighting 
equipment viz. 
fire tenders and 
trained 
manpower shall 
be considered on 
cost sharing basis 
or on outsourcing 
basis. 
Joint tender floated by HPCL for appointment of consultant 
cancelled as there was no acceptable offer. 
 
During the Industry meeting held on 21.08.12 it was decided 
to approach EIL for consultancy job of setting up of 
Emergency response centers. 
 
 
 
  

Training Related 
S.No. Recommendations Present Status Remarks 
-3 All terminal operating 
personnel including regular 
contractors and security 
personnel should be given 
safety and firefighting 
training with the help of 
reputed training institutes. 
The security staff should be 
trained as first responders 
for firefighting and rescue 
operations along with plant 
operating personnel. 
Training activities should 
include Safety Training for 
contract employees since a 
number of activities have 
been outsourced. 
 
Number of persons Targeted in 2 years 
 
Company No. of persons to be 
trained 
IOCL 1800 
BPCL 900 
HPCL 1200 
Total 3900 
 
During the Industry meeting held on 
21.08.2012 methodology and other details 
of imparting live fire training discussed. It 
was decided to set up live fire training 
facilities at 8 locations in India. 
Methodology of setting up of facilities are 
under finalization.  
 
In the meantime live fire training to 
employees, contract workmen & security 
staff are being imparted at refineries. 
 
 
Final Target Date of Completion : 
November’2014 
 
Training is an on -
going process and 
is carried out in -
house by 
respective oil 
companies. 
 
F&S trainings are 
being imparted to 
employees, 
contract workers 
and security as per 
OISD-154. 
 
Specialized training 
on HAZOP, risk 
analysis is also 
being imparted to 
identified officers. 
 
Mock drills are also 
being carried out 
as per plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2012-13) 
ELEVENTH SITTING 
(02.05.2013) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday the 02 nd May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1740 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shri Baliram Jadhav 
6 Dr. Manda Jagannath 
7 Shri Somabhai Gandalal Koli Patel 
8 Shri P.L.Punia 
9 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
10 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
RAJYA SABHA 
11 Shri Sabir Ali 
12 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
13 Smt. Kusum Rai 
14 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
15 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
16 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Deputy Secretary 

 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
1. Shri Vivek Rae - Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Bhargava - Special Secretary 
3. Shri L.N.Gupta - Joint Secretary (Refinery) 
4. Shri. Neeraj Mittal - Joint Secretary (Marketing) 
 
Representatives of Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 
 
1. Shri R.S.Butola - Chairman, IOCL 
2. Shri P.K. Goyal - Director (Finance) 
3. Shri Rajkumar Ghosh - Director (R) 
4. Shri M. Nene - Director (Marketing) 
5. Shri V.S. Okhde - Director (PL) 
6. Shri A.M.K. Sinha - Director (P&BD) 
7. Dr. R.K. Malhotra - Director (R&D) 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.    The Committee then considered draft action taken Report on the subject 
„Safety of Oil Installations‟ and draft Report on the subject „Long Term Purchase Policy 
and Strategic Storage of Crude Oil‟ and adopted the same without any modifications. 
 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to present/lay the above reports in both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
 
4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 
5.   *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
6. A verbatim of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept in records. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*Matter not related to the subject.  

Annexure III 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT  (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) ON ‘SAFETY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 16 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 7, 8, 10 and  15) 
 5 
 Percentage to Total 31.25% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4,5,9 and 11) 
 
4 
 Percentage of Total 25% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 13 and 14) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 12.5% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,3,6,12 and  16)  
5 
 Percentage of Total 31.25% 
 
 