 
 
 
20 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
CITY GAS DISTRIBUTION PROJECTS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Thirteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2011-12)] 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
 
(i) 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2013-14) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
CITY GAS DISTRIBUTION PROJECTS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2011-12)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2013  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2013 
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 

 
 
 
(ii) 
 
     CONTENTS     Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2013-14)…………                                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………                    (iv) 
   
 CHAPTER I   
 
Report ………………………………………………….     
                   
1 
 CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
               
10 
 CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………             
23 
 CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………                          
24 
 CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……                        
28 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I. The Gazette of India dated 31.10.2012 
 
31 
 
II. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2012 -13) 
held on 20.08.2013   
 
 
36 
 
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12) on 
`City Gas Distribution Projects’ 
 
38 

 
 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS  
(2013-14) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
4 Dr. Mehboob Beg 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
7 Shri Ram Sundar Das 
8 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav 
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath 
11 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
12 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
13 Shri Somabhai Gandalal Koli Patel 
14 Shri Rao Saheb Danve Patil 
15 Shri P.L.Punia 
16 Shri Takam Sanjoy 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
20 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
21 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Sabir Ali 
23 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
24 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
25 Shri Ahmed Patel 
26 Dr. Ram Prakash 
27 Smt. Kusum Rai 
28 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
30 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
31 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
   
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Acting Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‗ City Gas 
Distribution Projects‘.  
2. The Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Hon‘ble Speaker on 26.7.2012 and was thereafter presented to Lok 
Sabha on 9.8.2012 . The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report were received on 2nd April, 2013. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2013 -14) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 20 August , 2013 with the undersigned in the 
Chair, having been elected under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha for that sitting.  I was authorized by the Committee under 
proviso to Rule 277(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
to sign and present this Report on their behalf. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
6. The Committee place on r ecord their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          P.L.PUNIA, 
  December, 2013                                                               Acting Chairman,  
Agrahayana,1935 (Saka)            Standing Committee  on 
             Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

 
 
 
1 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum &  Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2011 -12) on ‗City Gas Distribution Projects‘, which was prese nted to Lok 
Sabha on 9.8.2012. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 18 Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- SI.Nos.1,2,4,5,8,10,11,12,14,15,16,17 and 18 (Total 13) 
         (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‘s replies SI. Nos.- Nil 
         (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - SI.No.       6,7, 9 
and 13  (Total 4)        
         (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final rep lies of the 
Government are still awaited: - SI.Nos. 3 (Total 1)               
        (Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final Replies 
in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government (included in Chapter-V), should be furnished expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

 
 
 
2 
Recommendation No.3 
Demand and Availability of Gas 
  
5. The Committee note that against the demand of 279.43 MMSCMD of gas 
in 2011-12 by various sectors only 166.17 MMSCMD was available. To meet the 
shortfall, besides increasing domestic production through intensified exploration 
efforts and developing alternate sources of gas, it is envisaged to bring gas from 
gas surplus countries through transnational pipelines and import through LNG. 
The Committee has been informed that govt. is pursuing two transnationa l 
pipeline Project viz. TAPI (Turkmenistian - Afghanistan - Pakistan - India) and IPI 
(Iran - Pakistan India) having gas transporting capacities of 90 and 60 MMSCMD 
respectively. The Committee have been informed that for TAPI pipeline project, 
Gas Sale Pu rchase Agreement have been settled and bilateral negotiations are 
on with Turkmenistian for Gas pricing and with Pakistan and Afghanistan for 
finalizing transit fee. While expressing satisfaction over the developments in this 
project, the Committee desire that the government should maintain the pace of 
progress for early start of the project.  
In case of IPI pipeline, the various issues relating to delivery point, structure of 
project in Pakistan, transportation tariff and transit fee have been discussed in  
bilateral talk with Pakistan in April· 2008. Further during the visit of Deputy 
Minister of Oil of Iran in November 2009 it was agreed to hold the next joint 
working group meeting at the earliest for discussion of IPI project. However, 
since then there ha s been no progress on the project. Noting that these projects 
would bring significant amount of gas in the country which will considerably ease 
the availability of the gas in the country, the Committee recommend for 
vigorously pursuing for the speedy settl ement of the remaining issues, and for 
earliest start of these projects.  
6. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following:-  
―The Government is pursuing transnational gas pipelines such as the 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Gas Pipeline Project and the 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline.  
On 11 th December, 2010 the four countries involved in the TAPI Gas pipeline 
project, signed an Inter -Governmental Agreement along with a Gas Pipeline 
Framework Agre ement in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. To accelerate the project, 
parties have formed the Minister level Steering Committee and Technical 
Working Group (TWG). 
 

 
 
 
3 
To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement (GSPA), 
bilateral and multilateral meetings have been held among the four countries and  
their gas companies participating in the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India 
(TAPI) pipeline project.  Regarding security & safety of the pipeline, suitable 
provisions have been made in the Inter -Governmental Agreement (IGA) and Gas 
Pipeline Framework Agreement (GPFA) signed by the Governments of 
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India in December 2010. On 23 rd May, 
2012 GAIL (India) Ltd. and Pakistan‘s Inter State Gas Systems signed their 
respective General Sales Purchase Agreements (GSPA) with Turkmenistan‘s 
state gas company Turkmen Gaz which envisages Turkmen gas being delivered 
to India and Pakistan via Afghanistan in 2018.  Turkmenistan and Afghanistan 
have also singed a MoU for coopera tion in the gas sector, leaving the signing of 
a bilateral GSPA till negotiations on gas prices are concluded. The TAPI Road 
shows were held at Singapore, New York and London, 14 companies (7 
International Oil Companies and 7 financers) participated in the  Road shows. No 
International Pipeline Company participated in the event. International Oil 
Companies expressed their desire to associate in the integrated project including 
equity investment in the upstream gas fields, bringing their own equity gas 
through TAPI pipeline. Financers expressed their willingness to finance the 
project with or without the participation of International Oil Companies. 
In view of no international oil company enhancing interest in the TAPI project 
without an upstream stake in Turk menistan, the Steering Committee meeting 
held after the road shows recommended formation of a Special Purpose Vehicle, 
i.e., TAPI Limited with participation of one company from each of the four 
countries.  The Special Purpose Vehicle was envisaged to carry  forward pre -
project activities and to find an appropriate consortium lead for the project. 
 The Government  has since approved the proposal ―Formation of SPV (TAPI 
 Limited) for the TAPI Pipeline Project and to permit GAIL India Ltd. to join the 
 SPV‖. 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline Project  has been under discussion with 
the Governments of Iran and Pakistan. 60 MMSCMD of gas is proposed to be 
supplied in Phase-I, to be shared equally between India and Pakistan. In Phase -
II 90 MMSCMD of gas is envisaged to be supplied. Several rounds of 
discussions have taken place, involving the India -Pakistan-Iran Joint Working 
Group (JWG), India -Pakistan JWG and the India -Iran Special JWG. The matter 
has also been discussed at the Ministerial level.  Several critical issues, viz., the 
delivery point of Iran ian gas, the project structure including project finance, 
guarantees related to safety of the pipeline and security of supply, pricing of gas, 
location of international seat of arbitration, etc are yet to be resolved‖. 
 

 
 
 
4 
7.  The Committee from the Ministr y’s reply observe that TAPI project is 
progressing well  and proposal has been initiated  for formation of SPV (TAPI 
Ltd.) to carry forward pre -project activities and to find an appropriate consortium 
for the project . However the Committee are disappointe d to note that IPI project 
has not progressed much due to various critical issues remaining unresolved. 
Given the significance of these projects, the Committee desire that MoP&NG 
should diligently pursue these international pipeline projects and must striv e for 
removal of all stumbling blocks in their implementation. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Gas Allocation to CGD Sector  
8. The Priority for gas allocation is being decided by Empowered Group of 
Ministers (EGoM) under gas Utilization Policy 2008, as per the demand and 
importance of the sector. The City Gas segments has been placed at 4 th position of 
this priority list after Fertilizer, LPG and Power Sect ors. The Committee note that 
CGD received about 4% Le. 5.34 MMSCMD of natural gas out of 120 MMSCMD 
produced in the country during 2010 -11. The Committee feel that taking into 
account the low r equirement of natural gas by CGD  network compared to other 
sectors like fertilizer and power wh ich consume 75% of the total gas production 
coupled with large bene fits that accrue from use of CGD , this sector should be 
given higher priority so that it get assured supply of gas.  
The Committee furt her note the total demand of CGD  sector of 15.83 MMSCM D, 
about 45% i.e. 6.227 MMSCMD was met through imported RLNG. Taking into 
consideration the rapid growth of CGD  at 39.4% in 2010 11, with another 201 cities 
expected to be covered by 2015, the demand of natural gas is expected to 
escalate in future. The Co mmittee, therefore, desire that the quantum of gas 
allocation to CGD sector should increase considerably in tune with the growth of 
the sector.  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
―CGD occupies fourth  position in the allocation priority.  Accordingly,CGD 
sector has so far been allocated 11.71 Million Standard Cubic Meters per 
Day (MMSCMD) of domestic natural gas (9.26 MMSCMD on firm basis and 
2.45 MMSCMD on fall -back basis). During the year 2011 -12, CG D sector 
consumed 7.53 MMSCMD of domestic natural gas and around 8 
MMSCMD of RLNG. The gas is allocated as per the availability and gas 
allocation policy‖. 

 
 
 
5 
10. The Committee note that in response to their recommendations for 
increased gas allocation to C GD sector, the Ministry has informed that gas for 
CGD sector occupies fourth position in the priority and is allocated as per the 
availability and gas allocation policy.  The reply is however, silent on action 
taken/proposed by MoP&NG to seek increased gas  allocation for CGD projects 
given the low requirement of gas for the sector and large benefits that accrue 
therefrom.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation of giving 
increased allocation to CGD sector and urge Ministry to take up the i ssue at 
appropriate level as large number of people will be directly benefited as also the 
subsidy on domestic LPG can be contained.   
Recommendation No.7 
Gas Allocation to Entities  
11. The Committee note that the total APM gas allocated under the gas 
Utilization policy for CGD sector was around 5.34 MMSCMD in 2010 -11 which in 
turn was allotted to the 21 entities. Rest of the requirement of gas was met by 
entities through imported RLNG.  
The Committee note that the percentage of APM gas allotted to the gas entities 
varies from 0% to 100%. While IGL and MGL were allotted 78% of its 
requirement from APM gas, other entities like GGCL were allotted less than 
10%. It appears to the Committee th at there is no specific criteria being followed 
in allocation of gas to these gas entities. The Committee desire that there should 
be a rationale in allocating gas to entities and recommend Ministry to evolve the 
criteria for this purpose as more entities may seek allocation once CGD network 
is expanded to more cities as per Vision 2015.  
12. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following:  
―The domestic gas is allocated to the entities based on availability of gas 
and ga s utilisation policy and readiness to consume gas in a transparent 
manner. As per current gas allocation policy, CGD for transport and 
domestic sector occupies forth priority after, fertilizer, LPG and power 
sector. All allocations are being made in accord ance with this policy. So far 
around 9.46 MMSCMD gas has been allocated on firm basis and 2.35 
MMSCMD on fall back basis to various CGD entities including IGL & MGL 
based on the availability, demand and readiness to consume from time to 
time‖. 

 
 
 
6 
13. While observing that the absence of specific guidelines regarding the 
percentage of APM gas to be allotted to the gas entities engaged in CGD network 
was leading to inequitable distribution of APM gas among the CGD entities, the 
Committee had therefore, desired the Ministry to evolve a fixed criteria for this 
purpose.  
The Action Taken reply furnished by MoP& NG  have not replied to the 
specific recommendations of the Committee and merely mentioned that 
allocation to these entities are based on the criteria of the availability of gas and 
gas utilization policy and readiness of entities to consume gas from time to time.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply as it has failed to show any 
guidelines being followed in APM gas allocation to CGD entities. Hence the 
Committee reiterate that Ministry should come out with specific guidelines on the 
issue for equitable allocation of APM gas to different CGD entities keeping in view 
the huge planned expansion of CGD network in coming year.     
Recommendation No.9 
Regulation of PNG/CNG prices  
14. The Committee note that the prices of PNG/CNG are being fixed by enti ties 
operating the CGD Projects and do not seek approval from PNGRB or Government 
while fixing I revising their prices.  
The Committee further note that PNGRB being the regulator of the hydro -carbon 
sector has been mandated under Section 11 (f) PNGRB Act t o monitor prices of 
notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas and take corrective action 
in cases of Restrictive Trade Practices. However, as informed by the Ministry, 
under Section 2(zc) of the Act CNG/PNG have not been notified Section 11 (f ) is 
not currently applicable.  
The Committee feel that CNG being an important fuel in the transportation sector 
and PNG for domestic, commercial and industrial customers, any revision of prices 
in CNG/PNG will have spillover effect to the other sectors of  the economy. The 
Committee also observe that CNG I PNG are supplied by single entity in the cities. 
In the absence of competition, the entity should not take advantage and revise 
prices arbitrarily. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that regulation  of gas 
prices is desirable as on the lines of other sectors namely Power.  
The Committee are of the strong view that PNGRB being the regulator of the  

 
 
 
7 
sector should be entrusted with the fixing or regulating the prices of CNG/PNG being 
sold in different cities by various entities. The Committee therefore recommend that 
Ministry should take immediate steps to notify Section 11 (f) of PNGRB Act so as 
to empower the natural gas sector to fix or approve pricing of PNG/CNG.  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
―The retail price of CNG in any city is fixed by the concerned City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) Company operating CGD network in the respective city. 
The CGD entities use a varying  mix of domestic gas, and imported RLNG 
under long term/ spot purchase. The price of CNG is a function of the 
weighted average of the price of gas (domestic gas/ RLNG/ Spot LNG), 
operating expenses, various Central, State and local taxes and 
levies.There i s no proposal for Amendment in Section 11 (f) of PNGRB 
Act‖. 
 
16. As CNG/PNG do not come under notified petroleum products category, the 
Committee had recommended that Section 11(f) of PNGRB Act be notified so as 
to empower  PNGRB to regulate gas prices an d to have supervision over the 
power enjoyed by CGD companies in fixing retail prices of CNG/PNG.   
In its reply, the Ministry has tersely stated that the price of CNG is fixed by 
concerned CGD companies and there is no proposal for amendment of sec (11)(f ) 
without replying to the concerns of the Committee on the need for  regulating gas 
pricing and making it more transparent.  The Committee find it surprising that 
retail prices of CNG/PNG have been left at the discretion of the companies 
operating entirely in a non competitive market, without even having any need for 
approval whatsoever.  Further when PNGRB Act has enabling provisions for 
monitoring prices of natural gas by PNGRB, but for reasons not explained, the 
same has not been notified rendering the p rovision to remain only on paper.  The 
Committee strongly object to the lackadaisical attitude of MoP&NG in this regard 
and reiterate its recommendation for notifying Section 11(f) of PNGRB Act so as 
to bring the price regulation of CNG/PNG to safeguard the interest of consumer.  
 

 
 
 
8 
Recommendation N o.13 
PNG Coverage in Delhi/NCR region  
17. The Committee note that in the NCR region CGD network is being handled 
by IGL, a joint venture of GAIL, BPCL and Delhi State govt. The Committee also 
note that PNGRB has divided Delhi into 70 charge areas corresponding to 70 
assembly constituencies. Howeve r, IGL network is present in only 55 charge 
areas in Delhi region and IGL plans to cover all 70 charge areas in 2012 -13. 
While expressing unhappiness that though IGL had started operation in Delhi as 
early as in 1998, the entire Delhi region is still not c onnected by IGL network, the 
Committee recommend that all the remaining 15 charge areas in Delhi should be 
expeditiously covered. The Committee further desire that in NCR regions PNGRB 
should finalize the charge areas at the earliest to enable IGL to expan d the 
service to households in these areas.  
The Committee also further note that 2.63 lakh connections have been released 
in Delhi which is about covering 33% of the household. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that the progress achieved in the las t 15 years is very 
modest as more than 67 % of the household still remain uncovered by PNG 
connections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry/ lGL should 
quicken the expansion of household connection to uncovered areas in Delhi and 
strive t o achieve 100% connection in areas where IGL Network is already in 
place.  
18. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the 
following  
PNGRB has divided Geographical Area (GAs) of NCT of Delhi into 70 
Charges Areas (CAs) corresp onding to 70 constituencies of Delhi State 
Legislature for expansion of IGL network into all parts of city. IGL‘s total 
pipeline network in Delhi currently exists in 61 CAs. IGL‘s MDPE pipeline 
network currently covers 50 CAs and at this stage work pipelin e has been 
laid and gas charging is in progress in another 2 CAs where the process of 
providing connections is expected to commence shortly. Simultaneously, 
IGL has been expanding its PNG services into newer colonies/areas in 
these CAs. The progress of spr ead into balance CAs has been affected 
due to delay in getting permissions from authorities and due to difficulties 
encountered in determining technically feasible route of pipelines. Work is 
expected to be started in balance charges areas in FY 2013 -14 subject to 
technical feasibility and availability of permission from concerned land 
owning agencies. 
Further, expansion of PNG network into any area/colony is undertaken with 
an objective to offer PNG connections, subject to technical feasibility, to all 
the residents of the area. Since availing a PNG connection is voluntary on  

 
 
 
9 
the part of residents of such areas where PNG services are available, 
regular registration campaigns are undertaken to increase the penetration 
of PNG in covered areas. Besides the regular campaign, customers are 
also offered various options of approaching IGL through customer portal, e -
mail, call centre etc to register their request for PNG connections and not 
all units or an area/colony of residential units are technically feasible  on 
safety grounds. The drive to increase this number is a continuous process. 
Further IGL is working to extend its PNG network into all technically 
feasible areas of NCT of Delhi by 2017 —18. 
IGL has provided 3.65 Lakh PNG connections in NCT of Delhi till February 
1, 2013 and it is planned to provide another approximate 65000 domestic 
connection in FY 2012-13 & 2013-14.  
19. The Committee observe from the Action Taken reply that CGD coverage to 
uncovered charge areas of NCT Delhi is progressing slowly due t o delay in 
getting permission from authorities and difficulties encountered in determining 
technically feasible routes.  It has been further stated that IGL is working to 
extend its PNG network to all technically feasible areas of NCT Delhi by 2017 -18.  
The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the slow pace of the progress 
achieved in the project. As main pipeline network is already in place in Delhi, the 
inordinate delay in covering whole of the city by PNG connections is not 
acceptable.  The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterate that IGL should quicken the 
expansion of PNG connections to all the uncovered area in Delhi NCT within a 
definite time frame. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
10 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
CGD Coverage 
The Committee note that use of natural gas  as fuel for city energy purposes has 
considerable advantage over traditional fuels as it is cleaner, more efficient, convenient 
and safe.  The Government is promoting City Gas Dis tribution (CGD) projects  in a 
phased  manner which comprises providing piped natural gas (PNG) to domestic, 
commercial and industrial consumers and compressed natural gas (CNG) to transport 
sector.  It is currently operational in 77 cities and Government has formulated Vision 
2015 which envisages CGD network  to cover  another 201  cities by 2015.  
 The Committee also note that the infrastructure for the project namely the trunk 
and other pipelines will be traversing through the major cities of the country.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that instead of limiting the CGD project to 201 cities as per 
VISION 2015, the people living in small towns and thickly populated villages which are 
on the route of the pipelines should also be extended the benefits of the project. This in 
the Committee‘s view will make the inclusive and equitable growth a reality f or the rural 
households.  The Committee desire that suitable incentives be given by the  
Government  to the entities and the consumers in the rural areas to opt for  PNG and 
CNG for their requirements    
 The Committee further note that use of CNG for tran sportation and PNG for 
household in cities envisages replacing use of liquid fuels and thereby saving on 
subsidies being given to diesel and domestic LPG cylinders. As the price of CNG/PNG 
is lower than the price of petrol, subsidized diesel and LPG, the c onsumers will also 
benefit from lower costs.  Also the cleaner environment is additional benefit. Since the 
gains could be manifold, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should conduct a 
study to arrive at a cost benefit analysis of the CGD project.  The Committee further 
desire that a similar study for use of CNG/PNG piped gas  in rural area may also be 
conducted taking into account the price advantage to farmers and environmental 
benefits that will accrue there  from by avoidance of felling of trees a nd use of unclean 
fuel. 
 
 

 
 
 
11 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 Based on the Expressions of interest (EOI) submitted to the Board and on  
 
Suo Moto basis depending on the natural gas pipeline connectivity/ availability, 
PNGRB has envisaged a roll out plan of CGD network development in several 
Geographical Area (GAs) covering more than 300 cities/towns in various States. 
Depending upon the natura l gas pipeline connectivity/ availability, PNGRB 
includes GAs in bidding rounds for grant of authorization for development of CGD 
networks. In order to ensure that the rural areas also get benefits of CNG and 
PNG, PNGRB has been considering the entire dist rict, which includes rural areas 
also, as the GA for development of CGD network based on the requests made by 
various State Governments. 
PNGRB grants authorization for development of CGD networks through 
competitive bidding process as per the provisions of  the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and the Regulations notified there under. Based 
on the past experience, PNGRB has undertaken the process of review of the 
bidding criteria. Moreover, before taking part in the bidding process, the e ntities 
are expected to conduct feasibility study of the CGD project in the GAs under 
bidding before and then they participate in the bidding. The viability of a CGD 
project depends on the demand potential available in four segments such as 
industrial, com mercial, domestic and transport sectors. The Government has 
noted the suggestionfor conducting studies and it would consult Ministry of 
Environment & Forest on the studies from environment perspective and decide 
accordingly. It may be noted that expansion of the CGDnetwork is dependent on 
availability of natural gas, specially domestic gas, which is constrained at present. 
CGD networks are at priority 4 under the current gas utilization policy, with 
fertilizers (Urea) at priority 1, LPG at priority 2 and po wer at priority 3. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Notification of Section 16 of PNGRB Act 
 The Committee note that the PNGRB Act, 2006 notified on 1.10.2007 inter alia 
provides  legal framework for  development of CGD network.   However Section 16 of 
the Act pertaining to authorization for laying, building etc. of pipeline was not notified 
with the Act.  The Committee are unable to understand  the reason for not notifyin g a 
crucial section which led to unnecessary court cases questioning the functioning of 
PNGRB and challenging the authorization given by the Board to the entities. This   

 
 
 
12 
resulted in stalling of bidding process for allocation of CGD projects. The Commit tee 
have now been informed that Section 16 have been notified on 12.7. 2010 and the 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court vide order dated 12.5.2011 allowed the Board to grant 
authorization.  While expressing strong disapproval on the delay on the part of the 
Ministry, th e Committee desire that the PNGRB should now quicken the pace of 
authorization and award licenses on priority.  
 The Committee are unhappy that the Ministry and the PNGRB are at 
loggerheads on various issues thereby affecting the implementation of CGD Proj ects. In 
this connection, the Committee would also like the Ministry and PNGRB to work in a 
constructive way for timely implementation of CGD projects rather being antagonistic for 
achieving same objectives. 
Reply of the Government  
  With the notification of Section 16 by MOP&NG, the issue of PNGRB 
not having power to grant authorization has got resolved and the Board had also 
commenced the CGD bidding process. However, the Board has had to withhold 
the bidding process due to several representation received  about irrational 
bidding because of which, it has undertaken the process of review of bidding 
criteria and will resume the bidding process after this process is completed.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.4 
LNG Regasification Capacity 
  
The Committee have been given to understand that consequent to Government 
decision of putting LNG under Open General License, the import of LNG is being 
pursued diligently to give necessary fillip to the ga s supply.  The Committee observe 
that present LNG regasification capacity of country stands at 13.6 MMTPA, comprising 
of 10 MMTPA at Dahej and 3.6 MMTPA at Hazira of Petronet LNG Limited (PLL). 
Government has set a target to augment this capacity to the le vel of 50 MMTPA by the 
year 2016 -17, by undertaking successive capacity additions in the existing LNG 
terminals capacities of Hazira and Dahej and also by installing new terminals at Kochi, 
Ennore, Mundra and at the eastern coast.  The Committee while expr essing satisfaction 
over the proposed targets, recommend that Government should closely monitor the 
progress to ensure adherence to the planned target. 

 
 
 
13 
Reply of the Government  
The Government has notified the PNGRB (Eligibility conditions for 
registration of LNG Terminal) Rules 2012 under section 15 (1) and 60 (2)(e) of 
the PNGRB Act vide notification dated 30 October, 2012. The PNGRB shall now 
be able to register entities desiro us of establishing or operating a LNG  terminal 
satisfying specified eligibility conditions and monitor the same. A copy of the 
notification dated 30 October, 2012 is attached as Annexure -I.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.5 
LNG Import 
 The Committee note that to meet the shortfall in the domestic supply  of natural 
gas, LNG is being imported from different countries through long term contracts or by 
spot LNG purchases.  However, there occurs considerable difference in the prices of 
gas when purchased under these two modes.  The Committee note that the 
Government has long term contract to supply LNG at $7.49 per  MMBTU, while for spot 
purchases the entities are paying around $14 per MMBT U.  The Committee, therefore 
desire the Government to seriously strive to secure long term LNG contracts by locating 
potential suppliers which will not only reduce the outgo of foreign exchange, but also 
result  in assured supply of gas. 
Reply of the Gover nment 
 As on date the available regasification capacity is 13.6 MMTPA (10 
MMTPA at Dahej terminal of Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) and 3.6 MMTPA of 
Hazira LNG Pvt. Ltd. (HLPL), Hazira). The regasification capacity of Dahej 
terminal of PLL is expected to reach  15 MMTPA by 2015 -16 and that of HLPL 
Hazira to 5 MMTPA by 2015 -16. PLL is also adding 5 MMTPA regasification 
capacity at its upcoming Kochi Terminal. The Dabhol LNG Terminal has been 
commissioned with an initial regasification capacity of 1.2 MMTPA which will 
subsequently increase to 5 MMTPA. PLL has entered into a 20 year contract with 
Mobil Australia Resources Company Pvt. Ltd. (a subsidiary of Exxon Mobil) from 
its Gorgon project in Australia for supply of 1.44 MMTPA of natural gas, to 
commence from 201 4. GAIL has entered into medium term contract with 
Marubeni for 0.25 MMTPA of LNG and supplies have already commenced. In 
addition, GAIL has signed a long term agreement with Sabine Pass Liquefaction 
LLP for supply of 3.5 MMTPA LNG from Sabine Pass termina l on FoB basis. The 
commencement of the supply is expected to start form 2016 -17. Further, Oil 
Companies, such as GAIL (India) Ltd., Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., (IOCL), GSPC  

 
 
 
14 
and PLL have entered into an agreement with Gazprom Marketing & Trading 
Singapore (GM & TS) for long term LNG supplies. Based on demand -supply the 
companies continue to scan the RLNG market and enter into import deals, both 
short & long term.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Pricing of PNG/CNG 
   
 The Committee note that the gas entities source their  gas requirement from 
APM gas allocated to them and through imports. The percentage of APM gas and 
RLNG in the total consumption determines the price of natura l gas charged by entities 
to its customers. The Committee have been informed that the landed cost of APM gas is 
Rs 8.70 per SCM while  the landed cost of RLNG  is Rs 22.77 to 36.75 per SCM.  
 The Committee note that IGL gets 78% of its requirement from APM  gas and 
sources 17% of its requirements by R -LNG imports. The retail price  charged by IGL  to 
domestic household in Delhi is under two slabs namely  Rs 22 per SCM upto  
consumption of 30 scm in two months and Rs 34 for above this consumption.As against 
this, GSPL  Gas which operates in Surat ,Bharuch and Ankhaleshwar  sources 100% of 
its requirements through import of R -LNG and  charges Rs 17.495 per scm  from its 
customers.  
 The Committee fail to understand as to how IGL  which is allotted 78% of its ga s 
requirements from APM Gas which is much cheaper as compared to RLNG charges a 
higher price from its customers  as compared to GSPL which meets its entire 
requirements through Imports. On the same count, the Committee are also not 
convinced of the reasoni ng by IGL for differential pricing of PNG charged by them.    
The Committee therefore would like  to be apprised in ithe variation of prices by the two 
entities  and justification for differential pricing by IGL in Delhi . 
 The Committee understand that Mi nistry is considering a report on uniform 
pricing of gas submitted by GAIL and holding consultations with various stakeholders. 
The committee desire that Ministry should move forward on this issue at the earliest. 
 
 

 
 
 
15 
Reply of the Government  
IGL has a firm APM allocation of 2.0 mmscmd for natural gas in Delhi, out 
of which 1.9 mmscmd i.e. 95% is for supply as CNG to the transport sector. Only 
0.1 mmscmd is available to IGL for supply as domestic PNG, which forms only 
5% of total firm APM allocation for Delhi. 
As of July 2012, nearly 71% of IGL‘s overall gas requirement of 3.76 mmscmd 
was met through APM, while the balance 29% was met through imported RLNG. 
The APM allocation to IGL towards domestic PNG in Delhi is only 0.1 mmscmd, 
which forms only 2.6% of IGL‘s overall gas requirement of 3.76 mmscmd.  
Based on consumption pattern, it is estimated that the daily average PNG 
consumption per household for an average family size is approximately 0.5 scm. 
Over the period, the total cost to serve domes tic PNG customers including the 
gas cost has increased substantially due to depreciation of Rupee vis -vis US 
dollar and addition of new domestic PNG customers resulting in increase in 
volumes with firm APM allocation for domestic PNG in Delhi remaining con stant 
at 0.1 mmscmd. 
 As regards the report of the Inter -ministerial committee to formulate a 
policy for pooling of natural gas & devise pool operating guidelines to make the 
policy operational, the scheme of pooling has not been implemented due to 
several operational difficulties.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.10 
Declared Goods Status to Natural Gas 
 The Committee note  that the  Central  & State taxes alongwith  Octroi  are levied 
to arrive at the retail price of CNG/ PNG. There is  however a large variation in state 
taxes on CNG/ PNG .  This is highlighted by the price of CNG at Delhi and Noida which 
is supplied by the same  entity viz. IGL. Due  to difference in  VAT ( Delhi – 0%, U.P. 
13.5%) the price at two places is Rs. 32 per K.G. and Rs.35.9 per K.G. respectively.  
  The Committee observe that to remove this disparity, MoP&NG had separately 
taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for granting declared goods sta tus to 
Natural Gas, The Committee desire that the Ministry should vigorously pursue  with the  
Government to get the Declared Goods Status for Natural Gas and Committee be 
apprised of the progress. 
  

 
 
 
16 
 The Committee further note that CGD sector does not get tax holiday under 
Section 80 I-A of   Income Tax Act. 1961 . The Committee feel that CGD projects should 
be treated as an important infrastructure project  and In order to give fillip to  
investments in this sector, they recommend  that MOPNG may take up with Ministry Of 
Finance to  get the benefit of tax holiday under Section 80 I-A of Income Tax Act 1961 . 
Reply of the Government  
The MoP&NG has supported Declared Goods status to PNG/RLNG due to 
their importance in the economic development of the country and also due to its 
being clean and safe source of energy. Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Revenue has informed MoP&NG that revenue for gone has been climbing 
significantly as a result of various exemptions, deductions and other tax 
incentives in the direct tax legislation. Under the scheme of the Income Tax Act, 
incentives for businesses have been largely profit -linked. This has had the e ffect 
of eroding the tax base. Profit -linked deductions are inherently inefficient, 
resulting in revenue loss and are also liable to misuse. Therefore, profit -linked 
deductions are being phased out. It is the stated policy of the Government to 
have a moder ate tax regime and at the same time phase -out profit -linked 
deduction in the direct tax legislation to ensure that all sectors contribute to direct 
taxes. Accordingly, an attempt has been made to weed out profit linked 
deductions or allow them to sunset an d also not to extend the nature or scope of 
these deductions in the legislation. Therefore, in the light of the policy of the 
government in respect of profit linked deductions, it is not feasible to extend the 
scope of profit linked deductions under Sectio n 80 IA to include City Gas 
Distribution Projects, as infrastructure facility for availing tax holiday under the 
section.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Laying of Infrastructure 
 The Committee find that gas trunk pipelines are being laid across the country  
under National Gas Grid  project to transport gas and spur lines from these trunk 
pipelines are being drawn to take gas to customer‘s household. As per PNGRB data for 
the year ( 2010-11) the country is having pipeline infrastructure of 11,404 kms. with 
carrying capacity of 288 MMSCMD. The upcoming network includes 14 trunk pipelines 
under operation of GAIL, RGTIL and GSPL which will increase the length to 14,531 kms 
and designed capacity to 425.55 MMSCMD..  

 
 
 
17 
 The Committee have been given to understand that work on these pipelines is 
going as per schedule except in the Haldia - Jagdishpur Pipeline authorized to GAIL.  
The Committee are unhappy to note that there has not been much  progress in this 
pipeline , though it was approved in July 2009 with completion schedule of 36 months . 
The roadblock is the  Kakinada -Haldia Pipeline stretch authorized to  RGTIL which is 
the gas conveying segment for transporting gas from KG -D6 field to  Haldia-Jagdishpur 
line. The work on this line has not started yet as according to the Ministry, RGTIL has 
cited insufficiency of gas from KG-D6 basin to feed this pipeline.  
 The Committee are of the strong view that National Gas Grid  is central to 
development of gas distribution networks in the country and it is essential that the 
completion schedule of these trunk pipelines should be strictly adhered to. The laying of 
infrastructure or any part thereof should not be linked to availability of gas as the same 
can be sourced from international market too. The Committee expresses their 
unhappiness on the delay  on the part of RGTIL which has delayed the laying of 
important trunk pipeline thus adversely affecting the national gas grid, In this 
connection, the  Committee have also been informed by PNGRB that in letters of 
approval to RGTIL, the implementation schedule was indicated as 36 months from the 
date of first notification granting Right of Use (ROU) under Petroleum Mineral Pipelines 
Act, 1962 which has m ade the implementation of these pipelines open -ended. While 
holding the Ministry responsible for this, the Committee recommend that Government 
should ensure completion of this pipeline in a time bound manner.   
Reply of the Government  
 The authorization of  the following four natural gas pipelines of Reliance 
Gas Transportation Infrastructure Limited (RGTIL) have been rescinded with 
effect from 24.09.2012 for non -submission of Bank Guarantee and non 
completion of pipeline projects within the stipulated perio d: 
 
1. Chennai- Bangalore – Mangalore Pipeline. 
2. Chennai – Tuticorin Pipeline. 
3. Kakinada – Basudebpur – Howrah Pipeline. 
4. Kakinada – Chennai Pipeline. 
 
2 In regard to Jagdishpur -Haldia natural gas pipeline, authorization for which 
was granted by MOP& NG to GAIL, GAIL has not yet requested MOP&NG for 
ROU notification under Section 3(I) of the Petroleum Minerals Pipeline Act, 
1962.Delay in setting up fertilizer plants along this route has added to uncertainty 
regarding this pipeline.  
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 

 
 
 
18 
Recommendation No. 12 
PNG Network   
 The Committee are happy to note that under the CGD network 18,27,802 PNG 
connection, have been released in 10 states till 1 st April, 2012.  The largest number of 
benefitted consumers are in state of Gujarat having 9,45,258 connections released so 
far.  However, large part of the country specially southern and eastern regions are not 
covered in the CGD network, where programme of  gas distribution, through pipelines 
has still to take off.  The Committee desire that the remaining states be also taken into 
the ambit of this facility by expediting the laying of trunk pipelines proposed under 
National Gas Grid so that CGD projects in the various states can also be implemented.  
Reply of the Government  
 The Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) established under the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act 2006, grants authorization for City 
and Local Area Natural Gas Di stribution Networks in accordance with the provisions of 
the said Act and the PNGRB (Authorizing Entities to Lay, Build, Operate or Expand City 
or Local Natural Gas Distribution Network) Regulations, 2008. PNGRB has envisaged a 
roll out plan of CGD network  development through competitive biding in more than 300 
possible Geographical Areas (GA) in the country including  26 GAs in Gujarat over the 
next five years, on the basis of Expressions of Interest (EOI) invited by the Board or on 
suo moto basis. The development of City Gas Distribution network in a GA is based on, 
inter alia, the availability of natural gas through transmission pipelines in its vicinity. The 
authorized CGD entities issue PNG connections as a part of the CGD Network 
development in the respective GAs.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Blocking of LPG connections 
The Committee find that till 1 st April, 2012 City Gas Distribution Companies have 
released 18,27,802 PNG connections in 10 states and corresponding to this only 
8,89,269 LPG connections, have been blocked by downstream oil companies.  The 
huge backlog is reportedly being attributed to th e lack of coordination between different 
companies involved in the process, namely the CGD entity releasing PNG connections 
and OMCs, who had distributed LPG connections to the consumer.   The Committee 
are surprised that this important aspect had remained unattended and only recently that  

 
 
 
19 
MoP&NG has taken steps which include  conducting regular meetings with OMCs and 
CGD entities for exchange of data on PNG connections released. The Committee note 
that due to steps taken by the Ministry there have been significant improvement in 
blocking of LPG  connections whereby 2 lakh connections have been surrendered 
between November 2011 and April 2012.  The Committee recommend that the steps 
taken by MoP&NG should be followed up regularly for early clearance of the remaining 
backlog.    
Reply of the Govern ment 
As per available information City Gas Distribution (CGD) Companies have 
released 21,53,267 PNG connections in the 10 States of the country as on 
01.02.2013. The number of LPG connections blocked against these connections 
are 11,10,895.  
In order to cl ear the remaining backlog of LPG connections, number of 
advertisement/ notices have been published by OMC‘s in the newspapers for 
larger public awareness exhorting persons who have obtained PNG connections 
to keep their LPG connections in safe custody. The  safe custody provision allows 
them to avail the connection incase of their shifting/ transfer to a place which 
does not have PNG distribution network. Also, the PNG customers can transfer 
the LPG connection to their kin residing at a place not having PNG distribution 
and not already in possession of an LPG connection.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Clearances for laying CGD network 
The Committee note that City Gas Distribution entities engaged in laying of 
pipeline network, require clearances from various authorities before starting any pipeline 
laying/digging work.  The Committee have been informed that these clearances are to 
be obtained from various State Governments, local civic authorities including municipal 
corporation, PWD, power companies and railways etc.  The whole process usually 
takes several months  and results in cost and time overruns on the projects.  The 
Committee, however, are happy to note  that  PNGRB has taken slew of measures like 
creation of facility of single window clearance mechanism, creation of pipeline corridors, 
nomination of senior officer as the nodal officer, etc. to effectively handle the situation.    
Considering the benefits of simplified  clearance process, the Committee strongly 
recommend Ministry / PNGRB to pursue the matter with adequate diligence with the 
respective State Governments to reduce delays in completing such works.  

 
 
 
20 
Reply of the Government 
 PNGRB has been emphasizing with the State Governments the need for 
notifying single window mechanism for avoiding delays in obtaining various approvals in 
implementation of CGD networks and pipeline projects by the authorized entities. The 
Board would continue to have meetings with the respective State Governments from 
time to time and impress the same upon them. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Recommendation No.16 
CNG Network 
The Committee note that presently there are 724 CNG Stations operating in 9 
states of the country. While Delhi (216) and Mumbai (144) have adequate number of 
CNG Stations, most of the other cities where CGD is operational have very few CNG 
stations. The Committee feel, with sparse network of CNG Stations the people in these 
cities have not been able to get the full benefit of CNG for their requirement.  
 The Committee have been informed that existing petrol/diesel outlets are suitable 
for dispensing CNG and  the same infrastructure could be utilized. In view of the above, 
the Committee recommend that Government should advise CGD entities / OMC‘S to 
utilize  the available infrastructure to increase the number of  CNG stations so as to 
meet the demand in these cities. 
Reply of the Government  
CNG forms part of the City Gas Distribution (CGD) network. PNGRB grants 
authorization for development of CGD networks in specified Geographical Area 
(GAs) through competitive bidding process. The authorized entities set up C NG 
stations at different locations within the respective authorized areas based on 
techno-economic feasibility. While the authorized entities set up CNG stations 
within the respective authorized GAs as per their own commercial decisions, they 
have been set ting up CNG dispensing facilities at retails outlets of the Oil 
Marketing Companies also. As requested by various State Governments, 
PNGRB has been considering entire district as a GA in the bidding rounds so that 
rural areas and all the roads including hi ghways are also covered with CGD 
network/CNG Stations. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 

 
 
 
21 
Recommendation No.17 
CNG Stations on highways 
 
The Committee note that there is an acute shortage of CNG stations along the 
highways causing hardships to commuters using CNG Vehicles on these highways. 
This situation cannot be remedied till the licenses are awarded to entities to operate 
CNG stations in the highways. However Committee are given to understand about 
GAIL‘s willingness to set up and operate CNG stations in these highways. The request 
of GAIL has not been agreed to by PNGRB since according to them the authorization 
rights without  the right to set up CNG stations  would  appear less lucrative to the 
bidders and hence may feel reluctant to bid for these areas in future. As informed by the 
then Chairman PNGRB ,to remove this stalemate, Government is offering bigger 
geographical blocks covering also the highways and   some guidelines pertaining to this  
are also in pipeline. The Committee recommend the PNGRB to expedite the issue of 
guidelines on highways  to set up more CNG stations which will greatly address the 
grievances of commuters. 
Reply of the Government  
CNG forms part of the City Gas Distribution (CGD)  network. PNGRB grants 
authorization for development of CGD networks in specified Geographical Area 
(GAs) through competitive bidding process. The authorized entities set up CNG 
stations at different locations within the respective authorized areas based o n 
techno-economic feasibility. While the authorized entities set up CNG stations 
within the respective authorized GAs as per their own commercial decisions, they 
have been setting up CNG dispensing facilities at retails outlets of the Oil 
Marketing Compani es also. As requested by various State Governments, 
PNGRB has been considering entire district as a GA in the bidding rounds so that 
rural areas and all the roads including highways are also covered with CGD 
network/CNG Stations. GAIL has recently submitte d an approach paper/proposal 
for allowing setting up of CNG dispensing stations enroute natural gas pipelines, 
which is being examined and a decision in this regard would be taken by the 
PNGRB soon. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
22 
Recommendation No.18 
Functioning of PNGRB 
The Committee observe that clause (g) of sub Section (2) of Section 61 of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 empowers board to levy fee 
and other charges in accordance with notified regulations. But due to lack of clarity of 
the provision , the board is in dilemma regarding the utilization of funds generated by 
levying of fee and other charges and hence facing financial constraints.  However, the 
Committee have been informed that PNGRB has requested Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas to clarify  whether board can utilize the revenue so generated for meeting 
expenditure in addition to the fund received from Government as grant -in-aid.  The 
Committee therefore, desire MOPNG to clarify regarding the utilization of funds and 
wish to be apprised of the same.  
 The Committee further note that one of the main bottlenecks being faced by 
PNGRB in way of gaining stability and establishing itself as an efficient oil/gas regulator 
is the problem of getting the required manpower with appropriate backgr ound and 
experience. The PNGRB has stated that Board has not been given flexibility and 
autonomy to decide the number and nature of the manpower and their compensation 
packages.   The attempts of PNGRB have therefore, not attracted the persons with 
appropriate professional background and experience. Taking into account the rapid 
growth of the sector with another 201 cities to be covered by 2015, the Committee 
strongly urge Government to take remedial measures. 
Reply of the Government  
 As per Section 10(2) o f the PNGRB Act, 2006, the Board can determine 
the number, nature and categories of the officers and employees only with the 
approval of the Central Government. Further, as per Section 10(3) of the said 
Act, the Central Government prescribes the salaries a nd allowances payable to 
and the other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, other officers and 
employees of the Board. The recommendations of the Committee are noted.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 

 
 
 
23 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
 
24 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation N o.6 
Gas Allocation to CGD Sector  
 The Priority for gas allocation is being decided by Empowered Group of 
Ministers (EGoM) under gas Utilization Policy 2008, as per the demand and 
importance of the sector. The City Gas segments has been placed at 4 th position of 
this priority list after Fertilizer, LPG and Power Sectors. The Committee note that 
CGO received about 4% Le. 5.34 MMSCMD of natural gas out of 120 MMSCMD 
produced in the country during 2010 -11. The Committee feel that taking into 
account the low req uirement of natural gas by CGO network compared to other 
sectors like fertilizer and power which consume 75% of the total gas production 
coupled with large benefits that accrue from use of CGO, this sector should be 
given higher priority so that it get ass ured supply of gas.  
 The Committee further note the total demand of CGO sector of 15.83 
MMSCMD, about 45% i.e. 6.227 MMSCMD was met through imported RLNG. 
Taking into consideration the rapid growth of CGO at 39.4% in 2010 11, with 
another 201 cities expec ted to be covered by 2015, the demand of natural gas is 
expected to escalate in future. The Committee, therefore, desire that the quantum 
of gas allocation to CGD sector should increase considerably in tune with the 
growth of the sector.  
Reply of the Gove rnment 
 CGD occupies fourth position in the allocation priority.  Accordingly,CGD 
sector has so far been allocated 11.71 Million Standard Cubic Meters per Day 
(MMSCMD) of domestic natural gas (9.26 MMSCMD on firm basis and 2.45 
MMSCMD on fall -back basis). During the year 2011 -12, CGD sector consumed 
7.53 MMSCMD of domestic natural gas and around 8 MMSCMD of RLNG. The 
gas is allocated as per the availability and gas allocation policy.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
  

 
 
 
25 
Recommendation No.7 
Gas Allocation to Entities  
 The Committee note that the total APM gas allocated under the gas 
Utilization policy for CGO sector was around 5.34 MMSCMD in 2010 -11 which in 
turn was allotted to the 21 entities. Rest of the requirement of gas was met by 
entities through imported RLNG.  
 The Committee note that the percentage of APM gas allotted to the gas 
entities varies from 0% to 100%. While IGL and MGL were allotted 78% of its 
requirement from APM gas, other entities like GGCL were allotted less than 
10%. It appears to the Committee t hat there is no specific criteria being followed 
in allocation of gas to these gas entities. The Committee desire that there should 
be a rationale in allocating gas to entities and recommend Ministry to evolve the 
criteria for this purpose as more entities  may seek allocation once CGD network 
is expanded to more cities as per Vision 2015.  
Reply of the Government  
 The domestic gas is allocated to the entities based on availability of gas 
and gas utilisation policy and readiness to consume gas in a transpare nt manner. 
As per current gas allocation policy, CGD for transport and domestic sector 
occupies forth priority after, fertilizer, LPG and power sector. All allocations are 
being made in accordance with this policy. So far around 9.46 MMSCMD gas has 
been al located on firm basis and 2.35 MMSCMD on fall back basis to various 
CGD entities including IGL & MGL based on the availability, demand and 
readiness to consume from time to time.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.9 
Regulation of PNG/CNG prices  
 The Committee note that the prices of PNG/CNG are being fixed by entities 
operating the CGO Projects and do not seek approval from PNGRB or 
Government while fixing I revising their prices.  
 The Committee further note that PNGRB being the regulator of the hydro-
carbon sector has been mandated under Section 11 (f) PNGRB Act to monitor 
prices of notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas and take 
corrective action in cases of Restrictive Trade Practices. However, as informed by  

 
 
 
26 
the Ministry, u nder Section 2(zc) of the Act CNG/PNG do not come under notified 
petroleum products and hence Section 11 (f) is not currently applicable.  
 The Committee feel that CNG being an important fuel in the transportation 
sector and PNG for domestic, commercial an d industrial customers, any revision of 
prices in CNG/PNG will have spillover effect to the other sectors of the economy. 
 The Committee also observe that in the cities CNG I PNG are supplied by 
single entity. In the absence of competition, the entity shou ld not take advantage 
and revise prices arbitrarily. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that 
regulation of prices is desirable as on the lines of other sectors namely Power.  
 The Committee are of the strong view that PNGRB being the regulator of the 
sector should be entrusted with the fixing or regulating the prices of CNG/PNG being 
sold in different cities by various entities. The Committee therefore recommend that 
Ministry sh ould take immediate steps to amend PNGRB Act in respect of Section 
11 (f) so as to empower it to fix or approve pricing of PNG/CNG.  
Reply of the Government  
 The retail price of CNG in any city is fixed by the concerned City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) Company operating CGD network in the respective city. The 
CGD entities use a varying mix of domestic gas, and imported RLNG under long 
term/ spot purchase. The price of CNG is a function of the weighted average of 
the price of gas (domestic gas/ RLNG/ Spot LNG), operating expenses, various 
Central, State and local taxes and levies.There is no proposal for Amendment in 
Section 11 (f) of PNGRB Act.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation N o.13 
PNG Coverage in Delhi/NCR region  
 The Committee note that in the NCR region CGD network is being handled 
by IGL, a joint venture of GAIL, BPCL and Delhi State govt. The Committee also 
note that PNGRB has divided Delhi into 70 charge areas corresponding to 70 
assembly constituencies. Howeve r, IGL network is present in only 55 charge 
areas in Delhi region and IGL plans to cover all 70 charge areas in 2012 -13. 
While expressing unhappiness that though IGL had started operation in Delhi as 
early as in 1998, the entire Delhi region is still not c onnected by IGL network, the 
Committee recommend that all the remaining 15 charge areas in Delhi should be  

 
 
 
27 
expeditiously covered. The Committee further desire that in NCR regions PNGRB 
should finalize the charge areas at the earliest to enable IGL to e xpand the 
service to households in these areas.  
 
 The Committee also further note that 2.63 lakh connections have been 
released in Delhi which is about covering 33% of the household. The Committee 
are constrained to observe that the progress achieved in t he last 15 years is very 
modest as more than 67 % of the household still remain uncovered by PNG 
connections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry/ lGL should 
quicken the expansion of household connection to uncovered areas in Delhi and 
strive to achieve 100% connection in areas where IGL Network is already in 
place.  
Reply of the Government  
PNGRB has divided Geographical Area (GAs) of NCT of Delhi into 70 
Charges Areas (CAs) corresponding to 70 constituencies of Delhi State 
Legislature for expansion of IGL network into all parts of city. IGL‘s total pipeline 
network in Delhi currently exists in 61 CAs. IGL‘s MDPE pipeline network 
currently covers 50 CAs and at this stage work pipeline has been laid and gas 
charging is in progress in another  2 CAs where the process of providing 
connections is expected to commence shortly. Simultaneously, IGL has been 
expanding its PNG services into newer colonies/areas in these CAs. The 
progress of spread into balance CAs has been affected due to delay in get ting 
permissions from authorities and due to difficulties encountered in determining 
technically feasible route of pipelines. Work is expected to be started in balance 
charges areas in FY 2013 -14 subject to technical feasibility and availability of 
permission from concerned land owning agencies.  
 Further, expansion of PNG network into any area/colony is undertaken with 
an objective to offer PNG connections, subject to technical feasibility, to all the 
residents of the area. Since availing a PNG connection i s voluntary on the part of 
residents of such areas where PNG services are available, regular registration 
campaigns are undertaken to increase the penetration of PNG in covered areas. 
Besides the regular campaign, customers are also offered various options  of 
approaching IGL through customer portal, e -mail, call centre etc to register their 
request for PNG connections and not all units or an area/colony of residential 
units are technically feasible on safety grounds. The drive to increase this 
number is a c ontinuous process. Further IGL is working to extend its PNG 
network into all technically feasible areas of NCT of Delhi by 2017 —18. 
 IGL has provided 3.65 Lakh PNG connections in NCT of Delhi till February 
1, 2013 and it is planned to provide another appro ximate 65000 domestic 
connection in FY 2012-13 & 2013-14.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 

 
 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINALREPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Demand and Availability of Gas 
 The Committee note that against the demand of 279.43 MMSCMD of gas 
in 2011-12 by various sectors only 166.17 MMSCMD was available. To meet the 
shortfall, besides increasing domestic production through intensified exploration 
efforts and developing alternate sources of gas, it is envisaged to bring gas from 
gas surplus countries through transnational pipelines and import through LNG. 
The Committee has been informed that govt. is pursuing two transnational 
pipeline Project viz. TAPI (Turkmenistian - Afghanistan - Pakistan - India) and IPI 
(Iran - Pakistan India) having gas transporting capacities of 90 and 60 MMSCMD 
respectively. The Commi ttee have been informed that for TAPI pipeline project, 
Gas Sale Purchase Agreement have been settled and bilateral negotiations are 
on with Turkmenistian for Gas pricing and with Pakistan and Afghanistan for 
finalizing transit fee. While expressing satisf action over the developments in this 
project, the Committee desire that the government should maintain the pace of 
progress for early start of the project.  
 In case of IPI pipeline, the various issues relating to delivery point, 
structure of project in Pakistan, transportation tariff and transit fee have been 
discussed in bilateral talk with Pakistan in April· 2008. Further during the visit of 
Deputy Minister of Oil of Iran in November 2009 it was agreed to hold the next 
joint working group meeting at the earliest for discussion of IPI project. However, 
since then there has been no progress on the project. Noting that these projects 
would bring significant amou nt of gas in the country which will considerably ease 
the availability of the gas in the country, the Committee recommend for 
vigorously pursuing for the speedy settlement of the remaining issues, and for 
earliest start of these projects.  
 
 

 
 
 
29 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is pursuing transnational gas pipelines such as the 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Gas Pipeline Project and the Iran -
Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline.  
 On 11 th December, 2010 the four countries involved in the TAPI Gas pipeline 
project, signed an Inter-Governmental Agreement along with a Gas Pipeline Framework 
Agreement in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. To accelerate the project, parties have formed 
the Minister level Steering Committee and Technical Working Group (TWG). 
 To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement (GSPA), 
bilateral and multilateral meetings have been held among the four countries and their 
gas companies participating in the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) 
pipeline project.  Regarding security & safety of the pipeline, suitable provisions have 
been made in the Inter -Governmental Agreement (IGA) and Gas Pipeline Framework 
Agreement (GPFA) signed by the Governments of Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and India in D ecember 2010. On 23 rd May, 2012 GAIL (India) Ltd. and Pakistan‘s Inter 
State Gas Systems signed their respective General Sales Purchase Agreements 
(GSPA) with Turkmenistan‘s state gas company Turkmen Gaz which envisages 
Turkmen gas being delivered to India  and Pakistan via Afghanistan in 2018.  
Turkmenistan and Afghanistan have also singed a MoU for cooperation in the gas 
sector, leaving the signing of a bilateral GSPA till negotiations on gas prices are 
concluded. The TAPI Road shows were held at Singapore , New York and London, 14 
companies (7 International Oil Companies and 7 financers) participated in the Road 
shows. No International Pipeline Company participated in the event. International Oil 
Companies expressed their desire to associate in the integrat ed project including equity 
investment in the upstream gas fields, bringing their own equity gas through TAPI 
pipeline. Financers expressed their willingness to finance the project with or without the 
participation of International Oil Companies. 
 In view of no international oil company enhancing interest in the TAPI project 
without an upstream stake in Turkmenistan, the Steering Committee meeting held after 
the road shows recommended formation of a Special Purpose Vehicle, i.e., TAPI 
Limited with participation of one company from each of the four countries.  The Special 
Purpose Vehicle was envisaged to carry forward pre -project activities and to find an 
appropriate consortium lead for the project. 
 The Government  has since approved the proposal ―Formation of SPV (TAPI 
Limited) for the TAPI Pipeline Project and to permit GAIL India Ltd. to join the SPV‖. 
 
 

 
 
 
30 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline Project  has been under discussion with the 
Governments of Iran and Pakistan. 60 MMSCMD of gas is proposed to be supplied in 
Phase-I, to be shared equally between India and Pakistan. In Phase -II 90 MMSCMD of 
gas is envisaged to be supplied. Several rounds of discussions have taken place, 
involving the India -Pakistan-Iran Joint Working Group (JWG), India -Pakistan JWG and 
the India-Iran Special JWG. The matter has also been discussed at the Ministerial level.  
Several critical issues, viz., the delivery point of Iranian gas, the project structure 
including project finance, guarantees related to safety of the pipeline an d security of 
supply, pricing of gas, location of international seat of arbitration, etc are yet to be 
resolved. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
O.M. No. L-15016/5/2012-GP Dated-02.04.2013 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          P.L.PUNIA, 
5 December,  2012                                                          Acting  Chairman, 
14    Agrahayana,1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee  on 
             Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
3


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
36 
Annexure II 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2012-13) 
 
SIXTEENTH SITTING 
(20.08.2013) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday the 20 th August, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 
1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.L. Punia - Acting Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
3 Shri Baliram Jhadhav 
4 Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
5 Shri Rao Saheb Danve Patil 
6 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
                RAJYA SABHA 
7 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
8 Shri Sabir Ali 
9 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
10 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
1. Shri Vivek Rae - Secretary 
2. Shri Rajive Kumar - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Giridhar Aramane  Joint Secretary  
4. Shri R.N. Choubey - DG, DGH 
 

 
 
 
37 
Representatives of Public Sector Organisations/Other agencies. 
1. Shri Sudhir Vasudeva - CMD, ONGC 
2. Shri S.K.Srivastava - CMD, OIL 
3. Shri B. C. Tripathy - CMD, GAIL 
 
2.   In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri P.L. Punia  to chair 
the sitting under rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, Hon‘ble  Chairman welcomed the Members. The Committee then 
considered the draft action taken Report on the subject ‗City Gas distribution Projects‘ 
and adopted the same without any modifications.  The Committee also authorised the 
Chairman to present/lay the above report in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
4. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****  
 
5. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****  
 
6.   ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****  
7. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****  
 
8.   Verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*Matter not related to the subject. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
38 
Annexure III 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2011-12) ON ‘CITY GAS DISTRIBUTION PROJECTS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 18 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
1,2,4,5,8,10,11,12,14,15,16,17 and 18 ) 
 13 
 Percentage to Total 72% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‘s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. NIL) 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.6,7.9 and 13) 
4 
 Percentage of Total 22% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3)  
1 
 Percentage of Total 6% 
 
 