 
10 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report   (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12)] 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2011/ Agrahayana,1933 (Saka) 
 


 2 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the         
Eighth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2011-12)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011  
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2011  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2011/ Agrahayana,1933 (Saka) 
 


 3 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted                                             by the 
Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-12) held on 20.12.2011   
 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of th e Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011 -12) on `Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas‟ 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & 
NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli            -             Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam Ahir 
3 Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
4 Shri Ramesh Bais 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
8 Shri Raosaheb Dadarao Danve 
9 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
10 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
11 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
12 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
14 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
15 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
16 Shri C.L. Ruala 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20 Shri C. Sivasami 
21 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
23 Shri Kalraj Mishra 
24 Shri Ahmed Patel 
25 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
26 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
27 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
28 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
29 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 

 5 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation s contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants  (2011-
12)’ of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
 
2. The Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 3 August, 2011 . The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report were received 
on 24th November, 2011. 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2011 -12) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 20 December, 2011.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by  the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
     December,  2011                                                                Chairman, 
    Agrahayana,1933 (Saka)             Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

 6 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2011-2012) on „Demands for Grants (20 11-2012)‟, 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2011. 
  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 2 8 Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- SI.Nos.  1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12,  14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22 
and 24 (Total 14) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies SI. Nos.- NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - SI.Nos.       
2, 6, 8, 9, 13, 16, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27 and 28 (Total 12) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited : - SI.Nos.4 and19 (Total 2) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  
 
 
  
 
  

 7 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No.1.15) 
 
 
5. The Committee note d that a token provision of Rs 1.00 crore each was 
provided in the Budget of 2010 -11 and 2011-12 for the proposed plan scheme of 
providing free LPG connections to all eligible  BPL families.  While the details and 
modalities of the scheme were still under consideration of the Government, it was 
expected to release 35 lakh LPG connection to BPL familie s every year.  The 
Ministry had  informed the Committee that for the time being,  the proposed 
scheme will be for one year (i.e. remaining year of the XI Five Year Plan Period) 
and its further extension for the XII plan period will be considered at appropriate 
state.  Considering the importance of the scheme, the Committee recommend ed 
the Ministry to earnestly pursue with Government for early clear ance of the 
scheme so that it was  implemented at the earliest in the current year.  The 
Committee further desire d the scheme be extended for the next Five Year Plan 
till all eligible BPL families were covered under the scheme. 
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) scheme has since been 
approved. It has been decided to utilize 20% of CSR fund s of six major Oil 
PSUs  namely Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC), Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
(HPCL), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC),  GAIL (India) 
Limited and Oil India Limited ( OIL) for extending one time financial 
assistance of `1400 to cover the security deposit for one LPG cylinder and 
one Pressure Regulator to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families for acquiring 
a new LPG connection.   
 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (C CEA) considered  
MoP&NG‟s proposal in the matter on 01.12.2010.  The CCEA directed that 
the scheme may be re -examined keeping in view the feasibility of its 
implementation and the financial cost thereof, in the medium and long 
term.  Accordingly, the Schem e is under re -examination and the proposal 
is being finalized in light of comments received through Inter -Ministerial 
consultation, as directed by CCEA". 
 
 
 

 8 
 
7. The Committee are unhappy to note th at an important scheme for  
providing free LPG connections to  eligible BPL families which was first 
mooted in Budget 2010 -11 and again in 2011 -12 has been further delayed 
as the Ministry  has been asked by CCEA to re -examine the scheme  
keeping in view the feasibility of its implementation and financial cost 
thereof in the medium and long term .  T he Committee feel that this  
important aspect pertaining to its implementation and financial cost should 
have been clearly laid in the initial proposal itself .  The Committee  desire 
that the Ministry to expeditiously finaliz e the re -examination and submit 
proposal complete in all aspects so that the scheme can get expe ditious 
clearance from the Government. 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No.1.20) 
 
8. The Committee noted that in the y ear 2009 -10, the Government had  
incurred an expenditure of Rs.2770 crore under the “PDS Kerosene on Domestic 
LPG Subsidy Scheme  2002” whereby the Government was  providing a subsidy 
of Rs.0.82 per litre on PDS Kerosene to Rs.22.58 per cylinder on Domestic LPG 
(at1/3rd level of the rate for 2002 -03) to OMCs.  However, the total under -
recovery on domestic LPG alone during the year 2009 -10 was Rs.14,257crore.  
As regards a proposal under consideration of the Government to restrict four 
cylinders during a year that can be given at subsidized rate to all  consumers, the 
Committee strongly felt  that to offset the huge losses made on account of 
subsidized domestic LPG cylinders, the Government may consider to do away 
with providing subsidized  LPG to rich and affluent people having an income of 
more than Rs. 6 lakh per annum including those holding constitutional posts, 
public representatives like MP s, MLAs/MLCs.  The Committee were  of the firm 
opinion that such an initiative by the Government will help to expand its 
subsidized LPG distribution to the rural people who were more in the need of this 
clean fuel.  The Committee desired to be apprised of concrete action taken in this 
regard within a period of 3 months. 
 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas have 
informed the Committee as under:-  
 

 9 
 
"Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted  a  proposal to Cabinet 
Secretariat for placing before the EGoM for consideration/approval.   
The proposal is still under consideration of the Government. 
 
10. In view to off set huge loss es made on account of domestic LPGs 
cylinder and expand subsidized distribution to rural people, the Committee 
had recommended  that the Government may consider to do away with 
providing subsidized  LPG to rich and affluent people having an income of 
more t han Rs.6 lakh per annum including those holding constitutional 
posts, public representatives like MPs, MLAs/MLCs .  The Ministry has  
informed in their Action Taken Reply  that the proposal is under 
consideration of the Government.   As with each passing day the burden of 
subsidy is mounting, causing loss to the exchequer and the under -
recovery of OMCs is also piling up , the Committee desire that the matter 
must be accorded top priority and a decision be taken without further 
delay.    
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No.1.20) 
 
 
11. The Committee further note d the significant shortfall in achievement of 
production target of gas by private/joint venture companies due to less number of 
producer wells drilled in D1 and D3 fields in KG D6 block in East coast agai nst 
the approved field development plan resulting in less  production. The Committee 
viewed it with serious concern and felt  that DGH had  not effectively monitored 
and took timely corrective action to ensure that approved targets were adhered to 
by the priv ate companies. The Committee, therefore, desire d DGH to be more 
proactive in monitoring implementation of various targets by private companies. 
The Committee would also like to know the penalty imposed on these companies 
for their failure to achieve the approved drilling targets. 
 
12. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted as 
below:-  
"Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, Operating 
Committee (OC) approved Annual Production T argets are being reviewed 
technically by DGH and subsequently being deliberated, reviewed and 
approved in Management Committee Meetings.   Further, Production 

 10 
 
Performances are being monitored through  review of daily, monthly 
production  reports, conducting Technical Committee Meetings etc., 
wherein planned versus  act ual  production status are  discussed and 
remedial actions required, if any, are advised to the operator. 
 
There are no specific penalty stipulations in Production Sharing Contract 
(PSC) in case of shortfall in achieving the production targets envisaged in 
either the approved Field Development Plan (FDP) or Annual Work 
Programme and Budget, except termination of the Contract. However, as 
a matter of project economics, operators will be interested in early 
realization of the investments made on development of oil and gas 
discoveries.  
 
DGH has taken actions in case of D1 & D3 fields of KG -DWN-98/3 (KG-
D6) block by asking the Operator to expeditiously drill wells in line  with 
approved Field Development Plan (FDP) during the year 2011 -12, which 
may help to revive the falling gas production from these fields. T he issue 
has been deliberated at  depth in various Technical Committee Meetings 
(TCM) and Management Committee Meetings (MCM). Further, well -wise 
performance analysis was also carried o ut by DGH to ascertain the 
reasons of decline in gas production from existing wells. The Operator has 
been asked to expeditiously drill, complete and connect required number 
of wells during 2011 -12 in line with approved FDP to ensure that 31 
producer wells  are put on stream by April, 2012 as envisaged in the 
approved FDP and the FDP approved gas production rate of 80 
MMSCMD is achieved. The Operator has since drilled 4 more 
development wells in D1 & D3 fields, which are yet to be completed and 
connected. Th ese wells are in addition to the existing 18 producers 
(currently 15 on production and 3 shut -in due to water ingress/other 
problems) in these fields. The results of these newly drilled wells are being 
currently analyzed by the Operator". 
 
13. The Committe e are surprised to note that there are no specific 
penalty stipulations in Production Sharing Contract (PSC) in case of 
shortfall in achieving the production targets envisaged in either the 
approved Field Devel opment Plan (FDP) or Annual Work P rogramme and  
Budget, thereby giving the operators an  escape route.  The Committee 
would like to know how this important aspect was overlooked while 
framing PSC by the Ministry /DGH.  Keeping in view the large scale 
dependence on natural gas as fuel , the unscheduled cut  in its production 
has adversely affected the plans of various important sector s of economy 
including the priority sector . The Committee , therefore, desire the 
Government/DGH to review PSC Contracts entered with various operators  

 11 
 
and incorporate stringent  provisions therein for any breach in approved 
plan by the operat ing companies.  The Committee would further like to 
know the findings of DGH relating to the well -wise performance analysis to 
ascertain the reasons of decline in gas production from existing wells.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the same at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No.1.37) 
 
14. The Committee was  concerned to note the unsatisfactory performance of 
public/private companies in respect of Minimum Work Programme (MWP) an d 
consistent delay in achieving drilling targets in 3D Acquisition, Processing and 
Interpretation. The yearly review of exploration activit ies of ONGC and OIL by 
DGH showed that there had  been significant shortfall during last 5 years (2006 -
11) in achievin g MWP by both O NGC and OIL. The Committee noted  the major 
reason for the shortfall was due to delay in drilling programme in various blocks 
owned by ONGC&OIL. The Committee observed  that although DGH, a technical 
arm of the Ministry o f Petroleum and Natura l Gas had  a strong monitoring 
mechanism involving relevant flow of information including periodical progress 
reports concerning fiscal, operationa l and related matters and carried out 
inspections and also held review meetings with the Contractors and management 
from time to time, the upstream companies had failed to achieve MWP during the 
last 5 years. While expressing their di spleasure, the Committee desired  that 
Government/DGH should take necessary steps to ensure that these upstream 
companies expedite th eir exploration work and make sincere efforts towards at 
least completing the Minimum Work Programme assigned to them. 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"The provisions of the Production Sh aring Contract (PSC) signed  under 
NELP, adequately provide  for strict implementation of the terms and 
conditions of the contract. The performance of Exploration & P roduction 
activities are monitored as per the provisions of the PSC. 
 
In so far as the explo ration blocks operated by NOCs/Private Companies 
are concerned , under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC)  regime, 
Government/DGH monitor and periodically reviews the progress of various 

 12 
 
exploration activities through  the Management Committee (MC). If 
Contractor fails to complete the committed MWP within the stipulated time, 
they are required to pay the cost of unfinished work programme as per the 
relevant PSC provisions and the prevailing Policy Guidelines in this 
regard. There is also a provision of avai ling extensions of the exploration 
phases as per Extension Policy formulated by Government after the 
payment of Liquidated Damages (LD) to complete the MWP as per PSC 
provisions. 
In case of Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PELs) for nomination areas 
under ONGC and OIL, h alf yearly review for all the areas are carried out 
by DGH , wherein,  the  performance on annual work programme for 
seismic data, drilling of exploratory wells and conversion / relinquishment 
of PEL areas, are also reviewed".   
 
16. While exp ressing displeasure on unsatisfactory performance of 
public/private companies in respect of minimum work programme , the 
Committee had desired the Government/DGH should take necessary steps 
to ensure that these upstream companies expedite their exploration work 
and make sincere efforts towards at least completing the Minimum Work 
Programme assigned to them.   The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply 
had stated that the Government/DGH monitor and periodically review the 
progress of various exploration activiti es through the Management 
Committee (MC).  If Contractor fails to complete the committed MWP within 
the stipulated time, they are required to pay the cost of unfinished work 
programme as per the relevant Production Sharing Contract ( PSC) 
provisions and the  prevailing Policy Guidelines in this regard. The 
Committee are of the view that  the penalty amount that the con tractor is 
required to pay if he/she  fails to complete the committed MWP is very less 
and does not act as a deterrent for not achieving the app roved targets.   
Therefore, the Committee desire that failure to complete MWP should be 
seriously viewed and higher penalty be imposed in case of shortfall.  
Moreover, extension of time to the contractor may not be given in normal 
course, rather it should be granted only in exceptional circumstances.    
Recommendation (Sl. No 9, Para No. 1.42) 
 
17. The Committee observed  that during 2009 -10 against the Budget 
Estimates of Rs.2375.35 crore, the actual expenditure by OIL was Rs.1556.86 
crore.  Further, the ac tual expenditure by OIL during 2010 -11 was only Rs. 

 13 
 
1241.17 crore up to December, 2010 against the Budget Estimates of Rs. 
4464.98 crore and the revised Estimate s of Rs.4212.98 crore which came  to 
27.8% utilization during the first three quarters.  The rea sons for downward 
revision of Plan outlays in 2010-11 by OIL had been attributed to deferment of 2D 
seismic survey in Rajasthan on account of prioritization of area for 3D seismic 
survey and prolonged rainy season and also due to cyclonic storming KG on-land 
block.  Revision in drilling targets due to non -availability of chartered rigs, land 
acquisition problem, delayed movement of projects, and capital investments 
therein, etc.  The Committee fail ed to understand as to why the reasons now 
cited by the Gove rnment could not be foreseen at Revised Estimate stage.  The 
huge mismatch between the plan outlay and utilizati on by OIL during 2010 -11, 
pointed towards systematic flaws in the planning and execution of work.  The 
Committee also note d from the outcome Bud get document of Ministry that their 
Monitoring Cell independently monitored major projects being implemented by oil 
PSUs, covering all aspects from process design/ basic engineering right up to 
completion stage.  It generated a monthly report which brought  out the current 
status of implementation of various projects along with the reasons for delay, if 
any.  Critical areas w hich can impact the progress were  also analysed.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that despite the strict moni toring by the 
Ministry there had  been large under utilization of funds.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend ed that the Government/DGH strengthen their monitoring 
mechanism to make it more effective and take all necessary steps to ensure the 
Budget estimates of Rs.3180 crore  for the year 2011 -12 were fully utilized to 
achieve the set targets. 
 
18. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has submitted as 
below:-  
"During the year 2009-10, 150 GLKM of 2D survey in Karbi -Anglong could 
not be compl eted due to difficu lt logistics and  poor law & order situation.  
615 GLKM of 2D survey in Sadiya could not be completed as Seismic 
Contractor, M/s GT, Poland declared Force Majeure due to insurgency 
problem.   
In Assam there was acute land acquisition problem, repeated 
environmental problem, down-hole problems, prolonged production testing 
of a few wells etc, extended drilling operation in a few deep exploratory 
wells etc., consumed more time than the planned , resulting the shortfall in 
Drilling targets. Drilling target could  not be achieved due to unforeseen 

 14 
 
deep drilling (sub-surface) complication in several locations and prolonged 
production testing.  
The target of Natural Gas Production and Sale could not be achieved due 
to prolonged & unplanned shut -down of Brahmaputra Va lley Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Namrup in Assam, less withdrawal of gas 
by Lakwa Thermal Power Station (LTPS), Indian Oil Corporation - Assam 
Oil Division (IOC -AOD), Assam Petrochemicals Limited (APL) and Less 
withdrawal by Rajasthan Rajya Vidy ut Utpadan Nigam Limited (RRUVNL) 
during the year 2009-10. 
During the year 2010 -11, in view of relinquishment of three NELP Block s 
in Rajasthan and consequential delay in finalization of the contract for both 
2D (560 GLKM) and 3D (1000 SQKM) could not be p ursued. In KG Basin, 
delay in obtaining EC Clearance ha d left little dry weather window for pre 
monsoon work.  Therefore prolonged monsoon caused delay in pursuing 
survey work in marshy and forest land. As a result planned target of 250 
GLKM could not be met.   
In order to supplement in -house drilling resources, 6 nos. charter hire 
drilling rigs were planned for deployment in Assam and Arunachal 
Pradesh throughout the year 2009 -10, whereas 5 charter hire drilling rig s 
were available up to 4 th Qtr. 2009-10 due to reasons beyond the control of 
the Company.  Thus the planned drilling programme could not be fulfilled 
during the quarter.  Surface and sub -surface problems like unprecedented 
rain caused flood in low lying areas, non availability of quarry material for 
plinth preparation, difficulties in movement of heavy oilfield vehicles 
coupled frequent bandh and blockades has disrupted the planned target of 
drilling.  OIL could achieve only 120,800 meter against the target of 
225450 meter.   
NRL failed to uplift gas during the year 2010 -11 as planned.  The 
necessary infrastructure required for the same was ready by a third party 
namely M/s Assam Gas Corporation Ltd. (AGCL) only in March, 2011 and 
gas supply was commenced w.e.f. 15.3.2011. Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut 
Utpadan Nigam Limited (RRUVNL ) was defaulted in uplifting the 
committed quantity of gas of 278 Million Standard Cubic Metres Per Day 
(MMSCMD) during the July and August 2010 -11. As a result actual 
withdrawal was 151 MMSCMD only, the shortfall being about 127  
MMSCMD.   
OIL made aggressive efforts for acquisition of an overseas 
exploration/discovered/producing acreages in order to realize early gains 
in equity oil and gas for the country. Accordingly, the company scouted 
and evaluated a number of discovered/pro ducing properties during 2010 -
11 and pursued acquisition of some prospective assets.  However, OIL 
faced difficulty in acquiring potential overseas assets due to aggressive  
competition and high premium on  discovered and producing properties 
due to increase  in international crude oil prices.  Additionally, increased 
risks were perceived due to regional political conflicts and economic 
downturns in middle -east and African countries by the end quarter of the 
year.  Despite best efforts of OIL, certain Merger a nd Acquisition/asset 
farm-in opportunities could not be materialized due to rejection of OIL‟s 
offer by the seller.  Since the situation was beyond the control of the 
company, the projected outlay of Rs.2000 Crores earmarked for overseas 

 15 
 
acquisition at the time of finalization of Annual Plan 2010 -11 could not be 
spent for the aforesaid reason.   
As regard s monitoring, OIL regularly monitors the physical and financial 
progress of Plan. In the 3 rd week of every month OIL reviews through 
Video Conferencing wit h field headquarters, Assam where the major cost 
centers are located and decides remedial action for future.  
DGH is regularly reviewing the work programme and progress of 
exploration activities of Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PEL) held by OIL 
awarded on nomination basis, on a half yearly basis vis -à-vis committed 
work programme. Presently, there are 11 active nomination PELs 
operated by OIL. Technical meetings are taken by DGH regularly to 
analysis the exploration activities of the nomination PELs, base d on the 
data provided by OIL, and discuss ways to resolve various technical 
issues. In case of non fulfillment of committed work programme, 
appropriate actions are taken in line with the provisions laid down in 
PSCs.  
Technical Committee Meetings (TCM) ar e also held, as and when 
required, to deliberate on technical issues related to the activities being 
undertaken in the respective blocks". 
 
19. The Committee ar e not convinced with the reply  of Government in 
regard to shortfall in utilization of funds by O IL during 2009-2010 and 2010-
11.   The Committee feel that  most of reasons given for shortfall viz. land 
acquisition problem, delay in obtaining various clearances from concerned  
departments, non -availability of drilling rigs, failure to uplift gas by NR L 
due to necessary infrastructure not in place etc. were  avoidable and could 
have been timely addressed with proper planning  by the company.   The 
Committee therefore desire the OIL to make all out efforts for 100% 
utilization of funds in the current financial year and also would like DGH  to 
effectively monitor to ensure that there is no underutilization of funds by oil 
companies. 
Recommendation (Sl. No 13, Para No. 1.78) 
 
20. The Committee note d that in view of global shortage of drilling rigs and 
associated services, the Government announced a drilling moratorium of 3 years 
starting from 01.01.2008 to 31.12.2010 for 30 deep water blocks under the 
Production Sharing Contracts (PSC) regime signed up to NELP -V where drilling 
commitments (except for developm ent drilling) were existing. Out of the 30 
blocks for which moratorium was granted, 16 blocks belonged to ONGC, 13 to 
RIL and 1 to ENI. The Committee note d with dismay that even after expiry of the 
rig moratorium policy on 31.12.2010, the ONGC  had completed drilling 

 16 
 
commitment only in 6 blocks out of the 16 blocks and sought extension of time 
for 9 blocks. In the remaining 1 block the ONGC could not complete 5 appraisal 
wells and requested the Ministry/ DGH that the number of appraisal wells should 
be 1 instead of 6. T he position in the case of RIL was  equally dismal as it could 
complete drilling commitment only in 6 blocks out of 13 blocks and sought 
extension for 6 blocks. In the remaining block, RIL could not complete 1 appraisal 
well and represented to t he Government that appraisal wells should be 1 instead 
of 2 as provided in the moratorium policy. Without going into the technicalities of 
the rig holiday policy and exten sion policy, the Committee felt  that companies 
which enter into PSC for exploration a ctivities should plan the requirement of rigs 
and their availability in advance instead of explaining such problems in terms of 
demand and supply for rigs due to volatility of international oil market.  It was  a 
fact that international oil mark et was  subject to frequent volatility due to 
increasing gap between demand and supply besides other unforeseen 
circumstances leading to dis ruption. The companies which were  required to 
complete minimum work programme under PSC should be made to comply with 
the set par ameters in a timely manner instead of granting rig holiday or 
extensions on one ground or other. The role of the Government and DGH 
acquired great significance in this area. The Committee felt  that policy of 
exploration should not allow the companies to dr ag on the explorat ion 
commitments unless there were  exceptional and justified circumstances.  The 
Committee, therefore, urged the Government to make an in-depth analysis of the 
policy framework in this regard to prevent such delays in order to achieve the 
objectives of NELP. 
 
21. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"Production Sharing Contracts have  provisions for payment of cost of 
minimum committed work programme(MWP) by the contractors. The 
extensions are granted only on justified and exceptional situations such as 
– Rig moratorium for non availability of deepwater drilling rigs, excusable 
delays for delay in getting Statutory Clearances, Force Majeures, etc. In 
order to have uniform treatment to all operators, an extension Policy has 
been framed by the Government. There are provisions for granting 
extensions on payment of liquidated damages as per the Policy and 

 17 
 
Contractors are panelized for delays in completing the committed 
exploration MWP. 
 
22. While expressing their displeasure on non -completion of  drilling 
commitment by the companies even after expiry of rig moratorium policy 
on 31.12.2010, the Committee had felt that the companies who had entered 
PSC for exploration activities should have pla nned the requirement of rigs 
and their availability in advance. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry 
instead of replying to the specific recommendations , has  given a general 
reply that there are provision s for granting extension on  payment of 
liquidated damages as per the policy and contractors are penalized for 
delays in completing the committed exploration of MWP.   The Committee 
express their displeasure on the lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Ministry in taking action against the companies whi ch drag on  exploration 
commitments on variou s pre texts.  The  Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and urge the Government to ensure an 
effective policy framework to prevent such delays to achieve the objectives 
of NELP.  
Recommendation (Sl. No 16, Para No. 1.91) 
 
23. The Committee appreciate d the progress made by the ONGC Videsh 
Limited (OVL) from a meager production of just 0.253 Million Metric Tonne oil 
equivalent (MMTOE) in 2002 -03, as OVL had  come a long way and registered 
the highest ever production of 8.870 MMTOE oil and oil equivalent gas in 2009 -
10.  The Committee f ound that C&AG in its report on purchase of Imperial 
Energy Corporation, Russia by OVL had revealed that all the wells drilled by OVL 
to produce oil were  turning out to be dry and the company had  reported to be 
running up a huge loss of Rs. 1182 crores due to unrealistic estimation of o il 
reserves.  The Committee had  noted that with reference to C&AG observation 
OVL has indicated that conclusion drawn by C&AG regar ding OVL not be ing 
successful as an operator was  not based on facts as 23 projects were  still under 
exploration and exploration effort was  42% against the world wide average of  
about 36%.  The Government had  also stated that the exploration expenditure 
involved risk capital and cost of dry wells should not be considered as unfruitful 
expenditure as it proved or disproved  the existence of hydrocarbons, therefore, 

 18 
 
expenditure incurred in survey and dry holes were  investments for fut ure.  The 
Committee strongly felt that not only estimation of oil reserves was properly done 
but even the production potential and profile were not analysed which required to 
be investigated. The committee desire d that all those blocks owned by the OVL 
should be analyzed with latest  technologies so that the production potential of 
these hydrocarbon reserves can be assessed properly and investment made in 
these blocks will not go in vain. 
 
24. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"OVL, as a standard practice, carries out in -house/ independent 
assessment of potential of the opportunity. Even when the seller provides 
its estimates, these are evaluated / revalidated by OVL either through in -
house team and/or through independent te chnical experts before taking 
the decision on the acquisition of the asset/block.  
 
OVL has deployed latest technologies such as multistage fracturing in 
long horizontal holes, in one or more layers in the tight formations, 
multilateral well in one of the field etc. for obtaining  optimum production 
level. E fforts are continuing to identify sweet spots through seismic 
attribute analysis for placement of the wells. 
 
OVL has noted the recommendations of Standing Committee and affirms 
that multi layer and more stringent evaluation procedure would be 
continuously followed". 
 
25. In view of reported huge loss Rs.1182 crores by OVL in purchase of 
Imperial Energy Corporation,  Russia due to unrealistic estimates of oil 
reserves the Committee had felt  that not only estimation of oil reserves 
was properly done but even the production potential and profile were not 
analysed which required to be investigated. The Ministry had not replied if 
any such investigation as recommended by Committee had  been done and 
would like to be apprised of the findings thereof .   The Committee would 
like to be apprised of action taken by Government in this r egard and also 
desire that the blocks owned  by OVL should be analysed with latest 
technologies so as to assess the hydro carban reserves.    
 
 

 19 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 20, Para No. 1.106) 
 
26. The Committee observe d that the findings of the audit and inspection 
conducted by OISD indicate non -compliance of safety norm s by oil installations 
which were of common nature and not specific to any  oil company. In respect of 
refineries and gas processing plants, the deficiencies were  related to lay out, fire 
fighting facilities and a few process hardware not conforming to norms in case of 
Oil Refineries, incomplete updation of Standard Operating Pro cedures, non -
compliance of Risk Mitigation Measures as identified in the risk analysis. As 
regards the pipelines network, the Committee note d that non -compliance was 
limited to a few Statutory Norms, standards/guidelines prescribed by OISD in 
case of old p ipelines mainly in the areas of intelligent pigging, coating survey, 
work permit system etc., Incomplete updation of Standard Operating Procedures 
were generally found at oil installation which are not complied by the companies. 
The Committee also note d wi th concern that there were  deficiencies in 
maintenance and operation of fire -fighting system at marketing installations and 
onshore and offshore (exploration and production) wells of ONGC and OIL.In 
view of the recent accident which had  taken place at Oil Installation like Jaipur 
and Mumbai, the committee recommend ed that Government should take 
necessary steps to strictly deal with non -compliance of safety norms by oil 
companies by fixing responsibility on service officers for all acts of omission and 
commission. 
 
27. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"Reports containing observations and recommendations of various 
periodic Safety Audits and inspection carried out by OISD for  the oil 
installations are forwarded to Chairmen / Managing Director of the Oil 
companies for compliance. These recommendations of periodic Safety 
Audits and inspection carried out in OISD are complied by the industry in a 
time bound manner on priority.  OISD also monitors impl ementations of 
these recommendations and follows up with industry closely". 
 
28. Concerned over deficiency in  maintenance and operation of fire 
fighting system at marketing installations and onshore and offshore wells 
of oil companies the Committee had re commended that Government 
should take necessary steps to strictly deal with non -compliance of safety 

 20 
 
norms of oil companies.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have 
stated that reports containing observations and recommendations of 
various periodic Safety Audits and inspection carried out by OISD for the 
oil installations are forwarded to Chairmen/Managing Director of the Oil 
companies for compliance.  The Committee however have not been 
informed as to what extent  of  the implementation of recommenda tions of 
OISD has been done.  The Committee would like to know the present status 
and the manner in which OISD follows for their implementation with the 
industry.  
Recommendation (Sl. No 23, Para No. 1.129) 
 
29. The Committee observed  that so far CBM reser ves of about 8.92 trillion 
cubic feet had been established in 5 CBM blocks and according to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, the likely time requirement for full development t o 
reach peak production level was  generally 5 to 6 years from the start  of 
development activities. The Committee, however, noted with concern that while 
16 blocks were awarded to different companies by the end of 2 nd round of CBM 
held in 2004, the commercial production of CBM had started only from one block 
i.e. Raniganj (Sou th) in West Bengal operated by M/s GEE CL in July 2007 and 
there was  no additional production from any block during the last 4 year. The 
Committee further observed  that cumulative production of CBM gas in 2010 -11 
was 36.19 MMSCM from April  2010 to February 2011, which was  very 
insignificant in comparison to establi shed reserves. The Committee were  
dismayed to not that even the minimum work programme for blocks like Raniganj 
East (West Bengal) entrusted to Essar Oil in 2002 was not completed. Similarly, 
Sohagpur (Chattisgarh), SP(E)CBM -2001 and SP(W)  CBM-2001 were  still at 
developmental stage even after total expenditure of Rs. 177.83 Crore with 
committed investment of Rs. 55.80 crore. The Committee also view ed with 
serious concern that as regards BK -CBM-2001/1 (Bokaro) awarded to ONGC in 
2002, against the committed investment  of Rs. 65.70 crore, the actual are Rs. 
43.02 crore and the field development plan of the block was  still under 
examination by DGH. The Committee further observe d that ONGC had  incurred 
a cumulative investment of Rs.591.27 crore in 9 CBM blocks awarded to it and 
only one block i.e. Jharia had witnessed incidental test production since 2002. 

 21 
 
While expressing their dissatisfaction over the very low CBM production in the 
country since the awa rding   of blocks in 2001, the Committee cannot but 
deplored the way the Government/DGH was  monitoring the exploitation of CBM 
reserves in th e Country. The Committee desired  that Government/Oil PSUs to 
make an in -depth analysis of the reasons for scanty pr oduction from these 
reservoirs and take concrete and corrective action including application and 
import of new advanced exploration technologies and technical knowhow, if 
necessary. 
 
30. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed the 
Committee as under: 
 
"Currently, Raniganj South block in the state of West Bengal is on 
commercial production and other 4 blocks are at advance stages for 
production. By the end of 12 th plan period, CBM production is projected at 
4 MMSCMD in 2016 -17 from the present level of about 0.23 MMSCMD in 
October 2011.  
 
The operators have imported the equipment and hired the consultancy of 
foreign CBM experts on the need basis.   Government has not put any 
restriction on import of new technology for CBM operations in the country". 
 
31. Expressing dissatisfaction over the very low CBM production since 
awarding of blocks in 2001, the Committee ha d desired the Government to 
make an indepth analysis to find out reasons for the same . Though the   
Ministry in their r eply have informed that by the end of 12 th plan period 
CBM production is projected at 4 MMSCMD in 2016 -17 from the present 
level of about 0.23mmscmd in October 2011, the reply  is, however,  silent if 
any analysis has been done on scanty production of CBM  till now and the 
monitoring of Government/DGH in this regard.   In view of the past record 
the Committee are not convinced if the projected target for 12th Plan can be 
reached unless effective steps are taken to boost present CBM production  
including through application and import of new technology.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire the 
Government/Oil PSUs to make an in -depth analysis of the reasons for 
scanty production from CBM reservoirs and take concrete and corrective  

 22 
 
action including application and  import of new advanced exploration 
technologies and technical knowhow, if necessary.   
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.25, 26, 27 and 28 Para Nos.1.138, 1.145, 1.150 
and 1.156) 
 
32. The Committee in recommendations No.25,26,27 an d 28 on development 
of alternate sources of oil and gas had made the following recommendations:- 
1. The Government should complete the technical evaluation and make 
efforts to bring required technologies to extract methane from gas  hydrates 
through collaboration  with advance countries like USA & Japan. 
2. The Government should make all out efforts to develop shale gas as 
source of alternate fuel and the areas or concern related to production of shale 
gas, i.e. environment impact of production of shale gas  and need of huge 
quantity of water for fractionation of rocks should be addressed at the earliest. 
3. The Government should fix a realistic time schedule for every stage of the 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) projects and monitor them regularly to 
prevent delays and consequent cost overrun in implementation of such important 
projects as UCG. 
4. The Government should make sincere efforts to bring the technology  of 
promoting hydrogen and transport fuel already developed in world  and further 
R&D activities should not only be restricted to the trial of these technologies.     
  
33. In their Action Taken Reply on the above recommendations the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas have informed the Committee as under:- 
1.The Resource assessment of gas hydrates  in the KG and Mahanadi basins 
deep water areas by National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) and NIO 
(National Institute of Oceanography) are ongoing.  The major challenge is gas 
hydrate programme is to develop technologies for production of methane f rom 
gas hydrate.  
2. The MOPNG in consultation with MOEF and other agencies would decide 
on the best practices which can mitigate possible environmental issues like water 
management treatment and ensure water availability for usage in Shale gas 

 23 
 
exploitation.   The environmental regulations for shale gas field development and 
production would be put in place in consultation with MOE&F. 
3. ONGC has signed an Agreement of Collaboration (AOC) with Skochinsky 
Institute of Mining, Russia on 25 th November, 2004 fo r implementation  of 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) project in India.  Vastan Mine block in 
Surat district, Gujarat has been selected for UCG Pilot project.  The 
Environmental clearance fro m Ministry of Environment & Forest has been 
obtained by ONGC.  However, ONGC is awaiting the mining lease.   Land 
acquisition process is in progress. 
4. Planning Commission initiated Hydrogren Energy programme in 2003 to 
suggest policy initiatives, fiscal/regulatory and other measures for promotion of 
hydrogren as clean fuel with an aim to assist in developing specific projects with 
public-private partnership.  Accordingly, National Hydrogen Energy Board 
(NHEB) under the Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources (MNES) with the 
involvement of TATA, Mahindra & Mahind ra and Indian Oil Corporation, 
academia and research institutions with Secretary P&NG and Chairman, IOC as 
members, was set up. 
 
34. Having carefully considered the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry 
on the recommendations of the Committee on development  of gas hydrate, 
shale gas, UGC and hydrogen as alternate sources of oil and gas, the 
Committee feel that the various programmes are not progressing at the 
desired pace.  Keeping in view the large potential of these resources in 
meeting the energy security of the country,  the Committee desire the 
Government to make concerted efforts in a time bound manner to develop 
these resources.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete 
action taken by the Government in this regard. 

 24 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No 1, Para No. 1.14) 
 
The Committee observe that the Non -Plan Budget (2011 -12) of Rs. 
23676.20 crore of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas comprises mainly of 
subsidy for domestic LPG and PDS Kerosene, freight subsidy on retail products 
for far-flung areas, subsidy for supply of natural gas to North East Region and the 
setting up of Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board.  This also includes 
provision of Rs. 20000 crore for compensation to Oil Companies for under 
recoveries on account of sale of sensitive petroleum products.  The Committee 
are of the view that these Non -Plan demands of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas are in order and expect the Minis try to keep expenditure within the 
sanctioned Budget of the Ministry and they should follow all the instructions of 
the Ministry of Finance to effect economy in non plan expenditure. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In so far as the Subsidy and Freight subsidy on  Domestic LPG and PDS 
Kerosene are concerned, the expenditure is being incurred on these products as 
per provisions of the „PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG Subsidy Scheme, 2002‟ 
and „Freight Subsidy (For Far -Flung Areas) Scheme, 2002‟.  The payment under 
these Schemes is made to the Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
namely, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (BPCL) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) on the 
basis of their subsidy claims. Under  these Schemes, provisions of ` 3,050 crore 
and ` 26 crore have been made respectively for the year 2011-12.   
 
Further, OMCs are incurring under -recoveries on the sale of sensitive 
petroleum products.  Under the burden sharing mechanism, Government is partly 
compensating the under -recoveries through budgetary support.  During the year 
2010-11, the OMCs have incurred under -recoveries of ` 78,190 crore on the sale 
of sensitive petroleum products. To partly compensate these under -recoveries, 
Government has fi nally released ` 41,000 crore from budgetary support towards 
under-recoveries for the year 2010-11 including ` 20,000 crore from the Non-Plan 
budget sanction of the year 2011-12.  The balance under-recoveries were met by 
upstream PSUs and downstream OMCs. 
 
A subsidy at the rate of 40% of the price of Administered Price Mechanism 
(APM) gas is being provided for sale of APM gas in North East (NE) Region.  The 
present price of APM gas, effective from June, 2010, is US$ 4.2/mmbtu less 
royalty.  For N.E., subsid ized rate is US$ 2.52/mmbtu.  The difference would be 
paid to ONGC & OIL through Government budget. 
 

 25 
 
A provision of Rs.461 crore was made for RE 2010 -11. For BE 2011 -12, 
Rs.564 crore has been made for grant of subsidy to OIL and ONGC.   
 
 The expenditure o n account of subsidy does not exceed the sanctioned 
budgetary provisions. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 3, Para No. 1.16) 
 
The Committee note that as per Economic Survey (2010 -11), th e 
budgetary support for the proposed scheme has been restricted to the extent of 
50% of the total funds required and rest of the 50% would be drawn for the CSR 
funds of six major oil companies and OMCs namely ONGC, IOCL, BPCL, HPCL, 
OIL and GAIL.  However,  on this issues, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
in their reply have informed that OMCs had advised that 20% of the CSR fund is 
to be contributed by them towards the scheme for release of new LPG 
connection to BPL families.  The Committee hope that t he remaining 30% will be 
contributed by other oil companies so that there will be no financial constraints in 
the implementation of the scheme. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
20% of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds would be borne by of 
six major Oil  PSUs  namely Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC), Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (HPCL), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC),  GAIL (India) 
Limited and Oil India Limited (OIL) for extending  one time financial assistance of 
`1400 to cover the security deposit for one LPG cylinder and one Pressure 
Regulator to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families for acquiring a new LPG 
connection.   The remaining will be borne by  the three oil marketing compani es 
namely, IOC, BPCL and HPCL in the ratio of LPG connections released to BPL 
families by each company. 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 5, Para No. 1.28) 
 
The Committee are constrained t o note that ONGC has failed to achieve 
oil production targets third time in a row with production declining from 25.37 
MMT  in 2008 -09 and 24.67 MMT in 2009 -10 to 24.42 MMT in 2010 -11. While 
OIL which could achieve oil production targets in 2008 -09 and 200 9-10, it could 
achieve only 97% of production target in 2010 -11. The main reason cited by 
ONGC is natural decline in base production as most producing fields of ONGC 
are aged and have surpassed their plateau production phase and are in natural 
decline phase. The rate of production decline from these old and matured fields 
is about 7 -8% of production and in case of OIL the production was less mainly 
due to prolonged Shut down of Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. during its half of the 

 26 
 
year. The Committee have been in formed that action taken by ONGC to offset 
decline from the matured fields by implementing of various lOR/EOR schemes 
and induction of State of Art technology in production enhancement and services 
taken of internationally renowned domain experts in this r egard. Taking note of 
the initiatives taken by ONGC, the Committee desire that increased focus thereto 
be given so as to arrest the decline of oil production. The Committee are also 
unhappy at the loss of production due to prolonged shut down of Numaligarh  
Refinery Limited and desire that in future the company take timely action to 
prevent prolonged shutdown.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC 
 
In order to arrest the decline of oil production and increasing the oil 
production, ONGC has taken several steps whic h inter -alia includes the 
following: 
 
i. Improved oil recovery/enhance oil recovery schemes – under these 
projects, augmenting of production facility, drilling of additional infill wells, 
water injection, artificial lift optimization, etc., are undertaken. 
ii. Technology induction in ONGC – installation of high volume lift pumps, 
tracer survey for water surveillance in water injection wells, use of cased 
hole, neutron logs, etc., have been implemented. 
iii. New infrastructure projects – creation of surface facilities, laying of 
pipelines, revamping/upgradation of existing facilities are being 
undertaken. 
iv. Implementation of marginal fields projects – ONGC has taken 
development of marginal fields in offshore areas which were not 
economical in the low crude oil price scenario earlier. 
OIL 
 
OIL has already taken action to enhance its crude oil storage capacity in the 
North East. The following projects are in progress in the district of Dibrugarh and 
Tinsukia in upper Assam to facilitate enhanced storage capacity of crude oil by 
OIL in future: 
 
i. Construction of one Secondary Tank Farm (40,000 Kiloliters) 
ii. Construction of 2(two) new Oil Collecting Stations - one at Barekuri 
(1800 Kiloliters) and other at Bhogpara (2700 Kiloliters). 
iii. Creation of new facility at Intermediate Tank Farm, Tengakhat ( 40,000 
Kiloliters)  
 
Meanwhile, the Bongaigaon Refinery has also commissioned their Diesel Hydro 
Treater Unit in July, 2011.  In the post commissioning scenario, it is expected that 
BRPL‟s crude storage and processing capability of Assam cru de alone may be 
enhanced in case of necessity during unforeseen long shutdown of any Refinery 
in the North East.   
 
 

 27 
 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited 
 
In order to meet requirement of Auto Fuel policy, there was a need for 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) to imp lement diesel quality upgradation 
project due to which NRL was shutdown.  In view of the same, crude oil 
processing during the 1 st quarter of 2010 -11 was lower than expected.  At 
present, normal crude oil processing is being carried out in Numaligarh Refinery.   
 
Following representations from other oil companies and in view of 
anticipated crude containment problem in the North East region, NRL was 
advised to defer refinery shutdown by 15 days.  
 
Thus, implementation of NRL‟s Diesel Quality Upgradation Proj ect was re-
scheduled. In addition to the above constraint, deferment of NRL‟s refinery 
shutdown led to shifting of project implementation into a period of unprecedented 
heavy rainfall resulting in a loss of additional 23 working days. Notwithstanding 
such compelling adversities, NRL succeeded in commissioning its primary 
Crude/Vacuum Distillation Unit (CDU/VDU) unit by 23 rd May, 2010. The 
secondary processing Delayed Coker Unit (DCU) was brought on -stream on 10th 
June, 2010. The complex Hydrocracker Unit wa s commissioned on 21 st June, 
2010.  
 
In view of foregoing, NRL‟s crude processing during the first quarter of 
2010-11 was lower than expected for reasons beyond control of the Company. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7, Para No. 1.30) 
 
The Committee note that the various targets set for oil PSUs are finalized 
by a task force consisting of experts, representatives from Ministries and oil 
companies taking all relevant factors into account.  After finalization of targets, 
MOUs are signed between oil PSUs and the Ministry. The Committee are 
however, constrained to observe that these targets which are fixed with great 
deal of exercise are not taken seriously by the companies and most of the targets 
set during the last 3 years are not fulfilled with reasons cited which are often 
repetitive in nature. The Committee are of the view that with signing of MOUs 
between companies and Ministry, it become a commitment on part of companies 
to adhere to the  targets. Therefore, any underachievement should be viewed 
seriously by the Ministry and suitable periodical corrective action should be taken 
to prevent shortfalls. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to impress on oil 
companies both NOC an d private, the absolute necessity to achieve the targets 
set for them with all seriousness and undertake indepth analysis for the shortfall 
and corrective action taken thereto. In case of repeated shortfall, some penal 
action may be considered against the defaulter companies. 
 
 

 28 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The performance of NOCs is monitored through quarterly performance review 
meetings, Planning Commission and Department of Public Enterprises. In 
addition, Committee on Public Sector Undertakings (COPU) also monitors the 
performance of NOCs. The performance of Private/JV companies is monitored 
as per the provisions of the production sharing contracts. 
 
Normally targets for crude oil and natural gas are set by NOCs and 
private/jv companies based on the optimal production potential of the reservoir, 
while adopting good reservoir practices suitable for the fields.  The reservoir 
production behavior is dynamic in nature unlike the production from a 
manufacturing unit, where inputs, process and output are fairly con trolled. 
Therefore, projection made for crude oil and natural gas production by E&P 
companies are the best possible estimates based on various technical 
parameters of reservoir. The achievement of targets is possible only when 
assumed conditions for reservoirs are fully met. In the situation when most of the 
producing fields are mature and at the stage of natural decline, the uncertainty in 
production projections also rises sharply.  In the ageing oil & gas fields, 
maintaining crude oil & natural gas produc tion is the challenge for the E&P 
companies. In addition, variation in demand of natural gas also affects the gas 
production, especially in Assam. The introduction of penal provisions for shortfall 
in the targets may result in making conservative projectio ns rather than the 
ambitious and realistic targets by E&P companies. 
The MOU parameters and targets in respect of Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. 
(NRL) (a subsidiary of BPCL), Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL) (a 
subsidiary of IOCL) and Mangalore Refinery  & Petrochemicals Ltd. (MRPL) ( a 
subsidiary of ONGC) are being finalized by the MOU Task Force constituted by 
the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).  
  
Oil & Natural Gas PSUs, including GAIL accord the highest priority to the 
MoUs signed with MoPNG. The top Management of the Oil & Natural Gas PSUs 
including, GAIL reviews MoU parameters on a monthly basis. The performance 
against the MoU parameters is also presented to MoPNG during the Quarterly 
Performance Reviews (QPR) meeting. 
 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
 

 29 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 10, Para No. 1.52) 
 
The Committee note that during NELP IX round, 34 exploration blocks 
were offered out of which 8 blocks were in deepwater, 7 blocks in shallow water 
and 11 blocks in onland, 8 type S -onland blocks. In all 74 bids were received for 
33 blocks against 34 blocks offered. Out of 74 bids so received, there were single 
bids for 14 blocks and double bids for 10 blocks. In so far as the single bids are 
concerned, ONGC, OIL, HPCL, GAIL, BRPL bid for 11 blocks and the remaining 
3 were bid by other companies. The Committee are informed that ONGC and OIL 
together or individually put in bids for 29 blocks in all and 8 foreign companies 
participated in the bids. In all ou t of the 33 blocks for which bids were received, 
20 have gone to the private sector and 13 to the public sector. In comparison 
during NELP VIII round, out of 41 blocks for which Production Sharing Contracts 
were signed, 27 went to the Public Sector Compani es and 14 went to the Private 
Sector Companies. Thus, the Committee feels that as compared to 7 th round, the 
bidding of Private Companies in ninth round of NELP has certainly improved. The 
Committee feels that though a level playing field is assured to all  companies 
participating in NELP rounds, yet one of the main objectives of NELP is to attract 
investment from the foreign and private players to increase exploration and 
production activity. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government, while 
striving for attracting investment in exploration through successive rounds of 
NELP, should also remain vigilant in stringently monitoring the implementation of 
the terms and conditions of contract for exploration work, capital expenditure 
pattern being underta ken by the contractor so that the vital national asset like 
crude oil and natural gas is explored, produced and delivered in the best 
interests of the nation. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, Government/DGH 
monitors and periodically reviews the progress of various exploration, 
development and production activities through Management Committee (MC). If 
Contractor fails to complete committed exploration MWP within the stipulated 
time, they are required to pay the c ost of unfinished work programme as per the 
relevant PSC provisions and the prevailing Policy Guidelines in this regard.  DGH 
also monitors the production performance of E&P companies as per provisions of 
PSCs. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 11, Para No. 1.53) 
 
As regards blocks left out under NELP VIII, the Committee note that 24 
deep water blocks were offered out of which bids were received for 8 blocks and 
were awarded. Explaining th e reasons for not offering the remaining 16 blocks 
during NELP IX round, the Government has informed that these block fall in 
Kerala-Konkan and Andaman basins and these basins are frontier basins and 
there is less availability of data especially in Western part of Andaman basin. The 
Committee failed to understand as to why these blocks were offered in the first 

 30 
 
place when the required data were not available. While expressing their 
displeasure, the Committee recommends that the DGH should take more 
proactive role and develop -adequate data in respect of every basin by using the 
latest survey technology before carving out the blocks for offer Under NELP. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
It was ensured by DGH that all blocks offered under NELP -IX, had adequate 
data. F urther, efforts are being made by DGH to acquire more data prior to 
offering blocks under bidding rounds. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 12, Para No. 1.54) 
 
The Committee have observed  that a company with rig resources gets no 
extra weightage in awarding the blocks in deepwater and under the Technical 
Capability of Bid Evaluation Criteria for NELP -VIII and NELP -IX, maximum 2 
points are earmarked for drilling of deepwater exploratory wel ls during last 5 
years and is one of the seven Technical Capability parameters which assess the 
Technical Capability of the Operator for award of deepwater blocks. In view of 
the scarcity of rig resources particularly in deep water areas and its consequent  
impact on drilling operations of companies, the Committee would like the 
Government to include the availability of rig resources, owned or chartered, with 
a company during the past 5 years as an important criterion in awarding of blocks 
in accordance with the best practices followed in other Countries. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Prior to the launch of each round of New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) 
bidding, various terms and conditions for bidding  as well as PSC provisions are 
reviewed and fine tuned  in consultation with all stakeholders.   The criteria of 
availability of rig resources, as advised by the Committee, would also be 
examined and deliberated prior to firming up terms for future rounds of bidding. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 14, Para No. 1.79) 
 
The Committee note that ONGC has total of 88 rigs for onshore 
operations and 30 rigs for offshore operations.  Out of the 36 offshore rigs, 27 are 
charter hired 9 are owned by ONGC. OIL have 10 in house and 5 charter hire 
drilling rigs for its operation in North East and one rig in Rajasthan and most of 
these rigs are operating for more than 20 o 30 years. 
The Committee are given to understand that ONGC has plans to acquire 
10 onshore and 4 offshore jack up rigs to augment its rig resources while OIL has 
initiated action for purchase f 3 drilling rigs for its in house operations.  The 

 31 
 
Committee note that the amounts spent on hiring drilling rigs for offshore 
operation by ONGC in 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 were Rs. 3550.59 crores, 
Rs. 6,243.39 crores and Rs. 8,493.68 crores respectively.  While the charges 
spent on hiring of rigs for onshore operations for the said three years was Rs. 
54.25 crore, Rs. 69.84 crore and Rs. 100.69 c rores respectively.  On the other 
hand, the proposed purchase price of 6 rigs in onshore and 4 rigs in offshore by 
ONGC was estimated at Rs.795.72 crores and Rs. 3539 crore respectively. In 
this regard OIL has not indicated the amount spent on hiring of ri gs during the 
said three year period but indicated the budget estimate for 2 drilling rigs of 2000 
1 Hp capacity as Rs. 270 crores and for 1 drilling rig of 700 HP capacity as Rs. 
70 crores respectively. In view of the increasing participation of ONGC and OIL in 
various rounds of NELP and consequent need for increased drilling activity and 
also the frequent volatility of International oil market resulting in abnormal 
variation in charges for hired rigs, the Committee feel that it would be prudent for 
the National oil Companies (NOCs) participating in exploration of oil and gas to 
acquire as many rigs as possible as it would facilitate induction of new State of 
the art rigs, lessen the dependency on hired rigs and also enhance the hands on 
experience. The Com mittee, therefore, recommends that the NOCs should 
workout a perspective plan in this regard at the earliest to acquire self sufficiency 
of rig resources. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ONGC 
 
ONGC has plan of acquiring 10 land rigs (6 rigs for higher depth drill ing 
capability and 4 mobile rigs for shallow depth drilling) to replace aging drilling rigs 
as well to augment the existing fleet of 68 ONGC owned land drilling rigs.  In 
addition, construction of 4 Jack - up offshore rigs is also planned to maintain 
/augment existing 7 offshore jack -up rig fleet for meeting the exploration / 
development plan activities.   
 
OIL 
 
OIL has taken action for purchase of three Drilling Rigs as replacement for 
its three in-house rigs which have been written off from service.  In addition to the 
existing 5 (five) Charter hire (CH) drilling rigs in operation, OIL has taken action 
to hire another rig to maintain the fleet of 6 (six) CH rigs in the north east.  For 
NELP operation, OIL has initiated actions for hiring the services of two  drilling 
rigs for its KG -basin block. Actions are also on hand for hiring of drilling rig for 
Mizoram and Karbi Anglong blocks in Assam. Oil has a firm drilling plan on three 
year cycle and same is monitored closely to avoid any idle rig time. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 15, Para No. 1.80) 
 
The Committee note that idle rig months in respect of ONGC during the 
last three years i.e. 2007 -08 to 2009-10 for ONGC was 55 months, 72.4 mont hs 
and 94.3 months and amount lost consequently was Rs. 106 crores, Rs. 527 

 32 
 
crore and Rs. 478 crore respectively.  The reasons for such loss were waiting on 
weather/natural calamity, waiting on location/site which was mainly due to delay 
in land acquisitio n for the locations falling under ea garden.  In the case of OIL, 
loss was explained in terms of idle rig days for he said three years for three 
categories of reasons such as environmental suffering of locational preparatory 
work for environmental reasons and non availability of charter hire rigs.  The 
consequential financial loss was said to be Rs. 10.37 crore, Rs. 7.40 crore and 
Rs. 14.12 crore respectively for the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11.  The 
Committee are not convinced with the reasons such as waiting on locations/ 
ready site due to delay in land acquisition, bandhs etc. because they could be 
factored in advance in any plan for deployment of rigs for drilling operations. 
Advancing the same reasons year after year for idle rigs months/ days in dicate 
absence of any systematic planning for enforcement of corrective measures to 
minimize such losses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NOCs 
take suitable corrective steps for efficient deployment of rigs in order to arrest the 
increasing trend of idle rig months / days and consequent financial losses in the 
years ahead.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ONGC 
 
Drilling rigs deployment plan is prepared by each work center based on 
the firm drilling location availability/likely availability. Land acqu isition and 
subsequent preparation of approach road and civil works are taken up for all the 
planned locations for making the site ready for deployment of rigs. Generally, 
sufficient time window is kept for all the activities such as land acquisition and 
civil works, however, in some cases even after planning the locations well in 
time, the land acquisition process takes longer time than envisaged due to local 
and environmental factors which ultimately affect the availability of ready sites. In 
such situati ons, rig waits for deployment till completion of planned site or 
readiness of alternate drill -site. All out efforts are made to deploy the rigs for 
productive operations such as work over/ side tracking etc. to avoid 
waiting/idling.  
  
OIL 
 
OIL is followin g a long term perspective drilling plan and has set up regular 
monitoring system and up -gradation of the same based on the additional 
information, interpretation and analysis of acquired data. OIL is adopting the 
following steps to improve future drilling performance. 
a) Drilling of High displacement Directional wells to overcome problems of 
delay in land acquisition and waiting for locations to the extent 
possible. 
b) Continuation of horizontal well drilling to minimise land foot print on 
surface. 
c) Reinforcement of constant monitoring and reviewing system of rig -
deployment. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 

 33 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 17, Para No. 1.92) 
 
The Committee also note with serious concern that utilization of plan outlay by 
OVL during 2009-10 was very less in different projects acquired by the company.  
Against the revised estimates of Rs.6620.85 crore in 2010 -11, the actual 
utilization was only Rs.3259.70 crore up to 31.12.2010.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the various reasons cited by the OVL such as less utilization in 
new project, drilling of less number of wells against the plan in Russia and delay 
in clearance from Environmental Authority of Colombia etc. for under utilization.  
The Committee recommend s that Government /OVL should take all necessary 
steps to utilize the fund earmarked for the particular year and adopt prudent 
measures before finalization of plan outlay by taking into account all the possible 
factors so that funds earmarked for the purpose are fully utilized.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
    At present OVL is operating in 33 Projects in 14 countries, out of which 
11 Projects are directly operated by O VL and in which 10 Projects are 
exploratory in nature.  Most of the Plan Outlay (more than 80%) is spent in 
producing assets and there is only one producing asset operated by OVL i.e. 
Imperial Energy, Russia. Sometimes, the Operators change the work progra mme 
and defer it at the fag end of the year due to various reasons over which OVL 
has limited control. 
OVL Budget largely consists of the outlay on ongoing projects and a 
provision is made towards new acquisitions. There is fair degree of certainty 
about t he outlays on the existing projects but utilization of budget on new 
acquisitions depends on so many factors including geo -political environment, 
level of competition, strategic importance of the assets to competitors, country 
risk perception and cost of c apital etc. which are very unique to each investor 
and are equally difficult to predict. OVL acquired Imperial Energy and Carabobo 
1 Venezuela projects during the year 2009 and 2010.  However, OVL had been 
pursuing so may other opportunities during this  p eriod and at least one of them 
involving multi -billion Dollar investment was almost clinched  but fell through 
largely  because of geo political developments witnessed in Africa and Asia  
during the past few months. Similarly OVL had kept Budget provision in RE 
2010-11 towards acquiring 25% stake in Satpaev block in Kazakhstan. However, 
the agreements for the said Asset could be signed in only 2011 -12, so the 
utilization would get reflected in the year 2011 -12 against year 2010 -11 as 
originally envisaged. 
In view of the preceding, it may be seen that budget utilization gets 
smoothened when viewed over medium to longer time horizons and as such 
OVL‟s utilization over medium term may be considered a more representative 
figure of OVL achievements. It may be men tioned that against the plan provision 
of Rs.36276 crore for first four years of 11 th Five Year Plan, the funds utilised to 
the tune of Rs.31,276 crore. (86% of plan outlays). 
Budget utilization is periodically reviewed at highest level within the company,  
to ensure better projection of budgetary requirements and improved utilization 

 34 
 
through closer monitoring of the performance and improvement of 
communication and coordination with Operators. It is hoped to further improve 
the position of Budget utilization in OVL. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 18, Para No. 1.97) 
 
The Committee note that the PNGRB was set up by the Government on 
1.10.2007 under the provision of PNGRB Act, 2006 with powe rs to regulate inter 
alia refining, processing, transportation, marketing and sale of petroleum and 
petroleum products in the downstream oil and gas sector.  These powers of the 
Board don‟t extend to production of crude oil and natural gas.  The Committee 
note with concern that the Board has not become fully functional as it is still trying 
to overcome the difficulties in the way of its establishment and stabilization.  
According to the Board, the main difficulties being faced in this process are the 
delayed notification of Section 16 of the Act which enable it to grant authorization 
for transportation of pipelines and CGD networks.  The matter regarding 
notification of the Section is presently pending in the Supreme Court.  Another 
problem is of getting req uired manpower with appropriate background and 
experience since the Board has not been given any flexibility to decide the 
number and nature of the manpower and their compensation packages.  
Therefore, the Board could not fill up 12 officer level posts out  of the total 44 
posts sanctioned by the Government.  The third area of concern in the 
functioning of the PNGRB is about utilization of revenue generated by the Board 
by way of fee for grant of authorization for pipelines/CGD projects other charges 
etc.  T he Committee were informed that during the year 2008 -09,  2009 -10 and 
2010-11, the PNGRB has received about ` 11.85 crore, ` 2.47 crore and ` 6.0 
crore respectively towards application fee for grant of authorization etc.  The 
Board has requested the Govern ment to clarify whether it can utilize such 
revenue for its expenditure but there appears to be no confirmation on this point 
to the Board.  Meanwhile, the Board is meeting its requirement of funds from 
grant-in-aid received from the Government.  The Commi ttee cannot but come to 
the inescapable conclusion that the above facts presently affecting the 
functioning of PNGRB present a sorry state of affairs for a Board entrusted with 
very significant regulatory duties in the down stream oil and gas sector.  Besi des, 
the Government is also considering amendment to the PNGRB Act to take away 
its safety related functions as the Board is thought to be saddled with too many 
functions.  After giving careful consideration to all these aspects and the need for 
making the  Board fully functional without further loss of time, the Committee 
recommend that the Government in consultation with PNGRB and other stake 
holders should resolve all the aforesaid problems and also make necessary 
amendment to the PNGRB Act, 2006 wherever  required in a time bound manner 
to enable the Board to function  effectively as an Independent statutory regulator. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006, notified by 
the Government on 03.04.2006 provides for s etting up of a Petroleum and 

 35 
 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board.  The Act, inter -alia, provides for a legal 
framework for downstream gas sector regulation, as also for development of 
natural gas pipelines and city/local distribution network.   
 
The Act (except S ection 16) was brought into force w.e.f. 01.10.2007.    
Section 16 has also been brought into force w.e.f. 15.07.2010.  The Board is in 
place and is functional.   
 
Government sanctioned 44 posts including 4 posts of Advisors in PNGRB 
for smooth functioning  of the Board.  These posts and their pay scales were 
decided and requested to get them sanctioned by PNGRB.   
 
Under the provisions of the relevant Regulations of PNGRB Act 2006, the 
Board is empowered to levy fee and other charges at such rates and in re spect 
of such services as may be determined by Regulations. PNGRB has notified the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (Levy of Fee and other charges) 
Regulations, 2007 vide notifications dated 26.11.2007 and 07.06.2010.  During 
the year 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11, PNGRB received ` 11.85 crore,  ` 2.47 
crore and   `6.0 crore respectively towards application fee for grant of 
authorization for pipelines/City Gas Distribution projects, other charges, sale of 
tender documents etc.   As far as utilisati on of revenue generation is concerned, 
it is being examined in consultation with Ministry of Finance.   
 
The amendments  being processed under the Act concern relevant rules 
in respect of  Salaires, Allowances and other conditions of service of 
Chairperson,  Members and Secretary, Annual Report,  Payment of 
Compensation and Procedure for appointment of a person or Constitution of an 
Authority for conducting inquiry against Chairperson and Members.  These 
amendments have no relation to safety related functioning of  PNGRB. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 21, Para No. 1.117) 
 
The Committee observe that in order to ensure effective & efficient 
operation & control of gas pipelines and uninter rupted supply of natural gas, 
dedicated captive telecom network has been implemented for providing voice & 
real time data communication facilities at all manned & unmanned remote 
pipeline locations of GAIL and with technological advancement from time to ti me, 
Optical Fibre Cable network was built along pipelines. The Committee were given 
to understand that GAIL having the advantage of right of way (RoW) and 
significant optic fibre assets along gas pipelines, was identified as one of the 
utility public secto r companies as a potential infrastructure provider under the 
National Telecom Policy. The Committee further noted that GAIL has a reach of 
around 13027 km of OFC network along GAIL‟s reliable cross Country pipeline 
(5681 km) and state/national highway rout es (7346 km), connecting around 150 
town/cities. Additionally, implementation of new OFC network (totaling about 
5200 km) has been envisaged along upcoming cross -Country pipeline networks. 
The Committee note that for profitability and diversifying their bu siness, GAILTEL 

 36 
 
has started to lease out OFC infrastructure to various public/private telecom 
operators. However, the Committee noted that GAILTEL has leased out OGC 
infrastructure on short -term contracts to various customers so far sand no long 
term contr act was given to any company. The Committee strongly feel that 
GAILTEL should not be seen as a mere leasing out entity rather it should try to 
take up the task by its own and complete it. Even if GAILTEL is required to go for 
leasing out, it should always try to go for the long term contracts, rather than 
opting for the short ones as duration of the contract is also a criteria for offering 
discounts by telecom vendors. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The performance of GAILTEL business is being reviewed on regula r basis 
by the management. Based on the deliberations & discussions, the actions for 
way forward are being decided and implemented. In the recent past GAILTEL 
has inked a couple of long term (10 -15 years) infrastructure lease agreements 
with different telecom operators. 
The Primary responsibility of GAILTEL is to provide reliable & adequate telecom 
facilities for real-time applications related to SCADA, ERP, office communications 
across GAIL‟s pipeline & plant locations (102 manned & 280 unmanned 
locations). Further, utilizing GAIL‟s telecom assets and manpower, GAILTEL is 
putting its best efforts for increasing the business, having focus on long term 
leasing of bandwidth & infrastructure. With the ongoing efforts, once the telecom 
business becomes self sustainable, the segregation of GAILTEL as a standalone 
subsidiary will be evaluated for consideration. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No 22, Para No. 1.118 
 
The Committee also feel that the r evenue earned by GAILTEL during the 
last five years is not more than Rs. 28.60 crore and even the target set for 
financial year 2011 -12 i.e. Rs. 8.25 crore is not very encouraging. The 
Committee are given to understand that the revenue generation form GAIL TEL 
business has gone done due to intense competition as other companies have 
kept the rate below the rates approved by TRAI. The Committee also note that all 
the service providers are now creating their own infrastructure laying their own 
optical fibre ca ble. With the 3G licenses coming up GAIL hope that demand of 
optical fibre cable will increase as they need larger bandwidths with 
corresponding increase in revenue in future. Therefore, the Committee desires 
that since GAIL has entered into telecom busine ss as infrastructure provider (IP -
II) license, it should try to establish GAILTEL as a standalone subsidiary and 
enter into the telecom business with the advantage of Right of Way and 
significant optic fibers as an independent telecom operator. It would be  not only 
competitive from market point of view but also increase revenue from its telecom 
business. 
 
 
 

 37 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The performance of GAILTEL business is being reviewed on regular basis 
by the management. Based on the deliberations & discussi ons, the actions for 
way forward are being decided and implemented. In the recent past GAILTEL 
has inked a couple of long term (10 -15 years) infrastructure lease agreements 
with different telecom operators. 
The Primary responsibility of GAILTEL is to provi de reliable & adequate telecom 
facilities for real-time applications related to SCADA, ERP, office communications 
across GAIL‟s pipeline & plant locations (102 manned & 280 unmanned 
locations). Further, utilizing the GAIL‟s telecom assets and manpower, GAI LTEL 
is putting its best efforts for increasing the business, having focus on long term 
leasing of bandwidth & infrastructure. With the ongoing efforts, once the telecom 
business becomes self sustainable, the segregation of GAILTEL as a standalone 
subsidiary will be evaluated for consideration. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 24, Para No. 1.130) 
 
The Committee further observe that out of 33 blocks, Government has not 
yet issued Petroleum  Exploration License (PEL) in 9 blocks viz RM(E) -CBM-
2008/IV, ST -CBM-2008/IV, SP(NE) -CBM-2008/IV blocks, KG -CBM-2005/III 
operated by Geo Petrol, GV(N) -CBM-2005/III owned by coal gas in Jharkhand , 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh respectivel y. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and DGH 
should take proactive steps in consultation with State Governments concerned to 
ensure issue of Petroleum exploration Licenses expeditiously. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
For onland blocks, the final PEL is to be issued by the State Governments 
only.   The recommendations for issuing of Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) 
for CBM blocks have already been sent by the Union Government to the 
respective State Governments. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
 

 38 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
 

 39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
 BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 2, Para No.1.15) 
 
The Committee note that a token provision of ` 1.00 crore each was 
provided in the Budget of 2010 -11 and 2011-12 for the proposed plan scheme of 
providing free LPG connections to all eligible BPL families.  While the details and 
modalities of the scheme are still under consideration of the Government, it is 
expected t o release 35 lakh LPG connection to BPL families every year.  The 
Ministry have informed the Committee that for the time being, the proposed 
scheme will be for one year (i.e. remaining year of the XI Five Year Plan Period) 
and its further extension for the  XII plan period will be considered at appropriate 
state.  Considering the importance of the scheme, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to earnestly pursue with Government for early clearance of the 
scheme so that it is implemented at the earliest in the  current year.  The 
Committee further desire the scheme be extended for the next Five Year Plan till 
all eligible BPL families are covered under the scheme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) scheme has since been 
approved. It has been decided to utilize 20% of CSR funds of six major Oil PSUs  
namely Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC), Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (BPCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) ,  GAIL (India) Limited and Oil India 
Limited (OIL) for extending one time financial assistance of `1400 to cover the 
security deposit for one LPG cylinder and one Pressure Regulator to Below 
Poverty Line (BPL) families for acquiring a new LPG connection.   
 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) considered  
MoP&NG‟s proposal in the matter on 01.12.2010.  The CCEA directed that the 
scheme may be re-examined keeping in view the feasibility of its implementation 
and the financial cost thereof, in th e medium and long term.  Accordingly, the 
Scheme is under re -examination and the proposal is being finalized in light of 
comments received through Inter-Ministerial consultation, as directed by CCEA. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter-I) 
 

 40 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 6, Para No.1.29) 
 
The Committee further note the significant shortfall in achievement of 
production target of gas by private/joint venture companies due to less number of 
producer wells drilled in D1 and D3 fields in KG D6 block in East coast against 
the approved field development plan resulting in less production. The Committee 
views it with serious concern and feels that DGH has not effectively mon itored 
and took timely corrective action to ensure that approved targets are adhered to 
by the private companies. The Committee, therefore, desire DGH to be more 
proactive in monitoring implementation of various targets by private companies. 
The Committee would also like to know the penalty imposed on these companies 
for their failure to achieve the approved drilling targets. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, Operating Committee 
(OC) approved Annual Production Tar gets are being reviewed technically by 
DGH and subsequently being deliberated, reviewed and approved in 
Management Committee Meetings.   Further, Production Performances are being 
monitored through review of daily, monthly production  reports, conducting 
Technical Committee Meetings etc., wherein planned versus  actual  production 
status are discussed and remedial actions required, if any, are advised to the 
operator. 
 
There are no specific penalty stipulations in Production Sharing Contract (PSC) 
in case o f shortfall in achieving the production targets envisaged in either the 
approved Field Development Plan (FDP) or Annual Work Programme and 
Budget, except termination of the Contract. However, as a matter of project 
economics, operators will be interested i n early realization of the investments 
made on development of oil and gas discoveries.  
 
 DGH has taken actions in case of D1 & D3 fields of KG -DWN-98/3 (KG -D6) 
block by asking the Operator to expeditiously drill wells in line  with approved 
Field Development Plan (FDP) during the year 2011-12, which may help to revive 
the falling gas production from these fields. The issue has been deliberated at 
depth in various Technical Committee Meetings (TCM) and Management 
Committee Meetings (MCM). Further, well -wise performance analysis was also 
carried out by DGH to ascertain the reasons of decline in gas production from 
existing wells. The Operator has been asked to expeditiously drill, complete and 
connect required number of wells during 2011 -12 in line with appro ved FDP to 
ensure that 31 producer wells are put on stream by April, 2012 as envisaged in 
the approved FDP and the FDP approved gas production rate of 80 MMSCMD is 
achieved. The Operator has since drilled 4 more development wells in D1 & D3 
fields, which are yet to be completed and connected. These wells are in addition 
to the existing 18 producers (currently 15 on production and 3 shut -in due to 
water ingress/other problems) in these fields. The results of these newly drilled 
wells are being currently analyzed by the Operator. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 

 41 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 8, Para No. 1.37) 
 
The Committee is concerned to note the unsatisfact ory performance of 
public/private companies in respect of Minimum Work Programme (MWP) and 
consistent delay in achieving drilling targets in 3D Acquisition, Processing and 
Interpretation. The yearly review of exploration activities of ONGC and OIL by 
DGH shows that there has been significant shortfall during last 5 years (2006 -11) 
in achieving MWP by both ONGC and OIL. The Committee notes the major 
reason for the shortfall was due to delay in drilling programme in various blocks 
owned by ONGC&OIL. The Commi ttee observes that although DGH, a technical 
arm of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas have a strong monitoring 
mechanism involving relevant flow of information including periodical progress 
reports concerning fiscal, operational and related matters  and carries out 
inspections and also holds review meetings with the Contractors and 
management from time to time, the upstream companies have failed to achieve 
MWP during the last 5 years. While expressing their displeasure, the Committee 
desires that Government/DGH should take necessary steps to ensure that these 
upstream companies expedite their exploration work and make sincere efforts 
towards at least completing the Minimum Work Programme assigned to them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The provisions of th e Production Sharing Contract (PSC) signed under NELP, 
adequately provide for strict implementation of the terms and conditions of the 
contract. The performance of Exploration & Production activities are monitored 
as per the provisions of the PSC. 
 
 In so far as the exploration blocks operated by NOCs/Private Companies 
are concerned, under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) regime, 
Government/DGH monitor and periodically reviews the progress of various 
exploration activities through the Management Commit tee (MC). If Contractor 
fails to complete the committed MWP within the stipulated time, they are required 
to pay the cost of unfinished work programme as per the relevant PSC provisions 
and the prevailing Policy Guidelines in this regard. There is also a p rovision of 
availing extensions of the exploration phases as per Extension Policy formulated 
by Government after the payment of Liquidated Damages (LD) to complete the 
MWP as per PSC provisions. 
 In case of Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PELs) for nominat ion areas 
under ONGC and OIL, half yearly review for all the areas are carried out by DGH, 
wherein,  the  performance on annual work programme for seismic data, drilling 
of exploratory wells and conversion / relinquishment of PEL areas, are also 
reviewed.   
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 

 42 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 9, Para No. 1.42) 
 
The Committee observes that during 2009 -10 against the Budget 
Estimates of Rs.2375.35 crore, the actual expenditure by OIL was Rs.1556.86 
crore.  Further, the actual expenditure by OIL during 2010 -11 was only Rs. 
1241.17 crore up to December, 2010 against the Budget Estimates of Rs. 
4464.98 crore and the revised Estimates of Rs.4212.98 crore which comes to 
27.8% utilization during the first three quarters.  The reasons for downward 
revision of Plan outlays in 2010 -11 by OIL have been attributed to deferment of 
2D seismic survey in Rajasthan on account of prioritization of area for 3D seismic 
survey and prolonged rainy season and also due to cyclonic storming KG on-land 
block.  Revision in drilling targets due to non -availability of chartered rigs, land 
acquisition problem, delayed movement of projects, and capital investments 
therein, etc.  The Committee fail to understand as to why the reasons now cited 
by the Government could not be foreseen at Revised Estimate stage.  The huge 
mismatch between the plan outlay and utilization by OIL during 2010 -11, points 
towards systematic flaws in the planning and execution of work.  The Committee 
also note from the outcome Budget document of Ministry that their Monitoring 
Cell independently monitors major projects being implemented by oil PSUs, 
covering all aspects from process design/ basic  engineering right up to 
completion stage.  It generates a monthly report which brings out the current 
status of implementation of various projects along with the reasons for delay, if 
any.  Critical areas which can impact the progress are also analysed.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that despite the strict monitoring by the 
Ministry there has been large under utilization of funds.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government/DGH strengthen their monitoring 
mechanism to make it more eff ective and take all necessary steps to ensure the 
Budget estimates of Rs.3180 crore for the year 2011 -12 are fully utilized to 
achieve the set targets. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
During the year 2009 -10, 150 GLKM of 2D survey in Karbi -Anglong could not be 
completed due to difficult logistics and poor law & order situation.  615 GLKM of 
2D survey in Sadiya could not be completed as Seismic Contractor, M/s GT, 
Poland declared Force Majeure due to insurgency problem.   
 In Assam there was acute land acquisition  problem, repeated 
environmental problem, down -hole problems, prolonged production testing of a 
few wells etc, extended drilling operation in a few deep exploratory wells etc., 
consumed more time than the planned, resulting the shortfall in Drilling target s. 
Drilling target could not be achieved due to unforeseen deep drilling (sub -
surface) complication in several locations and prolonged production testing.  
 The target of Natural Gas Production and Sale could not be achieved due 
to prolonged & unplanned sh ut-down of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Namrup in Assam, less withdrawal of gas by 
Lakwa Thermal Power Station (LTPS), Indian Oil Corporation - Assam Oil 

 43 
 
Division (IOC-AOD), Assam Petrochemicals Limited (APL) and Less withdrawa l 
by Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited (RRUVNL) during the year 
2009-10. 
  During the year 2010 -11, in view of relinquishment of three NELP Blocks 
in Rajasthan and consequential delay in finalization of the contract for both 2D 
(560 GLKM) and 3D  (1000 SQKM) could not be pursued. In KG Basin, delay in 
obtaining EC Clearance had left little dry weather window for pre monsoon work.  
Therefore prolonged monsoon caused delay in pursuing survey work in marshy 
and forest land. As a result planned target of 250 GLKM could not be met.   
 In order to supplement in -house drilling resources, 6 nos. charter hire 
drilling rigs were planned for deployment in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh 
throughout the year 2009 -10, whereas 5 charter hire drilling rigs were availa ble 
up to 4 th Qtr. 2009-10 due to reasons beyond the control of the Company.  Thus 
the planned drilling programme could not be fulfilled during the quarter.  Surface 
and sub -surface problems like unprecedented rain caused flood in low lying 
areas, non avai lability of quarry material for plinth preparation, difficulties in 
movement of heavy oilfield vehicles coupled frequent bandh and blockades has 
disrupted the planned target of drilling.  OIL could achieve only 120,800 meter 
against the target of 225450 meter.   
 NRL failed to uplift gas during the year 2010 -11 as planned.  The 
necessary infrastructure required for the same was ready by a third party namely 
M/s Assam Gas Corporation Ltd. (AGCL) only in March, 2011 and gas supply 
was commenced w.e.f. 15.3.20 11. Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam 
Limited (RRUVNL) was defaulted in uplifting the committed quantity of gas of 278 
Million Standard Cubic Metres Per Day (MMSCMD) during the July and August 
2010-11. As a result actual withdrawal was 151 MMSCMD only, the shortfall 
being about 127 MMSCMD.   
 OIL made aggressive efforts for acquisition of an overseas 
exploration/discovered/producing acreages in order to realize early gains in 
equity oil and gas for the country. Accordingly, the company scouted and 
evaluated a number of discovered/producing properties during 2010 -11 and 
pursued acquisition of some prospective assets.  However, OIL faced difficulty in 
acquiring potential overseas assets due to aggressive competition and high 
premium on discovered and produc ing properties due to increase in international 
crude oil prices.  Additionally, increased risks were perceived due to regional 
political conflicts and economic downturns in middle -east and African countries 
by the end quarter of the year.  Despite best ef forts of OIL, certain Merger and 
Acquisition/asset farm-in opportunities could not be materialized due to rejection 
of OIL‟s offer by the seller.  Since the situation was beyond the control of the 
company, the projected outlay of Rs.2000 Crores earmarked f or overseas 
acquisition at the time of finalization of Annual Plan 2010 -11 could not be spent 
for the aforesaid reason.   
As regards monitoring, OIL regularly monitors the physical and financial progress 
of Plan. In the 3 rd week of every month OIL reviews through Video Conferencing 
with field headquarters, Assam where the major cost centers are located and 
decides remedial action for future.  
DGH is regularly reviewing the work programme and progress of exploration 
activities of Petroleum Exploration Licens es (PEL) held by OIL awarded on 
nomination basis, on a half yearly basis vis -à-vis committed work programme. 
Presently, there are 11 active nomination PELs operated by OIL. Technical 

 44 
 
meetings are taken by DGH regularly to analysis the exploration activitie s of the 
nomination PELs, based on the data provided by OIL, and discuss ways to 
resolve various technical issues. In case of non fulfillment of committed work 
programme, appropriate actions are taken in line with the provisions laid down in 
PSCs.  
 Technical Committee Meetings (TCM) are also held, as and when 
required, to deliberate on technical issues related to the activities being 
undertaken in the respective blocks. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 13, Para No. 1.78) 
 
The Committee note that in view of global shortage of drilling rigs and 
associated services, the Government announced a drilling moratorium of 3 years 
starting from 01.01.2008 to 31.12.2010 for 30 deep water blocks under the 
Production Sharing Contracts (PSC) regime signed up to NELP -V where drilling 
commitments (except for development drilling) were existing. Out of the 30 
blocks for which moratorium was grante d, 16 blocks belonged to ONGC, 13 to 
RIL and 1 to ENI. The Committee note with dismay that even after expiry of the 
rig moratorium policy on 31.12.2010, the ONGC has completed drilling 
commitment only in 6 blocks out of the 16 blocks and sought extension o f time 
for 9 blocks. In the remaining 1 block the ONGC could not complete 5 appraisal 
wells and requested the Ministry/ DGH that the number of appraisal wells should 
be 1 instead of 6. The position in the case of RIL is equally dismal as it could 
complete drilling commitment only in 6 blocks out of 13 blocks and sought 
extension for 6 blocks. In the remaining block, RIL could not complete 1 appraisal 
well and represented to the Government that appraisal wells should be 1 instead 
of 2 as provided in the mora torium policy. Without going into the technicalities of 
the rig holiday policy and extension policy, the Committee feels that companies 
which enter into PSC for exploration activities should plan the requirement of rigs 
and their availability in advance in stead of explaining such problems in terms of 
demand and supply for rigs due to volatility of international oil market.  It is a fact 
that international oil market is subject to frequent volatility due to increasing gap 
between demand and supply besides ot her unforeseen circumstances leading to 
disruption. The companies which are required to complete minimum work 
programme under PSC should be made to comply with the set parameters in a 
timely manner instead of granting rig holiday or extensions on one groun d or 
other. The role of the Government and DGH acquire great significance in this 
area. The Committee feel that policy of exploration should not allow the 
companies to drag on the exploration commitments unless there are exceptional 
and justified circumstances. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to 
make an in-depth analysis of the policy framework in this regard to prevent such 
delays in order to achieve the objectives of NELP. 
 
 

 45 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Production Sharing Contracts have provisi ons for payment of cost of 
minimum committed work programme(MWP) by the contractors. The extensions 
are granted only on justified and exceptional situations such as – Rig moratorium 
for non availability of deepwater drilling rigs, excusable delays for dela y in getting 
Statutory Clearances, Force Majeures, etc. In order to have uniform treatment to 
all operators, an extension Policy has been framed by the Government. There 
are provisions for granting extensions on payment of liquidated damages as per 
the Policy and Contractors are panelized for delays in completing the committed 
exploration MWP. 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 23 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 16, Para No. 1.91) 
 
The Committee appreciate the progress made by the ONGC Videsh 
Limited (OVL) from a meager production of just 0.253 Million Metric Tonne oil 
equivalent (MMTOE) in 2002 -03, as OVL has come a long way and registered 
the highest ever producti on of 8.870 MMTOE oil and oil equivalent gas in 2009 -
10.  The Committee find that C&AG in its report on purchase of Imperial Energy 
Corporation, Russia by OVL has revealed that all the wells drilled by OVL to 
produce oil are turning out to be dry and the c ompany has reported to be running 
up a huge loss of Rs. 1182 crores due o unrealistic estimation of oil reserves.  
The Committee have noted that with reference to C&AG observation OVL has 
indicated that conclusion drawn by C&AG regarding OVL not being succ essful as 
an operator is not based on facts as 23 projects are still under exploration and 
exploration effort is 42% against the world wide average of about 36%.  The 
Government have also stated that the exploration expenditure involves risk 
capital and cost of dry wells should not be considered as unfruitful expenditure as 
it proves or disproves the existence of hydrocarbons, therefore, expenditure 
incurred in survey and dry holes are investments for future.  The Committee 
strongly feel that not only estim ation of oil reserves was properly done but even 
the production potential and profile were not analysed which requires to be 
investigated. The committee desire that all those blocks owned by the OVL 
should be analyzed with latest technologies so that the p roduction potential of 
these hydrocarbon reserves can be assessed properly and investment made in 
these blocks will not go in vain. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
OVL, as a standard practice, carries out in -house/ independent assessment of 
potential of the oppo rtunity. Even when the seller provides its estimates, these 
are evaluated / revalidated by OVL either through in -house team and/or through 
independent technical experts before taking the decision on the acquisition of the 
asset/block.  

 46 
 
 
OVL has deployed la test technologies such as multistage fracturing in long 
horizontal holes, in one or more layers in the tight formations, multilateral well in 
one of the field etc. for obtaining optimum production level. Efforts are continuing 
to identify sweet spots throu gh seismic attribute analysis for placement of the 
wells. 
 
OVL has noted the recommendations of Standing Committee and affirms that 
multi layer and more stringent evaluation procedure would be continuously 
followed. 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 20, Para No. 1.106) 
 
The Committee observe that the findings of the audit and inspection 
conducted by OISD indicate non -compliance of safety norms by oil installations 
which are of common nature and not specific to any oil company. In respect of 
refineries and gas processing plants, the deficiencies are related to lay out, fire 
fighting facilities and a few process hardware not conformi ng to norms in case of 
Oil Refineries, incomplete updation of Standard Operating Procedures, non -
compliance of Risk Mitigation Measures as identified in the risk analysis. As 
regards the pipelines network, the Committee note that non -compliance was 
limited to a few Statutory Norms, standards/guidelines prescribed by OISD in 
case of old pipelines mainly in the areas of intelligent pigging, coating survey, 
work permit system etc., Incomplete updation of Standard Operating Procedures 
are generally found at oil  installation which are not complied by the companies. 
The Committee also note with concern that there are deficiencies in maintenance 
and operation of fire -fighting system at marketing installations and onshore and 
offshore (exploration and production) we lls of ONGC and OIL.In view of the 
recent accident which have taken place at Oil Installation like Jaipur and Mumbai, 
the committee recommend that Government should take necessary steps to 
strictly deal with non -compliance of safety norms by oil companies by fixing 
responsibility on service officers for all acts of omission and commission. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Reports containing observations and recommendations of various periodic Safety 
Audits and inspection carried out by OISD for  the oil installati ons are forwarded 
to Chairmen / Managing Director of the Oil companies for compliance. These 
recommendations of periodic Safety Audits and inspection carried out in OISD 
are complied by the industry in a time bound manner on priority.  OISD also 
monitors implementations of these recommendations and follows up with industry 
closely. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 

 47 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 29 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 23, Para No. 1.129) 
 
The Committee observes that so far CBM reserves of about 8.92 trillion 
cubic feet has been established in 5 CBM blocks and according to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, the likely time requirement for full development to 
reach peak produc tion level is generally 5 to 6 years from the start of 
development activities. The Committee, however, noted with concern that while 
16 blocks were awarded to different companies by the end of 2 nd round of CBM 
held in 2004, the commercial production of CBM  has started only from one block 
i.e. Raniganj (South) in West Bengal operated by M/s GEECL in July 2007 and 
there is no additional production from any block during the last 4 year. The 
Committee further observes that cumulative production of CBM gas in 20 10-11 
was 36.19 MMSCM from April 2010 to February 2011, which is very insignificant 
in comparison to established reserves. The Committee are dismayed to not that 
even the minimum work programme for blocks like Raniganj East (West Bengal) 
entrusted to Essar  Oil in 2002 is not completed. Similarly, Sohagpur 
(Chattisgarh), SP(E)CBM-2001 and SP(W) CBM -2001 are still at developmental 
stage even after total expenditure of Rs. 177.83 Crore with committed investment 
of Rs. 55.80 crore. The Committee also view with serious concern that as 
regards BK -CBM-2001/1 (Bokaro) awarded to ONGC in 2002, against the 
committed investment  of Rs. 65.70 crore, the actual are Rs. 43.02 crore and the 
field development plan of the block is still under examination by DGH. The 
Committee further observes that ONGC has incurred a cumulative investment of 
Rs.591.27 crore in 9 CBM blocks awarded to it and only one block i.e. Jharia had 
witnessed incidental test production since 2002. While expressing their 
dissatisfaction over the very low CBM production in the country since the 
awarding   of blocks in 2001, the Committee cannot but deplore the way the 
Government/DGH is monitoring the exploitation of CBM reserves in the Country. 
The Committee desires that Government/Oil PSUs to make an in -depth analysis 
of the reasons for scanty production from these reservoirs and take concrete and 
corrective action including application and import of new advanced exploration 
technologies and technical knowhow, if necessary. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Currently, Raniganj South block in the state of West Bengal is on commercial 
production and other 4 blocks are at advance stages for production. By the end 
of 12th plan period, CBM production is projected at 4 MMSCMD in 2016 -17 from 
the present level of about 0.23 MMSCMD in October 2011.  
 
The operators have imported the equipment and hired the consultancy of foreign 
CBM experts on the need basis.   Government has not put any restriction on 
import of new technology for CBM operations in the country. 
 
 

 48 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 32 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 25, Para No. 1.138) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that there are huge prospects of 
reservoirs of gas hydrate in the Country and the total prognosticated gas 
resource from the gas hydrates is placed at 1894 TCM. The Committee notes 
that Government of India formulated a National Gas Hydrate Programme 
(NGHP) in 1997 for exploration and development of gas hydrates resources of 
the Country. The Committee further note that reconnaissance surveys which 
were carried out by DGH in the East Coast and Andaman Deepwater areas in 
1997 deciphered the most promising areas for gas Hydrates and after 
establishing th e presence of gas hydrate in the KG, Mahanadi & Andaman 
offshore deepwater areas of the Indian offshore and seeing the commercial 
nature of interest in the exploration & exploitation of Methane from Gas hydrates, 
the NGHP has adopted a strategy to concentr ate on the KG deep water area of 
the Indian Offshore and to emphasize in the R&D of development of technology 
for the commercial exploitation of methane from gas hydrate. The Gas Hydrate 
have huge energy resource of gas i.e. one cubic metre of gas hydrates  contains 
164 cubic meter of methane.    
 
In view of above, the Committee feels that Gas Hydrates as an alternate energy 
resource has great potential and research and development programme in this 
area should be intensified. Accordingly, the Committee unde rstands that from 
1997 to 2001, Government has already made an expenditure of about Rs. 
212.94 Crores on delineation and resource estimation studies for the Gas 
hydrates. The Committee feel that there should have been a road map or time 
bound plan to at le ast evaluate gas hydrates both for its quantum and technical 
recovery in commercial quantity before going in for commercial production. The 
Committee desires that Government should complete the technical evaluation 
and make efforts to bring required techno logies to extract methane from gas 
hydrates through collaboration with advance Countries like USA & Japan who 
are also into these research areas in time bound manner and investment should 
also be made on evolving or bringing required technologies to extrac t methane 
from gas hydrates reservoirs already identified in the Country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The production of methane gas from gas hydrate is at R&D stage world over.  
Even USA and Japan are not able to produce methane gas from gas hydrate on 
commercial scale. The national gas hydrate programme in the country is 
progressing in collaboration with foreign scientist and laboratories engaged in 
gas hydrate programme.  DGH has already collaborated with the expert agencies 

 49 
 
like USGS, USDOE & USMMS (USA), SUGAR (IFM -GEOMAR, Germany) & 
JOGMEC (Japan).      
 
Currently, the Resource assessment of gas hydrates in the KG and Mahanadi 
basins deep water areas by National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) and 
NIO (National Institute of Oceanography) are ongoing .  The major challenge in 
gas hydrate programme is to develop technologies for production of methane 
from gas hydrate. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 26, Para No. 1.145) 
 
The Committee  has observed that currently shale gas is being 
commercially produced in USA constituting about 17% of total gas production of 
US and Canada and a few European countries have taken up Shale gas 
resource assessment/exploration activities. The Committee note s that the 
Government has initiated the process of Shale gas resource assessment and 
identification of prospective area for Shale gas exploration /exploitation such as 
drilling of horizontal wells, multi -stage hydro fracturing etc are available in the 
Country. The committee appreciates the fact that Government is making efforts 
to identify prospective reserves of shale gas in the Country and as part of the 
R&D Project ONGC has drilled a shale gas well in Ichapur area in Raniganj  
North CBM blocks in West Be ngal. In view of this development, the Committee 
desires that the Government should make all out efforts to develop this native 
source of alternate fuel and the areas or concern related to production of shale 
gas, i.e. environment impact of production of s hale gas and need of huge 
quantity of water for fractionation of rocks should be addressed at the earliest so 
that after making huge investments in term of money and efforts in the project 
would not go in vain due to these problems. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Current status of Shale Gas activities in India are as under: 
 
1. As per MOU between MOPNG & DOS, USA, resources assessment study 
is in progress. Two technical meetings have been held in January 2011 & 
May 2011 and third meeting is being planned in Septemb er 2011 wherein 
results of the studies will be deliberated. 
 
2. Integration and identification of prospective area in Damodar valley is 
under progress by CMPDI. 
 
3. Discussion on Shale Gas Policy is under way between MoPNG & DGH 
and views from ONGC, OIL & GAIL has also been taken. 
 
4. DGH is in discussion with ONGC for analysis of data for identification of 
prospective area for 11 sedimentary basins for which processing of 
required approvals is underway. 

 50 
 
 
5. DGH has collaborated in arranging a Conference/Workshop on 
Technology & Regulatory issues related to Shale Gas.  
 
The MOPNG in consultation with MOEF and other agencies would decide on the 
best practices which can mitigate possible environmental issues like water 
management treatment and ensure water availability fo r usage in Shale gas 
exploitation. The environmental regulations for shale gas field development and 
production would be put in place in consultation with MOE&F. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 27, Para No. 1.150) 
 
The Committee note that ONGC has signed an Agreement of 
collaboration (AOC) with Skochinsky Institute of Mining, Russia on 25 th 
November 2004 for underground coal gasification which is valid till 24h 
November, 2011 and also si gned MOUs with major coal/lignite companies of 
India viz. Coal India Ld. (CIL), Nayveli Lignie Corporation Ltd. (NLC), Gujara 
Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (GMDC), Gujarat Industries Power 
Company Ltd. (GIPCL) etc. for Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) projects.  
The Committee understand that the project implementation envisages different 
stages from site selection to construction of UCG pilot o complete he project.  In 
regard to statutory clearance the Committee are surprised to note that application 
for Mining lease which was filed by GIPCL (Gujarat Industries Power Company 
Limited) on November 16, 2006 to Ministry of Coal is still pending even after 4 1/2  
years and environmental clearance from the Ministry of Environment and Forest 
has been obtained only in the month of February, 2010. The   Committee express 
their grave concern over poor implementation of the UCG projects and 
recommended that Government should fix a realistic time schedule for every 
stage of the UCG projects and monitor them regul arly to prevent delays and 
consequent cost overrun in implementation of such important projects as UCG. 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action plans chalked out by 
the Government/NOC in this regard to put the pending UCG project on the fast 
track to achieve the projected targets. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC has signed an Agreement of Collaboration (AOC) with Skochinsky 
Institute of Mining, Russia on 25 th November, 2004 for implementation of 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) project in India. Vastan Mine block in 
Surat district, Gujarat has been selected for UCG Pilot project.  The 
Environmental clearance from Ministry of Environment & Forest has been 
obtained by ONGC.  However, ONGC is awaiting the mining lease. L and 
acquisition process is in progress.   
 
 A number of sites were jointly identified by ONGC & Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation (NLC) for studying their suitability to UCG. These are Tadkeshwar in 
Gujarat and Hodu - Sindhari & East Kurla in Rajasthan. One more site was jointly 

 51 
 
identified by ONGC & Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation (GMDC) viz. 
Surkha in Bhavnagar Distt. , Gujarat. The data of all the fields have already been 
analysed for evaluating the suitability of these sites for UCG and all the sites 
have been found suitable for UCG.  The projects will be taken up on the basis of 
learning curve from Vastan project. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 28, Para No. 1.156) 
 
The Committee note that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has set up a 
Hydrogen Corpus Find (HCF) in 2004 for promoting hydrogen as transport 
fuel to accelerate the development and utilization of hydrogen energy. 
However not much headway has been made in production, storage and 
distribution of hydrogen except setting up of a dispensing station in New Delhi 
by IOC R&D in collaboration with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and 
the demonstration project on use of Hydrogen CNG blends in Automotive 
vehicles after 7 years of initiation of the project. The Committee express their 
unhappiness that even after lapse of 8 years, no tangible progress has been 
made and, therefore, recommend that the Government should chalk out a 
plan to ensure that all the identified R&D projects are initiated and com pleted 
in a given time frame. 
 
The Committee strongly urge the Government to make sincere efforts to bring 
the technology already developed in the world and further R&D activities 
should only be restricted to the trial of these technologies. Although the 
Government have stated that commercial utilization of Hydrogen and HCNG 
will depend upon the cost economics of hydrogen production, the Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the likely cost of production of hydrogen and 
at the same time desire that de velopment of large scale photocatalystic 
processing modular reactors for Hydrogen production which are under 
progress by IOC R&D centre and Banaras Hindu University should be 
expedited at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Planning Commission initiated  Hydrogen Energy programme in 2003 to 
suggest policy initiatives, fiscal / regulatory and other measures for promotion 
of hydrogen as clean fuel with an aim to assist in developing specific projects 
with public-private partnership. Accordingly, National Hy drogen Energy Board 
(NHEB) under the Ministry of Non -conventional Energy Sources (MNES) with 
the involvement of TATA, Mahindra & Mahindra and Indian Oil Corporation, 
academia and research institutions with Secretary P&NG and Chairman, IOC 
as members, was set up. 
  Steering Committee constituted by NHEB prepared a National Hydrogen 
Energy Roadmap for 2020 for the country and the same was approved by the 
NHEB. As per the road map, one million vehicles on Hydrogen will be plying 
on Indian road by 2020 besides generation of 1000 MW electricity through 
hydrogen fuel cell.In the light of the ongoing quest for use of clean energy and 

 52 
 
heightened interest taking place across the world on the use of hydrogen as 
future clean energy, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MOP&NG), 
Government of India created a Hydrogen Corpus Fund of Rs.100 crore in 
2004 to facility the oil industry to work synergistically and in continuous 
coordination with reputed technology institutions to make headway in this 
frontier area. The bre ak-up of contribution to the HCF was Rs.16 crore each 
by IOC, ONGC and GAIL, Rs. 6 crore each by BPCL and HPCL and Rs.40 
crore by OIDB. 
2.0 Prior to the formulation of new guidelines in June, 2009, the overall co -
ordination of HCF was entrusted with IOC (R &D). While the HCF was 
managed by OIDB, two bodies  were created, viz. a Technical Committee and 
the Steering Committee for reviewing and approving the R&D projects for 
funding under HCF. The Technical Committee comprised all the contributors 
to the fund a s members. IOC (R&D) was the nodal body for receiving the 
project proposals for funding and through the Technical Committee identify 
the projects to be taken up. The recommendations of the Technical 
Committee was put up to the Steering Committee for approval.  
3.0 In June, 2009, new guidelines were formulated by MOP&NG for projects 
to be taken up under HCF. Under this new guidelines, the existing Scientific 
Advisory Committee (SAC) on Hydrocarbons of MOP&NG will function as the 
Technical Committee. The procedure under the new guidelines is as under : 
 Centre for High Technology (CHT), under MOP&NG,  being the nodal 
agency, will receive and scrutinise all project proposals and put the same for 
review/approval by SAC. SAC will consider and recommend the proposa ls to 
the Steering Committee. 
 CHT will obtain financial concurrence from OIDB for projects 
recommended by SAC. 
 Proposals recommended by SAC and concurred by OIDB will be put up to 
the Steering Committee for approval. 
 After approval by Steering Committee, C HT will sign MOU with the 
proposing company and OIDB shall disburse funds as per sanction issued by 
CHT. 
 Steering Committee, under the Chairmanship of Secretary (P&NG), will 
review the progress of all on -going projects and other related activities from 
time to time. 
4.0 Since the formulation of new guidelines, Hydrogen project proposals have 
been received from ONGC, HPCL, BPCL and GAIL also in addition to the two 
projects of IOC which were taken up under the old HCF guidelines. So far, 7 
new projects relate d to production and storage of hydrogen have been 

 53 
 
approved for taking up under HCF since the formulation of new guidelines in 
June, 2009. The status of these projects are given below : 
a.    Hydrogen Generation by Thermo-Chemical Process by ONGC 
  The esti mated cost of the project was Rs.1240 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 60 months. The project was approved in July, 2009. 
 This project has been started in May, 2010 and expected to be completed by 
April, 2015. 
b. Setting up of Hydrogen Dispensing Station an d Demonstration of 
Hydrogen Vehicles during Common Wealth Games by IOC 
  The estimated cost of the project was Rs.800 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 30 months. The project was approved in July, 2009.However, due 
to non-availability of land by DDA, this project could not be taken up and has 
been dropped. 
c. Hydrogen Production from Natural Gas (Methane) by Catalytic 
Decomposition by HPCL and IIT-Delhi 
  The estimated cost of the project was Rs.51 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 36 months. The project was a pproved in July, 2009.MOU of this 
project has been signed and project activities started in February, 2010. 
Expected completion by January, 2013. 
 
 
d. Development of Large Scale Photo -catalytic Process using Modular  
Reactors for Hydrogen Production by Dissoc iation of Water / H 2S utilising 
Solar Energy by IOC (R&D) & BHU 
  The estimated cost of the project was Rs.70.62 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 36 months. The project was approved in October, 2010. MOU 
has been signed on 20 th Sept., 2011 and the expected completion is by Aug., 
2014. 
e.    Hybrid -sorption Enhanced Steam Reforming for the Production of 
Hydrogen from Natural Gas by BPCL (R&D): 
  The estimated cost of the project is Rs.415 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 36 months. The project was approved  in October, 2010. MOU 
has been signed and project started in  April, 2011. Expected completion by 
March, 2014. 
f. Design and Construction of Metal -Organic Framework Materials with 
Tuneable Physical Properties for Storage of Hydrogen  by HPCL 
&GitamUniv.,Visakhapatnam: 

 54 
 
  The estimated cost of the project is Rs.77.95 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 24 months. The project was approved in October, 2010. MOU 
has been signed  and project activities started in February, 2011. Expected 
completion by January, 2013. 
g. An integrated approach for bio hydrogen production through combined 
dark and photo fermentative process by HPCL & TERI: 
  The estimated cost of the project is Rs.141.63 Lakhs with completion 
schedule of 24 months. The project was approved in October, 2010. MOU 
has been signed and project activities has been started in March, 
2011.Expected completion by February, 2013. 
 
5.0 As regards the cost of production of hydrogen, it will be possible to 
estimate the same only after the completion and outcome of the R&D projects 
referred under para 4.0 above. The typical cost of hydrogen production from 
refineries (through naphtha steam reforming) is around Rs.140/kg and 
through bio -route (from molasses/corn syrup/distillery waste) is between 
Rs.65-140 /kg. 
6.0 As regards  the development of photo -catalytic processing modular 
reactors by IOC (R&D) and BHU, all efforts are being taken to expedite the 
project and is expected to be completed within next 36 months. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 35 of Chapter-I) 
 

 55 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINALREPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 4, Para No. 1.20) 
 
The Committee noted that  in the year 2009 -10, the Government have 
incurred an expenditure of Rs.2770 crore under the “PDS Kerosene on Domestic 
LPG Subsidy Scheme 2002” whereby the Government is providing a subsidy of 
Rs.0.82 per litre on PDS Kerosene to Rs.22.58 per cylinder on D omestic LPG 
(at1/3rd level of the rate for 2002 -03) to OMCs.  However, the total under -
recovery on domestic LPG alone during the year 2009 -10 was Rs.14,257crore.  
As regards a proposal under consideration of the Government to restrict four 
cylinders during a year that can be given at subsidized rate to all consumers, the 
Committee strongly feel that to offset the huge losses made on account of 
subsidized domestic LPG cylinders, the Government may consider to do away 
with providing subsidized  LPG to rich an d affluent people having an income of 
more than Rs.6 lakh per annum including those holding constitutional posts, 
public representatives like MPs, MLAs/MLCs.  The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that such an initiative by the Government will help to expa nd its 
subsidized LPG distribution to the rural people who are more in the need of this 
clean fuel.  The Committee desired to be apprised of concrete action taken in this 
regard within a period of 3 months. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
             Ministry o f Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted  a  proposal to 
Cabinet Secretariat for placing before the EGoM for consideration/approval.   
The proposal is still under consideration of the Government. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 19, Para No. 1.105) 
 
The Committee note that there is a serious overlap between OISD and 
PNGRB in so far as laying down of safety norms and standards are concerned. 
OISD which was set up by the Ministry of Petrol eum and Natural Gas through a 
resolution in 1986 looks after safety in the entire hydrocarbon chain in upstream 
and downstream sector viz oil exploration and production, petroleum refining, 
petroleum marketing and distribution, pipelines and gas processing  plants. On 
the other hand, the PNGRB which is a statutory body was set up on 01.10.2007 
under the provision of PNGRB Act, 2006 and is empowered to lay down by 
regulations the technical standards and specification including safety standards 

 56 
 
relating to pet roleum, petroleum products and natural gas, construction and 
operation of pipeline and infrastructure projects related to downstream sector. 
The Committee are also informed by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
that the PNGRB is saddled with too man y functions and it would be prudent to 
strengthen OISD by granting statutory status. The proposal would enable the 
OISD to comprehensively address safety and technical standards and 
specifications for entire oil and gas sector. The Committee note with conc ern that 
the Government has not been able to visualize and sort out the issues of 
jurisdictional overlap between OISD and PNGRB when the Bill for setting up of 
the PNGRB was brought before Parliament. The Committee feel that it is not 
desirable to have two  sets of bodies for regulating safety standards etc in the 
downstream sector. At the same time, the Committee are of the opinion that it is 
imperative to give OISD statutory status to enable the OISD to work effectively 
and independently in the area of saf ety standards and their enforcement in the 
entire oil and gas sectors because the OISD in its present form as an arm of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas with no statutory powers can‟t be 
expected to enforce the safety standards as vigorously as is  desirable. Though 
more than 3 1/2 years have elapsed from the date of setting up PNGRB, the 
Government is still in the process of consultation or consideration on giving 
statutory status to OISD and making necessary amendments to the PNGRB Act, 
2006. Consi dering the need and urgency for maintenance of uniform and 
effective standards in oil and gas sector in India, the Committee recommend that 
the Government should bring suitable legislation to give statutory status to OISD 
without further delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
With respect to giving Statutory Status to OISD, following are mentioned : 
 
(i) To enforce Safety in offshore – Exploration and Production activities, 
Government has already designated Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) as 
the Competent Authority to exercise the power and functions as stipulated in the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore Operations) Rules, 2008 which 
were notified in June‟2008. 
(ii)  Empowerment of OISD with statutory status is already under active 
consideration of MoP&NG. In the meantime the proposal from Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry – DIPP (Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion) 

 57 
 
regarding transfer of work from PESO (Petroleum and Explosive Safety 
Organisation) was received by MoP&NG. Considering all aspe ct, it has been 
decided in principle to transfer work related to Petroleum Act / Rule from PESO 
to OISD. In this regard a Committee has been constituted with members from 
MoP&NG, DIPP, PESO, OISD and Oil Marketing Companies. The Committee is 
going through the details in consultation with PESO with regard to precise tasks 
that need to be transferred, legal aspects, identification of functions that are 
redundant and list of amendments required in various Acts & Rules and 
adequate strengthening of OISD in view of new responsibilities. 
 
(M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM. No. G-25015/6/2011 Fin-1 dated 16.11.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
December, 2011 
Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
 
ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
 

 58 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
  
FOURTH SITTING 
(20.12.2011) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th December, 2011 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam Ahir 
3. Shri Badruddin Ajmal  
4. Shri Ramesh Bais 
5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
8. Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
9. Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
10. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
11. Shri Mahabal Mishra 
12. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
13. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
14. Shri C.L. Ruala 
15. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
16. Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
17. Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
18. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra- - Deputy Secretary 
 

 59 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi - Secretary 
2. Shri. Sudhir Bhargava - Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri. Vivek Kumar - Joint Secretary (M) 
4.  Shri. Neeraj Mittal - Director 
 
   
    
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other organisations 
 
1. Shri B.C. Tripathi - CMD,GAIL  
2. Shri R.K. Singh - CMD, BPCL 
3. Shri N.M. Bora - CMD, OIL 
4. Shri  R.P. Watal - Secretary PNGRB 
5. Ms. Nishi Vasudeva - Director (Mkt.), HPCL 
6. Shri  K.S. Jamestin - Director (HR), ONGC 
7. Shri  M. Ravindran - MD, IGL 
8. Shri V.C. Chittoda - MD, MGL 
9. Shri A.K. Balyan - MD, PLL 
10. Shri  V.K. Kaul - GM (Gas), IOC 
 
2.   At the outset, the Committee took up for consideration the following Report and 
adopted the same without any modification: 
(i) ***        ****          ****         ****            ****         ****       *****        **** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendati ons 
contained in the 8th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
3.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report after making 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Report 
by the Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.   
4. ***        ****          ****         ****            ****         ****       *****        **** 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
______________________________________________________________________
*Matter not related to the subject 

 60 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND 
NATURAL GAS (2011 -12) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRA NTS (2011 -12) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 28 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 
14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22 and 24 ) 
 
 
 14 
 Percentage to Total 50% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 8, 9, 13, 16, 
20, 23, 25, 26, 27 and 28) 
 
12 
 Percentage of Total 43% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 and 19) 
2 
 Percentage of Total 7% 
 
 
 
 
 