  
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  
  
 
 
STRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
SAFETY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 


2 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
CP&NG No. 12 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
SAFETY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.5.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  22.5.2012 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
  
CONTENTS  
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………... 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION …………………………………………… (vi) 
 
 REPORT  
 PART-I  
Chapter-I Introductory 
 
 
 Legislative Framework  
Chapter-II Safety Mechanism in oil and gas installations  
 Oil Industry Safety Directorate  
 Jurisdiction of OISD  
 Safety measures in private sector  
 Safety factors in new installations  
 Safety audits  
 Stoppage due to safety consideration  
 Accident/incident investigations  
 Training  
 Oil spill  
Chapter-III M.B.Lal Committee recommendations  
 Issues raised by industry on amended standard  
Chapter-IV Procurement related issues  
 HVLR monitor  
 Rim Seal fire protection system  
 Hydrocarbon detector   
 Double fire contingency   
 Replacement of Hammer blinds  
 Provision of MEFG  
                         PART II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee …………… 
 
 
              ANNEXURES  
I Implementation Status  of Major items of  M. B. Lal -  Committee  
recommendations 
 
II List of OISD Standards   
III Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee  (2010-11) held on 
26.07.2011  
 
IV Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee  (2011-12) held on 
31.10.2011 
 
V Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held on 29.3.2012  
VI Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee held on 16.4.2012  
VII Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Committee held on 21.5.2012  

4 
 
            (iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli            -             Chairman 
Members 
2 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam Ahir 
3 Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
4 Shri Ramesh Bais 
5 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
8 Shri Raosaheb Dadarao Danve 
9 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
10 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
11 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
12 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
14 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
15 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
16 Shri C.L. Ruala 
17 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20 Shri C. Sivasami 
21 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
 

5 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
23 Shri Ahmed Patel 
24 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
25 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
26 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
27 Shri Sabir Ali 
28 Shri Pankaj Bora 
$29 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
#30 Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
#31 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
#Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4.5.2012 
$ Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4.5.2012 
*Shri Kalraj Mishra ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.3.2012  
@ Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani  ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2.4.2012  
and Shri Silvius Condpan ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his demise w.e.f. 10.10.2011 
  

6 
 
(v) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Twelfth 
Report on ‘Safety of Oil Installations’. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas at their sittings held on 26.7.2011, 31.10.2011, 29.3.2012 and 16.4.2012. 
 
3. The Committee considered and ado pted the Report at their sitting held on 
21.5.2012. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and the Public Sector Undertakings/Organisations 
concerned for placing their views before  them and furnishing the information desired in 
connection with examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
21 May, 2012     
31Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)            
             
 
 ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
  Chairman, Standing Committee on              
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

7 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - 1 
Introductory 
Oil and gas sector comprising of crude oil, petroleum products and refinery is  a 
core sector of the economy and therefore, has a significant role in  the nation’s 
economic development. This sector is of strategic importance and play a pivotal role in 
addressing country’s energy concerns thereby influencing decisions on all other 
spheres of economy. The sector  has been witnessing steady growth as more blocks 
have been awarded in recent years under the New Exploration Licensing policy for 
intensifying exploration and product ion activities.   The number of oil and gas 
discoveries and production fields have also seen an increase in recent times  as also 
the number of companies operating in the sector. The refining activities have also been 
growing at a steady pace and our  nation  is becoming a refinery hub in this part of the 
world.  Also increasing urbanization of many parts of the country, increase in 
automobile usage, high growth in commercial vehicles have increased fuel outlets and 
the transportation of the oil and gas has increased the total length of pipelines. In view 
of the increased activities in exploration, refining, transportation of oi l and gas, the 
safety concerns ha s become a major and critical factor in the oil and gas industry. 
Since oil and gas are highly inflammable, the impact of any accident can be very high 
as such incidents will be felt not only on the accident site but also on the surroundings. 
These accidents can cause loss of material, loss of lives  and also damage to the 
environment.  Hence  it is imperative that the oil and gas industry need to be very 
vigilant and should not be lax to adopt stringent safety measure s in handling these 
products.  
1.2 On October 29, 2009, a fire accident occurred in Indian Oil Corporation's 
terminal at Sangane r in Jaipur during the transfer of kerosene and motor spirit to 
another terminal.  There was a blast which completely destroyed the facilities and 
resulted in 9 tanks catching fire in immediate succession.  Though fire tenders were 
rushed but no action was  initiated as a considered decision was taken by IOC, 
management to allow fire to burn till such time the products get completely burnt out.  

8 
 
The last tank fire extinguished itself after 11 days on 10.11.2009.  The incident caused 
death of 11 people, out of which 6 were company persons.  
1.3 This Committee were concerned about the  safety related aspects in the oil and 
gas installations in the country as more safety related incident s continued even though 
an inquiry committee headed by Shri M.B.Lal had given its report on the Jaipur 
accident and recommended safety measures to be implemented in these oil 
installations.  Hence the Committee decided to examine the  subject  "Safety of Oil  
Installations" in greater detail. 
Legislative Framework 
 
1.4 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the work 
allocated to Ministry are as under: 
 1. “Exploration for and exploitation of petroleum resources, including Natura l 
Gas and Coal Bed Methane. 
 2. Production, supply, distribution, marketing and pricing of petroleum, 
including   
           Natural Gas, Coal Bed Methane and petroleum products. 
3. Oil refineries including Lube Plants. 
4. Additives for petroleum and petroleum products. 
5. Lube blending and greases. 
6. Planning, development, control and assistance to all industries dealt with 
by the Ministry. 
7. All attached or subordinate offices or other organizations concerned with 
any of the subjects specified in the list. 
8. Planning, development and regulation of oilfield services. 
9. Public sector projects falling under the subjects included in this list.  
Engineers India Limited and IBP Company, together with its subsidiaries, 
except such projects as are specifically  allotted to any other 
Ministry/Department. 
10. The Oil Fields (Regulations and Development) Act, 1948 (53 of 1948). 
11. The Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959 (43 of 1959). 

9 
 
12. The Petroleum & Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User Inland) 
Act , 1962 (50 of 1962). 
13. The Esso (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1974 (4 of 1974). 
14. The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 (47 of 1974). 
15. The Burmah -Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1976 (2 of 
1976). 
16. The Calte x (Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited 
and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited Act, 1977. 
17. Administration of the Petroleum Act, 1934 (30 of 1934) and the rules made 
thereunder. 
18. Administration of Balmer Law rie Investment s Limited and Balmer Lawrie 
and Company Limited. 
19. Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006. 
20. To promote long term engagement of Indian Oil Companies in the 
hydrocarbon sector abroad. 
21. Strengthening energy security by acquir ing oil and gas equity abroad and 
participation in transnational oil and gas pipeline projects. 
22. Creation and administration of strategic petroleum reserve through Indian 
Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL)”.  
1.5 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has enacted a number of legislations 
over the year s to deal with the safety aspects of oil and gas industry.  When the 
Committee wanted to know the legislations that has been  enacted by the MOP&NG as 
part of its mandate  in regard to safety aspec ts of oil and gas industry , the Ministry in a 
written note  submitted the following:- 
"The legislations enforced by MoP&NG are as under: 
For downstream Oil & Gas Companies:- 
i. Petroleum Rules under Petroleum Act 1934. 
ii. Static and Mobile pressure vessel rule under Explosive Act 1884 
iii. Gas Cylinder Rule under Explosive Act.  
iv. Manufacture storage and import of hazardous Chemical Rules 
under Environment Act. 
v. Petroleum & Minerals Pipeline Act 1962 
vi. Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Act 2006 
 

10 
 
For Upstream Oil & Gas Companies:- 
i. Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules 1959 under ORDA Act 1948 
ii. Petroleum & Natural Gas (Safety in offshore operation) Rules 2008 under 
ORDA Act 1948. 
iii. Oil Mines Regulations, 1984 under Oil Mines Act, 1952” 
 
 
1.6 There are several agencies which are concerned with enforcement of the above 
legislations for the oil and gas industry.  On being asked about the details regarding  the 
agencies, the Ministry in a written note furnished the following reply:- 
 
“The agencies that enforce the laws related to safety are: 
Petroleum & Explosives Safety Organization (PESO) 
 Petroleum Rules under Petroleum Act 1934  
 Static and Mobile pressure vessel rule under Explosive Act. 
 Gas Cylinder Rule under Explosive Act.  
 Manufacture storage and import of hazardous Chemical Rules under 
Environment Act. 
 
DG, Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute / Chief Inspector of Factories 
of respective State 
 Factories Rule under Factories Act, 1948 of Ministry of 
Labour 
 Manufacture Storage  and Import of Hazardous Chemical Rules, 1989 
under Environment ( Protection) Act, 1986. 
 
State Labour Commissioner 
 Contract Labour Act 1970 
 
State Transport Commissioner 
 Motor Vehicle Act & Rule 
 
Central Electricity Authority 
 Electricity Rule under Electricity Act 1910 
 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
 Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Act 2006 
 
 

11 
 
Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
 Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules 1959 under ORDA Act 
1948 
 Oil Mines Act 1952” 
 
 
1.7  On being  pointed out that many of the legislations were very old and whether the 
Ministry has proposal to revisit these legislations for its proper updating, the Ministry in 
its written reply stated the following: 
“Amendments are done from time to time depending u pon the need. For 
example, amendment in respective Rules under Petroleum Act,1934 and ORDA 
Act,1948 were notified in 2011 and 2008 respectively”.  
 
1.8 Commenting on the issue  during the oral -evidence Secretary, MoPNG inter-alia 
made the following comments:- 
"We will definitely take your point into consideration. In fact, these rules and 
legislations are periodically visited.  That is why, as you would have noticed, the 
OISD standards have been revised on the basis of a particular incidence.  This is 
a continuous process and I agree with you.  They should be done from time to 
time".    
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER – 2 
 
SAFETY MECHANISMS IN OIL AND GAS INSTALLATIONS 
2.1 There are 21 refineries, 11 Gas processing plants, 660 oil and LPG installations 
and more than 30,000 km cross-country pipelines spread across the length and breadth 
of the country. In Offshore Exploration & Production, there are 16 production 
complexes, 180 well platforms and 35 rigs. On -land, there are 323 production 
installations and 223 rigs. The installe d refining capacity of the country is around 194 
MMTPA; indigenous crude oil production is around 38 MMTPA while gas production is 
around 48 Billion m 3 per annum. The marketing points including retail outlets, depots, 
and terminals are spread throughout th e country for maintaining steady supply of 
petroleum products in the country. Hence, safety of oil & gas installations is of 
paramount importance.  
  
2.2 Asked about the present safety level in the oil industry, the Ministry submitted the 
following:- 
"Oil industry maintains the highest level of safety standards. The safety 
measures include both proactive and secondary measures to combat any unsafe 
situation and are systemic in nature. Some of the major safety measures include 
incorporation of in -built safet y aspects at the nascent stage, i.e., during the 
design phase itself. These include process safety, instrumentation & safety 
interlocks, safety while design of equipment, following the best international 
standards. The Industry has systems and procedures i n the form of work permit 
system, operating manuals entailing start -up, shutdown, emergency handling 
procedures, disaster management plan etc.  
Besides, each installation has its dedicated fire -fighting facilities which are 
equipped with modern equipment, trained crew to fight fire in case of any 
eventuality. Safety measures in oil industry are looked after by a dedicated group 
of personnel.  Safety of vital plants, installations, employees and public at large is 
required to be given the highest priority.  
By adopting both proactive and reactive measures in fire and safety, Oil Industry 
is equipped with measures to protect its vital installations. The industry also 
carries out Internal Safety Audits and conducts periodic mock drills, both on -site 
and off -site. It has also developed its own Disaster Management Plan and 
organizes mock drills both offsite & onsite to ensure emergency preparedness.  

13 
 
The oil industry is continuously engaged in updating the standard operating 
procedures, training and retraining to narrow the knowledge gaps and strictly 
ensuring non -violation of systems and procedures. The renewed thrust has 
resulted in gradual decrease in number of fatalities over the years." 
Role of Safety Council 
2.3 When asked the safety mechanism for these installations, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“The Government, vide Resolution dated 10 th January, 1986, set up a Safety 
Council to ensure proper implementation of the various aspects of safety in the 
oil industry. The Safety Council, headed by  Secretary of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas includes all Joint Secretaries and Advisors in the 
MOPNG, the Chief Executives Officers of all Public Sector Undertakings of the 
oil industry, the Chief Controller of Explosives, Advisor, Fire to the Govt. of Indi a 
and the Director General of Factory Advice, Service and Labour Institutes as 
members. The major objective of the Safety Council is to lay down the 
procedures and guidelines in the matter of design, operations and maintenance 
as well as creation of new as sets with a view to achieving the highest safety 
standards in a cost effective manner. The Safety Council is assisted by a 
technical body viz the Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), which has expertise 
in the design of facilities, operations, maintenan ce, fire and safety as pects, 
industrial hygiene, etc.” 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate(OISD) 
2.4 OISD a technical directorate under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
was formed in 1986 by a resolution of the Government with an objective to formulat e 
and standardize procedures and guidelines in the areas of design, operation and 
maintenance as also the creation of new safety standards in a cost effective manner. It 
also coordinated the implementation of a series of self regulatory measures aimed at 
enhancing the safety in the oil and gas industry in India.  
2.5 OISD is successfully looking after the safety in entire hydrocarbon chain in 
upstream and downstream sector viz., Oil Exploration & production, Petroleum 
Refining and Gas processing, Marketing & distribution and cross country pipelines. 
  

14 
 
2.6 OISD is manned by a group of technical experts in the area of design, 
operation, maintenance, inspection, safety, environment etc drawn from oil industry on 
deputation.  
2.7 To address the operational safet y issues in Offshore Oil and Gas operations, 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore operations) Rules, 2008 have been 
formulated with emphasis on asset integrity and process safety. OISD is designated as 
nodal agency for implementation of this Rules  in Offshore operations with effect from 
June’2008. 
Jurisdiction of OISD 
2.8 The activities of Public Sector Undertakings, Private Companies, Joint Ventures 
in the hydrocarbon industry covered by OISD as under: 
“All Refinery & Gas processing Operations under PSU. 
 All Exploration and Production Operation in Onshore and Offshore both PSU 
and Private. 
 All Cross Country Pipeline Operations and Crude oil under PSU. 
 Marketing Operation for Storage and distribution of Petroleum products.  
Processing of hydrocarbon for production of bulk petrochemicals in the large 
scale public sector” 
 
 
2.9 OISD, over the years, has developed technical expertise in overseeing safety in 
the entire oil and gas sector. The core competence of OISD includes: 
“ Laying down safety norms and development of technical safety standards  
 Carrying out Safety audits/inspection of entire industry and verify 
compliance to standards. 
 Carrying out pre -commission safety audit of petroleum refineries, cross 
country pipelines and marketing locations prior to commissioning of the 
facility. 
 Investigating major causes of fire and incidents to prevent recurrence. 
 Disseminating safety knowledge by organizing seminars, training, 
workshops and through a newsletter of OISD, at regular intervals”.   

15 
 
2.10 Regarding safety standards developed by OISD, the Ministry informed the 
committee as under:-  
“OISD has till date developed a total of 112 standards for implementation by oil 
companies. These standards enable oil industry to meet the requisite safety 
measures. Industry implements these safety standards on self -regulatory basis. 
OISD through various safety inspections checks the implementations of these 
safety standards and recommends measures for enhancing safety in the 
installations.” 
 
2.11 When asked to f urnish the sanctioned and actual manpower of OISD in each 
category and the mode of recruitment of personnel for OISD, the Ministry gave the 
following in written reply:- 
"The manpower details are enumerated in the table below. 
OFFICERS: 
Technical Sanctioned Actual 
ED -Secretariat  3 2 
Process & Engineering 13 10 
Explorations & Production   28  6 
Marketing Operation  4  3 
Non- technical   
Administration 1 2 
Finance 1 1 
Executive Secretary 1 1 
Total 51 25 
 NON OFFICERS: 
 Sanctioned Actual 
Clerical Staff 15 4 
Total ( A + B)               
 
66 29 
  
The officers in OISD are positioned on deputation basis from PSU oil 
companies and are selected through a process of short listing and interview."  
          
 
2.12 Asked to explain as to why only six people out of 28 sanctioned strength are 
there in the Explorations and Production area and whether this limited workforce will 

16 
 
affect the effective functioning of the OISD, the Secretary, MoPNG during the oral 
evidence replied the following: 
"We agree with you that they do not have the required strength.  In case of the 
Explorations and Production, the only place from where they can get the 
manpower is either ONGC or Oil.  These organisations have not been able to 
spare m ore people relating to their own safety installations for deputation to 
OISD.  But as I had stated in the beginning, this is a cause for our concern also.  
We really intend to strengthen the organization. That is why we want to really 
create posts from whe re they can take people from outside or from the market. 
Out of 66 sanctioned staff strength, only 29 staff members are there.  It is less 
than 50 per cent. So, this is an area of concern for us also". 
2.13 Asked  to elaborate further on the concerns about  autonomous functioning of 
OISD as it presently stands, the Secretary further added the following  
"The degree of concern relates to two aspects.  One is that they do not have the 
legal authority and secondly they do not have a cadre of their own.  They have 
to draw from public sector undertakings because if we draw from  the private 
sector, it could cause graver problem.  So, it is safer  to have it from the public 
sector on deputation.  That is what, we are having.  Once the Organization gets 
the legal authority, it will have its own cadre, have its own strength of technical 
people and then they would be even authorized to prosecute whosoever is not 
following". 
2.14 When asked to explain on  building own cadre as OISD draws its personnel 
from the PSU sec tor on deputation , the Secretary, MoPNG inter-alia stated the 
following during the oral evidence:- 
"……….. we really want to strengthen OISD.   We want to give it a statutory 
status but in the meantime, we received a proposal from the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Planning that they would like to entrust the tasks related to 
OISD from their own Organization called Petroleum Explosive and Safety 
Organization which is a statutory body.  In fact, the legal authority for getting 
these OISD standards, it li es with PESO.  The OISD is meant for prescribing 
standards and for offshore they have the authority also.  But in case of other 
marketing and refinery, etc. PESO is the body which has the legal authority.  So, 
DIPP has, in fact, conveyed to us that they wo uld like to shut of this 
responsibility and give it OISD.  So, we are in the process of examining that and 
we have conveyed our concurrence but really to transfer it to us along with staff 
and legal authority, it required a very detailed functioning.   We have, in fact, 
engaged the services of a consultant and on that basis we would proceed 
ahead.  The intention basically is to strengthen OISD". 
 

17 
 
2.15 Asked to update  on the strengthening and giving statutory powers to OISD, the 
Ministry in its written reply stated the following: 
 
“To enforce Safety in offshore – Exploration and Production activities, 
Government has already designated Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) as 
the Competent Authority to exercise the power and functions as stipulated in th e 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore Operations) Rules, 2008 which 
were notified in June’2008. 
As regards transfer of PESO job to OISD, the same is under consideration of 
Ministry”. 
 
2.16 It has been noted that the Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO) 
is under the administrative control of Department of Industry Policy and Production 
(DIPP) which comes under the Ministry of Commerce. However, the role of PESO 
includes administrating of 6 OISD Standards over the oil and gas industrie s. When 
asked as to what is the role of PESO in implementation of safety aspects in the 
petroleum sector, the Ministry stated the following:- 
 
PESO is the competent authority to administer Petroleum Rules framed under 
Petroleum Act1934. Petroleum Rules, interalia, refers six OISD standards (No. 
105, 116, 117, 118, 141 & 156). Thus implementation of safety aspects provided 
in these six OISD standards is monitored by Chief Controller of Explosives, 
PESO. 
         
 
2.17 On the query that since PESO does not report to MoPNG, how does Mo PNG 
penalize the companies for violation of safety standards, the Ministry informed that 
PESO takes punitive action on its own, if required based on OISD standards.  On being 
asked whether  there is any move by MoP&NG to seek the activities of PESO 
connected with safety of petroleum sector under OISD, the Ministry is its reply stated 
the following:- 
 
“PESO, under the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP) of the 
Ministry of Commerce &  Industry at present is the statutory authority for 
implementation of Petroleum Act 1934 and the Rules thereof as well as 
Explosives Act 1884. DIPP hasproposed to transfer the PESO’s work relating to 
Petroleum Rules 2002 to a new statutory body/OISD under MOP&NG. 

18 
 
Accordingly, OISD has prepared an approach paper on transfer of job from 
PESO to OISD. 
 
In a review meeting chaired by Secretary, MoP&NG and attended by 
representatives of DIPP, PESO, OISD, it was decided that in order to arrive at a 
more informed decision on issues like requirement of manpower, legal aspects 
for empowering OISD with statutory authority, infrastructure etc. a detailed study 
of the extant system of both PESO & OISD is required to be carried out by 
engaging a consultant.The terms of r eference of the consultant has since been 
prepared and are under finalization”. 
 
Safety measures in private sector 
 
2.18 When enquired as to w hether OISD can enforce safety measures over private 
Oil and gas installation, the Ministry stated the following in written reply:-  
 “OISD does not have statutory power to enforce safety measures over 
downstream private Oil and gas installations. Petroleum & Explosive Safety 
Organization (PESO) has such legal authority. 
 
OISD has the statutory power & authority for enacting safety in upstream 
offshore Oil & Gas installations. 
 
In case of upstream onshore Oil & Gas installations, Director General of Mines 
Safety(DGMS) is entrusted with the legal authority”. 
 
 
2.19 On a further query  about the mechanism to monitor/ass ess the safety 
measures installed by private companies, the Ministry gave the following reply:- 
"OISD carries out safety audits for the private companies as well. The gaps in 
the system, if any, based on various OISD standards are identified by the audit 
team which are, in turn, discussed with the top management and a time bound 
plan for liquidation is emphasized. The companies prepare ATR and submit to 
OISD, which in turn, monitors the implementation process." 
 
Safety Factors in new installations 
2.20 When asked to submit  a note on factors required to be considered from the 
safety point of view when oil and gas companies set up their installation/plants/units, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The factors that are considered from the s afety point of view, when oil and gas 
companies set up their installations are as under: 

19 
 
 Risk analysis and risk assessment study of the proposed installations to be set 
up. 
 Environment impact assessment of the proposed location to be set up. 
 Conformity to the lay out design of the facilities that are being set up in the oil 
and gas installations in accordance with OISD standards. 
 During the nascent state of design of the oil installations/plants, various inbuilt 
safety systems viz., process safety, instrume ntation safety including instrument 
inter-locks, rigorous review of piping and instrumentation diagram, 3D model 
review of the plant/installation etc. are carried out. 
 Further, during the design stage itself for improved reliability of the various 
equipment besides the process safety aspects, international engineering 
standard like API, ASME codes are followed to enhance safety of the 
installations to be set up. 
 Guidelines towards in -built safety in design & other important aspects are also 
covered in various OISD standards viz. process design & operating philosophy; 
pressure relief & disposal system; design & safety recommendation for LPG 
mounded storage; hazardous area classification for electrical equipment; safety 
instrumentation for process systemetc. 
 The proposed firefighting facilities and infrastructure that are required to be 
installed are in accordance with the various OISD guidelines/Standards (OISD 
116 & 117).  
 
It may thus be seen that the safety considerations, while setting up 
installations/plants/units, follow a systemic approach beginning with risk analysis, 
process and engineering design considerations, inbuilt safety features as well as 
the relevant OISD guidelines/standards with respect to lay out of the plant and 
machinery, design, pressur e relief, firefighting facility etc. All these 
considerations are aimed at enhancing the safety of the installations”.  
 
2.21 Asked as to what studies/impact assessments does a company need to carry out 
before the units/installations are set up ,the Minist ry stated in their written reply as 
under:- 
"The impact assessment study needs to be carried out before the 
units/installations are set up in line with Environment (Protection) Rules notified 
by Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOE&F) and to be submitted to MOE&F 
for obtaining environmental clearance.  The impact assessments includes 
information like use of natural resources, release of pollutants, risk analysis, 
environmental sensitivity and anticipated impacts and mitigation measures 
according to MOE&F’s guidelines.  
 
MOE&F is the approving authority for giving environmental clearance after 
review on the impact assessments etc. OISD, on behalf of MOP& NG, in addition 
to verifying the safety measures to be taken by industry and its compliance, also 
scrutinizes the status of MOE&F clearance and compliance to the clearance 

20 
 
conditions stipulated during OISD’s pre -commissioning audit prior to start up and 
operation of the facility for downstream units.  With respect to E&P off -shore 
operations, OISD accords consent to operate after obtaining written confirmation 
from the company that environmental clearance and other statutory clearances 
have been obtained from the relevant authorities." 
 
Safety Audits 
2.22 Regarding  the safety systems and guidelines that are in place in the oil and gas 
installation and the nature of supervision of agencies who enforce these guidelines.  
The Committee enquired as to what measures do the agencies take to ensure that the 
safety systems and guidelines have been adhered to by the oil industry.  To this the 
Ministry furnished the following in a written reply:    
 
“To achieve safety in vital oil & gas installations, regular audits are conducted to 
ensure that safety systems are in place and are in accordance with the 
guidelines. These audits are very effective tool to identify the areas of strengths 
& weaknesses and action plan to overcome the gaps.  
  
Internal audit of the oil installations  
 
Oil companies at regular intervals carry out inte rnal audit of its respective 
installations to identify the gaps in the safety system and action plan to liquidate 
such gaps. Audits are conducted in a planned manner based on check lists, field 
visits and in accordance with OISD guidelines and standards. T hese internal 
audits are carried out by multi-disciplinary cross functional team. 
 
External Safety Audit and Surprise Safety Audit by OISD 
 
OISD periodically alsoconducts External Safety Audit and Surprise Safety Audit 
of oil installations with a purpose to check whether in-built design safety systems, 
operational safety, instrumentation safety, plant health & integrity and fire -fighting 
facilities etc. are in accordance with the OISD guidelines. During the course of 
such audits, OISD team through site visits, interaction with operating personnel 
and checking of various documents highlights the areas of improvement.  
 
During the Surprise Audit, OISD carries out similar exercise without informing the 
installation which is audited to check its preparedness and whether various 
safety systems are in accordance with the guidelines.  
 
Further during the audits, OISD team also carries out mock drills t o see the 
readiness of the plant personnel in mitigating any emergency situations that may 
take place in the installations due to fire or accidents. 
 
 

21 
 
The External Safety Audit/Surprise Safety Audit recommendations are forwarded 
to CMDs of oil companies for time bound action on the same. The oil companies 
in turn prepare time bound action plan and submit the Action Taken Report 
(ATR) to OISD on quarterly basis. The pending External Safety Audit/Surprise 
Safety Audit recommendations are also reviewed by th e top management of 
respective oil companies who in turn advise and facilitates quick disposal of the 
pending recommendations. 
 
Pre- Commissioning  Safety Audit by OISD 
 
Pre- commissioning Safety Audit is carried out by OISD for all new installations 
and f or additional facilities at the existing location in downstream Oil and Gas 
Installation of Oil PSUs for checking compliance of the norms prescribed by 
OISD and other statutory requirements.  
 
Safety Council 
 
To ensure proper implementation of various aspe cts of safety in oil and gas 
industry, OISD is headed by the Safety Council, and Secretary P&NG is the 
Chairman of the Safety Council. 
The major objective of the Safety Council is to lay down the procedures and 
guidelines in the matter of design, operations and maintenance as well as 
creation of new assets with a view to achieving the highest safety standard in a 
cost effective manner.  
Safety Council is assisted by Executive Director, OISD who is also the member 
secretary of Safety council”.   
 
2.23 When  asked  the frequency of safety audits and how does it conduct them, the 
Ministry provided the following in its written reply:- 
 External safety Audit 
These audits are conducted by OISD with members from other Oil companies 
other than the audited company. The period of audit varies from 3 to 5 days 
and the frequency of audits is: 
i. For Refineries & Gas Processing Plants:  Once in 3 years 
ii. For Marketing installations:  Two audits at a gap of 5 years initially and 
thereafter either a request audit or surprise inspection. 
 
External safety audit is carried out as per check list developed by OISD which 
broadly includes the following checks: 
i. Functioning of Safety Management, Safety Committee & Safety trainings 
ii. Emergency Management system 
iii. Internal Safety audit findings & its liquidation status 
iv. Layout & facilities of the installation 
v. Operational activities 

22 
 
vi. Maintenance & Inspection systems 
vii. Electrical & Instrumentation systems 
viii. Compliance of Statutory Licenses & it’s documentations  
ix. Review of status of implementation of Recommendations of earlier external 
safety audit/risk analysis recommendations/companies’ internal safety audits 
/other statutory inspections. 
x. Site visit of operational areas such as Process plant, Thermal Power house, 
Tank farm area, Pump House, Loading gantries (TT &TW), Electrical system, 
Fire protection system, Security system in the location etc.  
 
During the audit, mock drills a re also carried out to check the healthiness and 
preparedness of fire-fighting infrastructure including the knowledge of employees 
on handling such emergency scenarios. 
 
 Surprise Safety Audit 
 
The surprise safety audits of Refineries and major gas processing units are 
carried out by technical experts not below the rank of General Managers deputed 
from Industry. 
  
In case of Marketing installations, the surprise audits are carried out by Officers 
from OISD based on site visit and review of implementa tion of earlier external 
safety audits/internal audits recommendations.  
   
 Compliance report 
 
The oil companies are required to submit the compliance reports on the 
recommendations made in the above audits/inspections on quarterly basis to 
OISD. The compliance status is reviewed by the respective companies at senior 
management level. The pending issues of ESA/SSA are also reviewed at the 
Board level and by the Safety Council. 
 
 Pre-Commissioning Audit: 
 
Since 1994 all the Oil and Gas Installation of Oil PSU s are required to offer their 
facilities for checking the compliance of the norms prescribed by OISD and 
other statutory requirements. Pre -commissioning audit is carried by OISD 
based on request from OMCs which broadly includes the following checks: 
 
i. Layout & safe distances in conformity with OISD STD -118 & other statutory 
requirements. 
ii. Firefighting facilities in conformity with OISD STD -117 including fire alarm and 
communication facilities. 
iii. Compliance to various statutory approvals. 
iv. Risk analysis and implementations of corrective measures. 

23 
 
v. Operating manuals, emergency handling procedures & preparedness for 
emergency handling etc. 
vi. Development of standard operating practice.   
vii. Training of employees. 
viii. The MB Lal committee recommendations and provisions of OISD standard 116 
& 117”.  
2.24 In an information furnished to the Committee the Ministry had given the 
following details regarding the audit conducted by OISD. 
 
“During the last 5 years, OISD has carried out the following number of audits: 
 
Area 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total 
Refinery & Gas Processing 
plants Nos.) 15 23 27 28 31 124 
Marketing (Nos.) 23 27 20 33 48 151 
Exploration & Production 
(Nos.) 66 68 77 76 71 358 
TOTAL (Nos.) 104 118 124 137 150 633 
Pipeline-kms 3,129 3,216 3,082 3,100 4,798 17,325 
 
Stoppage due to safety consideration 
 
2.25 When asked to give details of instances of stoppage/suspension of operation of 
the oil and gas installation due to safety considerations during the last 5 years, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:- 
"OMCs have stopped/suspended operations of its installations due to the 
following safety considerations:  
 Not meeting inter-distance safety norms as per the standard, 
 Severe congestion within & outside the installations, 
 Unsafe railway sidings leading to suspension of dispatch thru rail, 
 No scope for complying with the safety norms due to space constraint etc. 
 
During the last 5 year, 30 POL and 02 LPG installations of OMCs have been 
closed due to factors mentioned above. The details are as under:  
 
 IOCL 13 POL and 2 Gas installations,  

24 
 
 BPCL 2 POL installations,    
 HPCL 15 POL installations."  
 
The Company wise details of installations stopped/suspended of operations 
during the last five years 
Category IOCL HPCL BPCL 
POL 1. Kathgodam 
2. Ratlam Depot 
3. Guwahati 
4.Biswanath Charali 
5. Pathankot 
6. Kannur 
7. Behrampur 
8. Jaypore 
9. Shakurbasti 
10. Srinagar 
11. Barapani 
12.Talchar 
13. Hanumangarh 
14.Sanganer, Jaipur 
(Damaged in devastating 
fire) 
1. Jagdalpur 
2. Barielly 
3. Kota (black oil) 
4. Rajkot 
5. Udaipur 
6. Vapi 
7. Ambala 
8. Madurai Old 
9. Erode 
10. Salem 
11. Vasco 
(MS/HSD) 
12. Ratlam 
13. Nishatpura 
14. Satna 
1. Katihar Depot 
2. Bakania Depot 
LPG 1. SawaiMadhopur BP 
2. Bangalore BP 
--- --- 
 
 
Safety Standards for Natural Disaster Prone installation  
2.26 On being asked  whether the oil and gas installation can handle natural disaster 
like tsunamis and earthquake and whether these safety standards are reviewed after 
certain revisions in conditions like change in seismic zone etc.   So the Committee 
enquired as to  whether any study has been conducted to review aspects of safety in 
the existing oil and gas installations whenever revision of Seismic zones in the country 
take place and If so to give details of the recommendations and me asures taken during 
the last such revision, the Ministry have the following in its a written reply:- 
  
"Specific study towards this has not been conducted to review safety aspects in 
the existing oil and gas installations due to revision of seismic zones i n the 
country. However, at the design stage itself, if the installation lies on the earth’s 

25 
 
fault zone then appropriate safety factors are considered to take care of any 
future eventuality."  
 
2.27 Regarding  the coastal oil and gas installations in the country subjected to 
review of safety measures and to  give details of measures to be taken, to which the 
Ministry replied the following in a written note:-  
"Review of safety measures of all the oil installati ons in the country including the 
installations in coastal area is carried out regularly by OISD. All the 
recommendations of such reviews are monitored on quarterly basis."  
 
 Details of safety measures to be taken and progress made. 
 Coastal Refineries  
The safety review of the coastal refineries (External Safety Audits) are carried 
out once in three years like other PSU refineries in the country. The progress of 
implementation of safety recommendations made in consecutive two audits is as 
under : 
 
 
 
A.  Major Safety measures already  implemented by Industry 
  
1) HPCL Mumbai and Vizag Refineries :Installed LPG mounded bullets by 
decommissioning the Horton Spheres storage ,  
2) BPCL Mumbai Refinery :Relocated  the fire station control room to safe 
area, The operation of POL loading gantry inside the BPCL Refinery premises has 
been  stopped to enhance safety of the location,  
 
 
Coastal 
Refineries 
 Safety review 
Year Recommendations (nos.) 
 
Year  Recommendations (nos.) 
 
Year  Recommendations (nos.) 
 
Total Implemented In 
progress 
Total Implemented In 
progress 
Total Implemented In 
progress 
HPCL-MR April, 
2006 
86 85 01 Feb, 
2010 
72 60 12 -  - - 
HPCL-VR Dec, 2005 62 60 2 May, 
2009 
64 57 7 -  - - 
BPCL-MR Feb, 2005 38 36 2 April 
2008 
35 33 2 Feb 
2012 
 - - 
BPCL KR April , 
2002 
50 50 - March, 
2006 
74 72 2 Jan 
2010 
170 111 59 
CPCL Manali Oct, 2002 85 85 - April 
2007 
65 60 5 June 
2010 
78 64 14 
CPCL CBR 2000 - - - Aug, 
2004 
70 70 0 Oct, 
2007 
62 62 - 
Hadia 
Refinery 
Feb, 2003 34 34 - Feb 
2007 
43 42 1 March 
2010 
74 64 10 
MRPL June 
2005(1st 
ESA) 
97 91 6 Feb 
2009 
(2nd 
ESA) 
129 116 13 -  - - 

26 
 
3) BPCL-Kochi Refinery: All the maintenance & Inspection recommendations 
for improvement of health of Off-site piping have been liquidated.  
4) IOCL Haldia Refinery :The safety valve discharge from Crude column is 
connected to flare , hydrocarbon detectors provided near LPG and Naphtha 
Pumps and the  LPG Pumps were provided with double mechanical seals, 
5)  CPCL Manali:The close blow-down system is implemented, 
6)  CPCL CBR : The LPG TTL gantry provided with water sprinkler to cover 
dish ends to TTL.  
7) MRPL: the off gases from VDU has been relocated to safe location, 
Installed hydrocarbon detectors at the FD suctions of all the furnaces. The 
smoke detector alarm system for central control room has been renewed& made 
workable. 
8) ONGC Tatipaka : The old condensate tanks which were in close proximity 
of control room are being emptied out to remove the oily sludge. 
9) ONGC Uran : Hydrocarbon detectors installed at Slug c atcher & Flare 
Knock out area.  
10) To minimize the human error industry strengthened the work permit 
system, training for employees & contractors and carried out updations of 
operating manuals/ SOPs. 
 
B. Safety measures implementation is in progress as given below 
 
1) HPCL Mumbai Refinery : Automatic Shutdown valve at Naphtha stabilizer 
Column bottom provided in one unit , the provision of same in the another unit is 
in progress. Similarly job is in progress for connection of safety valve discharge 
of the Propane compressor to Flare and both  of them require shut down of the 
units and are planned to be carried out during Turn around maintenance of the 
unit this year. 
2)  HPCL-Vizag Refinery:Safety valve discharge connection to flare for CDU is 
partly completed and balance is planned to be completed during planned shut -
down of the unit . 
3) BPCL: Job for firefighting of over head Air-fin coolers is in progress.  
4) BPCL-Kochi: LPG pump is being provided with double mechanical seal. 
The electrical instrumentation cables passing above the hot pumps/ hot lines are 
being rerouted / provided with adequate fire protection.   
5) IOCL, Haldia Refinery:Job to provide common isolation valve at CDU is in 
progress &  planned to be executed during turnaround. 
6) CPCL –Manali :The Safety valve discharge from CDU/VDU is  planned to be 
hooked up to flare during shutdown planned this year.  

27 
 
7) ONGC-Uran: I nternal inspection of two crude oil tanks planned & action 
taken for modification of Effluent treatment plant. 
8) MRPL: Job for connecting the Horton sphere safety valve dischar ge is 
taken up along with New Unit under capacity augmentation this year. 
 
Implementations of safety measures at  Coastal location of cross country 
pipelines stations:- 
 
Implementation of recommendations made in consecutive two audits is as under  
 
Coastal 
Location 
 
Date of Audit 
Compliance status 
No. of 
recommendations 
Recommendations  
Complied 
Vadinar 10.09.2004 
(ESA) 
14 14 
Paradip 5.2.2008 
(pre-com) 
25 25 
Haldia 1.2.2002 
(ESA) 
24 24 
Mundra 20.7.2005 
(Pre-com) 
28 28 
 
2.28 Asked as to whether there  is any laid down disaster management plan to 
minimize losses in case of natural disasters/accidents at the installation.  The Ministry 
in their reply stated that t he disaster management plans for natural disasters/accidents 
at the installations are alread y included in the Disaster Preparedness Manual of the 
concerned units.  
2.29  When  asked about the organisational set up of Safety, Health and 
Environment (HSE) in oil and gas companies, the Ministry stated as follows in their 
written reply:- 
 
 "All Oil &  Gas Companies have their own Safety, Health and Environment 
policy. Corporate Safety Departments’ functions include policy formulation, 
monitoring of safety management system, auditing, accident investigation, 
review and reporting to top management, OISD,  MoP&NG and various statutory 
authorities."  
 
 

28 
 
Accident/Incident Investigation findings 
2.30 Regarding  the details of accidents at installation during the last 5 years, the 
Ministry informed as under:- 
   
OIL INDUSTRY INCIDENT STATISTICS in LAST 5 YEARS 
Table 1: Total Consolidated 
Types of 
Incidents at 
Installations 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
FIRES 
Accidents 
20 
42 
19 
61 
17 
68 
23 
74 
14 
70 
                                                                                                                             
Total 
62 80 85 97  84 
Table 2   :   Group wise total fire Incident  
Group 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Refineries & Gas 
Processing Plants 
6 8 0 4 3 
Exploration / 
Production 
(Onshore) 
8 6 9 7 1 
Exploration / 
Production 
(Offshore) 
1 1 3 1 1 
Marketing 
Terminals/ LPG 
Plants/ Depots 
2 3 2 5 5 
Cross Country 
Pipelines 
3 1 3 6 4 
TOTAL 20 19 17 23 14 
Table 3   :   Group wise total accidents 
Group 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Refineries & Gas 
Processing Plants 8 15 12 18 5 
Exploration / 
Production 
(Onshore) 
13 22 23 18 26 
Exploration / 
Production 
(Offshore) 
9 16 23 21 23 

29 
 
Marketing 
Terminals/ LPG 
Plants/ Depots 
4 5 5 11 6 
Cross Country 
Pipelines 
8 3 5 6 10 
TOTAL 
(at Installations) 
42 61 68 74 70 
 
2.31 On being asked as to  how are  ‘accidents’ defined in the oil and gas industry 
and details regarding the accidents occurred in the oil and gas instal lations during the 
last 5 years,the Ministry stated the following:- 
 
"OISD Manual use the term “incidents”  to describe various fire and accidents 
that occur in the oil installations. Incidents defined in oil and gas industry are as 
follows: 
 
Major Incident  
i. Fatality 
ii. Permanent Loss of Body Part 
iii. Permanent Disability 
iv. Loss of Property >Rs. 5 lacs 
v. Shut down of Plant / Facility 
vi. Blow out / Explosion 
vii. Loss of more than 500 man-hours 
viii. Fire of more than 15 minutes duration 
ix. Failure of Rig Critical Equipment like draw works, casing line etc. 
 
Minor Incident  
Any incident not falling under any of the categories of major incident. 
Near miss Incident 
i. An incident which does not result in any injury or damage to property but 
has the potential to result in injury and / or property damage. 
ii. An undesirable event, if not timely controlled, would have led to a major / 
minor incident. 
The following events are to be categorized under major or minor incident, 
as applicable: 
 Hydrocarbon leakage from pipeline, resulting in stoppage of operations 
 Collision between vessel and offshore installation/ rig. 
 Release of toxic gases." 
 
 

30 
 
2.32 When asked as to when are accidents declared as major, the OISD, ED during 
the oral evidence stated as under:- 
"Sir, the OISD standard says that the major fire is where there is a loss of more 
than Rs.5 lakh or if the unit is shut down.  So, mostly  if the unit is shut down, we 
declare it as major fire even if there is some fire in the supply line without which 
you cannot run the unit".   
2.33 When asked whether the companies are obliged to report such 
accidents/incidents to statutory authorities, it was stated that Companies are obliged to 
report major incidents to PESO and Chief Inspector of Factories as per the MSIHC 
Rule and all the major accidents / incidents are also reported to OISD.  
 
2.34 On being asked about the  causes for these fire accidents , the Ministry replied 
that most of the accidents took place due to human error, like violation of work permit 
system as laid down in OISD standard -105and n on-adherence to the Standard 
Operating Procedures. 
2.35 On the financial impact of such fires and incidents in various oil installations.  
The ministry furnished the following information :- 
 
Financial Impact due to Fire Incidents Consolidated Summary  
 Rs.in Crore   
Sl. 
N
o. Group 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 TOTAL 
1 Refineries & 
Gas Processing 
Plants 
20.48 36.04 0.00 46.90 1.89 10.70 116.01 
2 Exploration / 
Production 
(Onshore) 
0.15 0.10 0.14 0.05 nil 1.31 1.75 
3 Exploration / 
Production 
(Offshore) # 
nil nil 0.30 nil 0.50 1.00 1.80 
4 Marketing 
Terminals/ 
LPG Plants/ 
Depots 
0.00 0.25 3.72 247.20 31.60 0.00 282.77 
5 Cross Country 
Pipelines  ## 
0.28 0.15 0.27 49.24 0.16 1.06 51.16 
  TOTAL 20.91 36.54 4.43 343.39 34.15 14.07 453.49 

31 
 
TRAINING 
 
2.36 High standard of safety can be achieved in an organisation if employees at all 
level are made to get involved in the safety p rogramme of the organisations. M ost 
accidents involved unsafe conditions and unsafe acts which are results of human 
failure.  One method of preventing this unsafe condition and unsafe acts is to train 
persons to establish and maintain a safe working environment. 
 
2.37 In handling safety related incidents, training of people plays an important role.  
When the Committee asked the Ministry to f urnish a note on the training given to the 
operating personnel/supervisors of the oil and gas installations, the Ministry give the 
following in their written reply:- 
 
2.38 Each of the oil company has its own train ing calendar. The training needs of the 
employees are identified and based on the need requisite in -house and off the 
company trainings are imparted. Training to the employees consists of both class room 
inputs as well as on the job training. In other words, through faculty interaction requisite 
theoretical inputs are provided and at site on -the-hand training is provided to gain 
practical approach.  
The training programs basically cover the following:  
 
 Understanding the process. 
 Understanding the PFD and P&I diagrams. 
 Inputs on start up, shut down, emergency handling procedures. 
 Training programs on HAZOP & QRA for officers. 
 Site specific programs on SOPs.  
 Inputs to improve the reliability of equipment. 
 Inputs on firefighting facilities & emergency handling. 
 Live firefighting training at fire training grounds. 
 Appreciation program on fire & safety for all employees. 
 Awareness program on fire & safety at the induction level. 
 Refreshers program on fire & safety. 
 
 

32 
 
2.39 Besides, regular training inputs are also provided to various contract labour 
employees working in the installation so as to equip them with adequate knowledge 
and skill not only to fight emergency situations like fires but also various do’s and 
don’ts of fire and safety. The Safety training to contract workers, TT crew, security 
personnel are given in line with OISD-standard-154. 
 
2.40 Induction level trainings are provided to all the contract workers prior to 
providing them gate pass for working in the installation.  
 
2.41 Asked whether Safe ty Drills are conducted by companies at their installations 
and to give details of the frequency of such drills conducted, the Ministry stated the 
following:- 
"Safety drills are regularly conducted by companies at their installations. The 
Onsite emergency drills are conducted at the interval of 6 months and offsite 
emergency drill is conducted once in a calendar year in line with provisions of 
Manufacturing, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals (Amendment) 
Rules, 2000."   
OIL SPILL  
2.42 When a questio n was posed by the Committee on offshore oil spill and its  
consequences the CMD, ONGC, replied as under during the oral evidence:- 
"Sir, as regards the offshore, I can tell you that we have a dispersion model 
based on a Norwegian software company.  It can indicate at any time in the year 
depending upon which installation oil spill is taking place, how much time it will 
take for us to tackle it and  which place it will land in.  So, it is very much 
available.  I am not aware whether it is prescribed there or not but this is very 
much prevalent not only with ONGC but even with joint ventures which are 
operating in the western offshore.  It is very much available".  
2.43 When asked as to whether such software are available  in the private sector  
also as they are now given oil blocks ,the Secretary, MoPNG stated that it is mandated 
by law and this requires a clearance from the Ministry of E nvironment and Forest. This 
impact assessment has to be submitted to them.  
2.44 On being asked as whether the GIS Mapping of consequences is part of 
environmental clearance, the Secretary during the oral evidence stated as under:-  

33 
 
"It applies more on off -shore installations because on on -shore the 
consequences are different. In off -shore definitely they have all the details with 
them".  
2.45 When asked as to whether Indian companies have capabilities to manage oil 
spill and its consequences impacting the environment, the CMD ONGC stated as 
under during oral evidence:- 
"Sir, I am not sure if it is mandated by law. But what we are trying to say is that 
any software which is making this prediction will look into all these, the weather, 
the current, the waves and the tide and will come to conclusions whether it is 
internal or external, irrespective of that fact, the model will always predict where 
these spills are going to take place and in how much time. Mostly what happens 
in case of oil spills is that oil ge ts evaporated before it reaches the shore. If the 
time is there it can always be collected, dispersed and disintegrated. So, there is 
hardly any chance of this going and creating a catastrophe in case it is of a 
smaller volume".  
2.46 Elaborating further on the subject, the CMD, ONGC stated the following:- 
'The entire oil spill has been broken into three tiers. If it is up to 700 tonnes, it 
called tier I, and all the operators, like the ONGC or the other operators in the 
offshore have been given the respons ibility of having the facilities. So, we have 
for both the Eastern and the Western off shores to contain if the oil spill is about 
700 tonnes. If it is more than 700 tonnes, then it called the tier II and the Indian 
Coast Guard has been mandated to have th is responsibility of containing this. 
Beyond that it is called tier III and there are world renowned companies, they 
are invariably called. Nobody maintains it. No country probably maintains this 
kind of tier III facilities. These are specialised companies  who have got the total 
wherewithal. They have got their own aircraft etc. and all that we need to have is 
a membership of that. They can mobilise within hours and then we have to pay 
for the oil spill control".   
2.47 When asked as to explain the domain expertise of the Coast Guard in oil spill, 
the ED, OISD replied the following during the oral evidence:-  
"There is a common pool and in the common pool the fund is given and Coast 
Guard takes the necessary equipment whatever is required and it  is the Coast 
Guard who does it".  
2.48 In a Note on the preparedness of oil PSUs to deal with oil industry problem like 
oil spill in offshore locations and other contaminations in onshore installation.   The 
Ministry furnished the following: 

34 
 
"OFFSHORE Installations: 
 The offshore oil installations have implemented the Oil Spill Response Plan to 
deal with Tier -I level oil spill (up to 700 MT of oil spill).  Regular mock drills are 
carried out to check the efficacy of the Oil Spill Response system. 
  Indian Coast Guard has the facility to deal with oil spill more than 700 MT and 
up to 10000 MT (Tier -II level). Tier -III relates to spill over 10000 MT and would 
involve national and international support. 
 National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan (NOS -DCP) exists in the country to 
preserve and protect the marine environment and prevent & control marine 
pollution. The functional responsibilities of various Ministries and Departments 
for oil spill response in maritime zones have been defined in the NOS -DCP. DG 
(Coast Guard) is designated as the Central Coordinating Agency (CCA) to 
implement the plan and coordinate resource pool up in the event of an oil spill. 
Individual oil companies are also the stakeholders in the plan, which will provide 
assistance to the Coast Guard. 
 Indian Coast Guard has four regional oil spill response centers at Port Blair, 
Mumbai, Chennai & Gulf of Kutch (Gujarat). 
 Indian Coast Guard periodically reviews the NOS -DCP provisions with the 
industry, Port authorities, central and state pollution control boards, National 
Institute of Oceanography etc. 
 The Contingency Plan prepared by the operator for handling oil spill 
emergencies is vetted by Coast Guard. 
 In order to further enhance the capabilities for oil spill response it has been 
discussed and decided to pool the resources available with the companies. 
Accordingly, mutual aid arrangement for ‘Pooling of Resources’  amongst all the 
companies located in near vicinity has been prepared as given below:  
a) Western Coast-   
 1. Vadinar    IOCL, RIL, Essar and BORL  
 2. Hazira    Cairn India &Niko 
 3. Mumbai High   ONGC & BG 
      4. Kochi    BPCL & Kochi Port 
b) Eastern Coast –  
5. Puducherry   Hardy & HOEC 
6. KG Basin/ Yanam  Cairn, RIL, GSPC & ONGC 
7. Vizag    HPCL &Vizag Port 
8. Paradip    IOCL &Paradip Port 
MOU for Pooling of Resources is finalized except at Mumbai High area, where 
ONGC & BG are in the process of finalizing the same and at Puducherry  area, 
where the MOU would be finalized as soon as production at Hardy platform is 
resumed. 

35 
 
 Major oil companies like ONGC have taken membership with M/s OSRL, 
Singapore to deal with any major oil spill. 
 
  ON SHORE Installation: 
For Onshore installations where storage facilities are there have been provided 
with containment system in the form of tank dyke. The volume of tank dyke is 
designed in such a way that it can contain 110% of the tank volume. Floor of the 
dyke are preferable made with cement concrete to prevent ingress of oil to the 
soil. Dyke valves are always kept in close position to pre vent oil spill from the 
dyke to the other areas. Thus, oil spill at onshore installation are remote 
possibility. " 
    
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER – 3 
 
MB LAL COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 
3.1 Jaipur Fire Accident took place on 29.10.2009 at Indian Oil Corporation 
Terminal.  The Ministry ordered an independent enquiry committee under the 
chairmanship of Shri M.B. Lal to investigate into the causes of fire and to suggest 
remedial measures to prevent recurrence of such incidents in future.  The Committee 
had given 113 recommenda tions in January, 2010 for implementation at existing 
locations of oil marketing companies.  MoP&NG on 21.04.2010 conveyed acceptance 
of the recommendations of the MB Lal Committee  and a specific timeframe was 
decided for implementation, after discussions with the OMCs.  
 The time frame  for implementation of recommendations of MB Lal Committee is 
given in Annexure - I 
 The MB Lal Committee in their report inter alia observed that:- 
  “The immediate cause of the accident was the non -observance of normal 
 safe procedure involving sequence of valve operation in the line up activity and 
 an engineering design which permitted use of a “Hammer Blind Valve”,  a 
 device which is used for positively isolating a pipeline.   The design of the 
 Hammer Blind valve all ows a large area at the top of the valve (at the valve 
 bonnet) to be completely open every time the valve position needed to be 
 changed.  It was through this open area that the liquid MS had gushed out, 
 when the tank was being lined up (made ready for p umping to BPCL) because 
 another valve connecting to the tank was also open when the Hammer Blind 
 was in the changeover position. 
  The basic or root causes were an absence of site specific written 
 operating procedures, absence of leak stopping devices f rom a remote location 
 (the facility for remote closing of the “Motor Operated Valve” connecting to the 
 tank  side, which could have stopped the leak and insufficient understanding of 
 hazards and risks and consequences.” 
 The M.B.Lal Committee had also o bserved that due to non -availability of self 
contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) at the accident site and absence of any training 
to deal with such emergency ,the personal could do little and had to withdraw. 
3.2 The salient recommendations of the M.B.Lal Committee include: 
a. Adherence to Standard Operating Practices (SOP)/management of 
change procedure 

37 
 
b. Improvement in design and layout for preventing loss of hydrocarbon 
containment along with terminal automation for new installations. 
c. Development of new standard by OISD covering all aspects at one place 
i.e. design, operations and maintenance. 
d. Strengthening of training and inclusion of Safety orientation as one of the 
performance evaluation criteria. 
e. The quantitative risk analysis  to identify the hazards and accordingly 
mitigations measures to be strengthened. 
f. Strengthening of fire-fighting facilities 
g. Strengthening of safety function 
h. Strengthening of internal safety audit mechanism 
i. Review of existing statutory provision s w.r.t. sitting criteria for major 
installations The Petroleum Rules and various provisions under The 
Environment Act with a view to create buffer safety zones around high -
hazard petroleum installations. 
3.3 When the Committee wanted to know the status of  implementation of the 
recommendations made by the MB Lal Committee, the Ministry replied the following in 
its written note:-   
“Implementation of recommendations is at various stages and is being regularly 
monitored by a Joint Implementation Committee constituted by the MoP&NG. 
The last meeting of JIC was held on 05.03.2012 and the present status of 
implementation of M B Lal Committee’s recommendations in respect of oil 
companies is as follows: 
Total Number of recommendations: 113 
S No. Recommendation Number Percentage 
A Recommendations implemented 66 58% 
B Recommendations under 
implementation 
47 42% 
(i) Engineering related 11 10% 
(ii) Procurement related 10 9% 
(iii) Training Related 03 3% 
(iv) General/ Policy related 13 11% 
(v) OISD Related** 10 9% 
(** indicate additional safety measures that are to be incorporated in a 
separate standard. Towards this, OISD std -244 is under development & 
will be put upto Safety Council for approval in FY 2013). 

38 
 
 
56 % recommendations of the MB Lal Committee have b een implemented and 
these address the vital issues for enhancing safety in oil installations like focus 
on training, strict adherence to Shortest Possible Procedures (SOPs), improving 
LUX level in the installations, operation of first tank body valve from both control 
room and field, from outside dyke area etc”.   
  Assuring the implementation of the recommendations , the Secretary 
during oral evidence on 29.8.2011 stated:- 
 “Hon. Chairman, since the time this issue was raised by the hon.  
Committee, we had convened certain meetings with all the concerned and have 
taken decisions.  Those decisions will stand.  We are committed to implement 
the M.B. Lal Committee recommendations.  We are moving ahead in that 
direction.  In fact, I had read ou t in one of the meetings that we have given them 
a timeline, a chart.  By that time, they will have to comply; they will have to put 
whatever is required in place to make the installation safe.  And there is no 
rethinking at our level.  We are, in fact, pr essing them continuously to move 
ahead and finalise the tenders, invite bids open bids, compare, place orders, 
and move ahead in the given time frame.  There is no rethinking and no review 
in our minds at our level.  It has to be done and that too, within a time frame.  
We have laid down a mechanism at the Ministry level.  Additional Secretary 
himself convenes the meetings periodically to monitor the progress.  The last 
meeting was convened in August.  I believe that the next meeting is again going 
to be convened and we are really going to see that each and every milestone is 
achieved.  I can only express my concern because hon. Committee Members 
have raised certain issues which may not have come to our notice.  Definitely, 
we would ourselves like to confront this to the Oil Marketing Companies.  This is 
the position.  Some slippages might be taking place.  They have to bring it to our 
notice.  Otherwise, they would not be able to adhere to the timeline.  I can from 
my side say and say with confidence that th ey have to comply with it.  They 
have to put all the safety equipments etc. in position as per the timelines given 
to them.  They keep assuring us that all the actions required for the safety 
equipments to be brought in are in line and somehow they are als o feeling 
confident that it will all be done within the given time  frame.  But, definitely 
looking to the concern which hon. Members have expressed, we would like to 
take it from them also so that there is no slippage, there is no carelessness at 
any level.  This much assurance I can give to the Committee”’ 
  
Regarding representations received to review some recommendations of 
the M.B. Lal Committee, including circulation of unsigned note from Shri M.B. 
Lal himself the Secretary informed that representations have been received 

39 
 
from some members, CVC and Shri M.B. Lal himself which were placed before 
the steering committee and thereafter to chairmen committee.  On being  asked  
that since the Ministry is moving in dire ction of implementation of M.B. Lal 
Committee report, the reasons for appointing another Committee the Secretary 
stated that it is a continuous process which keeps happening. 
 On being pointedly asked if there is a ny dilution of standards the 
Secretary stated there is no aim to dilute.  CMD, IOC however stated (in a sitting 
on  29.3.2012) that if any standards have been made one or two years earlier 
and if there is a better technology now they would  like to   make changes. It was 
agreed that since the new t echnology is ongoing process it should not be a 
reason not to implement the OISD standards.  
  When asked on the action taken on OMCs which are delaying the 
process the Secretary stated that with the time schedule given by M.B. Lal 
Committee report, in some cases it can happen that work is not completed in 
stipulated time as it can take more time.  However there is no dilution in 
implementing OISD standards. 
 3.4 OISD had revised two Standards namely OISD -STD-116 and OISD-STD-117 in 
November, 2010.  These Standards basically relate to fire protection Standards as per 
the details given below.  
“OISD-STD-116 – Fire protection facilities for petroleum refinery & oil/gas processing 
plants) 
OISD STD -117 - Fire protection facilities for petroleum depots, terminals, pipelines 
installations and lube oil installations” 
3.5 When asked by the Committee how the OISD Standards are developed , the 
Ministry stated the following: 
“All OISD standards are developed through a well-established approval process; 
the standards specifying only the minimum requirements are to be met. A 
company is at liberty to install facilit ies over and above those specified in the 
OISD standards.  

40 
 
OISD Std. -116 (Fire protection facilities for petroleum refinery & oil/gas 
processing plants) & OISD Std. -117 (Fire protection facilities for petroleum 
depots, terminals, pipelines installations an d lube oil installations) are statutory 
standards. These two standards were developed through a consultative process 
viz. wide consultation with industry members, incorporating recommendations of 
MB Lal committee and recommendations by the Chairman Committ ee 
constituted by the Safety Council. These standards, upon approval by the 
Safety Council, were notified for implementation in Nov, 2010”.  
3.6 It is seen that M.B. Lal Committee set up after Jaipur Fire Accident in 2009 
made 113 recommendations which the  Ministry has accepted. When the Committee 
enquired as to whether it does not indicate that there were gaps in the safety 
preparedness need for improvement of safety systems, revision of standards etc. of 
the oil and gas Installations, the Ministry in its reply furnished the following:- 
 
“Fire at IOCL’s Jaipur terminal occurred primarily due to human error. The 
operation involving reversal of the hammer blind with MOV kept in open position 
resulted in huge spillage of POL. This led to formation of vapour cl oud and 
subsequently fire of such a magnitude. It may be mentioned that although fire -
fighting equipment were in place but were of little help once hydrocarbon fire of 
such magnitude engulfed the area. Routine operations involving transferring of 
POL had b een carried out by the plant personnel umpteen numbers of times in 
the past without any accident. To this extent, there were gaps in safety 
preparedness. Knowledge gap is an issue and the OMCs have accorded extra 
thrust to equip their employees, including contract labourers with adequate skill 
& knowledge. 
 
 It is submitted that OISD standard 116 & 117 were in the process of revision as 
per normal practice prior to the Jaipur incident. The Jaipur fire incident led to the 
constitution of the MB Lal committee . The MB Lal Committee recommended 
certain safety measures. Recommendations were also made by a Committee of 
Chairmen of PSU oil companies. Since OISD standards were in the process of 
revision, the recommendations of both the committees were included in th e 
revised standard”.  
 
3.7 The Committee wanted to know as to how the decisions related to safety are 
decided in the Ministry and related agencies.  So the Committee sought from the 
Ministry as to w hich is the highest forum to decide on safety issues for oil and gas 
installations.  The Ministry in its written replies furnished the following:- 
“Safety aspects technically and operationally are looked after by concerned 
Unit head and Oil Companies CEOs. Besides, there is a Safety Council which 
is headed by Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as Chairman and 

41 
 
includes members comprising Additional Secretary, Joint Secretaries of 
MoP&NG, Chief Executives of Public Sector Undertakings, at least two Chief 
Executives from Private / JV Companies on rotatio nal basis, Advisor Fire to the 
Government of India, Director General of Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institute and Chief Controller of Explosives”. 
 
3.8 When asked by the Committee, about the estimated expenditure to be incurred 
to implement the MB La l Committee recommendations by oil PSUs and private 
companies, the Ministry furnished the following in its written reply:- 
 
“Since the procurement process is still on, it is difficult to arrive at a figure on 
the proposed expenditure that may be incurred o n implementation of all the 
recommendations of the MB Lal Committee. However, it has been roughly 
estimated by OISD that the expenditure would be about six to seven thousand 
crore rupees. A firm figure will emerge once the financial bids of all the tenders 
are opened”.  
   
3.9 Asked subsequently by the Committee to spell out the time frame by which the 
Ministry and PSUs will implement the recommendations of M.B.Lal Committee, the 
Ministry gave the following information:- 
 
 “As per the information received from OISD, there are 113 recommendations 
given by M.B. Lal Committee post Jaipur fire in 2010 that are to be implemented 
by the oil industry. Out of this, 66 recommendations have since been 
implemented and 47 recommendations are at various stages of implementation.  
 
As per inputs provided by the oil companies and OISD based on the progress 
achieved so far, the time frame for major engineering & procurement related 
recommendations are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Items Tentative Time Schedule 
1 High Volume Long Range Foam cum water 
monitors. 
Partly Implemented. 
Balance : December,2014 
 
2 Rim seal fire detection &suppression system. 
 
December,2014 
3 Hydrocarbon detection system. 
 
December,2013 
4 Up gradation of fire water system to meet 
double fire contingencies in installation having 
aggregate storage capacity of more than 
30,000 kl.  
 
December,2014 
5 Replacement of Hammer blind valves. Award of contract by 
May,2012. 
 

42 
 
 
6 Provision of Medium expansion foam 
generator (MEFG). 
 
January,2013 
7 Remote operated shut off Valve (ROSOV). 
 
Award of contract June,2012 
8 Close Circuit TVs 73 % completed.  
Balance by June,2012. 
 
9  Mass flow meter December,2013 
 
 
3.10 When the Committee sought to know regarding any assessment has been done 
on the safety measures installed by private companies in pursuance of MB Lal 
Committee Recommendations, the Ministry gave the following details in its written 
reply:- 
   “Assessment has been done on safety measures installed by private 
companies in line with OISD -116 &117 and as per the MB Lal Committee 
recommendations for following installations: 
 
(i) Vadinar Refinery, Essar Oil Limited 
(ii) Jamnagar Refinery, Reliance Industries Limited. 
(iii) Bathinda Refinery, Hindustan Mittal Energy Limited. 
(iv) Dhabol LNG unloading Facility, Ratnagiri Gas & Power Private Ltd. 
(v) Exploration and Production installations of CIL & RIL”. 
 
Issued raised by Industry on the Amended Standard 
3.11 The Ministry informed that p ursuant to the notification of standards in 
November’2010, OISD and the Ministry received a number of representations from 
RIL, BORL, and EOL raising questions on some of the issues pertaining to these 
standards.  
3.12 The Committee sought from the Ministr y as to what were the main issues raised 
by private companies in respect of OISD 116/117, the Ministry in their written reply 
furnished the following:-  
 

43 
 
 “Subsequent to the notification of revised OISD standards 116 and 117, BORL, 
EOL and RIL raised the following issues: 
 
i. Fire water requirement for Terminals with storage capacity exceeding 30,000 
KL- Double fire contingency.  
ii. Automatic actuated Rim seal fire detection (based on linear heat hollow metallic 
tube) and single shot foam protection system in Class A tanks. 
iii. Installation of Remote Operated Long Range variable flow monitors”. 
 
3.13 Asked by the Committee as to whether some of the M.B. Lal committee 
recommendations were changed due to representations made by oil and gas 
companies, the Ministry gave the following in its written reply :- 
"No representation has been received from oil and gas companies for changing 
the recommendations of the MB Lal committee. All the recommendations of M B 
Lal committee were accepted by the Government and these are being  
implemented by the industry". 
 
3.14 When the Committee wanted to know w hether there is any move to review the 
MB Lal committee recommendations, the Ministry gave the following in a written reply:-   
“There is no move to review the recommendations of M B Lal Committee 
recommendations except for the fire water requirement as per double fire 
contingency scenario.  It has been proposed by Chairmen Committee that the 
design water requirement for double fire contingency should be considered for 
large oil installations with total storage capacity of more than 30,000 KL”.  
 
3.15 The Committee wanted to know the steps taken by the Ministry in the issue of 
equivalency retroactivity and common fire -fighting facilities. The Ministry had furnished 
the following in its written note to the Committee which details out the sequence of 
activities carried out regarding the OISD standards 116 & 117:- 
“Meeting Convened by MoP&NG 
Addl. Secretary, MoP&NG convened a meeting on 21st April’2011 to address the 
issues that had been raised. During the meeting, it was agreed that OISD could 
consider inclusion of clauses on equivalency, retroactivity and common fire -
fighting facilities. However, it was also mentioned that any consideration  of this 
should not be an impediment in implementation of the fire safety measures as 
mentioned in the OISD standards 116 and 117. Any change in the standards 
would require approval of the Safety Council.  
 
 

44 
 
Steering Committee Meeting 
Subsequently, Steerin g Committee (consisting of members from public and 
private oil industry) meeting was convened by OISD on 20 th September, 2011, 
which was attended by the principal panelists drawn from entire Oil Industry, 
both private and public sector. In this meeting, it  was agreed by the Steering 
Committee members for insertion of appropriate equivalency clause, 
retroactivity clause and common fire -fighting facility clause in the OISD Std. -116 
& 117.   As regards Equivalency Clause, it was also agreed that the Equivalent  
or Superior system would have to be approved by a technical committee set -up 
by OISD. The equivalency clause provides the industry with choice/flexibility, an 
aspect which is found in International Standards like National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA ). During this meeting, it was categorically mentioned that 
inclusion of equivalency or retroactivity after following the due process should 
not be an impediment in the implementation process being taken up by the 
industry. 
10.2 During this meeting, some o ther issues, viz., necessity of rim seal 
protection system in all Class -A tanks irrespective of their size and diameter, 
requirement of remote HVLR facility etc. were also raised by the principal 
panelists. No consensus could be reached on these divergent views. 
Referral to the Committee of Chairmen 
Since there were enough divergent views and consensus could not be arrived 
at, OISD considered it prudent to refer the matter to the Committee of Chairmen 
for advice. The referral to Chairmen Committee was aimed  at getting a broader 
perspective and requisite advice from the team whose earlier recommendations 
had been incorporated in the Standards. 
 The Chairmen Committee (consisting of Chairman - IOCL, C&MDs -ONGC, 
BPCL & HPCL) meeting was held on 24 th Oct, 2011 and Chairmen Committee 
while accepting in principle the equivalency, retroactivity and common fire -
fighting facilities clauses for incorporation in OISD -STD-116 & 117, decided to 
constitute a Technical Expert Committee (TEC) to review and recomm end on 
the issues referred by OISD.    
  Outcome of Technical Expert Committee (TEC) meeting  
The Technical Expert Committee (TEC) consisting of Director (R) - IOCL & 
Convener, Director(R)- BPCL and Executive Director (O& D)- HPCL deliberated 
the issues at length and met four times at New Delhi. To arrive at a scientific 
solution, the expert committee with due approval of Chairmen Committee co -
opted two experts from EIL.  
Expert Committee members after detailed deliberation s; based on various 
International and National Standards and also on the basis of scientific 
evaluations submitted its report on 09.12.2011. TEC recommendations were 

45 
 
reviewed by Chairmen Committee in a meeting on Jan 04, 2012 where the 
following decisions were taken: 
 Recommended inclusion of Equivalency Clause, Retroactivity Clause and 
Common firefighting clause in OISD-STD-116 & 117.  
 Accepted TEC recommendations:  
 Automatic rim seal fire detection & suppression system for all Class A 
tanks (as already provided in the amended OISD STDs 116,117) 
 Related to HVLRs (fixed / portable applications) 
 Supplementary fire water requirement (36x4=144 cu.m/hr) in design 
fire water calculations in OISD-STD-117.  
TEC also suggested operating philosophy for HVLRs must be d eveloped by oil 
companies for effective firefighting. Provision of manual operated HVLR in OISD 
STD 117, wherever sufficient distance is available within the installation from the 
point of hazards, and in -company fire-fighting infrastructure with respect t o the 
location is available.  
 Removal of time schedule for implementation as provided in OISD -STD-
116 & 117. Instead direction to be provided by OISD / MoPNG”.  
  

46 
 
CHAPTER – 4 
PROCUREMENT RELATED ISSUES 
 
4.1 The Committee had wanted to know the progress of implementation of MB Lal 
Committee recommendations in the oil marketing companies.  All the 
recommendations were to  be implemented by 24 months i.e. by  April, 2012.  The 
Committee wanted to examine the issues that have resulted in delay of implementation 
of MB Lal Committee recommendations in the oil marketing companies.   
4.2 The Major Engineering & Procurement related items that need to be installed as 
part of MB Lal Committee recommendations are as under: 
 Provision of HVLRs.  
 Rim Seal Detection & Suppression System for Class ‘A’   FRTs. 
 Hydrocarbon detection system. 
 Double fire contingency.  
 Replacement of Hammer Blinds. 
 Provision of MEFG/ROSOV/CCTV/MFM. 
4.3 The Committee were informed that the oil companie s faced certain difficulties in 
procurement of some items/equipments which were part of MB Lal Committee 
recommendations/provisions of OISD std 116 and 117.  When asked by the Committee 
to elaborate, the Ministry stated the following in its written reply: 
 
“It may be mentioned that oil companies have been implementing the various 
MB Lal Committee recommendations/ provisions of OISD -STD-116 and 117. As 
informed by OISD, basing on inputs received from PSU Oil Companies, about 
58% of MB Lal Committee recommend ations have been implemented. The 
balance are also under various stages of execution. The difficulties that were 
faced by oil companies in the areas of procurement of some of the equipment, 
as intimated by the oil companies to OISD are as under – 
 
a) Limited number of vendors including high quotes: 
 
Various equipment like hollow metallic Rim Seal fire protection, HVLR, Double 
Block Bleeder valve, remote operated shut down valves, Mass Flow Meters etc. 
in large quantities have been recommended for procurement a nd installation to 
enhance safety of the oil installations. The oil companies faced problems with 

47 
 
limited number of vendors for procurement of such high value, high volume 
equipment. The limited number of vendors also resulted in non -competitive 
bidding pr ocess. As there were not many qualified vendors to supply such 
equipment and coupled with abnormally high quotes, oil companies faced with 
the problem of justifying the reasonability of the price quoted. 
 
It has been observed that in some cases the rates q uoted by the vendors were 
as high as 400% above the estimate which left oil companies with no other 
alternative but to stop the tendering process and float fresh tender. In the 
process, the procurement process got delayed. 
 
b) Vendors not meeting the PQ criteria: 
 
As large quantities of equipment were being procured for the first time, it was 
decided that procurement should be done by one nominated company on behalf 
of the industry to get the best price. However, at the time of procurement, it was 
found that the vendors did not qualify the laid down PQ criteria of the company. 
Even after relaxing the PQ criteria, it was found that vendors did not even meet 
the relaxed criteria. Under such circumstances oil companies had to essentially 
cancel the tender.  
 
It ha s now been decided that instead of joint tender individual oil companies 
must procure the equipment for their respective companies. Not qualifying the 
PQ criteria and the decision to go for joint procurement resulted in delay in 
procurement and implementation thereof. 
 
c) Vendors quoting high rates apropos incorporation of the items in 
OISD standards:  
 
It has been observed that vendors were quoting high rates for the same item as 
compared to the past supply taking advantage of Mandatory/Statutory provision 
in OISD Standard. For example, the quoted price Hollow Metallic Rim Seal 
system prior to the amendment of the OISD -STD-116 and 117 and thereafter 
had been quoted at around 2.5 times more even after adjusting the inflation 
factor. The high quote of the equipm ent apropos amendment of the standard 
posed problem in the oil industry in justifying the reasonability of rate. 
 
d) Complaints from some quarters– 
 
The other hindrances which resulted in delay in implementation are due to 
complaints that were being received by the oil companies from various agencies 
including vendors, CVC.  
 
The complaints of the vendors and subsequent reference from CVC had to be 
settled before the normal procurement process could be followed. The 

48 
 
settlement of the complaints through Independent External Monitors (IEM) took 
time which delayed the implementation process. 
 
Although oil companies in their right earnest intended to go ahe ad with the 
procurement process but due to the above constraints viz., limited vendors, not 
meeting the PQ criteria, quoting abnormal high rates, complaints from various 
quarters and its settlement delayed the implementation process particularly in 
respect of procurement of some of the items” 
 
4.4 When IOC was enquired as to how decisions to retenders are taken, the IOC, 
Chairman in the oral evidence stated as follows:  
"The decision is taken on the merit and the circumstances of the case.  There 
are instances where we have gone for re -tendering and there are instances 
where we have also accepted.  So, there is a mix of both the acceptance and 
rejection.  We normally do not calculate it in this manner.  If it is required we will 
do it.  I should also c larify that if it is a single tender case and it is more than the 
accepted rate then it is obviously re -tendered but wherever it is within the 
estimate but it is a single tender there could be both the situations". 
Giving his views on delay in implementati on the Secretary stated that major 
delays have been due to clubbing wh en the vendors were disqualified.   Later it 
was declubbed.   
 
4.5 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the procurement of 
certain engineering items are causing delays du e to which the implementation 
schedule has been postponed.   The Committee were concerned with the PSUs and 
Oil Companies for such serious delays done by them in providing safety at oil 
installations despite repeated commitments  by the Ministry/PSU officials regarding  the 
implementation of safety at all oil installations.  The Committee called for information 
from the Ministry regarding the reasons for such delays in procurement of the key 
equipments required for implementation of the revised OISD Standards.  The Ministry’s 
reply on each of the item is given below: 
“High Volume Long Range Monitors (HVLR) 
 

49 
 
The Ministry had informed the Committee that the OISD Standards 117 have 
provided for the following: 
Provision of manual HVLRs is only for locations where all of the following are 
available: 
1) In-house fire tenders with fulltime fire fighting crew. 
2) Sufficient distance  from the point of hazards. 
For locations not meeting inter-distance norms as per OISD-118 : Provision of 
HVLRs even for tank farms storing Class-B/C products. 
For locations meeting inter-distance norms as per OISD-118 : One trolley 
mounted HVLR for covering tank farm storing Class-B/C products. 
Provision of portable HVLRs where it is not possible to install fixed HVLR at a 
safe distance from the tank because of space constraints. 
The provisions proposed in the standard w.r.t HVLRs have not been diluted 
rather these have been made more stringent”. 
4.6 When the committee sought to know the reasons  for delay in procuremen t of 
HVLR, the Ministry informed the following: 
“Joint Industry Tender floated on 6th Dec, 2010.  
• Tech bids opened on 18th Jan, 2011 for evaluation. 
• Price bid opening planned in May, 2011 but could be done only in Jan, 2012. 
• Delay due to:  
 requirement of stage wise clearance from individual OMCs. 
 handling of complaints from some quarters.  
• Price bid finally opened on 04.01.12 
• Price quoted by L-1 vendor higher than estimate.  
• Negotiations held with L-1 party for price justification. 
• One of the Vendor inform ed on 12/03/12 that for similar monitor, they have 
supplied to HMEL at ~50% lower than the price quoted by L-1 vendor. 
• The final discounted offer of vendor received on 26/03/2012. 
• Evaluation committee took final decision on 2nd April 2012 and  Emergency 
procurement put up for management  approval”. 

50 
 
4.7 When asked whether the oil companies  had negotiated with the suppliers of 
monitors on prices,  during the oral evidence stated the following reply was given:-   
"Sir, when the Tender Evaluation Committee wer e negotiating with the L1 
bidder, we have received some work orders from Hindustan Mittal Refineries 
that they have supplied such monitors at 50 per cent lower cost.  Hindustan 
Mittal has supplied the monitors at 50 per cent lower cost. The monitor which 
was supplied was 2000 gpm, and the tender was for 5750 gpm max. So, he has 
supplied a higher volume monitor at a lower cost. That information came to TEC 
and then TEC wanted to examine the offer which we have received from HEML 
at 50 per cent lower cost". 
4.8 Asked to explain the delay in procurement of HVLR due to complaints, the 
Ministry in its written reply stated the following:- 
“CVC received a complaint regarding the HVLR tender which was forwarded by 
IOCL’s vigilance department to IOCL’s purchase department for review. As per 
CVC guidelines, the issues raised in the complaint were presented to 
Independent External Monitors four times. As per the advice of IEMs, following 
actions were taken: 
a) The issues of the complaint were shared with other OMCs(HPCL & 
BPCL) for examination at their end. 
b) Technical issues of the complaint were referred to independent fire 
experts for their opinion. Replies received from independent technical experts 
were presented to the IEMs.  
c) Approval was taken at One level Higher(Director) for relaxation in Pre -
Qualification criteria.  
   HPCL received a complaint that the three vendors participating in the tende r 
are related to each other. HPCL referred the issue to their legal department. 
Various documents were asked from the vendor & scrutinized by HPCL’s legal 
department. 
The process of scrutinizing the issues of the complaints delayed the 
procurement process by approximately 9-10 months.  
The complaints have been handled as per CVC guidelines and purchase 
procedures”. 
 

51 
 
 On the query of the Committee the reasons for not opening the  bids for which 
tenders were floated and were promised to be done in two months the  CMD , 
IOCL stated:- 
 “What I want to submit and what I did say is that we will make efforts.  
But, if you might recall, I had also said that since many companies are involved, 
IOCL on its own cannot go ahead and place the order.  We have to have an 
evaluation process.  All the companies have to accept it.  Then only, we can do 
it.  We are just the nodal agency to do work on behalf of everybody.  So, this is 
one of the aspects which we had anticipated.  It is not that we have stopped 
working.  We are st ill working.  We hope that we have given the status that 
some of them will be completed by 30 th November and some other will be 
completed by 31 st December.  Even that status has been given in the 
presentation.  We are not stopped.  But, it might take two m onths.  It might take 
a little more time.  We have good reasons as to why it took more time.  We are 
not trying to delay them.  The Secretary has already clarified that we have not 
put a stop to it.  We are going ahead.  So, the status is this.  We are abl e to 
present it.  If you ask and give us an opportunity, we will given in writing as to 
what has happened from the last date and why there is a delay of one, two or 
three months.  We will give that in writing.  We have cogen t reasons to submit 
before you”. 
 
 
 The matter was again raised during evidence on 29.8.2011.  The work regarding 
tendering of HVLRs was to  be completed in two months but even after a  lapse of 8 
months the process has not completed.  When enqui red the reasons for negotiating 
when as per  CVC guidelines if the bid is within 5% of estimated amount there would 
be no negotiations.  CMD, IOC stated that in the tender committee the CMD or officer 
immediate below are not involved.  They can only ask the committee to expedite.  They 
generally do not involve in the process as it will tantamount to vitiating their negotiating 
process.  
4.9 Asked by the Committee regarding the current status on 29.3.12 in  ordering of 
HVLRs, the Secretary, MoPNG, during the oral evidence informed that:-    
"Some orders have been placed and f or the remaining, orders will be placed in 
April, 2012". 
 
 

52 
 
4.10 The Committee have been given to understand that there was an unsolicited 
offer from a company named ACRON for supply of HVLR monitors to OMCs.  The 
Committee sought the factual position on this issue from the oil companies. R egarding 
ACRON email,  the representative of BPCL are made the following comments during 
oral evidence: 
"Sir, when the tender was floated, the material of construction which was given 
in the tender  was stainless steel and it was UL approved whereas this party, 
Akram Brass, has supplied with the material of construction as brass and also 
had UL approval at that particular point of time.  When the technical bids were 
received and were getting evaluate d, at that point of time the Technical 
Committee, which was there for evaluating the technical offers, rejected this 
officer saying that it is brass and it is not stainless steel.  That is why, he was 
rejected on technical grounds.  After that the price bi d was opened.  On 4 th of 
January the price bid was opened and the Negotiation Committee started.  
During the month of February, the e -mails came to all the Chairmen and also all 
the TEC Members. All nine TEC Members got the e -mail from some source 
where he had given the ACRON offer at Rs. 19 lakh or something and he had 
also given the technical offer.  Initially also he was saying: “Instead of brass I 
can give steel.  Give me some time; I will get approval for steel.”   It was not 
approved by the Technical Committee at that point of time.  When this offer 
came, as it was addressed to Technical Committee Members, everybody 
thought that let us look at that particular cost, what is the exact cost and all that.  
After that initially the vender has given only two  per discount and after the he 
has started increasing the discount up to 10 per cent.  That is one point".   
4.11 Elaborating further on the issue, the CMD, BPCL made the following 
observation:-  
“The fact is that the Technical Negotiating Committee took n ote of it and they 
use this as a negotiating point”. 
RIM SEAL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM 
4.12 When asked by the Committee as to  what is the cost of the rim seal fire 
protection system, the Ministry replied the following: 
"As far as the rim seal fire protection for Refinery Division Rs. 987 crore for IOC 
and  Rs. 350 crore for BPCL & HPCL". 
 

53 
 
4.13 When the Committee wanted to know the progress made by the companies in 
procurement of RIM SEAL system, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
IOCL 
• Foreign consultant was deployed initially to firm the spec. 
• JIC decided to go for Joint Tender on 8th Oct, 2010. 
• Draft tender document for industry prepared on 2nd Feb, 2011. 
• Comments of Industry members incorporated till June, 2011. 
• Industry Working Group finalized tender document on 11th Sep, 2011. 
• Since the value of job & volume of work was enormous and installation specific, 
decided to go for individual tender basis on 8th Dec, 2011. 
• Tender floated by IOCL on 4th Feb, 2012 
• Technical bid opened on 20th March, 2012 
• Only 01 offer received..Under evaluation. 
HPCL 
• Tender floated in Feb, 2012. 
• Tender opening scheduled on 29th March 2012. 
• Evaluation to be completed by July, 2012. 
• Expected award by August, 2012. 
BPCL 
• Tender floated on 31.01.2012.   
• Pre-bid meeting conducted in Feb, 2012. 
• Based on the technical clarifications from the vendors during the Pre -bid 
meeting, corrigendum is being issued with due date extension upto 23 rd April, 
2012. 
• Evaluation expected by May, 2012 
• Expected date of award June, 2012. 
4.14 During oral evidence , the IOC official made the following observation  to the 
Committee regarding the complexity in installing the systems:- 

54 
 
"That this has to be done on tanks which are having hydrocarbons.  We are 
discussing here about the safety. One tank will have 65,000 crude oil.  On the 
top of it, the job has to be done.  The job has to be done by people who have no 
knowledge of refining. Our submission is that we should go slowly and we 
should not rush  and do this job. This is our submission to you.  Initially, for the 
IOC Refinery Division, we have issued a tender for 236 tanks. When we issued 
the tender, there were so many complaints and counter complaints. Then, we 
went to IEM also. They also suggested that this is a safety items.” 
4.15 Adding further, the CMD, IOC stated:-   
"It will be done in such a mega scale. It has never been done in any country in 
the world. For the first time, in such a mega scale it will be done.  We were 
advised: “Do not do it in one go. Do it in phases.” So, we have gone to our 
Board. We have taken permission for going into phases. We have tenders, 
document, file but there is a v igilance guideline that we cannot reduced the 
number once we have already tendered out. If we go in two phases, 
automatically we have to retain that. I am talking of the refinery division".  
4.16 Elaborating further about the steps, he further added:- 
"Similarly, for the marke ting division, we are doing it.  Even if we purchase all 
these materials, these are to be put on the tank. We can hand over maximum 
three tanks at a time because there is crude, naphtha etc. At the same time, the 
refinery also has t o run to supply products to the marketing division. These 
refineries are running for 50 years without any major fire incidence. There  have 
been only seven fires in previous years. Out of tha t, five  happened in the crude 
tank.  I had explained last time t hat all these tanks are even double -sealed. 
Earlier one single seal was there. There will be vapor generation. So, we have 
gone for double sealing. We have a procedure". 
It is seen in case of procurement of Rim Seal system by IOCL the technical bid  
was opened on 20.3.2013 and only one offer was received which is under  
evaluation. 
 When asked  about the CVC guidelines on single tender , the 
representative informed that work can be awarded on single tender basis 
however, it requires board’s approval.  
Giving the activity chart for procurement of Rim –Seal Fire Protection system 
the Ministry in a post evidence  reply informed that on 20.3.12 technical bids 
were opened & only one offer received.  Bid was also not meeting the tender 
criteria.  Hence it was  proposed to cancel the tender.   On 4.4.12 industry 

55 
 
working group met on 4.4.12 and decided to revisit the rimseal specification in 
light of the clarification sought by various bidders in the tenders floated by 
OMC’s.  It was also decided to take up the matter with OISD.  
Hydrocarbon Detector 
4.17 The Committee sought to know the progress made and reasons for delay in 
installations of hydrocarbon detectors by the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) In 
regard to delay in procurement of hydrocarbon detector , the Ministry in a presentation  
given the following reasons: 
• Industry members visited abroad to study type, location & usage of HC 
detectors in their locations. 
• Requirement for liquid type detectors included as per HPC ( also MB Lal 
recommendation). 
• Found less vendors for liquid type detectors.  
• Took more than 3 months for IWG to finalize specifications for liquid detectors. 
Double Fire Contingency 
4.18 In an information furnished to the Committee, the Ministry had made the 
following regarding the status in procurement of double fire contingency. 
• “Concept of double fire contingency in 120 Marketing locations requires in -depth 
study as:   
 double fire contingency involves change in entire pipe size, capacity of 
water storage & fire water pumps. 
 each location has specific issues i.r.o of area, space etc. 
• Industry referred to Consultant to work out the design. 
• Expected award by Sept, 2012. 
• No delay expected”.  
 
 
 

56 
 
Replacement of Hammer Blinds 
4.19 The Committee note that this is one of the important recommendatio ns of MB 
Lal Committee.  In order to know the progress made in implementing this 
recommendations, the Committee sought the status and reasons for delay if any from 
the Ministry.  The following were the reasons given by the Ministry: 
• Technical committee too k time to study alternatives to Hammer blinds including 
International practices. 
• Finally Double Block & Bleeder valve was selected by OMCs. 
• Common tender floated by BPC for OMCs on 9th Dec, 2011. 
• Bid opened on 9th Feb, 2012. 
• PQ criteria evaluated. 
• Technical bid opening by 3rd April, 2012 
• Price bid opening by end April, 2012. 
• Award by individual OMCs expected by May, 2012. 
Provision of MEFG 
4.20 On being enquired to give an update regarding the procurement of MEFG by the 
OMCs, the Ministry furnished the following to the Committee: 
•  “Joint Industry Tender by IOCL on 7th July, 2011 
• Only one offer was meeting PQ criteria.  
• Price quoted by vendor more than 400% of estimate. 
• Tender thus cancelled and being re-floated by Individual OMCs. 
• Tenders have been floated by OMCs. 
• The exorbitant rate quoted was the main reason for delay”. 
4.21 The Committee noted that for some items of procurement, only one bid has 
been received. So the Committee wanted to know whether there are many suppliers of 
these items.  So the  Committee enquired as to whether there are many manufacturers 
of these items like MEFG and activated rim seal fire detection suppression system. 
The Ministry in its reply furnished the following:- 

57 
 
 
“As informed by OISD, it was initially decided by OMCs th at procurement of 
some of the fire -fighting equipment would be undertaken jointly on industry 
basis in order to avail price advantage. However, in the process of tendering, it 
was found that vendors were not meeting the pre -qualification criteria prepared 
by the OMCs for combined procurement. As a result, there was less competition 
and one vendor qualified, resulting in high quotes. In case of MEFG, against the 
global tender floated on Industry basis, only one offer was found meeting the 
Tender Pre-Qualification Criteria. Rate Quoted by the only eligible vendor was 
approximately 400 % (for portable type) & 500 % (for fixed type) above the 
departmental estimate. The tender was refloated with reduced quantity. Two 
offers were received and upon scrutiny, none o f the offers were found meeting 
the tender criteria.  The tender in respect of Rim Seal protection system was 
also recommended for re -tendering as OMCs reported that vendors were not 
meeting the PQ criteria.  Keeping in view the above situation, it has now  been 
decided by OMCs to go ahead with procurement on individual company basis”. 
  

58 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No.1 
Safety of oil installations 
 The Committee note that safety is a major and critical concern for oil and 
gas industry.  Any laxity in upkeep/handling of highly inflammable  oil and gas 
products can be a high risk to life, property and environment.  In view of 
increasing activity in the s ector and large number of oil and gas installations i.e. 
exploration sites, refineries, pipelines etc. in the country,  it  is imperative for the 
oil and gas companies to have well developed safety system s and pr actices in 
place and strict compliance of sa fety norms by personnel wor king in the 
installations. The safety mechanisms of the companies are also required to be 
regularly monitored by the Ministry. 
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that despite the safety 
being of paramount concern, th e Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas does not 
have implementation of safety measures as part of their mandate. To give due 
importance to the safety aspects, t he Committee recommend that monitoring of 
safety measures in both public and private companies should be included in the 
mandate of the Ministry.  They further desire that the Ministry should place safety 
in both upstream and downstream companies as a thrust area of 12th Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Need for Consolidation of safety legislations 
 The Committee note that 9 legislations (6 for downstream companies and 3 
for upstream companies) have been enacted to deal with the safety  aspects of oil 
and gas industry .  There are 7 agencies both in Central and State Gov ernments 
dealing with enforcement of safety standards .  The Committee note that some of 
the legislations like Explosives Act, 1884, Petroleum Act, 1934,  Oil Mines Act, 
1952 and Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 under ORDA Act, 1948 are very 
old and desire that the Government  should revisit the safety clauses of these 
legislations pertaining to the oil and gas sector  in the light of new 
technologies/practices evolved during the years in this sector.   
The Committee opine that multiplicity of legislations to deal with the safe ty 
of oil and gas installations has made t he enforcement process difficult .  The 
Committee recommend the Government to bring out a n umbrella legislation for 
the oil and gas sector with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas as nodal 
Ministry incorporating all safety related provisions contained in different Acts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Recommendation No 3 
Need for Single Agency to Enforce Safety  
 The Committee note that OISD has been functioning as the technical 
directorate of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and has formulated 112 
safety standards. OISD checks the implementation of these standards through 
various safety inspections but ha s statutory powers to enforce these standards 
only for upstream offshore installations.  The Committee further note that PESO 
which is under the administrative control of Ministry of Commerce and Industry is 
the competent authority to administer Petroleum Rules under Petroleum Act, 
1934 which inter alia refers to 6 crucial OISD standards pertaining to fire 
protection facilities for downstream oil and gas installations.  The Committee 
further note that Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Labour and Employment has been vested 
with powers for enforcing safety rules  for onshore oil and gas installations.  
The Committee have been informed that there is a proposal to transfer the 
PESO’s job relating to Petroleum Rules to OISD.  The Committee are in agreement 
with this move and desire that the process of transfer should be completed at the 
earliest.     The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the 
matter with appropriate authorities for the  transfer of DGMS responsibilities 
under the Petroleum Rules to OISD as well.   
The Committee would like to point out that multiple agencies enforcing 
different set of safety laws will lead oil industry to comply with number of 
authorities for safety related laws and regulations.  The Committee view that there 
will be no clear accountability on the part of agencies as they may blame other 
agencies for any lapses which lead to incidents.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that OISD should be made the nodal  agency to formulate, monitor 
and enforce the OISD standards and other applicable laws for the entire oil and 
gas sector.  
 

61 
 
Recommendation No 4 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) 
The Committee note that OISD carries out safety audits/inspection and 
conducts pre commissioning safety audits of PSU’s.  The Committee note that 
these standards are implemented on self regulatory basis by the industry.  
The Committee observe that 59 recom mendations out of 170 in BPCL -
Kochi refinery and 14 out of 78 recommendations in CPCL -Chennai are based on 
the safety audits conducted by OISD between January and June 2010 
respectively have not been implemented.  The Committee further note that 6 
recommendations pertaining to safety audit conducted during June, 2005 at 
MRPL are still pending.  The Committee fail to understand the delays in 
implementation of these recommendations and emphasize that the   
recommendations made by OISD should be considered with  due seriousness by 
Oil Marketing Companies and implemented in a time bound manner.  
The Committee note that OISD has not been vested with statutory authority 
to penalize the violators of safety standards.  The Committee feel that this has 
rendered OISD a mere recommendatory body with no powers to enforce the 
stipulated standards. The Committee are of the opinion that in the oil industry, it 
is essential to adhere to safety standards and implement safe working practices. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should confer statutory 
status on OISD to enable it to enforce the safety standards with legal authority 
and also to take penal action against the non-compliance thereof.  
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
Recommendation No 5 
Manpower requirements of OISD  
The Committee note that the total sanctioned manpower in OISD is 66 but 
the actual manpower is only 29. A large number of posts are vacant in 
Exploration & Production (E&P)  side as only 6 posts are filled against the actual 
strength of 28 posts. The Committee also note that OISD draws its personnel only 
on deputation from public sector oil companies and there are no permanent staff 
or its own cadre.  The Committee understand that this is due to fact that the oil 
companies are not able to spare their officials which the Ministry has also 
admitted as an area of concern.  
The Committee are of the view that since OISD has no permanent cadre 
with less than half of the sanctioned manpower in place, the efficacy of the 
enforcement of safety standards is compromised. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should u rgently look into the matter and take steps 
to fill up the vacant posts by exploring the options other than deputation. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry should consider manning OISD with  a 
permanent cadre of officers in a time bound manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

63 
 
Recommendation No 6 
Safety Recommendation implementation  
The Committee note that MB Lal Committee which was constituted in the 
aftermath of the Jaipur fire accident in October, 2009, came out with a Report 
containing 113 recommendations.  The M inistry while accepting the Report 
specified a time line of 24 months i.e.  by end of April 2012 in consultation with 
OMCs for the implementation of these recommendations. The Committee are 
constrained to note that by April, 2012, only 66 recommendations o ut of 113 have 
been implemented. The Committee further note that the timeline has been shifted 
to December, 2014 for implementation of some of the recommendations. 
 The Committee are unhappy  that though the initial timeline has expired, 
the recommendation s especially pertaining to procurement and installation of 
important safety equipments are still pending. This reflects poorly on the 
managements of OMC’s and their planning and implementation abilities.  The 
Committee strongly deprecate the dilatory tacti cs of the OMCs and inefficient 
supervision of the Ministry resulting in inexplicable delays in the implementation 
of safety standards.  
Taking into account all factors, the Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should direct the OMC’s to fast track the 
procurement of safety items and desire that the Secretary should monitor the 
progress on fortnightly basis. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
implementation  status within a month. 

64 
 
Recommendation No 7 
Training for personnel of oil marketing companies 
The Committee note that OISD has prescribed standards for training of 
personnel and provision of personal protective equipments and life saving 
appliances at the installations. They  are however, surprised to note that as 
pointed out by MB Lal Committee,  the personnel deployed at Jaipur IOC terminal  
at the time of the accident had no safety training and also Self Contained 
Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) which is an important safety equipment was not 
available. The Committee wonders wh ether these issues were pointed out by 
OISD when it conducted the safety audits at this installation.  The Committee 
observe that this clearly indicates gaps in the safety preparedness to handle the 
accidents in oil and gas sector.  The Committee are constr ained to note that 
M.B.Lal Committee recommendations for hands on training in fire fighting has not 
been implemented even one year after the expiry of the time line set for the 
purpose.   
The Committee are of the opinion that training related to safety sho uld be 
an integral part of work in the oil industry.  The Committee, therefore recommend 
that safety training to all employees should be made mandatory and at the same 
time ensuring the availability of personnel with protective equipments and life 
saving appliances at all oil and gas installations.  The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to ensure comprehensive safety audits in oil installations by 
incorporating the aspects not already covered. The Committee recommend that 
all oil and gas installations shou ld run mandatory disaster response simulations 
to ensure that adequate response mechanisms are in place for any eventuality.  
  

65 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Accountability for safety issues 
The Committee note that there has been increase in the number of 
incidents in oil and gas installations during the last few years. During 2010 -11 
there were a total of 84 incidents consisting of 70 accidents and 14 relating to fire 
leading to a loss of Rs.34.15 crore. The Committee find that such high number of 
incidents in a yea r unacceptable and feel  that the oil companies should have   
zero tolerance for accidents. The Committee desire that all  incidents including 
minor ones and near miss should be thoroughly investigated and accountability 
should be fixed.   The Committee  s uggest that oil and gas  companies  should 
designate the senior most official of the unit as the nodal officer for safety related 
matters to ensure closer supervision and effective monitoring of safety 
standards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

66 
 
Recommendation No 9 
Private sector oil industries should also be audited  
The Committee note that the OISD conducts pre -commissioning safety 
audits for the oil industry. The Committee, however, observe that the pre 
commissioning safety audits are being done only for Public se ctor oil companies  
and not for private sector oil companies. This is not a desirable situation as 
safety standards should be applied uniformly for both public  and private sector 
companies.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take st eps to 
bring the private sector oil installations under OISD for  complying with 
precommissioning safety audit and other  such  safety measures applicable to 
the industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

67 
 
Recommendation No 10 
Outside experts in Safety Council 
The Committee note that the Safety Council  includes Members comprising 
of all Joint Secretaries and Advisors of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
Chief Executive Officers of all of PSU’s of the oil industry, Chief controller of 
Explosives, Advisor,  Fire to the Govt of India and the DG of Factory Advice, 
Service and Labour Institutes.The Committee also note that the Secretary, 
MOPNG is Chairman of Safety Council.  
 The Committee observe from the composition of Safety Council, that it 
does not have any representation from academia or  renowned experts in the field  
to advise on safety aspects. The Committee opine that since safety in the oil 
industry is of vital importance, it is imperative that the highest decision making 
body in the country for safet y issues should have inputs and contribution of 
experts in the field. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should appoint national and international experts including from other PSUs like 
BHEL, NTPC etc. to the Safety Council.  
  

68 
 
Recommendation No 11 
Dilution of OISD Standards 116 and 117. 
The Committee were informed that the OISD Standards 116 and 117 relating 
to fire protection facilities in downstream companies were revised after inputs 
from MB Lal Committee and Chairmen Committ ee. The Committee note that the 
OISD and the Ministry received a number of representations from private 
companies raising some issues pertaining to revised standards.  The Committee 
further note that after receipt of the representations the issues were ref erred first 
to Steering Committee, then to Chairman Committee and thereafter to Technical 
expert committee and finally  certain clauses like Equivalency clause, 
retroactivity clause and common firefighting clause in OISD STD -116 and 117 
have been accepted for inclusion.  
 The Committee would like to point out that in the written replies of the 
Ministry and also during oral submissions before the Committee, the Secretary 
had maintained  that there is no move to review or dilute the OISD standards 
116/117 and the same are being implemented by the industry. The Committee  feel 
that this is an ambivalent stand of the Ministry since the inclusion of Equivalency 
clause, retroactivity clause and common firefighting clauses in OISD STDs clearly 
indicates dilution of  the OISD standards apart from derailing the implementation 
schedule. The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the Ministry and OMCs 
for misleading them on this important issue and would expect more diligent and 
responsible approach of officials while making submissions before the 
Committee.  The Committee recommend that there should be no dilution in OISD 
safety standards 116 & 117 till the implementation of M.B.Lal Committee Report.   
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Recommendation No  12 
High Volume Long Range Monitors (HVLR) 
 The Committee note that OISD St andard 117 have provided for installation of 
High Volume Long Range Monitors (HVLRs) in the oil installations. The Committee 
note that the Joint Industry tender for procurement was floated on 6th December, 
2010 and the tech nical bids opened on 18th Jan, 2011 for evaluation.  However, the 
price bids which were to be opened in May, 2011 could be  opened  only in January, 
2012.  This delay has been attributed to obtaining stage wise clearance from 
individual OMCs and handling of complaints from some quarters. The Committee are 
not convinced by reasons given by the oil companies.  They are unable to 
understand the requirement of stage wise clearance from individual OMCs when the 
Joint Industry tender has been floated. Though some o f the delay s were procedural 
due to handling of complaints, the Committee could not but come to a conclusion 
that the OMCs are not serious in early procurement of these items.   
 The Committee are further constrained to note that after more than 16 months 
only a bare minimum quantity for emergency procurement has been put up for 
approval.  The Committee deplore the kind of insensitiv ity shown by the oil 
companies in procurement of such a key safety equipment.  The Committee would 
like to know the reasons for making only an emergency procurement. 
 The Committee note that after the tech nical bids were opened there was an 
unsolicited offer from Akron Bros whose tender was earlier rejected on technical 
grounds and the price quoted by Akron Bros was used as negot iating point  with 
other vendors.  The OMCs claim that it is in accordance with CVC guidelines and 
purchase procedures. The Committee desire that the issue needs to be verified and 
reported upon by the Ministry and recommend  the matter be referred to CVC to see if 
there is any violation of guidelines in taking Akron Bros offer as negotiating point 
with other vendors.  
 
 

70 
 
Recommendation No 13 
Rim Seal Fire Detection System 
 The Committee note that the  Rim Seal Fire Detection System is an  the 
important safety equipment that needs to be installed in the tanks  carrying hydro 
carbons.  The Committee note that the  about 618 nos. of this system are required 
involving an expenditure of Rs. 1125 crore  for all the three oil m arketing 
companies.  The Committee note it was decided on 8th October, 2010  that this 
item was to be procured on Joint Industry basis.  The Industry Working Group 
finalized tender document on 11th September, 2011.   
 The Committee further note that as the volume of work was en ormous and 
installation specific , the OMCs decided to go for individual tender basis on 8th 
December, 2011.  The Committee express unhappiness at the time taken by the  3 
OMCs for finalizing the tender  document which almost took one year and then to 
go for company-wise tender. 
 The Committee are further anguished that after all the exercise Ministry has 
now informed that there is a proposal to cancel the tender since only one offer 
was received and the bid was also not meeting the tender criteria. Industry 
working group  has now decided to revisit the Rim Seal specification. The 
Committee are dismayed that an important recommendation of the MB Lal 
Committee has not progressed even after two years and the process has to start 
afresh. The Committee would urge the Ministry to relook at the decision of the 
OMCs as there appears to be a deliberate attempt on the part of OMC’s to delay in 
implementing this safety recommendation. 
   
 
 
 

71 
 
Recommendation No  14 
Hydrocarbon Detection System 
 The Committee note that requirement of  Hydrocarbon Detection System 
was one of recommendations of MB Lal Committee.  The Committee also not e 
that the Industry members visited abroad to study type, location and usage of HC 
detectors in t heir locations and  decided for liquid type  detector.  The industry 
working group took more than 3 months to finalize specifications.  The 
Committee further note that there are few vendors for liquid type detectors and 
the latest time line furnished by the Ministry indicate the completion time by 
March, 2013 to December, 2014.  The Committee deplore the fai t accompli 
provided by the oil companies and the Ministry regarding the timeline as the 
original timeline  have ended and the revised time line of December, 2014 i s 
another 30 months away.   
 The Committee desire the Ministry and OMCs to submit the explanation of 
the officials concerned on the inordinate delays in the matter and also take 
required measures to prepone the timelines for early implementation of safety 
standards.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
Recommendation No 15 
Procurement of Medium Expansion Foam Generators (MEFG) 
The Committee note  that MB Lal Committee has recommended for 
provision of Medium Expansion Foam Generators (MEFG) at marketing locations. 
The Committee note that the Joint industry tender  in this regard  was floated by 
IOCL on 7th July 2011 .  However, only one offer was meeting Pre -qualification 
criteria and the price quoted by the vendor was 400% of estimate.  The Committee 
have been informed that due to exorbitant rate quoted by vendor, the tender was 
cancelled and refloated by individual Oil marketing companies. The Committee 
further note that after retender ing by individual oil marketing companies in the 
case of IOCL, two offers were received but none found meeting the tender 
criteria. Hence the tender was refloated again on 4.4.2012 with relaxed PQ criteria.  
The Committee are dismayed at the considerable time lost in tendering and 
retendering due to which procurement of important safety equipment has got 
delayed.   Though 400% price qu oted by vendor is very much on higher side, the 
decision to go for retendering was not a prudent one since the offers received  
have been found not meeting the tender criteria.  The Committee hope that 
relaxed PQ criteria  for the refloated tenders does no t amount to dilution of safety 
standards.   
The Committee are disappointed that on one pretext  or other, the 
procurement of items has been getting delayed. The Ministry also does not seem 
to take any action on directing the OMC’s to adhere to the timelines  committed to 
the Ministry. The Committee therefore recommend that the timelines already 
committed should be strictly adhered to. 
 
 
  

73 
 
Recommendation No  16 
Enquiry on delay in procurement 
 The Committee note that the MB Lal Committee had made several 
recommendations and OISD also had revised its standards because of which the 
oil companies need to procure important safety equipments. The Ministry had 
consulted the OMC’s regarding implementation of these recommendations and 
had agreed for 24 month timeline. 
 Now the Committee have been informed by the ministry that the OMC,s 
have been facing the following important issues relating to procurement. 
i) Limited number of vendors to supply items 
ii) High price quoted by vendors  
iii) Lack of experience in dealing similar works 
iv) Complaints received about the tender process 
 The Committee understand that the Oil Marketing Companies are bound by 
their own procurement procedures and also CVC guidelines. The Committee are 
of the view that the delay that has happened is inexplic able and would expect the 
Ministry and OMC‘s should have shown more alertness and urgency in 
procurement rather than hiding behind procedures. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Ministry should order an enquiry into the entire process of 
procurement and delay in procurement and also whether the procedure followed 
were in conformity with the extant rules in place. The Committee may be apprised 
of the outcome of the above enquiry within a period of one month.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
21 May, 2012     
31Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)            
             
 
 ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
  Chairman, Standing Committee on              
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

74 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF Major items of  M. B. Lal   -  Committee  recommendations  
Recom. 
No. 
Item Description Implementation 
Schedule 
agreed with 
MoPNG 
Steps 
involved 
IOCL 
 
BPCL HPCL ONGC OIL 
 
10.6(b) 
 
The Rim Seal fire 
detection and 
protection system shall 
be installed in all Class 
‘A’ products in the 
terminal. 
 
 
 
 
24 moths.  
OISD-STD-
116/117 
specifies 
 
Tanks above 
5000 KL by Oct 
2012 and Tanks 
below 5000KL 
by October 
2013 
 As per Sl. 
No-1 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed. 
 
As per Sl. 
No-1 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-1 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-1 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-1 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. No-1 
of Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
10.2 (i), 
(ii), (iii) 
Push buttons on the 
MOV should be 
brought just outside the 
tank dyke and 
associated work 
12 months 
By April, 2011 
 Completed: 
47 locations 
In progress 
5 locations 
Target: 
28.2.2012 
Completed: 
15 locations 
In progress 
6 locations 
Target: 
28.2.2012 
Completed in 
all 21 
locations 
Progressively 
being 
completed by 
31.3. 20. 
In progress 
10.6(a) Fire water system 
augmentation for 
double fire contingency 
in marketing/ ctf and 
pipeline installations 
Fire water  
System: 48 
Months i.e. by 
Nov, 2014 Fire 
Water pumps : 
24 months Nov 
2012 
 As per Sl. 
No-2  of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed. 
 
As per Sl. 
No-2 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-2 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-2 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. 
No-2 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
As per Sl. No-2 
of Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
10.2 
(vi) 
Main emergency 
shutdown switch which 
should be located in 
the control room 
should also activate 
the MOVs to close. 
2 Months 
by July’2010 
 Completed : 
 43 locations 
In progress : 
 2 locations 
Target : 
28.2.2012 
 
Completed : 
 16 locations 
In progress : 
5 locations 
Target : 
31.3.2012 
 
Completed in 
all 21 
locations 
At Hazira : in 
progress 
Other 
location :  
Not 
Applicable 
Partly 
completed 
Balance in 
Progress 
10.2 
(xxix) 
Hydrocarbon (HC) 
detectors shall be 
installed near all 
potential leak sources 
of class ‘A’ and ‘B’ 
petroleum products 
e.g. tank dykes, tank 
manifolds, pump house 
manifolds, etc. Further, 
HC detectors of proper 
type should be 
selected and should be 
proof tested and 
maintained in good 
condition 
6 moths 
 
By 
October’2010 
As per Sl. 
No-5 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No-5 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No-5 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No-5 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No-5 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. No-5 
of Annexure-II 
10.2 
(xxx) 
Protection for Dyke 
Area/ Spill Fire (MEFG 
provision) for 
Marketing/CTF/Pipeline 
installations 
Progressively by 
April 2012 
As per Sl. 
No. 4 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No. 4 of 
Annexure-II 
 
As per Sl. 
No. 4 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No. 4 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. 
No. 4 of 
Annexure-II 
As per Sl. No. 
4 of Annexure-
II 
10.3(a) Avoid hammer blind as 
an equipment in the 
plant design. Only a 
closed system design 
should be adopted. It is 
understood that other 
OMCs/MNC’s are 
already using such 
designs in their 
installations. Using a 
24 months 
 
 
 
Progressively by 
May 2012 
Tendering Joint Tender 
Floated on 
09.12.2011 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
21.12.2011 
 
Tender 
received on 
Joint Tender 
Floated on 
09.12.2011 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
21.12.2011 
 
Tender 
received on 
Joint Tender 
Floated on 
09.12.2011 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
21.12.2011 
 
Tender 
received on 
No Hammer 
blind valve in 
operation 
 
Therefore 
Not 
applicable 
Under 
progress 

75 
 
Plug valve or a Ball 
Valve in place of the 
Hammer Blind should 
be an acceptable 
option. 
 
09.02.2012 
 
 
09.02.2012 
 
09.02.2012 
 
10.3(b) The first body valve on 
the tank should be 
Remote Operated Shut 
Off Valve (ROSOV) on 
the tank nozzle inside 
the dyke with Remote 
Operation only from 
outside the dyke as 
well as from the control 
room. ROSOV should 
be fail safe and fire 
safe. It should have 
only ‘close’ feature and 
not ‘open’ and ‘stop’ 
from control room. 
However, it should 
have ‘close’, ‘open’ & 
‘stop’ operation from 
the panel located 
outside the dyke. 
24 months 
 
by May’2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TENDERING Joint Tender 
Floated on 
18.01.2012 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
03.02.2012 
 
Tender 
opening  on 
02.03.2012 
 
Joint Tender 
Floated on 
18.01.2012 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
03.02.2012 
 
Tender 
opening  on 
02.03.2012 
 
Joint Tender 
Floated on 
18.01.2012 
Pre bid 
meeting held 
on 
03.02.2012 
 
Tender 
opening  on 
02.03.2012 
 
Completion 
by Nov’2013 
 
Under 
Progress: 
10.6(c) Remote operated long 
range foam monitors 
(1000 GPM and above) 
to fight tank fires shall 
be provided which 
should be of variable 
flow. 
24 months 
 by 
November’2012 
TENDERING As per Sl. 
No.3 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
 
 
    
10.2 
(xxxi) 
An emergency kit shall 
be provided consisting 
of safety items viz. fire 
suites, various leak 
plugging gadgets, oil 
dispersants and oil 
adsorbents, lifting jacks 
(for rescue of trapped 
workers), high intensity 
intrinsically safe search 
lights for hazardous 
area, etc. and shall be 
readily available at the 
terminals. 
Progressively by 
October 2012 
As per Sl. 
No. 8 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
As per Sl. 
No. 8 of 
Annexure-II 
enclosed 
    
10.3(q) A CCTV should be 
installed covering tank 
farm areas and other 
critical areas. The 
CCTV can nowadays 
provided with an alarm 
to provide warning in 
case of deviation from 
any normal situation. 
The CCTV monitoring 
station should be 
provided both in the 
control room as well as 
in the Security 
cabin/office. 
12 moths 
By  May’2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Completed : 
121 locations 
In progress : 
13 locations 
Target : 
31.3.2012 
 
 
 
    
10.3(n) Wherever PLT 
transfers take place, to 
avoid pilferages, a 
Mass Flow Meter with 
Integrator shall be 
provided on delivery 
pipelines. 
12 moths 
By May’2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TENDERING Under 
finalization 
 
 
    

76 
 
 
 
10.2 
(iv), 
10.2 
(xxiv), 
10.3 (k) 
Adequate lighting in 
operational areas 
should be ensured. 
18 moths by 
November’2011 
 Completed :  
89 locations 
In progress : 
49 locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 30.6.2012 
 
Completed :  
42 locations 
In progress : 
39  locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 31.3.2012 
 
Completed :  
20 locations 
In progress : 
52 locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 31.3.2012 
 
Implemented Implemented 
10.3(o) Tank Dyke Valves 
should be provided 
with position indicator 
(open or close) in 
control room and 
necessary hardware 
and instrumentation 
should be provided for 
this. 
9 moths 
 
By Feb’2011 
 Completed :  
109 locations 
In progress : 
29 locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 28.2.2012 
 
Completed :  
36  locations 
In progress : 
45  locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 31.3.2012 
 
In progress : 
58  locations 
Target : 
progressively 
by 31.3.2012 
 
In progress 
Target 
30.11.2012 
Under 
Implementation 
 
  

77 
 
Annexure-II  
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Legends:   A: Amendment,    R: Revision,  Re : Reaffirm  
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
1 OISD-STD-105 Work Permit System  1988 A- 1998 
R- 2004 
2 OISD-STD-106 Pressure Relief & Disposal System  1988 A- 1999 
R- 2010 
3 OISD-RP-108 Recommended Practices on Oil 
Storage and Handling 
1997  
4 OISD-STD-109 Process Design and Operating 
Philosophies on Blow Down & sewer 
system  
1988 A- 1999 
5 OISD-RP-110 Recommended Practices on Static 
Electricity  
1990 A - 1999 
6 OISD-STD-111 Process Design & Operating 
Philosophies on Fired Process Furnace  
1989 A- 1999 
7 OISD-STD-112 Safe Handling of Air Hydrocarbon 
Mixtures & Pyrophoric Substances  
1989 A- 2002 
8 OISD-STD-113 Classification of Area for Electrical 
Installations at Hydrocarbon Processing 
& Handling Facilities 
1996 A- 2001 
9 OISD-STD-114 Safe Handling of Hazardous Chemicals  1998 A- 2002 
R- 2010 
10 OISD-GDN-115 Guidelines on Fire Fighting Equipment 
and Appliances in Petroleum Industry 
2000  
11 OISD-STD-116 Fire Protection Facilities for Petroleum 
Refineries and Oil/Gas Processing 
Plants 
1991 A-1998 
A-2002 
A-2005 
R-2007 
A-2008 
A-2010 
12 OISD-STD-117 Fire Protection Facilities for Petroleum 
Depots, Terminals, Pipeline Installations 
& Lube oil installations 
1989 A-2000 
A-2005 
R-2007 
A-2008 
A- 2010 
13 OISD-STD-118 Layouts for Oil and Gas Installations  1988 R-1995 
A-2000 
R-2004 
A-2006 
A- 2008 

78 
 
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
14 OISD-STD-119 Selection, Operation and Maintenance 
of Pumps 
1990 A-1999 
A-2001 
R- 2008 
15 OISD-STD-120 Selection, Operation and Maintenance 
of Compressors 
1990 A- 1999 
R -2008 
16 OISD-STD-121 Selection, Operation Inspection & 
Maintenance of Steam & Gas Turbines 
1990 A-1999 
R- 2010 
17 OISD-STD-122 Selection, Operation and Maintenance 
of Fans, Blowers, Gear Boxes, Agitators 
& Mixers 
1990 A-1999 
R-2008 
18 OISD-STD-123 Selection, Operation and Maintenance 
of Rotary Equipment Components 
1990 A-1999 
R-2008 
19 OISD-RP-124 Predictive Maintenance Practices 1990 A-1999 
A-2005 
R-2007 
20 OISD-STD-125 Inspection & Maintenance of 
Mechanical Seals  
1990 A-1999 
A-2005 
R-2007 
21 OISD-RP-126 Specific practices for installations and 
maintenance of Rotating Equipment  
1990 A-1999 
A-2005 
R-2007 
22 OISD-STD-127 
      (Old) 
 
OISD-STD-127 
      (New) 
History Record of Rotary Equipment 
 
Selection, Operation, Inspection & 
Maintenance of Diesel Engines 
1990 
 
 
2010 
A-19 
23 OISD-STD-128 Inspection of Unfired Pressure Vessels  1988 A-1999 
R-2010 
24 OISD-STD-129 Inspection of Storage Tanks  1988 A-1999 
R-2006 
25 OISD-STD-130 Inspection of Piping Systems 1988 Re-1999 
R-2008 
26 OISD-STD-131 Inspection of Boilers  1990 A- 1999 
27 OISD-STD-132 Inspection of Pressure Relieving 
devices 
1990 Re- 1999 
28 OISD-STD-133 Inspection of Fired Heaters  1990 A-2000 
29 OISD-STD-134 Inspection of Heat Exchangers  1990 A-1999 
R-2010 
30 OISD-STD-135 Inspection of Loading & Unloading 
hoses for Petroleum Products 
1996 A-2001 
31 OISD-STD-137 Inspection of Electrical Equipment 1990 Re-1999 
A-2010 
32 OISD-STD-138 Inspection of cross country pipelines – 
Onshore  
1990 A-2001 
R-2003 
33 OISD-STD-139 Inspection of pipelines – Offshore 1990 A-2001 

79 
 
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
34 OISD-STD-140 Inspection of jetty pipelines 1990 A-2001 
35 OISD-STD-141 Design and Construction requirements 
for cross country hydrocarbon pipelines 
1990 A-2001 
R-2003 
36 OISD-STD-142 Inspection of fire fighting equipments 
and systems 
1996  
37 OISD-STD-144 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) 
Installations  
1994 A-2000 
A-2001 
A-2002 
R-2005 
R-2008 
38 OISD-GDN-145 Guidelines on Internal Safety Audits 
(Procedures and Checklist)  
1995 A-2001 
39 OISD-RP-146 Preservation of idle electrical equipment  1993 A-2000 
40 OISD-RP-147 Inspection & safe practices during 
electrical installations 
1993 A-2000 
A-2002 
41 OISD-RP-148 Inspection & safe practices during 
overhauling electrical equipment 
1993 Re-2000 
42 OISD-RP-149 Design aspects for safety in electrical 
systems 
1996 A-2001 
43 OISD-STD-150 Design and Safety Requirements  For 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Mounded 
Storage Facility  
2000 A-2002 
A-2003 
A-2008 
44 OISD-STD-151 Safety in Design, Fabrication and 
Fittings : Propane Tank Trucks  
1999  
45 OISD-STD-152 Safety Instrumentation for Process 
System in Hydrocarbon Industry 
1993 A-2001 
R-2010 
46 OISD-STD-153 Maintenance  & inspection of safety 
instrumentation in hydrocarbon industry 
1993 A-2001 
47 OISD-STD-154 Safety aspects in Functional Training 1993 A-2001 
48 OISD-STD-155 
(Part I) 
 
OISD-STD-155  
(Part II) 
Personal  Protective Equipment 
(Part I Non-Respiratory equipment)  
(Part II Respiratory Equipment) 
1995 
1995 
A-2002 
A-2010 
 
49 OISD-STD-156 Fire Protection Facilities for Ports 
Handling Hydrocarbons 
1992 R-2005 
50 OISD-RP-157 Recommended Practice for 
Transportation of Bulk Petroleum 
Products 
1996  
51 OISD-RP-158 Recommended Practices on Storage 
and  Handling of Bulk Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas 
1997 A-2000 
52 OISD-STD-159 LPG Tank Trucks - Requirements of 
Safety on Design/Fabrication & Fittings 
1997 A-2002 

80 
 
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
53 OISD-STD-160 Protection to fittings mounted on 
existing LPG tank trucks 
1993 1993 
54 OISD-GDN-161 LPG Tank Truck Incidents : Rescue  & 
Relief  Operations 
1993 R-2003 
55 OISD-STD-162 Safety in installation and  maintenance 
of LPG Cylinders Manifold 
1995  
56 OISD-STD-163 Process Control Room Safety 1996 A-2001 
R-2004 
57 OISD-STD-164 Fire Proofing in Oil & Gas Industry 1998  
58 OISD-GDN-165 Guidelines for Rescue & Relief 
Operations for POL Tank Truck 
Accident 
1999  
59 OISD-GDN-166 Guidelines for Occupational Health  
Monitoring in Oil and Gas Industry 
1997  
60 OISD-RP-167 POL Tank lorry Design & Safety 1997  
61 OISD-GDN-168 Emergency Preparedness Plan for 
Marketing Locations of Oil Industry 
1997  
62 OISD-GDN-169 OISD Guidelines on Small LPG Bottling 
Plants (Design and  Fire Protection 
facilities) 
1993 A-2001 
A-2008 
63 OISD-STD-170 Inspection, Maintenance, Repairs & 
Rehabilitation of Foundations & 
Structures 
1997  
64 OISD-STD-171 Preservation of Idle  Static & Rotary 
Mechanical Equipments 
1998  
65 OISD-STD-173 Fire Prevention and Protection System 
for Electrical Installations 
1996 A-2001 
R-2003 
66 OISD-RP-174 Well Control 1998 R-2008 
67 OISD-STD-175 Cementing Operations 1999 R-2008 
68 OISD-STD-176 Safety Health & Environment Training 
For Exploration & Production 
(Upstream) Personnel  
1996 R-2003 
69 OISD-STD-177 Inspection & Maintenance of Thermal 
Insulation  
1998  
70 OISD-GDN-178 Guidelines on Management Of Change 1999  
71 OISD-STD-179 Safety Requirements On Compression, 
Storage, Handling & Refueling Of 
Natural Gas For Use In Automotive 
Sector. 
1998  
72 OISD-GDN-180 Lightning Protection 1999  
73 OISD-STD-181 Geophysical Operations 1999 A-2010 
74 OISD-GDN-182 Safe Practices for Workover and Well 
Stimulation   Operations 
2000 R-2010 
75 OISD-STD-183 Standard on  Logging  Operations 1999  

81 
 
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
76 OISD-STD-184 Standard on Replacement of Personal 
Protective Equipment & Life Saving 
Appliances 
2000  
77 OISD-GDN-185 Wire Line Operations 2002  
78 OISD-GDN-186 Simultaneous Operations in E&P 
Industry 
2000 R-2008 
79 OISD-STD-187 Care And Use Of Wire Rope 2000  
80 OISD-STD-188 Corrosion Monitoring Of Offshore & 
Onshore Pipelines 
2000  
81 OISD-STD-189 Standard on Fire Fighting Equipment 
For Drilling Rigs, Work Over Rigs And 
Production Installations 
2000  
82 OISD-STD-190 Derrick Floor Operations 
(Onshore Drilling / Workover Rigs) 
2000  
83 OISD-STD-191 Oil Field Explosive Safety 2000  
84 OISD-GDN-192 Safety Practices during Construction 2000  
85 OISD-GDN-193 Guidelines for Gas Lift Operations & 
Maintenance 
2001  
86 OISD-STD-194 Standard for Storage & Handling Of 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
2000  
87 OISD-STD-195 Safety in Design, Operation, Inspection 
and Maintenance of Hydrocarbon Gas 
Compressor Stations and Terminals 
2001  
88 OISD-GDN-196 Guidelines for Seeking Environmental 
Clearance of Development Projects in 
Petroleum Industry 
2001  
89 OISD-GDN-197 Guidelines for Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
2001  
90 OISD-GDN-199 Guidelines for Conducting 
Environmental Audit in Upstream 
Petroleum Sector (Onland) 
2000  
91 OISD-GDN-200 Guidelines for Preparation Of Oil Spill 
Response Contingency Plan 
2000 A-2002 
92 OISD-RP-201 Environment Management in E&P 
Sector 
2001 R-2008 
93 OISD-GDN-202 Inspection of Drilling and Workover Rig 
Mast / Sub-Structure 
2002  
94 OISD-GDN-203 Operation,  Maintenance &Inspection Of 
Hoisting Equipment 
2003  
95 OISD-GDN-204 Medical Requirements, Emergency 
Evacuation And Facilities (for 
Upstream) 
2001  
96 OISD-RP-205 Crane Operation, Maintenance & 
Testing (for Upstream) 
2002  
97 OISD-GDN-206 Guidelines on Safety Management 2001  

82 
 
List of OISD standards with history of their updation year. 
Sr.No Standard Name of Standard Release of first 
edition (Year) 
Last Updated on 
(Year) 
System in Petroleum Industry 
98 OISD-GDN-207 Contractor Safety 2002  
99 OISD-STD-210 Storage, Handling and Refueling of 
LPG for automotive use 
2002 A-2010 
100 OISD-GDN-211 Safety in Petroleum Laboratories 2003  
101 OISD-GDN-212 Guidelines on Environmental Audit in 
Downstream Petroleum Sector 
2002  
102 OISD-STD-214 Cross Country LPG Pipelines 2006  
103 OISD-STD-216 Electrical Safety in Onshore Drilling 
&Workover Rigs 
2007 A-2010 
104 OISD-GDN-218 Guidelines for Safe Rig - Up & Rig - 
Down of Drilling and Work-Over Rigs 
2004  
105 OISD-GDN-219 Guidelines on Field Inspection, 
Handling & Testing of Casing Pipe & 
Tubing 
2004  
106 OISD-GDN-224 Monitoring & Control of Volatile Organic 
Compounds Emission 
2006 2006 
107 OISD-STD-225 Storage, Handling & Dispensing at 
Petroleum Retail Outlets 
2007 A-2010 
108 OISD-STD-226 Natural Gas Transmission Pipelines 
and City Gas Distribution Networks 
2007  
109 OISD-GDN-227 Emergency Response and 
Preparedness in E&P Industry 
2007  
110 OISD-GDN-228 Selection, Training & Placement of Fire 
Operators in Hydrocarbon & 
Petrochemical Industry 
2008  
111 OISD-STD-230 Unlined Underground Rock Cavern 
Storage for Petroleum & Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas 
2008  
112 OISD-STD-231 Sucker Rod Pumping Units 2008  
 
  

83 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2010-11) 
  
THIRTEENTH SITTING 
(26.7.2011) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 26th July, 2011 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room “B”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3         Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
4 Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
5 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
6 Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
7 Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
9        Shri Mahabal Mishra    
10 Shri K. Narayan Rao 
11 Shri C.L. Ruala 
12 Shir Uday Pratap Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
13 Shri Sillvius Condpan 
14 Shri Kalraj Mishra 
15 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
16 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
17 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
18 Shri Sabir Ali 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 

84 
 
 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1. Shri G.C.Chaturvedi - Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Bhargava - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri D.N.Narasimha Raju - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri L.N.Gupta - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Apurva Chandra - Joint Secretary  
 
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other organizations 
 
 
1 Shri R.S. Butola - Chairman, IOCL 
2 Shri A.K.Hazarika - C&MD, ONGC 
3 Shri R.K. Singh - C&MD, BPCL 
4 Shri N.M.Borah - C&MD, OIL 
5 Shri B.C. Tripathi - C&MD, GAIL 
6 Shri V.Vizia Saradhi - Director, HPCL 
7 Shri R.P. Wattal  - Secretary, PNGRB 
8 Shri Rajesh Vedvyas  - MD, IGL 
9 Shri V.C. Chittoda - MD, MGL 
10 Shri R.K. Dhadda - MD, RGTIL 
11 Shri R.P. Sharma - President, RIL 

85 
 
12 Shri R.K. Garg - Director, PLL 
13 Shri S.L. Chakravorty - ED, OISD 
 
2.   At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members, representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and public undertakings to the sitting and explained the 
purpose of the meeting and the need for maintaining confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
sittings. 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the status of 
implementation of recommendations of M.B. Lal Committee constituted in the wake of security 
concerns aggravated post Jaipur fire incident.  The  Committee then discussed various issues 
related to the subject including delay in implementation of some of the recommendations of 
M.B. Lal Committee which were required to be implemented immediately, delay in procurement 
of items as recommended by the above Committee and functioning of the monitoring Committee 
constituted for the purpose,  safety measures taken by the Government at oil installations, 
action taken against the officers who were charge -sheeted in the Jaipur fire accident and 
compensation given to affected parties and fixing the responsibilities at high level in such cases. 
 
4. The clarifications sought by the Members on various points related to the subject were 
provided by the representatives of the Ministry.  On some of the points to which the Ministry’s 
officials could not readily respond, the Chairman asked them to furnish written information within 
a specific time period.  
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
SECOND SITTING 
(31.10.2011) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, October 31, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to  1730 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                 
Shri  Aruna Kumar Vundavalli             -         Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.         Shri Sudarshan Bhagat  
3.         Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
4.         Dr. Thokchom Meina 
5.         Shri Mahabal Mishra             
6.         Shri M.B. Rajesh    
7.         Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
8.         Shri Dhananjay Singh 
9.         Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
10.       Shri C. Sivasami 
11.       Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12.   Shri Sabir Ali 
13.   Shri Kalraj Mishra 
14.        Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani  
15.    Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
16.    Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
17.         Dr. Prabha Thakur  
18.         Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

87 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1. Shri G.C.Chaturvedi - Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Bhargava - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri L.N.Gupta - Joint Secretary  
4. Shri Vivek Kumar - Joint Secretary 
 
 Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other Organizations 
 
1 Shri R.S. Butola - Chairman, IOCL 
2 Shri S. Roy Choudhury - C&MD, HPCL  
3 Shri R.K. Singh - C&MD, BPCL 
4 Shri N.M.Borha - C&MD, OIL 
5 Shri A.K.Hazarika - Director (Onshore), ONGC 
6 Shri P. Mahajan - Director (Tech), EIL 
7 Shri S. Venkataraman - Director (BD), GAIL 
8 Shri Hirak Dutta - Executive Director, OISD 
9 Shri S.L.Chakravarty - Director, OISD 
10 Shri N.K. Khosla - Executive Director, IOCL 
 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chaiman paid tribute to Late Shrimati Indira Gandhi on her death 
anniversary and late Shri Silvius Condpan, a member of this Commitee from Rajya Sabha, who 
passed away on 10th October,2011.  The Committee passed a Condolence Resolution in his 
honour. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members, representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and public Undertakings to the sitting.  

88 
 
  
3. The representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the subject 'Safety of Oil 
Installations' and also apprised them of  the stage of implementation of recommendations of the 
M.B. Lal Committee on Jaipur fire incident.  The Committee discussed var ious issues pertaining 
to the above subject and expressed unhappiness over the tardy progress made in implementing 
the recommendations of M.B.Lal Committee.  Other issues which came up for discussion 
included putting on hold tendering process resulting in delay of procurement of safety items as 
recommended by the said Committee,  CVC guidelines and enquiry into single tender process 
by IOC, review of OISD standards 116 and 117 particularly relating to equivalency, retroactivity 
and common fire fighting faci lities in a meeting despite the same notified by the OISD for 
adoption and incorporation by the industry.   
 
4. The Members registered their strong protest over circulation of unsigned note of Shri 
M.B. Lal submitted to the Secretary, MOPNG, in his individ ual capacity despite the fact that the 
recommendations of the M B Lal Committee have been accepted by the Government for 
implementation.  The note was in regard to expenditure on implementing Jaipur fire Committee 
recommendations and the scope for optimizing costs and time.    
 
5. The clarifications sought by the members on various points related to the subject were 
provided by the representatives of the Ministry.  On some of the points to which the Ministry's 
officials could not readily respond, the Chairman asked them to furnish written information within 
a specific time period. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(29.3.2012) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, March 29, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'B',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT                 
Shri  Aruna Kumar Vundavalli            -             Chairman 
 
                                              Lok Sabha        
 
2 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam Ahir 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
6 Shri Raosaheb Dadarao Danve 
7 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
10 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
11 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
12 Shri C.L.Ruala 
13 Shri Dhananjay Singh  
14 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 

90 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
16 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
17 Shri Sabir Ali 
18 Shri Pankaj Bora 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1. Shri G.C.Chaturvedi - Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Bhargava - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri L.N.Gupta - Joint Secretary  
4. Shri Vivek Kumar - Joint Secretary 
 
 
 Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other Organizations 
 
1 Shri R.S. Butola - Chairman, IOCL 
2 Shri S. Roy Choudhury - C&MD, HPCL  
3 Shri R.K. Singh - C&MD, BPCL 
4 Shri N.M.Borah - C&MD, OIL 
5 Shri Hirak Dutta - Executive Director, OISD 
6 Shri S.L.Chakravarty - Director, OISD 

91 
 
 
7 Shri Anoop Kumar  - ED, HSE, ONGC 
  
2.   At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members, representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the implementation 
of M.B.Lal Committee recommendations.  While deliberating on the issues, the Committee 
deplored the inordinate delay and tardy progress in the implementation of safety measures in oil 
installations resulting in  vulnerability of thousands of workers deployed  in the oil installations in 
various parts of the country.  The Committee  also exhorted the oil companies to ensure strict 
adherence to the safety guidelines prescribed by OISD.  
 
4. Other issues which came up for discussion included putting on hold tende ring process 
resulting in delay of procurement of safety items as recommended by the said Committee, CVC 
guidelines and enquiry into single tender process by IOC, review of OISD standards.   
 
5. The clarifications sought by the Members on various points re lated to the subject were 
provided by the representatives of the Ministry.  On some of the points to which the Ministry's 
officials could not readily respond, the Chairman asked them to furnish written information within 
a specific time period. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
(16.4.2012) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, April 16, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room 
No. 62,  Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT                 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli            -             Chairman 
 
                                              Lok Sabha 
 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
7 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
10 Shri M.B. Rajesh 
11 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
12 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri C. Sivasami 

93 
 
15 Shri Thol Thirumaavalavan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
17 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
18 Shri Sabir Ali 
 
 
ecretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1. Shri G.C.Chaturvedi - Secretary 
2. Shri L.N.Gupta - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Neeraj Mittal - Joint Secretary 
    
 Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other Organizations 
 
1 Shri Sudhir Vasudeva - C&MD, ONGC 
2 Shri R.S. Butola - Chairman, IOCL 
3 Shri S. Roy Choudhury - C&MD, HPCL  
4 Shri R.K. Singh - C&MD, BPCL 
5 Shri Hirak Dutta - Executive Director, OISD 
6 Shri A.Mishra - Director, OISD 

94 
 
  
2.   At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members, representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on procurement of items like Rimseal 
protection and other key safety items.  Some Members also raised the issue of oil spill in 
onshore/offshore installations and its environmental impact.  The Committee also deliberated on 
single tender process, functioning and administrative framework of OISD, its inspections, rules 
and standards, role of PESO (Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization) in overseeing 
safety issues and increasing major and minor fire accidents in the oil installations. 
 
4. The clarifications sought by the Members on various points related to the subject were 
provided by the representatives of the Ministry.  On some of the points to which the Ministry's 
officials could not readily respond, the Chairman asked them to furnish written information within 
a specific time period. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

95 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2011-12) 
ELEVENTH SITTING 
(21.05.2012) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday the 21st May, 2012 from 1015 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in 
Room No ‘113’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
4 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
5 Shri Raosaheb Dadarao Danve 
6 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
7 Shri Mukeshkumar Bheravdanji Gadhvi 
8 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Shri Mahabal Mishra 
11 Shri C.L. Ruala 
12 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15 Dr. Prabha Thakur 

96 
 
16 Shri Sabir Ali 
17 Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject 
‘Safety of Oil Installations’ and adopted the same with minor modifications. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light of 
consequential changes arising out of the suggestions made by the Committee Members in 
Report and to present/lay the same in the both Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 