4 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
„THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF RIGHT 
OF USER IN LAND) AMENDMENT BILL, 2010‟ 
 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
„THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF 
USER IN LAND) AMENDMENT BILL, 2010‟ 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.08.2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka) 


CP & NG No.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi - 110005 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)……………..……………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………… (v) 
 
REPORT 
 
 
A. Introductory   
B. Observations and Recommendations 
 
Provisions of the Bill  
 
 
(a) Clause 2 -Substitution of new section for sections 15 and 
16 
 
 section 15 (1)  
(b) Amendment of section 15 (2)  
(c) Insertion of new section 15(3)  
(d) Insertion of new section 15(4)  
(e) Amendment of section 16  
(f) Conferment of powers of arrest, investigation etc. on 
Central Government Officers (Insertion of new section 
16A) 
 
(g) Burden of proof in certain cases & presumption regarding 
property (Insertion of new section 16B and 16C) 
 
(h) Provisions as to bail (Insertion of new section 16 D)  
(i) Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not 
to apply (Insertion of new section 16E) 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in 
Land) Amendment Bill, 2010……………… 
 
II. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
& Natural Gas (2009-10) held on 21.5.2010…………….. 
 
III. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
& Natural Gas (2009-10) held on 6.7.2010…………….. 
 
IV. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (2009-10) held on 5.8.2010……… 
 
V. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (2009-10) held on 20.8.2010……… 
 

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (2009-10) 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli             -             Chairman 
 
Members 
   
Lok Sabha 
2         Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3         Shri Ramesh Bais 
4         Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
5         Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
6        Dr. Ratna De 
7         Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi  
8       Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9          Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
10       Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
11       Shri Virendra Kumar     
12       Shri Vikrambhai A. Madam 
13       Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
14       Shri Mahabal Mishra 
15       Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
16       Shri Kabindra Purkayastha    
17       Shri K. Narayan Rao       
18       Shri C.L. Ruala  
19       Shri Uday Pratap Singh (Hoshangabad) 
20       Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
21       Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22      Dr. Prabha Thakur 
23      Shri Ahmed Patel 
    $24     Shri B.K.Hariprasad 
25      Shri Kalraj Mishra 
26      Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 

   @27    Shri Kamal Akhtar 
   @28     Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
    *29     Shri Subhash Prasad Yadav 
30     Shri Sabir Ali 
    #31     Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P.Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Arvind Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
# Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.06.2010. 
 
$ Ceased to be Member of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
30.06.2010. 
 
@Ceased to be Members of the Committee on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
04.07.2010.  
 
*Ceased to be Me mber of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 
07.07.2010. 

 
 (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas (2009 -10) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, prese nt 
this Fourth Report on „Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in 
Land) Amendment Bill, 2010‟ relating to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
2. The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) 
Amendment Bill, 2010 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2010.  The Hon‟ble 
Speaker referred the Bill to the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas on 
7th May 2010 for examination and Report within three months.  Hon‟ble Speaker granted 
extension to finalise and present the report on the Bill to the Parliament by the last day 
of the Fifth session. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of Law (Department of Leg al Affairs) and the 
concerned Public Sector Undertakings/Organisations for placing their views before them 
and furnishing the information desired in connection with examination of the Bill. 
 
4. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas considered a nd adopted the 
Report at their sitting held on 20 August, 2010. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
 
6. The Committee place on rec ord their appreciation for the invaluable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.   
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
25 August,  2010                                                                         Chairman, 
3 Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka)               Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

REPORT 
 
 
A. Introductory 
 
 The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 
1962 was enacted to provide for the acquisition of right of user in land for laying 
pipelines for the transport of petroleum and minerals and for matters connected 
therewith.  The underground onshore cross -country pipelines are laid at a depth of 
about 1.5 metre in about 1 8 metre wide corridor and operated normally at high 
pressure.  The 18 meter wide corridor which is called „Right of way‟ (ROW) is acquired 
by various oil companies under the Act. 
 
1.2 Since the enactment of the aforesaid Act, several underground pipelines have 
been laid across the country carrying crude oil, petroleum products and gas.  The 
network of such pipelines has grown in a big way.  Despite regular patrolling and 
inspection of the pipelines, large number of incidents of pilferage and sabotage of 
pipelines by anti -social elements are taking place frequently.  As the crude petroleum 
and its products are hazardous material, their pilferage and spillage from such pipelines 
have serious consequences. 
 
1.3 Section 15 and 16 of the aforesaid Act, lay down t he provisions to deal with the 
cases of pilferage from, or sabotage of, pipelines. Sub-section (2) of section 15 provides 
that whoever willfully removes, displaces, damages or destroys any  pipeline, shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a ter m which shall not be less than one year, 
but which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.  Section 16 
provides that offence under sub -section (2) of section 15 shall be deemed to be 
cognizable under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.   
 
1.4 The Government have, however, found the existing provisions of the law 
inadequate to deal with cases of pilferage and sabotage as they do not provide for 
sufficient deterrence to criminals from committing the offence of pilferage or sabotage. 
To c urb incidents of pilferage from, and sabotage of, pipelines and also to serve as 
deterrence to the emerging security threats to the pipeline installations, including those 

from extremists and terrorists, the Government felt that more stringent punishment i s 
required to be provided for in aforesaid Act and accordingly the Petroleum and Minerals 
Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment Bill, 2010 was introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 16 th March, 2010.  The Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the 
Amendment Bill to the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas on 07 th May, 
2010 for examination and Report thereon.     
 
1.5 According to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the last few decades 
have witnessed a huge growth in the network of p ipelines in the country because 
transportation of petroleum products, crude oil and gas through pipelines is the 
cheapest, safest and environment friendly mode of transportation.  The pilferage and 
spillage from petroleum pipelines has serious consequences like:- 
 
(a) loss of precious crude oil/petroleum product resulting in financial loss to the oil 
companies as well as to the nation; 
 
(b) disruption in supply of crude oil to refineries and of finished products to markets; 
 
(c) damage to cultivable soil, e nvironment, aboveground and sub -soil water bodies 
or resources; 
 
(d) loss of life and property,  in case of a fire; etc. 
 
1.6 Difficulties in the existing legal framework - Section 15 and 16 of the 
Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of U ser in Land) Act, 1962 do 
not contain provisions for the enforcement authorities to arrest or detain any person 
unless he is caught red -handed during the act of pilferage or sabotage.  Even if a 
person is arrested for committing pilferage, he is prosecuted  under the provisions of 
Sections 379 and 380 of IPC.  Due to non -availability of witnesses in such cases, they 
do not stand the test of law in courts.   
 Sec. 379 of IPC deals with theft and section 380 talks of theft in a building, tent or 
vessel.  Offen ces under both the above sections are bailable.  The punishment for 
offences under Sec. 379 is imprisonment for a term which extends upto three years 
whereas under Sec. 380 the imprisonment is for 7 years.  Thus, it would be seen that 
the punishments provided for under Sec. 379 and 380 are not stringent enough to serve 
as a deterrent. 

1.7 To contain the pilferage/sabotage of oil pipelines and also to serve as deterrent 
to the emerging security threats from extremists and terrorists on the pipeline 
installations, amendment of Section 15 and 16 of the Act has been proposed with the 
following objectives:  
 
a) Provide stringent punishment regime - the quantum of punishment (rigorous 
imprisonment) may extend upto 10 years in the case of first offence and for 
subsequent offence the minimum period of imprisonment shall not be less than 3 
years except where the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgement, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less 
than three years -section 15 (2) & (3) of the Amendment Bill.  
b) Exemplary punishment of life imprisonment/death punishment for extreme 
sabotage/terrorist act in section 15(4) of the Amendment Bill.  
c) To amend section 16 to make the offences under section 15(2), (3) & (4) of the 
Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962 
cognizable and non-bailable. 
d) To insert a new section 16A notwithstanding the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 for conferring powers to any officer of Central Government for the pur pose 
of arrest, investigation, prosecution and all other proceedings under this 
Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962. 
e) Putting the onus on the accused to prove that the pilfered product does not belong 
to him under section 16 B of the Amendment Bill. 
f) To insert a new section 16C to provide that w hen in any proceedings taken under 
this Act, or in consequence of anything done under this Act, if any question arises 
as to whether any petroleum product is the property o f the Corporation, such 
property shall be presumed to be the property of the Corporation until the contrary 
is proved.    
g) Strengthen the enforcement mechanism by making offences under section 15 (2), 
(3) & (4) cognizable and non-bailable under Section 16 of the Amendment Bill. Bail 
to be granted only after hearing the Public Prosecutor in section 16 D of the 
Amendment Bill. 

h) To insert a new section 16E to provide that section 438 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 shall not apply in relation to any case  involving the arrest of any 
person on an accusation of having committed an offence under sections 15(2) and 
15(4) of the Act.   
(a) Observations and Recommendations 
 
B. Provisions of the Bill  
 
Clause 2 -Substitution of new section for sections 15 and 16 
 
1.8 Clause 2 of the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in 
Land) Amendment Bill, 2010, seeks to substitute the existing sections 15 and 16 of the 
principal Act as per details given below:- 
 
section 15 (1) 
 
(i) As far as sub -section (1) of section 15 of the principal Act, no change has been 
proposed. 
 
(b) Amendment of section 15 (2) 
 
(ii) The existing sub-section (2) of section 15 has been amended as under:- 
“whoever makes or causes to make any unauthorized  connection with or 
removes, destroys, damages or displaces any pipeline laid under section 7 or 
inserts any device to extract petroleum product/minerals from such pipeline, or 
disrupts supplies being made through the pipeline, shall be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a  term which may extend to ten years and shall also 
be liable to fine”. 
 
1.9 Asked about the reasons for keeping offences under sub -section (2) of section 
15 under a category of strict liability by omission of the word „wilfully‟, the Ministry of 
Law (Department of Legal Affairs) in a written note inter-alia have stated as under: 
“It may be clarified that this Department never suggested omitting the word 
„wilfully‟ from sub-section (2) of section 15 of the Act as proposed under the Bill.  
The said omission w as proposed in the draft Cabinet note prepared by the 
administrative ministry”. 
 
1.10 It further states:-                                                                                       . 
“The offences as existed under sub -section (2) of section 15 o f the existing 
provisions of the Act relate only to remove, destroy, damage or displace any 
pipeline and fall under the proposed amendment. However, the administrative 

Ministry have added some other activities as also punishable namely (a) „makes 
or causes to make any unauthorized connection with‟, (b) „inserts any device to 
extract petroleum products or minerals from such pipeline‟ and (c) „disrupts 
supplies being made through the pipeline‟. It is also proposed to enhance the 
punishment. In that process, t he word „wilfully‟ has been deliberately omitted by 
the administrative Ministry.  It may not be out of place to mention that the draft 
amendment Bill was vetted by the Legislative Department as per the requirement 
of the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The Bill after 
finalization by the Legislative Department had not been examined by us.   
The existence of the word „wilfully‟ as in sub -section (1) of section 15 under the 
existing provision and also in the existing sub -section (2) o f section 15 and its 
omission from proposed sub -section (2) will lead to different interpretations. 
Hence, there may be no objection if the word „wilfully‟ is retained in sub -section 
(2)”. 
 
1.11 Explaining their views on the above clarification of the Law Ministry, the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas stated in a written reply that the Ministry has no objection 
to retain the word „wilfully‟ in section 15 (2) as the objective of the proposed amendment 
would not be affected.   
 
1.12 Asked about provisions of strict liability in any other law providing for protection of 
public goods/services such as railways property and electricity etc.  and their 
sustainability under judicial review, the Dept. of Legal Affairs in a written note submitted 
as under :- 
  
“Similar provisions of strict liability are available in several statutes such as 
 section 3 of the Prevention of Damage of Public Property Act, 1984 and section 3 
 of the  Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966”.    
 The proposed offences are bein g created in public and national interest and the 
 same cannot be said to be unreasonable, arbitrary or unjust.  The provisions 
 mentioned  under this sub-section may not hit the provisions of Article 21 of the 
 Constitution and may withstand the judicial scrutiny”. 
 
1.13 The Committee note that the proposed amendments to sub -section 2 of 
section 15 has added some other activities as punishable offences namely          
(a) „make or causes to make any unauthorized connection with‟ (b) „insert any 
device to extract petroleum products or minerals from such pipeline‟ (c) disrupts 
supplies being made through the pipeline‟.  Besides the amendment proposes to 
enhance the punishment of rigorous imprisonment for these offences for a term 
which may extend to ten years .  The Committee further note that the word 

„wilfully‟ has been omitted while the same has been retained in sub -section (1).  
The Committee while deliberating over this provision expressed their 
apprehension that the removal of word „wilfully‟ from the sub-section will not only 
make the provision more stringent but very destructive particularly when it is 
actually implemented and it will give unfettered powers to officers to abuse the 
provision for roping in and punishing innocent persons for any of their a cts done 
„accidentally‟ or „unintentionally‟.  Clarifying their position, Ministry of Law 
(Department of Legal Affairs) informed the Committee that they have never 
suggested the omission of word „wilfully‟ from sub -section (2) and it was only 
proposed by t he Ministry of Petroleum in their Cabinet note.  Both, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) 
finally agreed to the inclusion of the word „wilfully‟ in sub-section (2).  After giving 
consideration to all the  aspects including the availability of provisions of strict 
liability in other statutes, the Committee recommend inclusion of word „wilfully‟ 
after the word „whoever‟ in sub-section (2) of section 15.  The Committee endorse 
the other amendments proposed in sub-section (2) of section 15. 
 
(c) Insertion of new section 15(3) 
 
1.14 Sub-section (3) is being inserted to deal with a situation if a person convicted for 
offence under sub -section (2) is again convicted of similar offence.  When the same 
person repeat s the crime committed by him under sub -section 15(2), he shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence 
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years.  It 
also provides that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned 
in the judgement, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three 
years. 
 
1.15 Keeping in view the objectives of the Bill and the need for stringent 
provisions to ach ieve the same, the Committee agree with the amendments 
proposed in sub-section (3) of section 15.   

 
(d) Insertion of new section 15(4) 
 
1.16 Section 15(4) proposed to be inserted in the principle Act by clause 2 of the Bill 
stipulates that:- 
 
“Whoever, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause damage 
to or destruction of any pipeline laid under section 7, causes by fire, explosive 
substance or otherwise damage to the pipeline being used for transportation of 
petroleum products, crude oil and gas with the intent to commit sabotage or with 
the knowledge that such act is so imminently dangerous that it may in all 
probability cause death of a person or such bodily injury likely to cause death of 
any person, shall be punishable with rigorou s imprisonment which shall not be 
less than ten years but may extend to imprisonment for life or death” 
 
1.17 Regarding the need for making a distinction between organized criminal gangs or 
terrorists committing such acts of sabotage and ordinary persons c ommitting such acts 
of sabotage inadvertently, Department of Legal Affairs informed the Committee as 
under:- 
“From perusal of section 15 (4) of the proposed Bill, it is noticed that the intention 
is not to make any distinction between commission of offence  by an organized 
criminal gangs or terrorists committing such acts of sabotage or by ordinary 
persons. There may be a case where an ordinary person may commit the 
offence so grave in nature that the act may cause harm to thousands of people. 
Therefore, perhaps it is not necessary to make a distinction between commission 
of offence committed by organized criminal gangs or terrorists committing such 
acts of sabotage.  
The court has ample discretion to award the sentence, keeping in view the facts 
and circumstances of the case, gravity of the offence, etc.  For example, if the 
alleged act is committed by the organized criminal gangs or terrorists committing 
such acts of sabotage or by ordinary person”.     
 
1.18 Considering the fact that Indian Courts impose th e punishment of death only in 
the rarest of rare cases, the Committee have desired to know the justification for 
provision of death sentence as proposed by insertion of a new section 15(4) in the Bill.  
In this regard, Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) have informed the 
Committee in a written note as under:- 
 
“Death Sentence in other Statutes:  Apart from the IPC there are many other 
Statutes in which death sentence is prescribed.  For example, the Narcotics 
Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1 985; Explosive Substances Act, 1908; 
the Scheduled Caste & Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocity) Act, 1989 ; The 

Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987; TADA 1987; POTA 1987; POTA 
2002 (Since repealed but cases are still pending in the Court); the A rmy Act, 
1950; The Navy Act, 1957; The Air Force Act, 1950 ; the National Security 
guards Act, 1986; the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992”. 
 
1.19 It further stated:- 
„Death sentence in rarest of rare cases: - Section 354 (3) of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973 provides that „when the conviction is for an offence 
punishable with death or, in the alternative for life or imprisonment for a term of 
years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the 
case of sentence of de ath, the special reasons for such sentence‟.  The Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in the case of Bachan Singh Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1980 SC 
898 (para 209) have observed as follows:  
 
 “A real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life postulates resistance to 
taking a life through law’s instrumentality.  This ought not be done save in the 
rarest of rare cases when the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed.” 
 
The Supreme Court has indicated the guidelines for rarest of rare of cases in the 
case of sentence of death in Bachan Singh case (supra) and in Lehana Vs. State 
of Haryana (2002) 3 SCC 76 have reproduced these guidelines.  
 
Thus the concern of the Hon‟ble Committee with regard to the punishment of 
death even to the land owner or villager for com mitting the act of sabotage of 
pipeline may be taken care of by the concerned judicial forum, as per established 
principles that the death penalty be imposed only in rarest of rare cases‟.  
 
1.20 The Committee are not basically against the stringent provis ions proposed 
in section 15(4).  Although the new provisions proposed in section 15(4) are to 
provide sufficient deterrence to potential offenders, the Committee apprehend the 
scope for misuse of these harsh provisions against innocent people.  As regards,  
the punishment of death proposed in section 15(4), the Committee take note of 
the safeguards provided for in section 354(3) of CrPC, 1973 and particularly the 
observations of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court:- 
“A real and abiding concern for the dignity of human  life postulates 
resistance to taking a life through law’s instrumentality.  This ought not be 
done save in the rarest of rare cases when the alternative option is 
unquestionably foreclosed”. ( Supreme Court in the case of Bachan Singh 
Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1980 SC 898 (para 209). 

 
, 
 
The Committee therefore trust that the stringent provision proposed in 
section 15(4) regarding death penalty will not be misused/abused. 
 
(e) Amendment of section 16 
 
1.21 The Committee note that amendment to section 16 of t he Bill proposes to 
make the offences under sub -section (2), (3) and (4) of section 15 cognizable and 
also non -bailable within the meaning of Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, 
whereas the provisions of the existing Act make the offences under sub -section 
(2) only cognizable.  The Committee endorse the proposed amendment to section 
16.   
 
(f) Conferment of powers of arrest, investigation etc. on Central Govt. Officers  
 
(Insertion of new section 16A) 
 
1.22 Section 16 A  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained i n the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, confer on any officer of the Central Government, 
powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under that 
Code. 
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby required 
and empowered to assist the officer of the Central Government referred to in 
sub-section (1), in the execution of the provisions of this Act. 
 
1.23 As regards the guidelines to be laid down for regulating exercise of the powers of 
Central Govt. Officers under sec. 16 A and availability of similar provisions in other 
Statutes, the Committee were informed that section 21 (2) of „The Central Excise Act, 
1944, specifically provides that „Central Excise Officer may exercise the same powers 
and shall be subject to the same provisions as the officer -in-charge of a police station 
may exercise and is subject to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  The 
Committee find from the Central Excise Act that suitable provisions regarding exercise 
of powers of arrest, investigation, disposal of persons arrested with adequate 
safeguards against any vexatious search, seizure, etc. by the Central Excise Officer 

have been laid down in the Act itself (reference section 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of the 
Central Excise Act).  The Act further provides for penalty against the Central Excise 
Officer for his failure to perform duty.   
 
1.24 The provisions of section 22 of Cent ral Excise Act providing safeguards against 
vexatious search is given below:-  
 
“Section 22. Vexatious search, seizure, etc. by Central Excise Officer. – Any 
Central Excise or other officer exercising powers under this Act or under the rules 
made thereunder who –  
 
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches or causes to be 
searched any house, boat or place; 
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any person; 
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the movable property of any person, 
on pretence of seizing or searching for any article liable to confiscation 
under this Act; 
(d) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of any person, without 
having reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his 
duty; 
shall, for every such offence, be punishable with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees. 
Any person willfully and maliciously giving false information and so causing an 
arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or with both”.   
  
In this connection, the Dept. of Legal Affairs has informed the Committee that 
 section 17 of the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Ri ght of User 
 in Land) Act, 1962 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
 out the provisions of the Act.  The Central Government may confer such powers 
 upon the officer in accordance with the Rules framed/to be framed.  The powers 
 so conferred since have to be exercised in accordance with the provisions of Cr. 
 PC and the Rules framed under the Act may not be unfettered.  It would be 
 advisable if the level of officer is either specified or such power may be conferred 
 by general or spec ial order of the Central Government, by notification to be 
 published in the official Gazette. 
 
 

 
1.25 When asked about any proposal to set up own security forces by oil companies 
to tackle with the issue of pilferage/sabotage from their pipeline networks, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas inter -alia have informed the Committee in a written reply as 
under:- 
 
“Presently, there is no proposal to set up own security force to tackle the issue of 
pilferage/sabotage from pipelines.  Presently, Director Ge neral of Resettlement 
(DGR) sponsored Security Agencies are being engaged who provide a sizable 
number of ex-servicemen as security guards and line walkers”. 
1.26 Asked to explain the manner in which the powers of Central Government officers 
to be conferre d under section 16 A (1), would be executed, the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas stated during evidence that:- 
 
“this is a futuristic provision.  When the oil companies would like to raise a force 
separately to maintain the pip eline, these powers can be conferred.  But, at the 
same time, even the existing officers, like on the pattern of Excise Act, can also 
be conferred with the powers of police depending upon the number of 
occurrences which they are facing.  The existing secur ity officers can also be 
conferred the power to arrest and other similar powers by notification of the 
Central Government”. 
 
1.27 Explaining further on this point, the Secretary stated as under:- 
 
“first of all there is no proposal at all to empower any em ployee of the oil 
company.  It only talks about officers of the Central Government and employees 
of the oil companies are not officers of the Central Government.  These are 
exceptional cases in which, if the Government so desires, it can empower an 
officer of the Central Government but it is unlikely to happen because there are 
no officers of the Central Government on the field who can actually implement it”.  
 
1.28 The  Committee were informed that provisions similar to clause 16 A (1) of 
the Bill are avai lable under section 21 (2) of the Central Excise Act, 1944.  
However, the Committee find that the procedure to regulate the powers of arrest, 
investigation, disposal of persons arrested are laid out very clearly in the Central 
Excise Act itself with adequate safeguards against any vexatious search, seizure, 
etc. by the Central Excise Officer.  It is surprising that although powers of arrest, 
investigation and prosecution are proposed to be conferred on Central 
Government officers under clause 16 A (1) of th e Bill, it is silent on the provisions 
regarding regulation of their powers with adequate safeguards.  The Government 

have also failed to explain the mechanism by which these powers will be 
executed in the future particularly when there is no proposal by the oil companies 
to set up their own security force to deal with the cases of pilferage and 
sabotage.  The Committee strongly feel that there is a need to lay down clear 
provisions for exercise of the powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution by 
Central Government officers in the Act itself in order to avoid ambiguity and the 
scope for misuse of such powers against innocent villagers or land owners for 
any of the acts done by them accidentally or unintentionally.  The Committee feel 
that such substant ive powers to be exercised by the Central Govt. Officers 
should not be dealt with in the Rules to be made under the Act.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend to incorporate suitable safeguard provisions in the Bill 
itself on the lines of similar provisions  in Central Excise Act to regulate the 
powers of the Central Government officers and safeguard the interest of the 
villagers and the land owners.   
 
(g) Burden of proof in certain cases & Presumption regarding property  
 
(Insertion of new sections 16 B and 16 C) 
 
1.29 Section 16 B. Where any petroleum product together with all tools, vehicles and 
all items used in committing any such offence under sub -section (2) or sub -section (4) 
of section 15 are seized under this Act in the reasonable belief that such p etroleum 
products have been stolen from the pipeline laid under section 7, the burden of proving 
that they are not stolen property shall be, in case where such seizure is made from the 
possession of any person –  
(i) on the person from whose possession the property was seized, and  
(ii) on the person who claims to be the owner thereof, if any person other than 
the person from whose possession the stolen property was seized. 
 
1.30 Section 16 C. Where any proceeding taken under this Act, or in consequence of 
anything done under this Act, a question arises as to whether any petroleum product is 
the property of the corporation, the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown, 
that such petroleum product belongs to the corporation. 

1.31 On the justification to shift  the burden of proof on the accused as it may be 
contrary to the protection given to an accused person under Article 20(3) of the 
Constitution, the Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) informed the Committee 
in a written reply as under: 
1. According to section 102 of the Evidence Act, the burden of proof in a suit 
or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all were 
given on either side.  However, similar provisions as mentioned under the 
proposed section 16(B) of the Bill ar e already in existence under the 
following Statutes:- 
 
(i) Section 54 of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 
deals with presumption from possession of illicit articles  
  
(ii) Sub-section 7(B) of section 10 of the Prevention of Food A dulteration Act, 
1954 provides that “when any adulterant is seized under sub -section (6), 
the burden of proving that such adulterant is not meant for purposes of 
adulteration shall be on the person from whose possession such 
adulterant was seized.” 
 
(iii) Section 3 of the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 
provides that “whoever is found, or is proved to have been, in possession 
of any railway property reasonably suspected of having been stolen or 
unlawful obtained shall, unless he proves that  the railway property came 
into his possession lawfully…….” 
 
(iv) Section 9(A) has been inserted by suppression of unlawful acts against 
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment) (Act 40 of 1994) which provides for 
such presumption “in a prosecution for an offe nce under sections 3, 3 A 
and 4 of the Act. 
“Therefore, the proposed section under section 16B of the Bill may not be 
legally objectionable in the present form and the same will not be hit by 
article 20(3) of the Constitution and the Legislature has the co mpetence to 
make provision in a law shifting the burden of proof as a matter of public 
policy. “ 
 
1.32 In view of the clarifications given by the Ministry of Law (Department of 
Legal Affairs), the Committee agree with the provisions as proposed in new 
sections 16B and 16C. 
(h) Provisions as to bail (Insertion of new section 16 D) 
 
1.33 Section 16 D. (1)  notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless –  

(a)  the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application for such release; and 
 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied 
that there are reason able grounds for believing that his is not guilty of such 
offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. 
 
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub -section (1) are in 
addition to the limitations under the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 or any 
other law for the time being in force on granting of bail. 
 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special 
powers of the High Court regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
(i) Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply 
 
 (Insertion of new section 16E) 
 
1.34 Section 16 E.  Nothing is section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any  person on an accusation of 
having committed an offence punishable under sub -section(2) or sub -section (4) of 
section 15 
 
1.35 When asked about the reasons for making the bail procedure so stringent under 
this section even after making the offences non -bailable and whether any similar 
provisions exist in any other law providing for protection of public goods and property 
unit, the Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) submitted the following : 
 
“As regards the stringent procedure for grant of bail, attention is invited to the 
following Statutes which contained similar provisions: 
 
(i) Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982  - section 7A. Provision as to bail: 
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no 
person accused of an offence punishab le under this Act shall, if in custody, be 
released on bail or on his own bond unless-  
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application for such release; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such 
offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.  
 

(ii) The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) 
section 20 provides the modified application of certain provision of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure 1973. The sub -section 8 of section 20 of TADA provides that 
„Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code no person accused of an 
offence punishable under this Act or any rule  made there under shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless-  
 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application for such release, and 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such 
offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. 
2. It is submitted that the opportunity to hear Prosecutor at the time of 
hearing of the bail appl ication is in accordance with the gravity, seriousness and 
economic importance of the crime and is justifiable on the ground that the similar 
provisions already exist in several statutes”.  
 
1.36 Further, when the Committee desired to know the implications  of section 16E 
proposed in the Bill for the rights of an accused person in connection with the offences 
committed under section 15(2) and (4).  The Ministry of Law (Department of Legal 
Affairs), informed the Committee: 
 
“It is stated that the implication  of section 16 (E) of the proposed Bill is that the 
right of the accused to seek the anticipatory bail has been taken away and he is 
not entitled to seek anticipatory bail under section 438 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
 
It is relevant to mentio n that the applicability of section 438 of Cr.PC which deals 
with the provisions of anticipatory bail has been taken away in several Statutes.  
e.g. sub section (7) of section 20 of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987; sub section (3 ) of section 21 of the Maharashtra Control 
of Organized Crime Act, 1999”.  
 
1.37 After giving careful consideration to the objects of the Bill and also the 
need for stringency of punishments and bail provisions to achieve the objectives 
of the Bill, the Co mmittee feel that there is a need for the Government to pay 
attention to the rights of accused persons also.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that stringent provisions of the law on their own may not completely prevent 
criminal acts of pilferage from and sabotage of oil pipelines by organized criminal 
gangs.  On the other hand, such stringent provisions with unfettered powers to 
Officers may lead to harassment and punishment of the innocent villagers and 

land-owners for any of their acts done accidently or  unintentionally attracting the 
provisions of section 15.  Viewed in this context, Committee feel that there would 
be no impediment to achieve the objectives of the Bill if stringency of the Bail 
provisions proposed in section 16 (D) and (E) are made appli cable only to the 
offences defined under section 15 (4).   
 
 
 
New Delhi;       
 25 August,  2010         
03  Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka) 
ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI,                                                   
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
       
 
 

Annexure-I 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 38 of 2010 
 
 
THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF 
RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in 
Land) Act, 1962. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines 
(Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment Act, 2010. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
   
 
 
2 

 
Subsitution 
of 
new section 
for sections 
15 and 16. 
Penalty. 
 
2. For sections 15 and 16 of the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of 
Right of User in Land) Act, 1962. the following sections shall be substituted, namely: — 
 
"15. (1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised 
by section 4 or section 7 o r section 8 or wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces 
any trench or mark made under section 4 or wilfully does any act prohibited under 
section 9, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine or with both. 
 
(2) Whoever makes or causes to make any unauthorised connection with or  
removes, destroys, damages or displaces any pipeline laid under section 7, or inserts  
any device to extract petroleum product or minerals from such pipeline, or disrupts  
supplies being made through the pipeline, shall be punishable with rigorous  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
 
(3) If any person convicted of an offence under sub-section (2) is again convicted 
of an offence under the same provision, he shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for a term which shall  
not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years: 
 
        Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned 
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.  
 
(4) Whoever, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause 
damage to or destruction of any pipeline laid under section 7, causes by fire, explosive 
substance or otherwise damage to the pipeline being used for transportation of  
petroleum products, crude oil and gas with the intent to commit sabotage or with the  
knowledge that such act is so imminently dangerous that it may in all probability cause 
death of a person or such bodily injury likely to cause death of any person, shall be  
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may  
extend to imprisonment for life or death. 
 
50 of 1962. 
 
Certain 
offences to 
be 
cognizable. 
 
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, an offence falling under sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 15 shall be 
deemed to be cognizable and non-bailable within the meaning of that Code. 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
Conferment 
of powers of 
investigation, 
etc. 
 
16A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, confer on any officer of the Central Government, powers of arrest,  
investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under that Code.  
 
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby required and  
empowered to assist the officer of the Central Government referred to in sub-section 
(1), in the execution of the provisions of this Act. 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
Burden of 
proof in 
certain cases. 
 
16B. Where any petroleum product together with all tools, vehicles and all items  
used in committing any such offence under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of 
section 15 are seized under this Act in the reasonable belief that such petroleum  
products have been stolen from the pipeline laid under section 7, the burden of proving  
that they are not stolen property shall be, in case where such seizure is made from the  
possession of any person,— 
 
         (i) on the person from whose possession the property was seized, and 
        (ii) on the person who claims to be the owner thereof, if any person other 
than the person from whose possession the stolen property was seized. 
 
 
 

 16C. When any proceeding taken under this Act, or in consequence of anything  
done under this Act, a question arises as to whether any petroleum product is the  
property of the corporation, the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown,  
that such petroleum product belongs to the corporation. 
 
Presumption 
regarding 
property. 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
16D. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody,  
be released on bail or on his own bond unless— 
 
          (a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application for such release; and 
         (b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is 
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of  
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.  
 
Provisions as 
to bail 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub-section (1) are in addition 
to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the  
time being in force on granting of bail. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special 
powers of the High Court regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973. 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
16E. Nothing in section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall ap ply 
in relation to any case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having  
committed an offence punishable under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 
15.”. 
 
Section 438 
of the Code 
of Criminal 
Procedure, 
1973 not to 
apply. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962  
was enacted to provide for the acquisition of right of user in land for laying pipelines for the  
transport of petroleum and minerals and for matters connected therewith. 
 
2.  Since the enactment of the aforesaid Act, several underground pipelines have been  
laid across the country carrying crude oil, petroleum products and gas. The network of such  
pipelines has grown in a big way. Despite regular patrolling and inspection of the pipelines, 
large number of incidents of pilferage and sabotage of pipelines by anti-social elements are 
taking place frequently. As the crude petroleum and its products are hazardous material, their  
pilferage and spillage from such pipelines have serious consequences. 
 
3.  To curb the incidents of pilferage from, and sabotage of, pipelines and also to serve  
as deterrence to the emerging security threats to the pipeline installations, including those  
from extremists and terrorists, more stringent punishment is required to be provided for in the  
aforesaid Act. 
 
4.  Sections 15 and 16 of the aforesaid Act, which lay down the provisions to deal with  
the cases of pilferage from, or sabotage of, pipelines, do not provide for sufficient deterrence 
to criminals from committing the offence of pilferage or sabotage. Sub -section (2) of section 
15 provides that whoever wilfully removes, displaces, damages or destroys any pipeline,  
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year, but which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Section 16 provides  
that offence under sub-section (2) of section 15 shall be deemed to be cognizable under the  
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
5.  It is proposed to substitute the said sub-section (2) of section 15 of the aforesaid Act 
and insert sub-sections (3) and (4) in that section, inter alia, to provide that— 
 
(a) whoever makes or causes to make any unauthorized connection with, or 
removes, destroys, damages or displaces any pipeline or inserts any device to extract  
petroleum or its products or minerals from such pipeline or disrupts supplies being  
made through the pipeline, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine; 
 
(b) a person, who is convicted of an offence under sub-section (2), commits the 
offence again under that sub-section shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than three years and may extend to ten years for the 
second or subsequent offence; 
 
(c) whoever, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause damage  
to or destruction of any pipeline, causes by fire, explosive substance or otherwis e 
damage to, or destruction of, any pipeline being used for transportation of crude oil/  
petroleum product/gas with the intent to commit sabotage or with the knowledge that  
such act is so imminently dangerous that it may in all probability cause death of a  
person or such bodily injury likely to cause death of any person, shall be punishable  
with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years and may extend to  
imprisonment for life or death. 
 
6. It is further proposed to amend section 16 of the aforesaid Act to make the offences 
under sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 15 of the said Act to be cognizable and non -bailable. 
 

 
7. It is also proposed to insert new sections 16A, 16B, 16C and 16D in the aforesaid  
Act, inter alia, to provide that— 
 
(a) the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, confer on any of its officers the powers of arrest,  
investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer and all the officers of  
police and the Government shall assist the officers of the Central Government in 
execution of the provisions of the said Act; 
 
(b) when any petroleum product together with all tools, vehicles and all items 
used in committing any offence under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of the aforesaid 
section 15 are seized in the reasonable belief that the petroleum products have been  
stolen from the pipeline, the burden is on the person from whose possession the  
petroleum products (crude oil/petroleum product/gas) together with the tools, vehicles, 
etc., used in committing the crime are seized or who claims to be owner thereof, to  
prove that he is not guilty; 
 
(c) if any question arises, in any proceedings taken under this Act, or in 
consequence of anything done under this Act, as to whether any petroleum product 
is the property of the corporation, such property shall be presumed to be the property  
of the corporation until the contrary is proved; 
 
(d) no person accused or convicted of an offence punishable under the said 
Act, shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has been  
given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release; 
 
(e) section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to the grant of  
bail to person apprehending arrest, shall not apply in relation to any case involving 
the arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence punishable  
under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15 of the said Act. 
 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI;           MURLI DEORA 
The 9th March, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

EXTRACTS FROM THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF 
USER IN LAND) ACT, 1962 
(50 OF 1962) 
 
                        *                              *                              *                        *                                    * 
Penalty. 15. (1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised by 
section 4 or section 7 or section 8 or wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces 
any trench or mark made under section 4 or wilfully does any act prohibited under 
section 9, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or 
with fine or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully removes, displaces, damages or destroy any pipeline laid under 
section 7, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than one year, but which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
 
 
Certain 
offence to 
be 
cognizable 
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, an 
offence falling under sub -section (2) of section 15 shall be deemed to be cognizable 
within the meaning of that Code. 
 
5 of 1898 
 
* * * * * 

 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User  
in Land) Act, 1962. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas) 
 

Annexure-II 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
  
NINTH SITTING 
(21.5.2010) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 21 st May, 2010 from 1130 hrs. to 1415 hrs. 
in Committee Room “C”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais  
4         Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5 Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
6 Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
7 Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8 Shri Virendra Kumar 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
10 Shri K. Narayan Rao 
11 Shri C.L. Ruala 
12 Shri Uday Pratap Singh (Hoshangabad) 
Rajya Sabha 
13 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
14 Shri Kalraj Mishra 
15 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
16 Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
17 Shri Subhash Prasad Yadav 
18 Shri Sabir Ali 

Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board and Department of Legal Affairs 
 
 
1. Shri S.Sundareshan - Secretary 
2. Shri Ratan P. Watal - Secretary (PNGRB) 
3. Shri S. Bhargava - Additional Secretary  
4. Shri P.K.Sinha - Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 
5. Shri D.N.Narsimha Raju - Joint Secretary   
6. Shri L.N. Gupta - Joint Secretary  
7. Shri Apurva Chandra - Joint Secretary  
8. Shri S.S. Chahar - JS&LA, Dept. of Legal Affairs 
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other organisations 
 
1. Shri R.S.Sharma - CMD, ONGC 
2. Shri B.C.Tripathi - CMD, GAIL 
3. Shri N.M.Borah - CMD, OIL 
4. Shri Ashok Sinha - CMD, BPCL 
5. Shri Arun Balakrishnan - CMD, HPCL 
6. Shri B.M. Bansal - Chairman, IOCL 
7. Shri S.K. Srivastava - DG, DGH 
8. Shri A. Sengupta - Dir. (Finance), PLL 
9. Shri S.L. Das - Director (BD&C), Petrofed 
10. Shri Rajesh Vedvyas - MD, IGL 
 
 

2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Secretary of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and accompanying officials of PSUs and of Department of 
Legal Affairs to the sittin g of the Committee and explained the purpose of holding the 
sitting, i.e. Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas on 
(i) “Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment 
Bill, 2010”, referred to the Committee by Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination 
and report and (ii) the subject „Pricing of Gas‟.   
 
3. The representative of the Ministry made a power point presentation on various 
aspects of the two subjects.  Thereafter, Committee di scussed with the representatives 
of the Ministry and PSUs the following points:- 
 
A (i) The legal implications of the omission of the word „willfully‟ for the offences 
defined under section 15(2), stringency of the punishment of rigorous 
imprisonment of ten years which may extend to life imprisonment or death 
for the offences detailed under section 15(4), conferment of the powers of 
investigation and prosecution etc. on the officers of Central Government 
under section 16A and shifting the burden of proof to  the accused for 
offences committed under section 15(2) and (4) of the Petroleum and 
Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment Bill, 
2010 
 
(ii) The scope for misuse of the stringent provisions of the amendment Bill 
against the innocent villagers and land owners for any of their inadvertent 
act of omission and commission hitting the provisions of section 15(1), (2) 
and (4) of the Bill 
 
(iii) The need for evolving adequate preventive measures to prevent damage 
or destruction of the p ipelines by use of technology such as satellite 
surveillance and close monitoring of the activities of the patrolling staff and 
their supervisory officers for any act of collaboration or connivance in 
cases of theft from the damage to pipelines and  
 
(iv) the need for the Law ministry to look at the stringency of the provisions of 
the amendment Bill and their sustainability under judicial Review.  The 
Committee further desired that the opinion of Ministry of Law (Dept. of 
Legal Affairs) on the above points may be obtained and furnished to this 
Committee for their consideration. 
 
B (i) to (x) ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
  
   
 
 

 
The Members sought clarification on various issues relating to the subjects and 
the representatives of the Ministry responded to the s ame.  The Committee directed the 
representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies to the queries which could not 
be responded to by them. 
  
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**  Matter not related to the subject 

Annexure-III 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
  
TENTH SITTING 
(06.07.2010) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06 th July, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room “C”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais  
4         Smt. Ratna De  
5 Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
6 Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
7 Shri Virendra Kumar 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shri Mahabal Mishra  
10 Shri K. Narayan Rao 
11 Shri C.L. Ruala 
12 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
13 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
14 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
15 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
16 Shri Subhash Prasad Yadav 
17 Shri Sabir Ali 

Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board  
1. Shri S.Sundareshan - Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Sinha - Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 
3. Shri S. Bhargava - Additional Secretary  
4. Shri Apurva Chandra - Joint Secretary  
 
Representative of Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) 
 Shri M.K. Sharma - Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other organisations 
 
1. Shri R.S.Sharma - CMD, ONGC 
2. Shri B.C.Tripathi - CMD, GAIL 
3. Shri N.M.Borah - CMD, OIL 
4. Shri Ashok Sinha - CMD, BPCL 
5. Shri Arun Balakrishnan - CMD, HPCL 
6. Shri B.M. Bansal - Chairman, IOCL 
7. Shri S.L. Das - Director (BD&C), Petrofed 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Secretary of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, other officials of the Ministry and PSUs and representative of 
Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) to the sitting of the Committee and 
explained the purpose of holding the sitting, i.e. to have evidence of the Ministry on 
“Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment 
Bill, 2010”, referred to the Committee for examination and report.  The Chairman made 
a reference to the last briefing meeting held on 21 st May, 2010 where Committee had 
sought certain clarifications on various aspects of the proposed amendments including 

opinion of the Ministry of Law on the harsh provisions of the Bill and their sustainability 
under judicial review. 
 
3. As the Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) ha d not submitted the 
detailed note on the issues raised by the Members of the Committee during the briefing 
meeting and even the written replies to the List of Points forwarded to them were still 
awaited; the Committee directed the representative of the Min istry of Law that the 
desired information be furnished to them immediately. The Committee decided to have 
another meeting to take evidence of the Ministry on the Bill after the receipt of written 
replies to the points from the Ministry of Law (Department o f Legal Affairs) during the 
forthcoming session of Parliament.   
 
4. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
5. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
** Matter not related to the subject

 
Annexure-IV 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
  
ELEVENTH SITTING 
(05.08.2010) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 05 th August, 2010 from 1600 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room “C”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
4         Smt. Ratna De  
5 Shri Dilipkumar M. Gandhi 
6 Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
7 Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8 Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
9 Shri Vikrambhai A. Madam 
10 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
11 Shri Mahabal Mishra  
12 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
13 Shri K. Narayan Rao 
14 Shri C.L. Ruala 
15 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
16 Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
17 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 

 
Rajya Sabha 
18 Dr. Prabha Thakur 
19 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
20 Shri Sabir Ali 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board  
1. Shri S.Sundareshan - Secretary 
2. Shri S. Bhargava - Additional Secretary  
3. Shri L.N. Gupta    - Joint Secretary 
 
Representative of Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) 
 
 Shri S.S. Chahar - Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other organisations 
1. Shri R.S.Sharma - CMD, ONGC 
2. Shri B.C.Tripathi - CMD, GAIL 
3. Shri N.M.Borah - CMD, OIL 
4. Shri Ashok Sinha - CMD, BPCL 
5. Shri B.M. Bansal - Chairman, IOCL 
6. Shri S. Roy Choudhury - CMD, HPCL 
7. Shri S.L. Das - Director (BD&C), Petrofed 
 
2. At the outset, the  Chairman welcomed the Secretary of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas, other officials of the Ministry and PSUs and representative of Ministry of 
Law (Department of Legal Affairs) to the sitting of the Committee and explained the 
purpose of holding the sitting, i.e. to have evidence on “Petroleum and Minerals 

Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Amendment Bill, 2010 ”. The Chairman 
made a reference to the last sitting held on 6 th July, 2010 which was deferred due to 
non-receipt of legal opinion of the Department of Legal Af fairs on certain points raised 
by the Committee.  The Chairman also informed the Committee that Hon‟ble Speaker 
had granted  extension of time to finalise and present the report on the Bill to the 
Parliament by the last day of the current session.   
 
3. Thereafter, representatives from Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
presented their views on the legal opinion given by the Ministry of Law (Department of 
Legal Affairs) on certain points raised by the Committee on the provisions of the Bill.  
Asked about  the manner in which the powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution 
proposed to be conferred on Central Government officers under Section 16A (1) of the 
Bill would be executed, the representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
clarified tha t it would be a futuristic provision only and when oil companies raised a 
separate force it would be conferred with these powers.  Explaining his point of view on 
this issue, the representatives of Department of Legal Affairs stated that the power of 
prosecution could not be conferred on the Central Government officers. Considering the 
divergent views of the Ministries on this point, the Committee could not further consider 
the provisions of the Bill and authorized the Chairman to call the Secretary, Depart ment 
of Legal Affairs along with his other colleagues to reconcile and resolve the differences 
on the provisions of the Bill.     
 
4. The Chairman also requested to the Members of the Committee to give to the 
Secretariat their suggestions in writing, if an y, on the provisions of the Bill before 10 th 
August, 2010.    
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Annexure-V 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
  
TWELFTH SITTING 
(20.08.2010) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Ratna De 
3         Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
4 Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
5 Shri Virendra Kumar 
6 Shri Vikrambhai A. Madam 
7 Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
8         Shri Mahabal Mishra    
9 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
10 Shri C.L. Ruala 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 

2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
                                  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following two draft Reports:- 
(i) The „Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) 
Amendment Bill, 2010‟ and  
(ii) ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
4. After some discussions, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any modification. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the 
Ministry and present the same to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Matter not related to the subject  
 