5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the First Report   (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2009-10)] 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 


  
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the         
First  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2009-10)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.08.2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka) 


  
CP & NG No.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi - 
110005 
 
 

  
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (v) 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted                                              by the 
Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2009 -10) held on 
20.8.2010   
 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of t he Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2009-10) on `Demands for Grants (2009 -10) 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟ 
 

  
 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (2009-10) 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli             -             Chairman 
 
Members 
   
Lok Sabha 
2         Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3         Shri Ramesh Bais 
4         Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
5         Smt. Santosh Chowdhary 
6        Dr. Ratna De 
7         Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi  
8       Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9          Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
10       Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
11       Shri Virendra Kumar     
12       Shri Vikrambhai A. Madam 
13       Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
14       Shri Mahabal Mishra 
15       Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
16       Shri Kabindra Purkayastha    
17       Shri K. Narayan Rao       
18       Shri C.L. Ruala  
19       Shri Uday Pratap Singh (Hoshangabad) 
20       Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
21       Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22      Dr. Prabha Thakur 
23      Shri Ahmed Patel 
    $24     Shri B.K.Hariprasad 
25      Shri Kalraj Mishra 
26      Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
(iv) 

  
  
  @27    Shri Kamal Akhtar 
   @28     Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
    *29     Shri Subhash Prasad Yadav 
30     Shri Sabir Ali 
    #31     Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P.Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Arvind Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
# Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.06.2010. 
 
$ Ceased to be Member of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 30.06.2010. 
 
@Ceased to be Members of the Committee on their retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 04.07.2010.  
 
*Ceased to be Member of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 07.07.2010. 

  
 
 
 (v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Re port on their behalf, present 
this Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
„Demands for Grants (2009-10)‟ of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
 
2. The First Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 10 December, 2009. The Action Taken Replies 
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the First Report were 
received on 16 March, 2010. 
 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2009 -10) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 20 August, 2010.   
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
  25 August,  2010                                                                Chairman, 
03 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)             Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Gov ernment on the Recommendations contained in 
the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2009 -2010) on „Demands for Grants‟, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 10.12.2009. 
 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been  received from the Government in respect 
of all the 29 Recommendations /Observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- SI.Nos. 1, 6, 7, 9, 12, 14, 15 , 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 24, 
26 and 28 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: - 10, 13 and 
18  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been acc epted by the Committee: - SI.Nos.       
5, 8, 11, 23 and 29. 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited : - SI.Nos.2, 3, 4, 20, 25 and 27. 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  
 

  
A. Under Performance of exploratory drilling by ONGC 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No.1.19) 
 
5. In view of the stagnant oil production from indigenous sourc es, the 
Committee were concerned to note the under -performance of exploratory drilling 
by ONGC because as against 483985 meterage of Budget Estimates, the actual 
during 2008-09 were only 297146 meterage.  Similarly, against the target of 162 
well for exploratory drilling, the actuals during 2008 -09 were only 106 wells.  The 
Committee had observed that drilling meterage achievement by ONGC was 
affected due to reasons such as non -availability of planned charter hired 
rigs/deep water rigs.  Given the fact that  more and more exploratory drilling work 
had to be undertaken by ONGC after awarding of bids under NELP VIII since 
ONGC ha d made bids for as many as 21 blocks, it is imperative for 
Government/ONGC to make an in -depth analysis of the situation and make 
concerted efforts to ensure that exploratory drilling work is not affected due to 
non-availability of desired rigs.  The Committee  had, therefore, urge d the 
Government/ONGC to take the requisite  steps to ensure availability of adequate 
numbers of state of art deepwater rigs so that the planned targets for exploratory 
drilling during the 11th Plan Period do not go haywire.  
 
6. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas ha ve submitted as 
below:-  
“Constraints of deepwater rig resources have been felt in the country since 
quite some time due to global shortage of highly specialized type of rigs 
for operating in deepwater. Operators, mainly ONGC, RIL and ENI have 
requested the Government  for drilling moratorium for a period of three 
years w.e.f. 1.1.2008  in the deep water blocks operated by them due to 
global shortages of deepwater drilling rigs. ONGC and RIL could not 
complete their committed and additional  drilling programmes in the 
deepwater blocks awarded to them under NELP due to non availability of 
deep water rigs.  The issue of Rig Moratorium is under examination by 
Government of India. 
 
In the deepwater, ONGC has deployed 3 deep water rigs (one owned, 
Sagar Vijay and two charter hired rigs DSS & DDKG -1) in various 
nomination and NELP blocks  
 

  
To mi tigate the shortage and to complete the unfinished programme of 
exploratory drilling, ONGC is also making efforts to utilize the rig 
resources available with partner ENI for drilling one to two locations in 
case of shortfall”. 
 
7. The Committee note with d isquiet that constraints of deep water rig 
resources have for some time affected the committed and additional 
drilling programmes of ONGC and RIL in the deep water blocks awarded to 
them under NELP  and operators like ONGC and RIL have requested the 
Government for drilling moratorium for a period of three years w.e.f. 
01.01.2008 in the deep water blocks operated by them which is under 
examination of the Government.  However, the reply of the Government 
does not indicate any strategy or steps proposed to be t aken by the 
Government or by the operators to overcome the shortage of specialized 
deep water rigs in the short run to prevent any slippages in committed 
drilling programmes of ONGC and other operators under the NELP.  The 
constraints of deep water rigs re sources also raises questions atleast in 
the short run about the technical capabilities of the operators like ONGC, 
RIL in bidding for more and more blocks in deep water areas and the scope 
for time and cost over -run in their committed exploration programm es 
under NELP.  After giving due consideration to all these facts, the 
Committee recommend that the Government take a pragmatic view and 
offer deep water blocks in the future rounds of NELP to only those 
operators having adequate technical capability in te rms of deep water rigs 
resources.   
 
 
B. Additional expenditure on development drilling 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No.1.20) 
 
8. As regards the development drilling, the Committee were constrained to 
note that against the targets of 514820 meterage by  ONGC during 2008 -09, the 
actuals were 477144 meterage with 218 wells completed as against the target of 
232 wells.  The Committee had further noted with disquiet that although 92.8% of 

  
the annual targets for development drilling was achieved by ONGC durin g 
2008-09, the actual utilization of funds w ere Rs. 4764.79 crore against the 
budget estimates of Rs. 3836.58 crore.  Thus, though an additional expenditure 
of about Rs. 928 crore w ere incurred by ONGC, there w ere shortfall in achieving 
physical targets se t for development drilling during 2008 -09.  Although, the 
Government in a post evidence reply furnished to the Committee ha d informed 
that the increase  was mainly due to significant increase in drilling rigs day rates 
from Rs. 0.5 crore in 2007 -08 (which were the basis for BE 2008 -09) to Rs. 0.85 
crore in 2008 -09, the Committee ha d failed to understand as to why these 
escalations were not projected at Revised Estimates (RE) stage.  The huge 
mismatch between the financial outlays and the physical targets ach ieved for 
development drilling point towards systemic flaws in the planning and 
implementation of exploratory work.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that not only the physical as well as financial targets should be set 
realistically for explorato ry works, but Government/ONGC should also monitor 
them periodically as per agreed performance parameters to ensure the prudent 
expenditure of the planned targets.   The Committee had further recommended 
that DGH being responsible for management of entire oil sector should effectively 
enforce performance parameters on PSUs as well as private companies 
engaged in oil exploration. 
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, t he Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas have submitted as under:-  
“The financial and physical targets are approved by the Board of 
ONGC. The review of financial and physical targets is carried out 
by the Board of ONGC and Planning Commission. DGH monitors 
the performance of PSUs/ Private/ joint venture companies as per 
the c ommitted programme mentioned in the production sharing 
contracts, as well as commitment given by National Oil Companies 
in respect of National blocks. DGH also reviews and monitors the 
exploration programme and development plans for commercial 
discoveries of hydrocarbon reserves for all E&P Companies 
operating in India”. 
 
10. The Committee had taken serious note of huge mismatch between 
the financial outlays and the physical targets in development drilling which 
showed systematic flaws in the planning and i mplementation of 

  
exploratory work.  The Government in their A ction Taken Note, have 
informed that the financial and physical targets are approved by the Board 
of ONGC and the review of financial and physical targets is carried out by 
the Board of ONGC and Planning Commission.  The Committee find the 
Action Taken Reply of the Government vague and evasive because the 
Production Sharing Contracts (PSC) are formal contracts between the 
Government of India and the operators, who were awarded various 
blocks/fields under NELP.  The DGH has been vested with the 
responsibility for monitoring the execution and management of these PSCs 
through management committees set up for each block/field.  The process 
of monitoring involves in -depth review of annual work programme  and 
project monitoring etc. specially with regard to time and cost over-run.  The 
Committee observe that the Government has simply narrated the functions 
of ONGC and the DGH  and has not acted on their recommendation .  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Government 
should ensure effective monitoring to prevent disparities between financial 
and physical parameters set under PSCs. 
 
C. Low expenditure on engineering activities 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 1.23) 
 
11. The Co mmittee had noted that the oil PSUs ha d been allocated activity 
wise budgetary allocation during XI Plan period.  Although, the actual utilization 
for Exploration & Production, Refinery and Marketing and Petrochemicals during 
2008-09 were Rs. 42,477.58 cro re (97.13%), Rs. 9,147.49 crore (97.43%) and 
Rs. 4,818.51 crore (111.81%) respectively, the actuals for engineering activities 
were Rs. 19.65 crore which were 25.19% of the Revised Estimates of Rs. 78 
crore.  The Committee had further noted that against the Budget Estimate of Rs. 
95 crore for engineering activities during 2009 -10, the actual upto 31.5.2009 
were Rs. 1.28 crore i.e. only 1.35% of the plan outlays for the year  due to low 
expenditure by two engineering companies viz. Balmer Lawrie and Company and 
Biecco Lawrie Limited.  The Committee ha d been further informed that business 
and financial restruct uring of Biecco Lawrie Limited were under active 
consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee had desired that an early decision 

  
should be taken by the  Government in this regard to ensure that the Plan 
outlays for engineering activities are fully utilized during 2009-10.  
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas ha ve submitted the 
following action taken reply:-  
 
“Biecco Lawrie Limite d : - Biecco Lawrie Limited is a medium 
sized Electrical Engineering Co. and presently carrying a negative 
net worth in the Books of Accounts. The impact of financial 
imbalance is reflected in its inability to mobilize funds for plan 
expenditures. 
 
The Rest ructuring proposal of the Company, which will also take 
care of financial imbalances, is under active consideration of the 
Ministry. The Financial Restructuring will help the company to 
mobilize funds for plan expenditure. 
 
 
Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. : -  The financial data for plan 
expenditure of Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd is as follows :- 
Rs./Crores 
 2009-10 2009-10 Actual 2009-10 
 BE RE Apr./June’0
9 
Apr./Jan.’10 
Plan 
Expenditure 
(*) including 
Commitment 
90.00 66.90 1.28 34.83 (*) 
 
 
From the above it is ev ident that the company has taken necessary 
steps to incur the plan expenditure as per the plans/targets taken 
by the company. The plan expenditure had been low in the initial 
quarter of the year but has increased in the 2 nd half of the year 
2009-10. Howeve r, the estimated plan expenditure for the year 
2009-10 is anticipated to be Rs. 66.90crores instead of Rs. 90.00 
crores as was planed earlier due to non -materialization of 
expenditure towards investment in acquiring synergistically related 
companies where various option are still being evaluated. 
Moreover, the competitive situation prevailing in the market, led the 
company to conserve cash and to examine more closely returns 
from the capital expenditure entailing deferment of plan 
expenditure”. 
 
13. The Committee observed that the actual expenditure on engineering 
activities by oil PSUs during 2008 -09 was Rs. 19.65 crore w hich amounted 
to only 25.19% of the Revised Estimate of Rs. 78 crore .  Therefore, the 
Committee had desired the Government to ensure that the plan outlays for 

  
the year 2009 -10 be fully utilized.  The Committee are, however, 
concerned to note considerable delay in approval of financial restructuring 
of Biecco-Lawrie Company by the Government which otherwise might have 
helped the company to mo bilize the required funds for plan expenditure .  
Further, the plan expenditure of Balmer -Lawrie Company was drastically 
reduced from Rs. 90 crore (Budget Estimate) to Rs. 66.90 Crore (Revised 
Estimate) due to   non-materialization of expenditure towards investment in 
acquiring synergistically related companies where various option s are still 
being evaluated.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate that the Government 
should take early decision on restructure proposal of Biecco Lawrie 
Limited and also ensure that realistic plan outlays are prepared by these 
companies. 
 
D. Monitoring of the performance of all the oil companies by DGH 
  
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No.1.34) 
 
14. The Committee had observed that Directorate General of Hydrocarbon 
(DGH) is inter-alia entrusted with the responsibility to ensure proper and sound 
management of the oil and natural gas resources besides monitoring of E&P 
activities. The Committee, however, were unhappy to f ound shortfall in crude oil 
and gas production especially by pr ivate/JV companies despite regular 
monitoring by DGH. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the 
Government should issue necessary instructions to the DGH to aggressively 
monitor the performance of all the oil companies whether public or private/jo int 
venture to ensure no slippages in the exploration projects.  Besides taking timely 
remedial measures to achieve the targeted production of crude oil and natural 
gas, the Committee had also desire d that manpower in DGH should be 
strengthened so that DGH  could fulfill its mandate and effectively monitor the 
E&P activities.   
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas have 
submitted the following information:-  
“The Government vide Resolution dated 8.4.1993 and Notification 
No. S.O.1391 (E) dated 1.9.2006 has already notified the detailed 

  
functions of DGH.  Presently, DGH is manned by staff 
mainly from Public Sector Undertakings who are posted in DGH on 
deputation/tenure basis and people taken on contractual/tenure 
basis.  The manpower requirement of DGH is reviewed by the 
Ministry from time to time and action is taken to meet  the 
requirement”.  
 
16. The Committee express their concern over the casual Action Taken 
Reply of the Government since it does not give details of any ins tructions 
issued or proposed to be issued by the Government to the DGH for more 
effective monitoring of the performance parameters of the Government and 
private oil companies in order to prevent slippages in their exploration 
targets.  The reply of the Government also does not carry any conviction as 
it does not explain the steps being taken by the m to strengthen the DGH in 
terms of adequacy of staff, recruitment of permanent staff and professional 
autonomy to enable the DGH to discharge its mandate fairly and effectively.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to furnish the outcome of the 
reviews they have made so far regarding the manpower requirement of 
DGH and the remedial steps taken  to strengthen the DGH.  The Committee 
would like to be apprise d of the conclusive action taken in this regard at 
the earliest. 
 
 
E. Vision 2015 of oil sector for ‘Consumer satisfaction and beyond’    
Recommendation (SI. No. 23, Para No.1.89) 
 
17. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas ha d finalized „Vision-2015‟ of 
oil sector for „consumer satisfaction and beyond‟, focusing primarily on providing 
better services to consumers and it inter-alia envisages an establishment of 
PNG/CNG network to connect 200 cities by the year 2015.  Although, the 
Committee appreciated the ambitious plan of the Government to cover 200 cities 
by 2015, the Committee fe lt that the project ha d yet to be started.  The 
Committee further noted that the total pipeline length and pipeline spread in India 
falls far behind the pipeline network of th e developed countries like USA and 
France.  The Committee, therefore, desire d that the Government should take 
concerted efforts to frame a year -wise action plan to cover all the 200 cities for 

  
CNG/PNG network under „Vision 2015‟.  The Committee w anted to b e apprised 
of the action taken by the Government in this regard.   
 
18. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“Government has accorded priority to enhance energy security of 
the country.  A multi -pronged strategy has been adopted to 
augment gas supplies and to bridge the gap between supply & 
demand for the domestic market by intensification of domestic E&P 
activities, including Coal Bed Methane (CBM), through LNG  and  
import of natural gas through tr ansnational gas pipelines.  In order 
to boost the spread of pipeline length in the country,  Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas has authorized nine new trunk pipelines 
with total length of 5523 km.  Out of the nine authorized pipelines, 
five new pipelin es were authorized to GAIL, namely (i) Dadri -
Bawana-Nangal, (ii) Chainsa -Jhajjar-Hissar, (iii) Dabhol -Bangalore, 
(iv) Kochi -Kanjirrakod-Bangalore-Mangalore and (v) Haldia -
Jagdishpur.  Accordingly, GAIL  is planning to double the present 
pipeline network of  around 7,000 km to 14,000 km by 2014 with a 
planned capex of Rs.34,300 crore.  Apart from this,  five new 
pipelines were authorized to Reliance Gas Transport & Infrastrucre 
Ltd. (RGTIL)   by this Ministry, namely (i) Kakinada -Basudevpur-
Howrah, (ii) Kakin ada- Nellore Chennai, (iii) Chennai -Tuticorin and 
(iv) Chennai-Bangalore-Mangalore.  Thus with increased availability 
of Natural Gas in the country under NELP and through import of 
LNG, along with increased capacity to transport gas through out the 
country,  this Ministry would be in position to realize the  targets  of 
Vision-2015 of oil sector for “consumer satisfaction and beyond‟. 
 
Further, PNGRB Act, 2006 has been enacted and PNGRB has 
been constituted to increase development of inter alia CGD entities 
and attract investment from both Public & Private sectors in the 
field of City Gas Distribution”. 
 
19. The Committee had recommended that the Government should 
frame year-wise action plan to cover all the 200 cities for CNG/PNG network 
as envisaged under “Vision 2015” .  The Government in their reply have 
informed that nine new trunk pipelines have been authorized in order to 
boost the spread of gas pipeline network in the country and GAIL  is 
planning to double the present pipeline network of around 7,000 km to 
14,000 km by 2014 with a planned capex of Rs.34,300 crore .  However, the 
Government have not apprised the Committee of the details of year-wise 

  
target for laying these pipelines.  The Committee would , therefore, like to 
be apprised of year -wise actio n plan  of the Government to lay these 
pipelines to cover the identified 200 cities for CNG/PNG network under 
Vision 2015, programme. 
 
F. Adulteration of Petroleum Products   
Recommendation (SI. No. 25, Para No.1.101) 
 
20. The Committee had noted that the G overnment as well as Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) were taking several technological and institutional measures 
including regular and surprise inspections of retail outlets, tamper proof tank -
truck locking systems, the import of SKO by private parties ha d been canalized 
through OMCs.  The OMCs ha d created a separate wing to report to a Director 
other than Director (Marketing), who w ould be responsible for monitoring all 
activities and operations to curb adulteration. To contain adulteration further, 
Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) ha d been issued in 2005 under which 
OMCs take penal action against the erring dealer.  The Committee had further 
noted that the Government did not ruled out possibility of diversion of PDS 
Kerosene by some unscrupulous eleme nts due to huge price difference between 
PDS Kerosene and petrol/diesel and the easy miscibility of these products with 
petrol/diesel.  The Committee f ound that the number of dealers reported to ha ve 
been involved in malpractices were increased from 451 in  2005-06 to 1467 in 
2008-09 in case of IOCL, from 318 in 2005 -06, to 989 in 2008 -09 in case of 
HPCL and 1050 in case of BPCL during 2005 -06 to 1029 cases during 2008 -09. 
The Committee had further observed that against the 1467 cases of malpractices 
in case of IOCL dealers during 2008 -09, there were only 85 terminations and as 
regards 989 cases of malpractices by HPCL dealers, the cases where 
termination of dealership took place was only 36.  Similarly, the cases of 
termination of dealership by BPCL were onl y 17 against a total 1029 cases 
reported during the year.  In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas during evidence on Demand for Grants (2009 -10) had admitted that 
the rules for terminating a license were made very severe and d uring the last 
three years, a large number of cancellations ha d taken place, the number of 
dealerships terminated  were very small as compared to the malpractices 

  
reported.  Despite the various corrective and preventive measures 
undertaken by OMCs against e rring dealers, the Committee were surprised to 
note that the number of cases of malpractices ha d increased considerably over 
the last three years.  The Committee had expressed their serious concern that 
the action taken by the Government to prevent adulter ation and other 
malpractices did not have the deterrent effect on erring dealers.  The Committee, 
had, therefore, desired that oil companies should strictly enforce the MDG and 
also conduct more and more surprise inspections to curb the incidents of 
adulteration.  The Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry should 
also monitor the situation regularly and devise stringent steps to stop rising 
trends of malpractices/adulteration including strict implementation of Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines ( MDG), 2005 regarding cancellation of dealership in the 
first instance of adulteration so that dealers stop Indulging in adulteration and 
malpractices and consumers get the quality petrol/diesel.  The Committee 
wanted to know the steps taken by the Governme nt to increase surprise 
inspections by OMCs.   
 
21. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas have 
submitted the following information:- 
“Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) namely Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd., Bharat Pet roleum Corporation Limited and 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited have reported that total 
number of malpractices shown for the period 2005 -06 to 2008 -09 
mostly include minor irregularities like poor housekeeping, non -
provision of/or inadequate facili ties, non -display of Retail Selling 
Price (RSP) or Motor Spirit (MS)/High Speed Diesel (HSD), 
discourteous behavior, non -maintenance of records etc (which do 
not lead to termination). It can be seen that the number of 
termination of Retail Outlet dealershi ps have increased over the 
years due to stricter provisions under Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines, 2005. It may be noted that termination is a long drawn 
process after detection of adulteration like testing of samples in the 
laboratory, issue of show cause  notice, dealer‟s reply to show 
cause, court case etc, which delays the whole termination process. 
Hence, few cases of irregularities detected are still under 
examination. 
 
Surprise inspections are carried out by Sales Officers and Senior 
Officers of the O MCs and also by the Quality Control Wing/Anti -
Adulteration Cell teams and the Multi -disciplinary Teams of the 

  
Officers drawn from various departments with in the 
Organization from time to time/periodically. Further to increase 
number of inspections, the in dustry is in process of discussions for 
conducting Joint Industry inspections of Retail Outlets”.  
 
22. In order to curb the rising incidents of adulteration of petroleum 
products, t he Committee had desired th at oil companies should strictly 
enforce the M arketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) and also conduct more 
and more surprise inspections of retail outlets.   The Committee had also 
recommended that the Ministry should monitor the situation regularly and 
ensure strict implementation of Marketing Discipline  Guidelines (MDG), 
2005 including cancellation of dealership in the first instance of 
adulteration  so that dealers stop Indulging in adulteration and 
malpractices and consumers get the quality petrol/diesel.  In their reply, the 
Government have stated that although termination is a long drawn process 
after detection of adulteration like testing of samples in the laboratory, 
issue of show cause notice, dealer’s reply to show cause, court case etc, 
which delays the whole termination process , the number of te rmination of 
Retail Outlet (RO) dealerships have increased over the years due to strict 
provisions under Marketing Discipline Guidelines, 2005.   The Government 
have further stated that a few c ases of irregularities detected are still under 
examination.  The Committee desire that the Government should take 
necessary steps to ensure that these  cases of adulteration and other 
malpractices by ROs which are serious in nature  should  be examined in a 
time bound manner and necessary action taken.  As regards the s teps 
taken by the Government to increase number of inspections, the industry is 
reported to be in process of discussions for conducting Joint Industry 
inspections of Retail Outlets.   The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the final decision taken in the matter.   
   
G. Safety performance by oil companies   
Recommendation (SI. No. 29, Para No.1.114) 
 
23. The Committee noted that OIL Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) was set 
up by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to assist the Safety Council 

  
headed by Secretary, P&NG as Chairman and include d Additional/Joint 
Secretaries, Advisors in Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Chief Executives 
of all public sector undertakings (PSUs) under the Ministry, Chief Controller of 
Explosives (CCE), Advisor (Fire) of Government of India, DGMS and the Director 
General of Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, etc. as members.  OISD 
develops standards for hydrocarbon industry to keep abreast of the latest 
designs and practices in the area of safety and fire fighting in the developed 
countries. Despite OISD which develops high standards in areas of safety and 
fire fighting, there had been regular reporting of incidents of fire in refineries/oil 
depots.  The Committee were concerned to note the incident of fire  in May, 2009 
at Digboi Refinery of IOC where two persons were reportedly died due to fire.  
The Committee were given to understand that the fire was due to rupture of a 
bend pipe of common discharge line of the Fractionator column bottom pumps 
followed by auto ignition of leaked hot hydrocarbon and the rupture was due to 
thinning down of the bend pipe due to metallurgy mix -up at project construction 
stage and wrong replacement of the identified bend during schedule 
maintenance shut down of Delayed Coking Unit in 2007.  Further, the Committee 
were concerned to note that 11 persons ha d been reportedly died and oil worth 
hundred crores of rupees was burnt at Jaipur Depot in October this year.  When 
the fire was raging at Jaipur Depot, the Government/oil compan ies had no fire 
fighting strategy except to let the oil stored in the depot to burnt out.  It only 
indicated that there were no proper safety mechanism to prevent such major fire 
nor are there any technology/equipment to tackle such a devastating fire.  It  is, 
therefore, imperative that external safety audit of all the refineries/depots must be 
ensured periodically, as per safety standards.  The Committee would like to know 
the details of the outcome of the investigation report of the Government/IOC into 
the fire at Jaipur and the remedial measures taken/proposed to be taken by the 
Government to avoid reoccurrence of such incidents in future.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the monitoring mechanism available with 
OISD/Safety Council to check the implementation of safety standard approved by 
them and the steps taken by the Government to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism to ensure safety of world standards in refineries/storage depots.   In 
view of a large number of habitat areas that ha d come up/developed around oil 

  
storage depots, the Committee would like the Government to take a review of 
the locational hazards of these depots and desire d that the Government must 
ensure adequate safeguards/shifting of these depots away from habitat areas.  
 
24. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas have 
submitted as under:- 
“The POL Terminal at Sanganer, Jaipur of Indian Oil Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL) was constructed by Engineers India Ltd by conforming 
to all statutory norms including  the codes and standards of Oil 
Industry Safety Directorate.  The fire at IOCL‟s POL Terminal at 
Sanganer on 29.10.2009 was consequent to Unconfined Vapour 
Cloud Explosion after a very heavy leak of Motor Spirit (MS) i.e. at 
an estimated rate of 1000 MT/HR.  It was not possible for anyone to 
approach the leakage or the terminal to activate the fire fighting / 
prevention system.  The explosion was so heavy that even the fire 
fighting network was damaged which made the entire system non -
functional and 9 tanks  were on fire at a time leaving no room for 
any major efforts to handle the situation. 
  
The situation at the accident site was reviewed by Crisis Management 
Group headed by Principal Secretary(Home), Govt. of Rajasthan, the 
controlled burning of the fuel was allowed to prevent horizontal spread of 
fire  in view of larger interest of the public.  
 
The Hon‟ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Shri Murli Deora had 
taken a review meeting on the Safety and Security Aspects of the Oil and 
Gas Sector in the c ountry on 3.11.20 09, where all the public and private 
oil and gas companies have been asked to take the following action : 
 
(1) All companies shall take measures to promote safety 
consciousness and training on safety requirement at all levels.  The 
measures of zero tolerance in matters of safety has to be conveyed to all 
concerned. 
 
(2) All oil and gas installations and transportation systems in the 
country will carry out self safety audit conforming to statutory norms and 
risk assessment, including OISD standards by 31.12.2009.  Oil companies 
will submit the reports to OISD which in turn will submit a consolidated 
report to MOPNG. 
 
(3) All oil and gas companies in the country must update their standard 
operating procedures (SOPs) for operations and maintenance practice s 
for all countrywide installations / setups under due technical supervision 
and attention, availing the benefits of best practices in the country and 
abroad.  A strict implementation of such standard operating procedure 

  
(SOPs) will be ensured.  All oil an d gas companies will 
submit reports on SOPs and its due implementation to OISD by 
31.12.2009. 
 
(4) All oil and gas installations will have their safety audit  done on 
quarterly basis.  All major as well as minor incidents in any such 
installations/setup in the country including that of private companies will be 
reported to OISD.  
 
 
OISD checks the implementation of the Safety Standards approved by the 
Safety Council by the following mechanism: 
 
1. Pre-commissioning Inspection  
 
OISD carries out pre -commissioning i nspection whenever a 
new facility is developed and/or major modifications, capacity 
enhancement etc is done in the Refineries and other 
Installations based on request received from Oil PSUs. 
 
2. External Safety Audit  
 
These Audits are coordinated by OISD wit h members from 
other Oil companies other than auditee company.  The period 
of audit varies from 3 to 5 days and the frequency of audit is 
given below :  
 
For Refineries & Gas Processing Plants – once in 3 years  
 
For Oil Storage and Distribution Installations -  Two Audits at a 
gap of 5 years initially and thereafter either a request audit  or 
surprise inspection  
 
3.     Surprise Safety Audit    
 
The Surprise Safety Audit of Refineries and major Gas 
Processing units are carried out by technical experts  no t 
below the rank of General Manager. 
 
In case of Oil & Gas Storage and distribution Installations the 
surprise audits are carried out by an officer from OISD 
considering the degree of hazardous location / sensitive 
location on various counts.  So far 42 su ch audits have been 
carried out in the last 5 years. 
 
4.      Compliance Reports 
 
The Oil companies are required to submit compliance 
reports on the recommendations given in above audits / 

  
inspections on quarterly basis to OISD and they are 
reviewed every six months (approx.) in a steering committee 
comprising of the officers of General Manager rank of Oil 
PSUs.  The compliance status is also put up to the Safety 
Council in its annual meeting.   
 
In some cases variations in the compliance status submitted 
by O il PSUs is observed and necessary advice given to the 
Chief Executive of the respective Oil PSU. 
 
The Oil Companies have been advised to carry out the self-audit of 
Oil Installations with a special focus on the installations located in 
densely populated ar eas and carry out the risk analysis of such 
installations to mitigate the hazards”.   
25. The Government appointed a Committee to enquire into the incident of fire 
at oil deport of Indian Oil Corporation near Jaipur.  According to  the Enquiry 
Report on the  incident of fire , there is no concrete evidence of any sabotage as 
per the extensive field surveys and analysis of equipment condition.  The basic 
causes of fire as identified by the enquiry are human as well as technical and 
engineering factors.  Among t he human factor were operational safety 
rules/procedures not being effectively followed, experience level of supervisory 
staff being considerably diluted as a result of policy on transfers, absence of one 
shift operator etc., whereas technical and engineer ing factors related to 
inadequate design of system, congested and poor approachable area, etc.  One 
of the important technical and engineering factors pointed out in the Enquiry 
Report for the fire accident is inadequate design of the system relating to us e of 
Hammer Blind (HB) with Motor Operated Volve (MOV) used for isolating HB.  
According to the Report only one press of a wrong button when HB is open can 
result in extreme hazard and there is no fallback in case of leak except remote 
shutting provision. 
 
26. To plug the loopholes in the present safety rules and procedures and to 
prevent the recurrence of such incidents, the Enquiry Report has made certain 
recommendations on design/engineering improvement, strengthening internal 
safety Audit, preparation o f emergency plan, Oil Industry Security Board (OISD) 
to be developed as an autonomous body, etc.  
 

  
27. In view of major incidents of fire at Digboi and Jaipur which 
entailed besides substantial financial losses, also loss of lives, the 
Committee had emphas ized the need to strengthen monitoring mechanism 
to check implementation of the laid down safety standards and for periodic 
external safety audit for all refineries.  In Action Taken Replies, though the 
Ministry has enumerated some safety measures that the  Oil Companies have 
been asked to take post Jaipur incident, the reply is silent on the steps taken 
to strengthen the monitoring mechanism by the OISD/Safety Council.  The 
Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation 
recommend that Safety Council which is the apex body in the Ministry to 
oversee the safety aspects of oil installations should devise ways to 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism and also review the present time 
frame for periodical audits/review of these installations.   
 
28. The Committee further observe that the Government have advised the 
oil companies to carry out the self -audit of Oil Installations with a special 
focus on the installations located in densely populated areas and carry out 
the risk analysis of such ins tallations.  The Committee would, therefore, like 
to be apprised of details of the locational hazards identified in the se self 
audits reports and the action taken by the Government/oil companies to 
mitigate the hazards and ensure adequate safeguards/shifti ng of these 
depots away from habitat areas.    
 
29. The Committee note with dismay that roo t causes of accident at IOC 
terminal near Jaipur which include violation of safety rules /procedure, 
flaws in design of system , etc., have not been identified by the external or 
internal audits being conducted so far. If such causes were identified, it 
appears that no remedial action has been taken to rectify the same.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to give top priority to quick 
implementation of variou s recommendations made in the enquiry Report.  
In this context, the Committee specifically emphasize the need to take 
immediate measure (Technical and operational) as pointed out by the 
Enquiry Report with request to Hammer Blind (HB) and Motor Operated 
Value (MOV) system etc.  For the sake of greater transparency and 

  
accountability in the matter of safety audits and compliance of their 
instruction, it is equally imperative to strengthen the internal audit teams 
with people from outside the functional areas  by all the oil companies.  It 
needs no emphasis that OISD which is a technical Directorate under the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that formulates and coordinates 
implementation of a series of self regulatory measures aimed at enhancing 
the safety in the oil and gas industry in India, should be developed as an 
autonomous body totally independent from the public sector oil and gas 
companies and made free to develop its own cadre of safety professional 
with no affiliations to any company.  The Commit tee would also like to be 
apprised of conclusive action taken by the Government on all the 
recommendations contained in the Enquiry Report.  

  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No.1.9) 
 The Committee note that the Non Plan Budget (2009 -10) of Rs. 3144 
crore of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas comprises mainly of subsidy 
for domestic LPG and PDS kerosene, freight subsidy on retail products for far -
flung areas, subsid y for supply of natural gas to North Eastern Region and 
setting up of the Petroleum Regulatory Board.  During 2009-10, an amount of Rs. 
2840 crore has been allocated for subsidy on domestic LPG and PDS Kerosene 
to make them available to households at subsi dized and affordable prices.  The 
Committee further note that non -plan outlays of Rs. 243 crore have been 
allocated to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to bear the difference 
between the producer price and the consumer price of natural gas supplied in the 
North Eastern region.  In view of these non -plan outlays for the above referred 
schemes, the Committee are of the view that these non -Plan Demands of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas are in order and expect that the budgetary 
allocations during the year would be fully utilized as targeted.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Against BE 2009 -10 (Non -Plan) of Rs. 3144 crore, Rs. 2987 crore has 
been allocated in RE 2009 -10. Out of Rs. 2987 crore, an amount of Rs. 
2485.48 crore (83.21%) has been utiliz ed upto 28.2.2010 and the balance 
amount is likely to be spent during the remaining period of the current financial 
year 2009-10. 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No.1.21) 
 
The committee, therefore, recommend that the Government/ oil PSUs 
take care in finalization of their annual plan in future for various exploratory 
activities taking into account all the possible factors so that budget allocations 

  
are fully utilized . The committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in advance to check these administrative problems. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Oil India Limited has been advised to take care in finalization of their 
annual plan in future for various exploratory activities taking into account all the 
possible factors so that budget allocations are fully utilized. The action taken in 
this regard by OIL would be regularly monitored by Ministry in Quarterly 
Performance Reviews of OIL. 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No.1.22) 
 
As regards utilization of Budget outlays by Indian Oil Corporation, the committee  
note that although the actual expenditure at Rs.9644.22 crore was 109.54 % of revised t 
estimate of Rs.8000 crore, there were some major variations in the expenditure on 
some of the projects / activities of IOC. The committee are unhappy to note that during 
2008-09 against budget estimates of Rs.1000 crore for Paradip Refinery, the actuals 
were Rs.233.86 crore and for Chennai -Bangalore product pipeline an expenditure of 
Rs.18.47 crore was incurred against BE of Rs.50 crore. The committee note that the 
reasons for less expenditure than projected expenditure b y Paradip Refinery has been 
attributed to delayed final investment approval of the project by Board of Directors and 
for Chennai-Bangalore pipeline , it was due to delay in Environmental Clearances. The 
committee feels that these projects should have been monitored at every stage so that 
budgetary allocations are fully utilized. The committee expects the Government to take 
the desired steps to ensure that these projects are commissioned as scheduled. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Paradip Refinery Project 
 
 The p roposal for implementation of reconfigured (fuel -only) 15 MMTPA Paradip 
Refinery Project was approved in -principle by the Board of Directors of IOC in its 
meeting held on 28.5.08. While according approval, the Board desired that the proposal 
be resubmitted with the funding methodology to mitigate the financial risks involved in 

  
such huge investments and expenditure was allowed only to the extent already 
sanctioned for pre-project activities. 
  M/s. SBI Capital Markets Limited (SBICAPS) was appointed in June‟ 08 for debt -
syndication services. In view of prevailing liquidity constraint in Banking Sector on 
account of meltdown and higher inflation rates during July to Dec‟08, funding 
methodology was finalized by SBICAPS in Feb‟09 and the Board of Directors of IOC  
accorded Final Investment Approval to the 15 MMTPA Paradip Refinery Project on 
28.02.2009 with a progressive completion schedule from March 2012 to July 2012 and 
full stabilization by November, 2012. 
  IOC made a commitment of Rs.155 crore from April‟08 to  Feb‟09 for the project. 
Immediately upon approval, IOC awarded all the major contracts for Project Consultants 
and made a commitment of Rs.2379 crore in one month‟s time i.e. in March 2009. 
However, actual expenditure was limited to Rs.233.86 crore during  2008-09; due to 
limited time available post investment approval dated 28.02.09, was accorded, which 
was necessary for expenditure on EPC phase of project. 
  The project is being closely monitored by IOC top management and also at its 
Board level besides be ing monitored at Ministry level to ensure full utilization of 
budgetary allocations and commissioning & stabilization of the project in line with the 
approved schedule.  
  In the current financial year (2009 -10) IOC has already spent Rs.792 crore up to 
Nov.‟09 against the budgetary allocations of Rs.597 crore for the corresponding period. 
 
Chennai-Bangalore pipeline  
 
  Investment approval of Chennai -Bangalore pipeline was accorded by Board on 
30.07.2007. The completion schedule of the project was 24 months from receipt of 
Environment and Forest Clearance. The pipeline passes through Palamaner Reserve 
forest in the state of Andhra Pradesh.  
 
  Forest clearance to lay the pipeline was received on 24.06.2008. Accordingly the 
approved completion schedule of the project is June 2010. Due to delay in receipt of 
forest clearance, construction activities could start only after June 2008 and target 
expenditure for year 2008-09 was Rs.18.47 Crores as against B.E. of Rs.50.00 Crores. 
 

  
  At present, the project construction is going on in full swing. 96 % of 
mainline welding has been completed. Station works are nearing completion. Overall 
physical progress achieved as on 30.11.2009 is 87.06 %. 
 
  The project is likely to be completed within the scheduled completion of Ju ne, 
2010. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No.1.32) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the low crude oil production during 
2007-08 and 2008 -09, the first two year s of XI Plan by oil PSUs as well as 
private/Joint Venture companies. Against the planned target of crude oil 
production of 27.16 MMT in 2007 -08 by ONGC, the actuals were 25.945 MMT 
and during 08-09 as well ONGC could not achieve the plan target of 28 MMT o f 
crude oil production and only 25.336 MMT of crude oil was produced by it. The 
Committee is further unhappy to note the very low achievements of projected 
targets of crude oil by private/JV companies. Against the target of 10.57 MMT 
and 10.78 MMT crude oi l production for the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, the 
actual production was only 5.087 MMT and 4.674 MMT.  The Committee note 
that despite the continuous shortfall in achieving crude oil production by both 
public and private oil companies in the X Plan perio d and during 2007 -08 and 
2008-09, the Govt. has projected and additional production of 40.204 MMT of 
crude oil during XI Plan amounting to an increase of 24% over X Plan. The 
enhanced production is likely to be achieved by increase in production of 14.564 
MMT by ONGC and OIL from the reserve accretion made during X Plan period in 
their operative areas in the country but the Committee find that major increase is 
projected to come from private/JV companies which is expected to contribute 
about 25.64 MMT of cr ude oil during Xl Plan Period. The additional crude oil 
production by private/JV companies is to come from Rajasthan where oil 
production could commence only w.e,f. 29.8.2009 due to delayed evacuation 
facilities. The Committee feels that to achieve these t argets which are fully within 
reach, there is need for oil companies to fine tune their production units and sort 

  
out their problems in the right earnest so as to ensure that production starts 
as per schedule. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC 
 
Most of the pro ducing offshore fields are old and most of these major 
producing fields including Mumbai High have entered into the natural decline 
phase and no significant/major oil field has been found for last several years. 
Therefore it has been a challenge all throug h these years to sustain as well as to 
augment production from ageing and matured fields. 
 
In order to sustain production from these oil fields, ONGC has implemented 
the development projects with induction of state of the art technologies to get 
incremental oil from these mature fields.   
 
Field wise comparison of crude oil production targets between 10th plan and 
11th plan is provided as under. 
(MMT) 
Field 10th  Plan STP 
(Start of the Plan) 
10th Plan Actual 11th Plan STP 
(Start of the 
Plan) 
Mumbai High 60.690 58.709 59.018 
Neelam Heera 17.638 18.428 16.828 
Bassein & Satelliete  0.503 5.151 
Condensate 09.676 10.067 9.684 
New & Marginal fields   6.242 
Rajahmundry   0.706 
Total offshore 88.004 87.205 97.628 
 
In regard to performance of Offshore in 11 th plan, Offshore Assets have 
produced 18.020 MMT (96.95 %) oil in 2007 -08 against the plan of 18.585 MMT. 
While in 2008 -09 Offshore Assets have produced 17.807 MMT (93.23%) oil 
against the plan of 19.099 MMT oil. Year wise details for less production are as  
under: 
 
2007-08  
 Less inputs in terms of side track wells in Mumbai High and development 
wells in Heera field. 

  
 Well fluid Handling problem at Mumbai High North after BHN 
accident and production of  additional well fluid processing /handling from  
new development wells  
 Non-availability of NA-SBM w.ef. 5th July‟07  to March‟2008 . 
 
2008-09  
 
 Delay in installation of 04 new platforms under Heera Redevelopment Project 
which has led to the non availability of planned inputs of 18 new wells.  
 Less production from VSEA due to delay in VSEA & BCP-A2 project  
 Less input in terms of sidetrack wells due to less availability of rigs and less 
than anticipated production from development wells. 
 Increase in water cut in Neelam and Vasai West (SB-11) fields.  
 Less condens ate receipt due to non -commencement of gas production from 
C- series and less condensate drop out in MUT/BUT/HUT gas trunk lines.  
   
OIL 
 
As far as Oil India Limited (OIL) is concerned, crude oil production of 
3.468 MMT in the year 2008 -09 (101.4 % of tar get of 3.42 MMT) was highest 
ever by OIL since inception and about 12% more than the production of 3.101 
MMT in the year 2007-08. 
 
OIL is maintaining the increasing trend in crude oil production in the 
current year of 2009-10 also,  which is anticipated to be about 3.57 MMT, thereby 
registering  further increase of  2.94 % over 2008 -09 and overall 15.1 % in two 
years‟ time since 2007-08.  
 
Private/JV compnies 
 
It was envisaged that the crude oil production by Pvt/JVs would 
considerably increase during the XI Plan period due to estimated contributions to 
the tune of 5 to 6 MMTPA from the major oil finds in RJ -ON-90/1 block in 
Rajasthan.Initially, the commercial production of oil from this block  was planned 
during 2009.However, due to delay in laying down cru de evacuation pipeline, oil 
production could commence only w.e.f. 29.08.09 through trucking.The delay in 
Production start –up was due to various reasons such as delay in approval of 
Field Development Plan   as a result of disagreement in Operating Committe , 
delay in getting Right of Use  (ROU) for the pipeline, shifting of delivery point 
from Salaya to Bhogat, Environmental issues such as Marine Sanctuary area in 

  
the proposed pipeline route and delay in finalizing nominations of  refineries 
for crude offtake etc.The present average oil production from Mangala field in RJ-
ON-90/1 block  is about 20,000  to 25,000 bopd.However, oil production is likely 
to increase considerably once the complete processing facilities and 
transportation pipelines become ready  b y first quarter of  2011. Based on the 
current rate of  production,it is estimated that the oil production by Pvt/JVs during 
2009-10 will be about 5.2 MMT. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No.1.37) 
 
The Committee note that our import dependence percentage in respect of 
crude oil has been on continuous increase as it stood at 76% in 2006 -07, the 
terminal year of 10 th Plan and 80% in the year 2008 -09. It is further pr ojected to 
stand at 79% by the end of the 11 th Plan i.e. during 2011 -12, which in turn will 
commensurate with increased expenditure incurred on import of crude oil and 
petroleum products from Rs. 131891 crore in 2004 -05 to Rs. 408911 crore in 
2008-09. In view of the alarming increase in demand of petroleum products in the 
country during last 5 years and corresponding increase in expenditure on import 
of oil and gas, the Committee feel that more focus by way of increased financial 
and technological support s hould be given to develop and harness alternate 
sources of fuel like coal bed methane, gas hydrates, bio -fuels, coal liquefaction 
etc. The Committee urge the Government to make a comprehensive plan in this 
regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per India Hyd rocarbon Vision (IHV) -2025, a document of Government of 
India, the following has been envisaged:- 
 
(A) To develop hydrocarbon sector as a globally competitive Industry 
which could be benchmarked against the best in the world through 
technology upgradation and capacity building in all facets of the 
industry. 

  
(B) The growing demand and supply gap would require 
increasing emphasis to be given to the exploration and production 
sector.   
(C) To keep pace with technological advancement and application and be 
at the technolog ical forefront in the global exploration and production 
industry. 
(D) Continue technology acquisition and absorption along with 
development of indigenous Research & Development (R&D). 
(E) Exploit the gas hydrates reserves, produce gas from Coal Bed 
Methane and through Underground Coal Gasification. 
 
Coal Bed Methane:   
 
The Government had approved a comprehensive Coal Bed Methane 
Policy (CBM) in July, 1997 for exploration and production of CBM gas.  So far, 23 
CBM Blocks have been awarded through competitive intern ational bidding under 
first three rounds of CBM policy, under which blocks are being operated by 
technically competent companies. Two blocks were awarded on nomination 
basis and one block through the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) 
route.  The es timated resources of CBM gas in 26 blocks is about 1374 billion 
cubic metres (BCM). In last five years, 162 core holes, 30 test wells and 70 pilot 
wells have been drilled in awarded 26 blocks. 8 TCF (227 BCM) reserves have 
already been established in 5 CBM blocks. The commercial production of CBM is 
from Raniganj East in West Bengal at the rate of about 97,500 cubic metres per 
day.   
 
Government had offered 10 blocks under CBM -IV covering an area of 
about 5,000 sq. km. spread over seven states namely, Assam , Jharkhand, 
Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu.   
Government has received 27 bids for 8 CBM blocks from 19 companies including 
3 foreign companies.  The bids received are being evaluated and blocks will be 
awarded  after approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA). 
 

  
National Gas Hydrates Programme (NGHP): 
 
Gas Hydrate is at Research & Development (R&D) stage world over.  
India, U.S.A & Japan are three of the pioneers in the field of Gas Hydrate. In 
accordance with the roadmap for National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP), 
India has already acquired core samples with the help of the drill ship “JOIDES 
Resolution”, USA.  In December 2008, an MOU was signed between the 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and U. S. Geological Survey 
(USGS), USA for cooperation on exchange of scientific knowledge and technical 
personnel in the field of Gas Hydrate and research with the view to exploit the 
potential of the Gas Hydrate as an alternate source of energy.   Second NGHP 
expedition has been planned in 2010 to map the prospects of Gas Hydrate in 
Krishna Godavari and Mahanadi deepwater areas.   
 
Coal to Liquid (CTL). Project undertaken by OIL: Oil India Limited 
successfully completed the Pre -Feasibility Study of exploring an d exploiting the 
possibility of converting coal from North -East region of India into liquid fuel as a 
means to establish an alternative source of liquid fuel.   OIL has    considered a 
10,000 BPD capacity mid -sized plant for Pre -Feasibility Studies (PFS) a nd 
awarded a contract to EIL to carry out the study. In the proposed study, M/s. 
HCTL, based on the results of the ongoing 44,000 BPD Feasibility Study, will 
provide the necessary process input to EIL to carry out the PFS.   CTL project is 
part of MOU signed by OIL with the Government. 
     
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG): ONGC has   undertaken a project 
in Vastan, Gujarat for Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) in collaboration with 
reputed Russian institute.  The commercialisation of UCG is likely by December, 
2010. 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
 
  

  
Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No.1.49) 
The Committee note that under New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP), 
so far 71 oil and gas discoveri es have been made in 21 blocks.  The number of 
oil and gas discoveries by Public/Government companies is 30 whereas by 
private companies, it is reported to be 41.  The Committee further note that out of 
70 exploration blocks of NELP -VIII comprising of 24 d eepwater blocks, 28 
shallow-water blocks and 18 onland blocks, 76 bids have been received for 36 
blocks by the Government by the closing date of October 12, 2009 which are 
under process of scrutiny and the licenses for exploration would be awarded after 
examining the bids as per the NELP terms and conditions.  Although, the 
Committee observe that the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
was candid enough to admit that NELP -VIII was launched at a time when there 
was an international downturn and recession in some parts of the world and the 
minimum committed investment in these 36 blocks under NELP -VIII is estimated 
at 1.3 billion dollars,  however, the fact remains that even the major domestic 
private players have kept themselves away from partici pating in the bids for the 
NELP-VIII round and single bids by ONGC for 21 blocks have been received by 
the Government. The Committee, thus, feels that the Government has failed to 
attract adequate response from both domestic and foreign companies under the  
NELP-VIII. In view of the single bids received for various blocks, the Committee 
note that bidding is not competitive and the very purpose of NELP has been 
defeated.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to 
analyse the situation and take corrective steps including making the NELP terms 
and conditions more attractive.  The Committee, further, desire that the 
Government should make a comparative study of the various parameters 
followed in different countries in regard to such issues a s pricing, marketing or 
royalty etc. under production sharing agreements to make future rounds of NELP 
more attractive. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NELP rounds blocks are offered  through international   competitive 
bidding system on the basis of transparen t  and quantifiable Bid Evaluation 

  
Criteria (BEC) indicated in Notice Inviting Offers (NIO).  There is a  level 
playing field for award of blocks to public sector and private companies.  The 
blocks  are awarded to successful bidders based of BEC. Companies  bid 
keeping in view their commercial prudence. 
              
In all, out of a total of 70 NELP -VIII blocks, bids have been received in 
respect of 36 for NELP -VIII.  This amounts to 51.4% of the total blocks offered.  
Under similar circumstances, the respo nse has been even poorer in many other 
countries like Algeria, Uruguay, Brazil, Indonesia, Norway and Iceland, etc. this 
year.   Following table, clearly establishes this:  
 
Sr 
No.  
Name of 
Countries  
No. of blocks 
offered  
No of blocks for which bids 
received (% of blocks offered)  
1.  Algeria  15  04 (26.67%)  
2.  Uruguay  11  02 (18.18%)  
3.  Indonesia  16  05 (31.25%)  
4.  Brazil  130  54 (41.54%)  
5.  Norway  67  35 (52.24%)  
6.  Iceland  05  02 (40%) (later both  withdrawn)  
7.  India  80  44    (55%)  
   
 
In earlier rounds from NELP I to VII, the number of blocks for which bids 
were received, have been 28, 23, 24, 21, 20, 52 and 45 respectively.  This time, 
in NELP-VIII, bids have been received for 36 blocks.  Thus, Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas has been able to put a large number of blocks under exploration 
even in the downturn period.   T he number of bids received per block has   
declined due to global financial situation.  Government has advised   DGH to 
carry out a study of Producti on Sharing Contracts (PSCs) of 10 representative 
countries, suggest measures to make future rounds of NELP more attractive.   
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 

  
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No.1.50) 
 
The Committee note that under NELP while evaluating bids of the 
participants, the past performance of the bidder is never taken into consideration 
before awarding the contract.  Consequently, a good consistent performer in 
production of oil and gas  from the awarded blocks and a past penalty payer for 
the reason of not even completing the minimum exploration work are being 
placed on the same footing.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government while awarding blocks should give due weight age to previous 
performance records of the bidders and discourage the defaulters.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NELP rounds blocks are offered through international competitive bidding 
system on the basis of transparent and quantifiable Bid Evaluation Criter ia (BEC) 
indicated in Notice Inviting Offers (NIO).  There is a level playing field for award 
of blocks to public sector and private companies.  The blocks are awarded to 
successful bidders based of BEC. Previous performance acreage holding, 
production profile is already taken into consideration while evaluating the bids as 
per BEC.   From NELP VII onwards, to discourage defaulters, a provision has 
been made in BEC that companies would be ineligible to bid as operator for the 
block(s) which was/were relinqu ished by it/them without completing the MWP 
under NELP regime.  However, such company can be a member of consortium 
with another company as operator. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No.1.54) 
   The Committee are dismayed to note that although promotion of Research 
and Development activities has been identified as one of the thrust areas of 11 th 
Plan, the R&D expenditure by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (H PCL) 
and Oil India Limited (OIL) is only Rs.2.64 crore and Rs.16.75 crore respectively 
during 2008 -09 against their total XI Plan allocations of Rs.55 crore and 
Rs.216.19 crore.  The Committee are amazed to note that there is „NIL‟ 

  
expenditure by GAIL on R &D activities during 2008-09.  The Committee further 
observe that no fixed percentage of annual budget outlays have been earmarked 
by oil PSUs for R&D activities and their allocations vary from 0 % to 1 %.  As 
R&D is the backbone of any oil company‟s insti tutional arrangement for induction 
of appropriate technology and in meeting the varied needs including increasing 
the yields of value added products, bringing down the costs of engineering and 
construction work, safety and environment, the Committee feel t hat there is an 
urgent need for adequate allocation for R&D activities by all oil sector PSUs.  The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Government to analyze the reasons for very 
low allocations and expenditure on R&D activities by oil PSUs and recommend 
the Government to issue necessary guidelines to oil PSUs to allocate a certain 
fixed percentage of their annual budget for R&D activities. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
Reasons for shortfall in expenditure 
HPCL is setting up Corporate R&D centre at Devanagunti, Bangalore.  
The budget estimates were made anticipating that the land acquisition activity 
would be done shortly.  However, land acquisition issues from KIADB (Karnataka 
Industrial Areas Development Board) de layed the progress of infrastructure 
works.  The infrastructure works like compound wall construction and borewells 
alone costing Rs.3 crore, could not be completed due to land acquisition issues. 
 
Steps taken for increase in allocation for R&D activities. 
The KIADB board has approved the balance land acquisitions in 
September, 2009.  Disbursement of compensation from KIADB to parties for 
surrendering the land is at final stages.  Subsequently, after this disbursement 
and allotment, expenditure on R&D will pick up.   
GAIL (India) Limited 
Reasons for shortfall in expenditure 

  
The R&D activities of GAIL were being looked after by TTAC 
(Technology Transfer & Application Cell), under the Project Development 
Department.  R&D Projects and works like Underground Coa l Gasification,  
Hydrogen Corpus Fund etc. were being pursued by TTAC.  However, the stage 
for financial commitments and expenditures on these projects could not be 
finalised during 2008-09.   
Steps taken for increase in allocation for R&D activities. 
Realising their deficiency in the area of R&D, GAIL has reconstituted their 
R&D Department in 2009, headed by an Executive Director (R&D) with a vision 
and improved focus on developing innovative & cutting edge technologies. R&D 
budget of Rs.17.60 crores has b een allocated for 2009 -10.  For the XI Plan 
outlay of GAIL (INDIA) Ltd., an amount of Rs.68.30 crores has been earmarked 
for R&D activities alongwith other projects on Science & Technology as well as 
projects on environmental & pollution control.  GAIL has  taken proactive steps to 
increase their activities and significantly scale up the investment under R&D.  
The R&D projects proposed to be undertaken are as under:  
a) Waste plastics to value added liquid fuels:  The objective of the activity is to 
develop catalysts and process for conversion of waste plastics to useful 
hydrocarbons.  Lab studies have been carried out and the contract agreement 
with M/s IIP, Dehradun was signed on 29 th September, 2009 to carry out the 
bench scale studies.  GAIL would incur a n estimated expenditure of Rs.20 lakhs 
in 2009-10 and a budget provision of Rs.40 lakhs has been earmarked for 2010 -
11. 
b) UCG Technology: This project involves the development of technology for 
underground insitu gasification of coal.  M/s UZBEK COAL has been identified as 
one of prospective technology partner for GAIL, who have pioneering experience 
in this field.  GAIL would incur an estimated expenditure of Rs.25 lakhs in 2009 -
10 and a budget provision of Rs.50 lakhs has been earmarked for 2010-11. 
c) Land Fill Gas at New Delhi: Land fill site at Ghazipur, New Delhi has been 
identified and signing of MOU between GAIL and MCD is in process, which will 
form the basis of further implementation of the project for extraction and 
commercialization of methane g as generated from land fill site.  GAIL will incur 

  
an estimated expenditure of Rs.100 lakhs in 2009 -10 and a budgetary 
provision of Rs.100 lakhs has also been provided for 2010-11. 
d) Land Fill Gas at Mumbai: The land fill gas at Mumbai has been retrieved and 
the gas shall be commercialized.  GAIL would be signing MOU with Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai for commercialization of the land fill gas by 
processing, sweetening & compressing the gas to be utilized as Piped Natural 
Gas or Compressed Natural Gas.  GAIL would incur an estimated expenditure of 
Rs.9 crores in this regard.  
e) Hythane Project (Methane & Hydrogen admixture):  This comprises  
experiment on Fuel characterization and fitness for commercialization of Hythane 
as fuel in public transport  system.  This project, on successful completion, would 
have large environmental benefit.  Signing of Tripartite Agreement between 
GAIL, Mumbai Gas Limited (MGL)  & EDEN is in the process.  The technology 
would be provided by M/s Eden and GAIL & MGL would provide the fuel and 
facilities for the project.  GAIL will incur an estimated expenditure of Rs.10 lakhs 
in 2010-11. 
OIL India Limited (OIL) 
Reasons for shortfall in expenditure 
In OIL, majority of R&D activities revolve around applied research. As and 
when any specific requirement in the areas of drilling, production, transportation 
etc. arises, it is immediately taken up as R&D project and implemented on need 
basis only. 
  Notwithstanding the above, there are key areas such as alternate sources 
of energy, technology upgradation, IOR / EOR activities etc., which are regularly 
taken up as R&D Projects in OIL. 
Steps taken for increase in allocation for R&D activities. 
            OIL is undertaking the following projects in its operational areas among others : 
 1. To pursue Coal Liquefaction Project in Assam. 
 2. Experimental Production of Heavy Oil/Bitumen in Baghewala Field 
in  
                        Rajasthan. 
 3. 2D-3C / 3D-3C Seismic Survey in Assam. 

  
 
These projects will substantially enhance the expenditure on R&D. 
As regards guidelines for allocation of funds for R&D activities, it is 
informed that the Department of Public Enterprises, the nodal Ministry for Public 
Enterprises,  has prescribed 5% weightage for R&D activities, in the 
Memorandum of Under standing for the year 2010 -11.  Apart from this, the 
Integrated Energy Policy-2008, formulated by the Planning Commission, has also 
stressed on the need for increasing the allocation on R&D, as a percentage of 
their turnover.  Thus, there is an increased e mphasis for stepping up the 
expenditure on R&D activities in the PSUs. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No.1.55) 
The Committee are, however, happy to note that ONG C plans to put in 
concerted efforts in R&D relating to a number of areas, such as Underground 
Coal Gasification, Basin Centered gas, Gas Hydrates exploration, Petroleum 
Biotechnology and Surface Coal Gasification.  The Committee would like the 
other oil PS Us to emulate ONGC and take up projects in areas like shale gas 
exploration, economic and ecologically more safer ways to exploit gas hydrate 
resources and economic methods for converting coal to oil for making the 
process economically viable, etc. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
    The suggestion has been noted.  Other Oil PSUs have also taken up R&D 
projects and 5% weightage has been given to this aspect in the MOUs signed 
between Oil PSUs and MoP&NG for 2010-11. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 

  
Recommendation (SI. No. 19, Para No.1.66) 
The Committee note that the present refining capacity of the public and 
private sector refineries is 105.47 MMTPA and 72.50 MMTPA respectively.  
Further, the capacity expansion/addition planned by the public and private sector 
by the end of the 11 th Plan (March 2012) is 77.81 MMTPA – public sector 48.31 
MMTPA and 29.50 MMTPA in private sector.  The Committee are further 
informed that during the year 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and  2008-09, the petroleum 
products exported from the existing refineries stood at 33.6 MMT, 40.8 MMT and 
38.6 MMT.  Although, the Committee are happy to note that the refining capacity 
expansion/addition programme of both the public and private sector oil 
companies has increased their export and profit margins, the Committee are also 
concerned about the adverse environmental impact of refineries.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Government/DGH to effectively monitor and 
ensure that environmental norms ar e adhered to both by public and private 
sector refineries.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of Central Government, Ministry of 
Environment & Forests (MoE&F) while recommending the Environment 
Clearance (EC) specifies the general and specific conditions that are to be 
complied with by the industry.  Based on EAC recommendations, Ministry of 
Environment & Forest issues the environment clearance.  
 
The Project proponent takes care of compliance of various statutory 
stipulations appli cable to the respective industry in respect of Environmental 
Control and also monitors inline with the requirements.  The industry  is  required  
to  submit  6 monthly reports about compliance status of EC conditions to 
Regional office of MoE&F and State Pollution Control Board (SPCB).  
 
After setting up of the industries, pollution checks are undertaken by the 
respective State Pollution Control Board independently or sometimes in 
coordination with the Central Pollution Control Board under the Air (Preventi on 

  
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974.  From time to time, the regional offices of MoE&F also visit 
the industry sites to check the compliance of pollution norms.  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 21, Para No.1.80) 
The Committee are concerned to note that the Bio -diesel purchase policy 
devised by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to encourage the production of 
bio-diesel in the country has not made any substantial progress so far, as the 20 
purchase centres have failed to purchase bio -diesel from the registered 
manufacturers at specified decided price of Rs. 26.50 per litre. The Committee 
are, however, happy to no te that Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Gas (HPCL) are engaged in exploring possibility of promoting green fuel with the 
aim to secure a safer and pollution free environ ment. For the purpose, BPCL has 
planted Jatropha plants at the vacant land of oil depots and has launched “ 
project triple one”, providing for bio -fuel plantation on 10 lakhs acres of land 
belonging to Panchayats, BPL families/ Scs/STs/ other Government be neficiaries  
with the permission of State Government of Uttar Pradesh. Like wise, IOC has 
also entered into a MoU with Indian Railways to study complete value chain of 
Bio-diesel and consequently, about 150000 saplings of Jatropha have been 
planted at 62 h ectares of railway land at Surender Nagar in Gujarat. IOCL has 
also identified wasteland availability across States. Potential State Governments 
have been contacted for allotment of 30,000 hectare of wasteland to produce 1 
lakh tones of Jatropha seeds to s upport a 100 TPD plant with 30,000 MTPA bio -
diesel output. Besides this, States of Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan have also shown interest in energy crop plantation programme and 
accordingly lands have been acquired for the purpose. The Committe e 
appreciate the efforts made by oil PSUs and State Governments for cultivation of 
Jatropha plants impress upon the need that in view of the lurking danger of the 
anticipated failure of bio -diesel programme envisaged in Bio -diesel Purchase 
Policy, the Government should encourage State Governments and private/ public 

  
sector undertakings to plant the energy crops. The Committee, further desire 
that the “project triple one” of BPCL be completed in a time bound manner since 
the project has also received the go ahead from the Uttar Pradesh Government. 
Further, the study programme of IOCL with railway be fast -tracked to facilitate 
further steps for Jatropha cultivation programme. The Committee believe that the 
action plan prepared by the OMCs to implement the ongo ing projects as well the 
projects which are to be finalized and launched for bio -diesel cultivation would 
not only help in protecting the environment and reduce pollution but would also 
reduce dependence on import of crude oil.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Action taken by IOCL 
 
Indian oil CREDA Biofuels Ltd. a JV floated by Indian oil has already 
undertaken Jatropha plantation on Govt. wastelands in Chhattisgarh. Plantation 
on 653 Ha has been completed so far. 
 
It is further planned to undertake Jatropha plantation on 20000 hectares of 
Govt. revenue waste land. This will generate about 20000 tonnes of Biodiesel per 
annum from fourth/fifth year. 
 
Jatropha plantation on 241 Hectares of Govt. wasteland has been 
completed by IOC in Jhabua district of MP during 2009. Based on the experience 
of this pilot project, further Jatropha plantation on 30,000 Ha revenue waste land 
will be undertaken in MP. 
 
Action taken by BPCL 
 
BPCL has launched “PROJECT TRIPLE ONE”, set up a Bio -Diesel Value 
Chain in the State of Uttar Prade sh. This project is being implemented by newly 
formed joint venture company, M/s. Bharat Renewable Energy Ltd. 11744 acres 
waste land belonging to Panchayat has been identified for the project. Land 
Management Committees of the concerned districts has alre ady cleared our 
proposal for 7122 acres for release of fund from NREG Scheme for Jatropha 
plantation. Jatropha plantation has been completed on approx. 480 acres and pit 
digging has been completed on 390 acres land. The plantation work taken up in 

  
the last  monsoon season was affected due to severe drought conditions faced 
in entire UP. Whereas the pit digging and identification of further waste land and 
its approval from State Govt. Authorities will continue, the plantation  will be 
taken up in hand in the next monsoon season.  
 
Action taken by HPCL 
 
Some manufacturers of Bio -diesel have expressed interest to become the 
registered supplier of Bio -diesel to Oil PSUs. Based on this industry members of 
Oil PSUs visited 5 numbers of Bio -diesel plants in West Ben gal & Andhra 
Pradesh to inspect their Bio -diesel plants in line with the Bio -diesel Purchase 
Policy. HPCL could not buy Bio -diesel for blending in Diesel to make B5 blend at 
any of the collection centers. With regard to the plantation of Jatropha, HPCL has 
signed MOU with G.B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar, 
Uttarakhand State for the experimental plantation of 10 lakh Jatropha, installation 
of Transesterification unit and Research on the development of Tissue Culture 
Technology of mi cropropagation of best variety of Jatropha. This collaborative 
R&D project is completely funded by HPCL and the plantation work is in 
progress. HPCL has also formed a JVC with Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (CREDA) for the plantation of J atropha over 15,000 
hectares of waste Revenue land in Chhattisgarh. The name of the company is 
CREDA – HPCL Bio -fuel Ltd. The agreement with Govt. of Chhattisgarh & 
CREDA to form JVC was signed in Sept. 2008. The JVC has already acquired 
700 hectares of re venue land on lease from the Govt. of Chattisgarh for 
plantation of Jatropha. Total 15,000 hectares of land on lease will be acquired by 
the JVC over a period of three years.    
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 

  
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 22, Para No.1.88) 
The Committee note that to provide a clean and cheap burning fuel at the 
doorstep of the consumer and to reduce pollution from conventional fuel, Gas 
Authority of India Limited has so far launched C ity Gas Distribution Projects in 18 
cities either independently of through the Joint Venture mode. Besides GAIL has 
also incorporated GAIL Gas Ltd. on 27 th May 2008 to further expedite the 
implementation of these projects. In line with this, Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board has granted authorization to gas Authority of India Limited 
(GAIL) to develop city gas distribution network in four metro cities (Kota, Dewas, 
Sonipat and Merut) in the first phase and GAIL would also be bidding  for the II 
phase of city gas distribution network development projects for seven other 
additional cities. The Committee are apprised that the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) has segmented Delhi into 70 charge areas 
corresponding to 70 assembly constit uencies out of which Indraprastha gas 
limited is presently having network in 49 charge areas. The committee are 
however, unhappy to note that against the present potential network to provide 4 
lakh PNG connections in Delhi, only 1.5 lakh connections have b een issued by 
IGL so far and 50,000 are targeted t be issued in the current financial year. Since 
IGL is unable to provide PNG connections in Delhi as per the present potential, 
government/IGL;s plan to cover all the 70 charge areas by the year 2012 does 
not carry conviction. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
in the first instance ensure that the present laid down network is fully utilized to 
its potential. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 has been notified 
to provide a regulatory and developmental framework for developing inter alia 
city/local natural gas distribution networks and to promote investment in the area 
from both public & private sectors. Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Boar d 
(PNGRB) has accepted 70 electoral wards as Geographical Areas (GAs) and 
Charged Areas (CAs)  for City Gas Distribution (CGD) Network for National 
Capital Territory of Delhi.  PNGRB has prescribed technical standards and 
quality of service standards throu gh Regulations framed by it.   Laying of 

  
pipelines by CGD entity requires municipal permission and substantial 
interface with the local administration.   Accordingly, PNGRB has prescribed that,  
during the year 2009 -10 to 2011 -12,  35,000 Piped Natural Gas  connections be 
provided each year.  However, IGL is hopeful to provide 75,000 to 1,00,000 PNG 
connections  every year.    IGL has initiated awareness campaigns though media  
to educate and encourage people to use PNG.  It may also be relevant to 
mention t hat any violation of the conditions mentioned by PNGRB makes IGL 
liable for  action under the provisions of PNGRB Act, including fine which may 
extend to Rs.25 crore.  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 24, Para No.1.94) 
In view of low accessibility of LPG in the remote and rural areas, the 
Committee in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants have recommended 
that the Ministry should assess the situation in rural and remot e areas and 
release more LPG connections and strengthen the distribution network to ensure 
cleaner fuel at affordable rate to people living in those areas. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Government on 06 th August, 2009 have approved Rajiv 
Gandhi Gramin LPG Vitrak Yojana for small size LPG distribution agencies to 
cover remote as well as low potential areas having potential of up to 600 refill 
sales per month. While appreciating the Government‟s initiative to increase rural 
penetration by OMCs, the  Committee would like to know the details of the follow 
up action of all the OMCs to implement the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have already advertised 
for 1215 Rajiv Gandhi Gramin LPG Vitrak Yojana (RGGLVY ) locations in 8 
States namely, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa , 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal and have received more than 12000 
applications for the locations. The applications are being processed. As per laid 
down procedure for RGGLVY, the selection of candidates will be conducted and 
the distributorship will be commissioned. Identification of locations under 

  
RGGLVY for other States of the country is in progress. The setting up of LPG 
distributors under this scheme will now  be a continuous process till all parts of 
the country are covered by LPG network. However, no time limit can be indicated 
for achieving 100% LPG coverage. 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 26, Para No.1.102) 
The Committee have also been informed that filter papers, marker system, 
etc. are available at the retail outlets and consumer can also file complaints if 
they suspect some kind of adulteration in petroleum products.  The  Committee 
feel that in the absence of any public awareness programme, these initiatives 
taken by the Government/OMCs have not yielded the desired results.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to take necessary action to 
popularise the meas ures taken by way of adequate publicity in print and 
electronic media to alert the people at large and create public fear in the minds of 
erring dealers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Customer education/Public awareness is an ongoing process and 
initiatives are in place to educate the customers at the Retail Outlets (ROs) level 
by way of customer service cell boards/posters giving details of the Field 
Officer/Divisional office and also the availability of filter papers/density equipment 
and 5 litre measure at the ROs. 
 
 Further, to bring focus on the rights of the customer, an initiative has 
been taken by oil industry to launch an All India Campaign in January 2010 
inviting customers to check quality and quantity at ROs with the objective to build 
customer confidence and project a customer friendly image under name “ Check 
& Fill”.  
 
 To have an effective campaign, necessary hoarding/Banners as per 
design circulated were prominently displayed covering almost all the Retail 
Outlets across the country. Equipments to carry out the checks were made 
visible to the customers at the ROs by  setting up kiosks. In many locations, the 
campaign was formally launched by local dignitaries including elected 

  
representatives/Senior Government Officials and prominent socialites w ho 
have profusely appreciated the efforts of oil industry. 
 
 Wide publicity was also given through advertisements in various 
National Dailies in English and Vernacular languages. Check and Fill print 
advertisements were released by OMCs almost for a fortni ght ending 15 Dec 
2009.  Various other initiatives were also taken by Oil Marketing Companies for 
spreading the message, which include: - 
 
(a) Painting of Buses with Banner design. 
(b) Painting of Tractors with Banner design. 
(c) Ad-Wheel (mechanical vehicle) Moving display. 
(d) SMS to over 1.5 lac customers. 
(e) Banners on auto-rickshaw. 
(f) 15 seconds Jingles on Red FM. 
 
 The campaign has been a good success and within a span of one and 
half months, as per field reports over two lacs customers have carrie d out checks 
across the country and have given very encouraging feed back on the initiative of 
OMCs. This initiative has also received very positive media coverage. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 28, Para No.1.107) 
The Committee are given to understand that the Government in addition to 
the existing storages of crude oil and petroleum products with the oil companies 
have planned to construct a strategic storage facility of  crude oil of 15 MMT 
capacity in three phases.  The first phase is likely to be completed by December 
2012 involving three projects sites at Visakhapatnam (1.00 MMT), Mangalore 
(1.5 MMT), Padur (2.5 MMT).  The project involving a capital cost of Rs. 2400 
crore (September, 2005 prices) is being managed by Indian Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves Limited (ISPRL), a special purpose vehicle of the Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB). The Committee are unhappy to note the long 
gestation period of 6 years for implem enting Phase -I projects (2006 -12) which 
were sanctioned in January, 2006.  The Committee express its serious concern 

  
over the delay in implementation of projects at Mangalore and Padur which 
were hindered with the problem of land acquisition.  While apprec iating the 
visionary approach adopted by Government for setting up strategic storage 
facility in the country to cope with any short-term disruption in Crude Oil supplies, 
a natural calamity or any unforeseen global event, leading to an abnormal 
increase in  crude oil prices, the Committee desire that not only Phase -I of the 
programme should be expedited by the Government as originally targeted but 
also Phase II and III of the project should be initiated and completed at the 
earliest. The Committee would like  to be apprised of the action plan framed by 
the Government in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The gestation period of 6 years for implementing Phase -I of the Project 
was laid down with the approval of the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) when MoP&NG had moved the Committee for deciding the financing 
pattern of the Project.  Based on the information gathered from a leading 
consultant for the cavern projects in the world, it has been observed that the 
average gestation period for such cave rn projects is approximately 7 years 
worldover. Hence, the gestation period of 6 years is quite tight, considering the 
long periods required for statutory clearances for land acquisition, environment 
clearances etc. required for completing such projects. 
 
The land acquisition at Mangalore has since been completed and the 
underground civil works at this site have commenced.  For Padur site, the 
Karnataka State Government has issued final Notification on 22 nd February 2010 
for acquiring 140.65 acres of land for the project. The physical possession of land 
is likely to be taken by ISPRL by April 2010.   The Work Order for the 
underground civil works at Padur has already been placed to the successful 
bidder.  
  
As regards Phase -II of the project,  Engineers Indi a Limited (EIL) is 
conducting the pre -feasibility study.  The scope of the study includes locating 

  
technically suitable sites, identifying type and capacity best suited for each 
location, preparation of design and concept and the Rough Order of the 
magnitude cost and time schedule estimates etc.  In addition to this study, the Oil 
Industry Development Board (OIDB) has engaged The Energy and Resources 
Institute (TERI) for conducting research and analysis of various technical aspects 
of petroleum reserves in India relating to location, construction technique, cavern 
structure and economic parameters like India‟s crude oil demand, its sensitivity to 
growth factors etc.  Once the Study Reports are received, MoP&NG will consult 
all the stake -holders and draw up a  strategy for developing the blueprint of 
Phase-II of the Petroleum Reserves Project. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 

  
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No.1.33) 
 
The Committee note that there is a major shortfall in achievement of XI Plan 
targets in natural gas production. Against a plan target of 8.55 BCM of natural 
gas produ ction by private/JV companies only 7.227 BCM was achieved during 
2007-08 and for 2008 -09 against the plan target of 22.55 BCM, private/JV 
companies could produce only 8.090 BCM of natural gas. Further, natural gas 
production from KG -D-6 block which has com menced from April, 2009 at about 
38 MMSCMD is very much below the target. In view of the low natural gas 
production by private/JV companies during the last 2 years, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should ensure increased production of natural 
as from the existing fields,. Without going into the merits of the ongoing KG -D6 
block gas dispute which is sub -judice, the Committee desires that the 
Government while taking necessary steps to keep the national interests above 
the business interests of the  warring parties should resolve the dispute early to 
achieve the targeted production. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Hon‟ble Court of Bombay has already allowed natural gas production from 
KG Deepwater, which commenced in April, 2009. It has been gradually 
increased  and the production level is  currently about 60 MMSCMD. This is 
likely to increase to 80 MMSCMD. The dispute between the parties has not 
affected the natural gas production from KG basin. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No.1.41) 
 
The Committee note that although Government have not provided 
infrastructure status as such to the entire hydrocarbon sector, it has taken some 
steps like amendment of section 35(a) (d) of Income Tax Act providing full 
deduction of capital expenditure for a pipeline approved by the Petroleum and 

  
Natural Gas Regulatory Board and having 33% excess capacity in the first 
year of operation and income tax exemption to projects to be awarded  under 
NELP-VIII and CBM-IV.  In the opinion of the Committee, in order to attract more 
investments by the private sectors in E&P activities, refineries etc. it is necessary 
that complete infrastructure status be provided to the entire hydrocarbon 
industry. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The issue of extension of infrastructure status to exploration and refining 
activities was taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  In its Budget proposals for 
2010-11, this Ministry had suggested  that hydrocarbon sector should be  at par 
with the power sector in the matter of fiscal incentives since undertakings 
engaged in commercial production or refining of mineral oil are equally capital 
intensive as power plants. It was suggested that the definition of “infrastructure 
sector” i n the explanation to Section 80 -IA of the Income Tax Act should be 
amended to include exploration and refining activities and accordingly, 
exploration and refining undertakings may be allowed deduction for 10 
consecutive assessment years as against 7 years  at present, out of a 15 -year 
period.  It was further suggested that undertakings, which have already started 
commercial production or refining of mineral oil should also be given the option of 
claiming the 10 -year tax holiday beginning with the year in wh ich they start 
earning taxable profits so that they are in a position to enjoy the incentive for the 
intended period of 10 years. 
  
However, there was no announcement in this regard in the Budget 2010 -
11 presented in the Lok Sabha on 26.2.2010. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 

  
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para No.1.59) 
 
The Committee in their 20 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) had expressed their 
displeasure over the fact that only a meager amount is bei ng released to the Oil 
Industry Development Board out of the cess proceeds for development of 
petroleum sector.  They had recommended for referral of the entire issue of 
deployment/utilization of cess levied on crude oil/revenues collected from the 
petroleum sector vis-à-vis the amount released for development of oil sector to a 
group of Ministers comprising the Union Ministers for Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Finance, Law and Chemical and Fertilizer.  In a post -evidence reply, the 
Ministry of Petroleum and N atural Gas have informed the Committee that 
Ministry of Finance had not commented upon the matter to refer the whole issue 
to a Group of Ministers in spite of repeated reminders.  The Committee take a 
very serious view on the whole issue and urge the Gover nment to again take up 
the matter with the Ministry of Finance and progress in the matter be intimated to 
the Committee at the earliest.  As regards creation of Price Stabilization Fund, 
the Committee feel that the inbuilt mechanism to allow variation in p rices of 
diesel and petrol as claimed by the Government is not sufficient. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for creation of Price 
Stabilization Fund. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In so far as creation of Price Stabilization Fund i s concerned, the matter 
has been taken up with Ministry of Finance on several occasions.  The Ministry of 
Finance has not concurred with the proposal 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
 

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (SI. No.5, Para No.1.20) 
 
As regards the development drilling, the Committee is constrained to note 
that against the targets of 514820 meterage by ONGC during 2008-09, the actual 
were 477144 meterage with 218 wells completed as against the target of 232 
wells. The Committee further noted with disquiet that although 92.8 % of the 
annual targets for development drilling could be achieved by ONGC during 2008-
09, the actual utilization of funds was Rs. 4764.79 crore against the budget 
estimates of Rs. 3836.58 crores. Thus, though an additional expenditure of about 
Rs. 928 crore was incurred by ONGC, there was shortfall in achievin g physical 
targets set for development drilling during 2008 -09. Although the Government in 
a post evidence reply furnished to the Committee have informed that the 
increase is mainly due to significant increase in drilling rigs day rates from Rs. 
0.5 crore in 2007-08 (which was the basis for BE 2008 -09) to Rs. 0.85 crore in 
2008-09, the Committee have failed to understand as to why these escalations 
were not projected at Revised Estimates (RE) stage. The huge mismatch 
between the financial outlays and the ph ysical targets achieved for development 
drilling point towards systematic flaws in the planning and implementation of 
exploratory work. The Committee, therefore, recommends that not only the 
physical as well as financial targets should be set realistically  for exploratory 
works, but Government / ONGC should monitor them periodically as per agreed 
performance parameters to ensure the prudent expenditure of the planned 
targets. The Committee further recommend that DGH being responsible for 
management of entir e oil sector should effectively enforce performance 
parameters on PSUs as well as private companies engaged in oil exploration. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The financial and physical targets are approved by the Board of ONGC. 
The review of financial and phys ical targets is carried out by the Board of ONGC 
and Planning Commission. DGH monitors the performance of PSUs/ Private/ 

  
joint venture companies as per the committed programme mentioned in the 
production sharing contracts, as well as commitment given by Na tional Oil 
Companies in respect of National blocks. DGH also reviews and monitors the 
exploration programme and development plans for commercial discoveries of 
hydrocarbon reserves for all E&P Companies operating in India. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter-1) 
 
Recommendation (SI. No.8, Para No.1.23) 
 
The Committee note that the oil PSUs have been allocated activity wise 
budgetary allocation d uring XI plan period. Although, the actual utilization for 
Exploration & Production, Refinery and Marketing and Petrochemicals during 
2008-09 were 42,477.58 crore (97.13%), Rs. 9,147.49 crore (97.43%) and Rs. 
4,818.51 crore (111.81%) respectively, the actuals for engineering activities were 
19.65 crore which were 25.19% of the Revised estimates of Rs. 78 crore. The 
Committee further note that against the Budget Estimate of Rs. 95 crore for the 
engineering activities during 2009 -10, the actual upto 31.05.200 9 were Rs. 1.28 
crore i.e. only 1.35% of the plan outlays for the year due to low expenditure by 
two engineering companies viz. Balmer Lawrie and Company and Biecco Lawrie 
Limited. The Committee have been further informed that business and financial 
restructuring of Biecco Lawrie Limited is under active consideration of the 
Ministry. The Committee desire tha an early decision should be taken by the 
Government in this regard to ensure that the plan outlays for engineering 
activities are fully utilized during 2009-10. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Biecco Lawrie Limited : - Biecco Lawrie Limited is a medium sized Electrical 
Engineering Co. and presently carrying a negative net worth in the Books of 
Accounts. The impact of financial imbalance is reflected in its ina bility to mobilize 
funds for plan expenditures. 
 

  
 The Restructuring proposal of the Company, which will also take care 
of financial imbalances, is under active consideration of the Ministry. The 
Financial Restructuring will help the company to mobilize fun ds for plan 
expenditure. 
 
Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. : -  The financial data for plan expenditure of Balmer 
Lawrie & Co. Ltd is as follows :- 
  
Rs./Crores 
 2009-10 2009-10 Actual 2009-10 
 BE RE Apr./June‟09 Apr./Jan.‟10 
Plan 
Expenditure 
(*) including 
Commitment 
90.00 66.90 1.28 34.83 (*) 
 
From the above it is evident that the company has taken necessary steps 
to incur the plan expenditure as per the plans/targets taken by the company. The 
plan expenditure had been low in the initial quarter of the year but  has increased 
in the 2 nd half of the year 2009 -10. However, the estimated plan expenditure for 
the year 2009-10 is anticipated to be Rs. 66.90crores instead of Rs. 90.00 crores 
as was planed earlier due to non -materialization of expenditure towards 
investment in acquiring synergistically related companies where various option 
are still being evaluated. Moreover, the competitive situation prevailing in the 
market, led the company to conserve cash and to examine more closely returns 
from the capital expenditure entailing deferment of plan expenditure.  
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter-1) 
 
Recommendation (SI. No.11, Para No.1.34) 
 
The Committee note that Directorate General of Hydrocarbon (DGH) is inter -alia 
entrusted with the responsibility to ensure proper and sound management of the oil 
and natural gas resources besides monitoring of E&P activities. The Committee, 

  
however, unhappy to find shortfall in crude oil and gas  production especially by 
private/JV companies despite regular monitoring by DGH. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Government should issue necessary instruction to the DGH to 
aggressively monitor the performance of all the oil companies whether public or 
private/Joint venture to ensure that there are no slippages in the exploration projects. 
Besides taking timely remedial measures to achieve the targeted production of crude 
oil and natural gas, the Committee also desire that manpower in DGH should be 
strengthened so that DGH could fulfill its mandate and effectively monitor the E&P 
activities. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government vide Resolution dated 8.4.1993 and Notification No. S.O.1391 
(E) dated 1.9.2006 has already notified the detailed functions of DGH. Presently, DGH 
is manned by staff mainly from Public Sector Undertakings who are posted in DGH on 
deputation/tenure basis and people taken on contractual/tenure basis.  The manpower 
requirement of DGH is reviewed by  the Ministry from time to time and action is taken 
to meet the requirement.  
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter-1) 
 
Recommendation (SI. No.23, Para No.1.89) 
Further, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has finalized “Vision -
2015‟ of oil sector for “consumer satisfaction and beyond‟, focusing primarily on 
providing better services to consumers and it inter -alia envisages an 
establishment of PNG/CNG network to connect 201 cities by the year 2015. 
Although, the Committee appreciate the ambitious plan of the Government to 
cover 200 cities by 2010, the Committee feel that the project has yet to be 
started. The Committee further note that the t otal pipeline length and pipeline 
spread in India falls far behind the pipeline network of the developed countries 
like USA and France. The Committee, therefore desire that the government 
should take concerted efforts to frame a year -wise action plan to co ver all the 

  
200 cities for CNG/PNG network under “Vision 2010”. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Government has accorded priority to enhance energy security of the 
country.  A multi -pronged strategy has been adopted to augment gas supplies 
and to bridge the gap between supply & demand for the domestic market by 
intensification of domestic E&P activities, including Coal Bed Methane (CBM), 
through LNG and import of natura l gas through transnational gas pipelines.  In 
order to boost the spread of pipeline length in the country,  Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas has authorized nine new trunk pipelines with total length of 5523 
km.  Out of the nine authorized pipelines, five new pipelines were authorized to 
GAIL, namely (i) Dadri -Bawana-Nangal, (ii) Chainsa -Jhajjar-Hissar, (iii) Dabhol -
Bangalore, (iv) Kochi -Kanjirrakod-Bangalore-Mangalore and (v) Haldia -
Jagdishpur.  Accordingly, GAIL  is planning to double the present pip eline 
network of around 7,000 km to 14,000 km by 2014 with a planned capex of 
Rs.34,300 crore.  Apart from this,  five new pipelines were authorized to Reliance 
Gas Transport & Infrastrucre Ltd. (RGTIL)   by this Ministry, namely (i) Kakinada -
Basudevpur-Howrah, (ii) Kakinada - Nellore Chennai, (iii) Chennai -Tuticorin and 
(iv) Chennai -Bangalore-Mangalore.  Thus with increased availability of Natural 
Gas in the country under NELP and through import of LNG, along with increased 
capacity to transport gas through  out the country,  this Ministry would be in 
position to realize the  targets  of Vision -2015 of oil sector for “consumer 
satisfaction and beyond‟. 
 Further, PNGRB Act, 2006 has been enacted and PNGRB has been 
constituted to increase development of inter a lia CGD entities and attract 
investment from both Public & Private sectors in the field of City Gas Distribution. 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 19 of Chapter-1) 

  
Recommendation (SI. No.29, Para No.1.114) 
 
The Committee note that OIL Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) has been 
set up by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to assist the Safety Council 
headed by Secretary, P&NG as Chairman and includes Additional/Joint 
Secretaries, Advisors in Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Chief Executives of 
all Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) under the Ministry, Chief Controller of 
Explosives (CCE), Advisor(Fire) of Government of India, DGMS and the Director 
General of Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, etc. as members. OISD 
develops standards for hydrocarbon industry to keep abreast of the latest 
designs and practices in the area of safety and fire fighting in the developed 
countries. Despite OISD wh ich develops high standards in areas of safety and 
fire fighting, there had been regular reporting of incidents of fire in refineries/oil 
depots. The Committee were given to understand that the fire was due to rupture 
of a bend pipe of common discharge lin e of the Fractionator column bottom 
pumps followed by auto ignition of leaked hot hydrocarbon and the rupture was 
due to thinning down of the bend pipe due to metallurgy mix -up at project 
construction stage and wrong replacement of the identified bend duri ng schedule 
maintenance shut down of Delayed Coking Unit in 2007. Further, the Committee 
are concerned to note that 11 persons have been reportedly died and oil worth 
hundred crores of rupees was burnt at Jaiput Depot in Octoboer this year. When 
the fire was raging at Jaipur Depot, the Government / Oil companies had no fire 
fighting strategy except to let the oil stored in the depot to burn out. It only 
indicates that there are no proper safety mechanism to prevent such major fire 
nor are there any technolo gy/equipment to tackle such a devastating fire. It is, 
therefore, imperative that external safety audit of all the refineries/depots must be 
ensured periodically, as per safety standards. The Committee would like to know 
the details of the outcome of the i nvestigation report of the Government / IOC 
into the fire at Jaipur and remedial measures taken / proposed to be taken by the 
Government to avoid reoccurrence of such incidents in future.  The Committee 
also like to be apprised of the monitoring mechanism available with OISD / 
Safety Council to check the implementation of safety standard approved by them 
and the steps taken by the Government to strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
to ensure safety of world standards in refineries / storage depots. In view of  a 

  
large number of habitat areas that have come up / developed around oil storage 
depots, the committee would like the Government to take a review of the 
locational hazards of these depots and desire that the Government must ensure 
adequate safeguards / shifting of these depots away from habitat areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
    The POL Terminal at Sanganer, Jaipur of Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 
(IOCL) was constructed by Engineers India Ltd by conforming to all statutory 
norms including the codes and sta ndards of Oil Industry Safety Directorate.  The 
fire at IOCL‟s POL Terminal at Sanganer on 29.10.2009 was consequent to 
Unconfined Vapour Cloud Explosion after a very heavy leak of Motor Spirit (MS) 
i.e. at an estimated rate of 1000 MT/HR.  It was not poss ible for anyone to 
approach the leakage or the terminal to activate the fire fighting / prevention 
system.  The explosion was so heavy that even the fire fighting network was 
damaged which made the entire system non -functional and 9 tanks were on fire 
at a time leaving no room for any major efforts to handle the situation. 
  
 The situation at the accident site was reviewed by Crisis Management 
Group headed by Principal Secretary(Home), Govt. of Rajasthan, the controlled 
burning of the fuel was allowed to pr event horizontal spread of fire  in view of 
larger interest of the public.  
 
  The Hon‟ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Shri Murli Deora had 
taken a reiview meeting on the Safety and Security Aspects of the Oil and Gas 
Sector in the country on 3.11 .2009, where all the public and private oil and gas 
companies have been asked to take the following action : 
 
(5) All companies shall take measures to promote safety 
consciousness and training on safety requirement at all levels.  The 
measures of zero toleranc e in matters of safety has to be conveyed to all 
concerned. 
 

  
(6) All oil and gas installations and transportation systems in the 
country will carry out self safety audit conforming to statutory norms and 
risk assessment, including OISD standards by 31.12.2009.   Oil companies 
will submit the reports to OISD which in turn will submit a consolidated 
report to MOPNG. 
 
(7) All oil and gas companies in the country must update their standard 
operating procedures (SOPs) for operations and maintenance practices for 
all coun trywide installations / setups under due technical supervision and 
attention, availing the benefits of best practices in the country and abroad.  
A strict implementation of such standard operating procedure (SOPs) will 
be ensured.  All oil and gas companie s will submit reports on SOPs and its 
due implementation to OISD by 31.12.2009. 
 
(8) All oil and gas installations will have their safety audit  done on 
quarterly basis.  All major as well as minor incidents in any such 
installations/setup in the country inclu ding that of private companies will be 
reported to OISD.  
 
 
  OISD checks the implementation of the Safety Standards approved by the 
Safety Council by the following mechanism: 
 
3. Pre-commissioning Inspection  
 
OISD carries out pre -commissioning inspection wh enever a new facility is 
developed and/or major modifications, capacity enhancement etc is done in 
the Refineries and other Installations based on request received from Oil 
PSUs. 
 
4. External Safety Audit  
 
These Audits are coordinated by OISD with members fr om other Oil 
companies other than auditee company.  The period of audit varies from 3 to 
5 days and the frequency of audit is given below :  
 
For Refineries & Gas Processing Plants – once in 3 years  
 

  
For Oil Storage and Distribution Installations -  Two Audits at 
a gap of 5 years initially and thereafter either a request audit  or 
surprise inspection  
 
3.     Surprise Safety Audit    
 
The Surprise Safety Audit of Refineries and major Gas Processing units are 
carried out by technical experts  not below the rank of General Manager. 
 
In case of Oil & Gas Storage and distribution Installations the surprise audits 
are carried out by an officer from OISD considering the degree of hazardous 
location / sensitive location on various counts.  So far 42 such audits ha ve 
been carried out in the last 5 years. 
 
5. Compliance Reports 
 
The Oil companies are required to submit compliance reports on the 
recommendations given in above audits / inspections on quarterly basis to 
OISD and they are reviewed every six months (approx.)  in a steering 
committee comprising of the officers of General Manager rank of Oil PSUs.  
The compliance status is also put up to the Safety Council in its annual 
meeting.   
 
In some cases variations in the compliance status submitted by Oil PSUs is 
observed and necessary advice given to the Chief Executive of the respective Oil 
PSU 
 
  The Oil Companies have been advised to carry out the self -audit of Oil 
Installations with a special focus on the installations located in densely populated 
areas and carry out the risk analysis of such installations to mitigate the hazards.   
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 27, 28 & 29 of Chapter-1) 
 

  
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINALREPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No.1.10) 
 
The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the budgetary allocations 
(Plan) of Rs.25 crore during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 to R ajiv Gandhi Institute of 
Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) as the total budgetary support of Rs.285 crore 
was proposed to be allocated to RGIPT during 11 th Plan to meet the capital 
expenditure.  The Committee note that original projection for budgetary support 
proposed for 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 were of Rs. 81 crore and Rs.69 crore 
respectively for setting up infrastructure facilities like purchase of land, land 
acquisition, building, residences, other amenities like school, hospitals 
equipments, sports facilities.  To their utter surprise, the Committee find that only 
Rs. 25 crore each for both the years have been actually allocated for the 
purpose.  In the opinion of the Committee, the whole RGIPT project originally 
scheduled to be completed in 2011 -12 would be ba dly affected due to certain 
bottlenecks like acquisition of additional land from UPSIDC and reduced 
budgetary allocations during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the issue so of land acquisition may be resolved at the earliest  
and all infrastructure facilities be established at RGIPT as scheduled by infusing 
the desired budgetary support.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The lower budgetary allocation of Rs. 25 crores for 2008 -09 as against 
original projection of Rs. 81 crore and Rs .69 crore respectively was due to the 
delay in acquisition of additional land by Uttar Pradesh Industrial Development 
Corporation (UPDSIDC).  Though, RGIPT applied to UPSIDC for the acquisition 
of additional land in August 2007, the acquisition process did  not progress well 
despite regular follow -up by RGIPT/MOP&NG at various levels of t he State 
Government.   
 

  
RGIPT is in possession 47.8 acres of land purchased by from Indian 
Oil Tanking Ltd.  The balance land admeasuring 95 acres contiguous to the 
available land is under acquisition by UPSIDC for which RGIPT had approached 
them in August 2007.  Despite regular follow -up by RGIPT / MOPNG acquisition 
process has got delayed. 
 
Recently, with the MoP&NG intervention and day to day tracking by 
RGIPT at District Magistrate level and UPSIDC the process acquired momentum 
and one of the major steps , i.e. clearance by Land Use Committee at state 
government level is expected soon.  With this development and as per indication 
given by authorities the process will be completed by end May 2010. 
 
Meanwhile, RGIPT has appointed Engineers India Ltd. as Project 
Management Consultant and with their help the first phase of construction 
activities on the available land has been initiated.  The second phase plan is 
being made ready which will be taken up as soon as the acquisition of additional 
land by UPSIDC is completed. 
 
Action plan has been drawn for the construction activities, seeking 
approval for revised project cost and completing the RGIPT campus by February 
2013.   
In the  above contest the budgetary allocation of Rs.25 crores each for 
2008-09 and 2009-10 seems adequate.   
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No.1.11) 
 
The Committee find that although in their 20th Report on DFG (2008-09) of 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (14 th LS), they had recommended that the 
Government should act fast in setting up the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum 
Technology (RGIPT) and make it functional from the academic year 2008-09, the 
Committee are concerned to note that only two B. Tech courses in Reservoir 

  
Engineering and Petroleum Refining at Rae Barelly and one MBA course in 
Petroleum and Energy Management at Noida from 5.9.2008 and 12.9.2008 
respectively have commenced so far.  The Committee, therefore, again stress 
that a detailed action plan be prepared by the Government to make the Institute 
at Rae Barelly fully functional in a time bound manner and would also like to 
know the action plan of all the professional courses to be started at the Institute.  
As regards the decision of the Board of RGIPT taken at a meeting held on 
29.1.2009 to set up a centre of RGIPT at Assam, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of further progress made by the Government/RGIPT in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RGIPT is in the early stage of its academic activity and pursuing  
programmes from temporary campus in hired premises at Rai Barelly /Noida.  
RGIPT is currently conducting two B. Tech, one M. Tech and one MBA 
programmes launched in 2008.    The  academic programmes will be taken up in 
RGIPT‟s own campus for which construction plan has been initiated.  
 
The progress in setting up of Assam Centre of RGIPT is as follows: 
 
A project feasibility report h as been prepared by EdCIL (India)Ltd. (a PSU 
under HRD Ministry) and finalized in August 2009. MoPNG ha d decided about 
funding of the Assam Centre Campus in October, 2009. 
 
Government of Assam has  approved allocation of 100 crore land in 
Sibasagar, Upper A ssam for Rs.61 lakhs in December, 2009.  The amount has 
been deposited in Treasury at Sib asagar as directed by local authorities . T he 
process of taking possession of the land is in progress.  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No.1.19) 
 
In view of the stagnant oil production from indigenous sources, the Committee is 
concerned to note the under -performance of exploratory drilling by ONGC 
because as against 483985 metera ge of Budget Estimates, the actual during 

  
2008-09 were only 297146 meterage. Similarly, against the target of 162 well 
for exploratory drilling, the actual during 2008 -09 were only 106 wells. The 
Committee observed that drilling meterage achievement by ONG C was affected 
due to reasons such as non -availability of planned chartered hired rigs/ deep 
water rigs. Given the fact that more and more exploratory drilling work has to be 
undertaken by ONGC after awarding of bids under NELP VIII since ONGC has 
made bids for as many as 21 blocks, it is imperative for Government/ ONGC to 
make an in-depth analysis of the situation and make concerted efforts to ensure 
that exploratory drilling work is not affected due to non -availability of desired rigs. 
The Committee, ther efore, urge the Government/ ONGC to take the requisite 
steps to ensure availability of adequate numbers of state of the art deep water 
rigs so that the planned targets for exploratory drilling during the 11 th Plan Period 
do not go haywire. The Committee wo uld like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government/ ONGC in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Constraints of deepwater rig resources have been felt in the country since 
quite some time due to global shortage of highly specialized type of r igs for 
operating in deepwater. Operators, mainly ONGC, RIL and ENI have requested 
the Government for drilling moratorium for a period of three years w.e.f. 1.1.2008 
in the deep water blocks operated by them due to global shortages of deepwater 
drilling rigs. ONGC and RIL could not complete their committed and additional  
drilling programmes in the deepwater blocks awarded to them under NELP due 
to non availability of deep water rigs.  The issue of Rig Moratorium is under 
examination by Government of India. 
 In the deepwater, ONGC has deployed 3 deep water rigs (one owned, 
Sagar Vijay and two charter hired rigs DSS & DDKG -1) in various nomination 
and NELP blocks  
To mitigate the shortage and to complete the unfinished programme of 
exploratory drilling, ONGC i s also making efforts to utilize the rig resources 
available with partner ENI for drilling one to two locations in case of shortfall.  
 
 

  
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter-1) 
 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 20, Para No.1.74) 
 
The Committee note that Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) had 
decided on 9.10.2007 to make 5% blending of ethanol with petrol mandatory with 
immediate effect across th e country and optional blending of 10% ethanol with 
petrol from October 2007 and  afterwards making it mandatory from October 
2008. The Committee also note that at present 5% EBP programme is being 
implemented in 16 States and 3 UTs out of 20 States and 4 UTS identified for 
implementing the programme. Further, against the procurement of ethanol for the 
three years period which is 180 crore litres, the OMCs have been able to contract 
146.6 crore litres, out of which only 57.33 crore litres have been procured  as on 
15.8.2009. As current ethanol supply is not adequate to meet the demand of 
even 5% blending, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas have submitted a 
proposal for the consideration/ approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs on 19 th October, 2009 to defer the decision of making 5% and 10% EBP 
programme mandatory till the supply of ethanol is ensured for the purpose. What 
follows from the above is that the 5% or 10% EBP was devised and implemented 
without considering its commercial and ph ysical viability. The availability of 
adequate ethanol either indigenously or by way of imports is central to effective 
implementation of EBP. However, in the absence of any proper planning and 
now faced with an evitable failure of the scheme, the Ministry  has taken the    
easy option of  requesting the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs to defer 
the  scheme till supply of ethanol is ensured for the purpose. The Ministry has not 
indicated any action plan to increase the supply of ethanol to meet the 
requirement of EBP either in the short or long time. It means that the scheme will 
remain in abeyance for an indefinite period. Considering the present constraints 
and the fact that oil companies have been able to procure only 57.33 crore litre of 
ethanol, the Committee desire that 5% EBP may be implemented in a curtailed 
form in a few States to make it more relevant and effective and the Government 

  
to come up with a strategy to increase ethanol supply in a time bound manner 
instead of leaving the matter open ended without any time frame. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the  Government in this  regard.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas vide its notification dated 20th 
September, 2006 has directed the Oi l Marketing Companies (OMCs) to sell 5% 
Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) subject to commercial viability as per Bureau of 
Indian Standards specifications in entire country except North -Eastern States, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshdweep w ith effect 
from 1st November, 2006.   
 
2. Subsequently, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its 
meeting held on 9.10.2007 had decided to make 5% blending of ethanol with 
petrol mandatory with immediate effect and optional blending of 10% ethanol with 
petrol from October 2007 and thereafter mandatory blending from October 2008. 
 
The indigenous availability of ethanol on a sustainable basis to meet the 
requirement of the EBP programme remained an issue ever since the 
programme was launched by the MoPNG throughout the nation in November, 
2006.  Availability of ethanol during the period 2006 -2009 was deficient to the 
extent of 60%.  Besides there were State specific issues, due to which, the 
programme could not be implemented in 6 States and 1 UT  out of 20 States and 
4 UTs notified. State-wise requirement of ethanol for 1 year from November 2009 
to October 2010 works out to 86.35 crore litres for 5% blending.  However, 
quantity offered against tenders floated by OMCs in the month of June-July 2009, 
was not sufficient (40% of requirement) in view of the deficit in sugarcane 
production during the year. 
 
 In order to bring out the constraints in implementing the EBP Programme 
on mandatory basis, MoPNG sent a note to CCEA on 19.10.2009 seeking 
relaxation on mandatory clause till the availability of ethanol in required quantity 
and uniformity in the state government procedures in use and movement of 

  
ethanol become a reality in practice.  The CCEA considered the above note 
on MoPNG on 12.11.2009 and decided  
 (i)  to enforce mandatory blending of 5% ethanol with MS for time being and in 
the event of the failure of oil marketing companies to do so, appropriate financial 
penalties be imposed on them.  (ii) All issues relating to supply of ethanol be 
resolved by Inter-ministerial Committee consisting of Secretaries in Department 
of Food & PD, Department of Consumer Affairs, MoPNG and MNRE.   
 
 OMCs have accordingly been directed to take necessary action in view of 
the decisions taken by the CCEA.  OMCs and Suga r Industries have been asked 
to find out a viable solution so that the OMCs as well as the sugar industry are 
able to meet the demand and supply needs.  Efforts are being made to 
implement the above decision and a cabinet note has been circulated by MoPNG 
for comments from different Ministries.  
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 25, Para No.1.101) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government as well as Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) are taking several technological and institutional measures 
including regular and surprise inspections of retail outlets, tamper proof tank -
truck locking systems, the import of SKO by private parties has been canalized 
through OMCs.  The OMCs have cre ated a separate wing to report to a Director 
other than Director (Marketing), who will be responsible for monitoring all 
activities and operations to curb adulteration. To contain adulteration further, 
Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) have been issued  in 2005 under which 
OMCs take penal action against the erring dealer.  The Committee further note 
that the Government have not ruled out possibility of diversion of PDS Kerosene 
by some unscrupulous elements due to huge price difference between PDS 
Kerosene and petrol/diesel and the easy miscibility of these products with 
petrol/diesel.  The Committee find that the number of dealers reported to have 
been involved in malpractices have  increased from 451 in 2005 -06 to 1467 in 
2008-09 in case of IOCL, from 3 18 in 2005 -06, to 989 in 2008 -09 in case of 

  
HPCL and 1050 in case of BPCL during 2005-06 to 1029 cases during 2008 -09. 
The Committee further observe that against the 1467 cases of malpractices in 
case of IOCL dealers during 2008 -09, there were only 85 term inations and as 
regards 989 cases of malpractices by HPCL dealers, the cases where 
termination of dealership took place was only 36.  Similarly, the cases of 
termination of dealership by BPCL were only 17 against a total 1029 cases 
reported during the year.  In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas during evidence on Demand for Grants (2009 -10) has admitted that 
the rules for terminating a license have been made very severe and during the 
last three years, a large number of cancellations have taken place, the number of 
dealerships terminated is very small as compared to the malpractices reported.  
Despite the various corrective and preventive measures undertaken by OMCs 
against erring dealers, the Committee are surprised to note t hat the number of 
cases of malpractices have increased considerably over the last three years.  
The Committee express their serious concern that the action taken by the 
Government to prevent adulteration and other malpractices did not have the 
deterrent ef fect on erring dealers.  The Committee, therefore, desire that oil 
companies should strictly enforce the MDG and also conduct more and more 
surprise inspections to curb the incidents of adulteration.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry shou ld also monitor the situation regularly 
and devise stringent steps to stop rising trends of malpractices/adulteration 
including strict implementation of Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG), 2005 
regarding cancellation of dealership in the first instance of adulteration  so that 
dealers stop Indulging in adulteration and malpractices and consumers get the 
quality petrol/diesel.  The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the 
Government to increase surprise inspections by OMCs.   
Reply of the Government 
   
 Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) namely Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd., Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited and Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited have reported that total number of malpractices 
shown for the period 2005 -06 to 2008 -09 mostly include minor irregularities like 
poor housekeeping, non -provision of/or inadequate facilities, non -display of 

  
Retail Selling Price (RSP) or Motor Spirit (MS)/High Speed Diesel (HSD), 
discourteous behavior, non -maintenance of records etc (which do not lead to 
termination). It can be seen that the number of termination of Retail Outlet 
dealerships have increased over the years due to stricter provisions under 
Marketing Discipline Guidelines, 2005. It may be noted that termination is a long 
drawn p rocess after detection of adulteration like testing of samples in the 
laboratory, issue of show cause notice, dealer‟s reply to show cause, court case 
etc, which delays the whole termination process. Hence, few cases of 
irregularities detected are still under examination. 
 
 Surprise inspections are carried out by Sales Officers and Senior Officers 
of the OMCs and also by the Quality Control Wing/Anti -Adulteration Cell teams 
and the Multi-disciplinary Teams of the Officers drawn from various departments 
with in the Organization from time to time/periodically. Further to increase 
number of inspections, the industry is in process of discussions for conducting 
Joint Industry inspections of Retail Outlets.  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 22 of Chapter-1) 
 
Recommendation (SI. No. 27, Para No.1.103) 
 
The Committee note that the automation of retail outlets is being done in 
phases and 79% of automation of retail outlets selling more than 200 KL per 
month has been completed as on 31 st March, 2009.  The Committee note with 
concern that although automation of retail outlets selling more than 200 KL per 
month was targeted to be completed by March, 2007, the same could  not be 
completed as yet.  Taking a strong note of the slothful approach in 
implementation of the automation of retail outlet  by OMCs, the Committee 
recommend the Government/OMCs to take necessary steps so that automation 
of all the remaining retail outle ts selling more than 200 KL is completed in the 
current financial year.  The Committee further desire than an action plan for 

  
automation of remaining retail outlets selling less than 200 KL per day should 
also be prepared and implemented by the Government at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IOCL 
During the meeting taken by Secretary (P&NG) on 12.4.2006 to review the 
steps taken by OMCs to contain adulteration, a directive was issued to OMCs to 
complete automation of all retail outlets selling more tha n 200 KL per month by 
March, 2007.   Accordingly 2357 retail outlets with average monthly sales of 
more than 200 KL during 2005-06 were identified.  
 
Phase I :  1250 retail outlets were identified for automation and accordingly work 
order was placed on M/s  Honeywell Automation India Limited for 1158 retail 
outlets and Tata Consultancy Services for 92 retail outlets.  Till date, 1238 retail 
outlets have been upgraded.  Up -gradation of balance 12 outlets is being 
undertaken, which was pending due to resolution of density etc.  
 
Phase II :   1178 retail outlets were identified for automation and accordingly 
tenders were floated, work order could be placed for 935 retail outlets.  Work 
orders were placed on M/s Roseman for 544 retail outlets under Western Region 
& Southern Region and on HAIL for 391 retail outlets under Northern Region 
Retail Outlets Work Order could not be placed for 243 retail outlets under 
Eastern Region because of high quotes by vendors against tender.  Work has 
been completed at 126 retail ou tlets so far and is in progress at balance.  IOCL 
has completed automation of 1399 retail outlets as on 31.12.2009.  The time lag 
in execution of automation is due to vast geographical spread of retail outlets 
being automated, higher percentage of these re tail outlets being on 
highways/rural & indigenous dispensing units of various models existing in these 
retail outlets.  
 
Further, based on the average sales during the period, April – December 
2009, it is observed that there are a total of 4267 retail outl ets, which have an 
average monthly sales more than 200 KL.  Out of these 1250 retail outlets under 

  
Phase I and 1178 identified under Phase II, automation work is completed 
/ in progress.  Summary of automation of retail outlets is as under: 
 
No. of retail outlets selling more than 200 KL/month (April – 
December 2009) 
4263 
Administrative approval available & work in progress phase - I 1250 
Administrative approval available phase – II 1178 
Balance retail outlets requiring administrative approval for 
automation  
1835 
 
Accordingly, for undertaking automation of additional 1835 retail outlets selling 
more than 200 KL/month in the Phase – III, the process of obtaining 
administrative approval of the Competent Authority has been initiated. 
 
As regards the recomm endations of Hon‟ble Committee for a automation 
of retail outlets selling less than 200 KL per month, the retail outlets falling under 
this category have been identified.  Various options of low cost automation at 
these retail outlets are being tried & the discussions for the same, at various level 
with vendors, are currently in process. 
 BPCL 
 
As on 1.4.2007, BPCL had 1600 outlets and the target was revised on 
1.4.2008 to 2200 nos., based on the sales at these outlets.  BPCL has advised 
that Corporation ha ve so far completed automation of 2100 outlets and 
Corporation will complete the target of 2200 outlets by 31.3.2010. 
 
The action plan for automation of the remaining outlets selling less than 
200 KL per month is as follows: 
 
OMCs have discussed this issue  and it has been provided in the Vision 
2015 document that automation of outlets selling more than 100 KL per month 
will be taken up initially.  The tentative plan drawn up by BPCL is as follows: 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
300 400 400 800 900 
 
HPCL 

  
HPCL have 1530 retail outlets selling more than 200 KL per month as 
of 31.032007.  HPCL have completed automation of 1683 outlets as of June 
2010.  Corporation have planned for Retail Automation of another 300 retail 
outlets selling more than 200 KL per month during financial year 2010-11. 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
OM. NO. G- 25015/6/2009-Fin-I dated 15th March, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
  25 August, 2010                          ARUNA KUMAR VUNDAVALLI, 
 03 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)                                                             Chairman, 
             Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

  
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2009-10) 
  
TWELFTH SITTING 
 
(20.08.2010) 
 
The Committee sat on F riday, the 20 th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Ratna De 
3         Shri Mukesh B. Gadhvi 
4 Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
5 Shri Virendra Kumar 
6 Shri Vikrambhai A. Madam 
7 Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
8         Shri Mahabal Mishra    
9 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
10 Shri C.L. Ruala 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
3. Shri J.V.G. Reddy - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 

  
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.   
                                  
3. The Committe e then took up for consideration the following two draft 
Reports:- 
(i) **  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 1st Report of the Committee (15 th LS) on „Demands for Grants (2009 -
10)‟ of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
 
4. After some discussions, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any modification. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light 
of consequential changes, if any, a rising out of the factual verification of the 
Reports by the Ministry and present the same to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
** Matter not related to the subject 
 
 

  
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND 
NATURAL GAS (2009 -10) ON ‘ DEMANDS F OR GRANTS (2009 -10) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 29 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 6, 7, 9, 12, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 24, 26 and 28) 
 
 
 15 
 Percentage to Total 52% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 10, 13 and 18) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 10% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5, 8, 11, 23 and 29) 
 
5  
 Percentage of Total 17% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 20, 25 and 
27) 
6 
 Percentage of Total 21% 
 
 
 
 
 
 