 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
PRODUCTION OF COAL BED METHANE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 March, 2017/Chaitra,1939 (Saka) 


2 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
PRODUCTION OF COAL BED METHANE 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.03.2017 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.03.2017 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2017/Chaitra,1939 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)……………………………..                      3 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                      4 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
16 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
20 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
21 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
22 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the  Fourteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas (201 6-17) 
held on 22.03.2017. 
28 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of  the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16) on 
the subject 'Production of Coal Bed Methane' 
30 

4 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2016-17) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
13 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
14 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
15 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16 Shri Raju Shetti 
17 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
23 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
26 Shri Ahmed Patel 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
28 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya                     
31 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Sujay Kumar   - Under Secretary 
 

5 
 
 (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the 
subject ‘Production of Coal Bed Methane'. 
2. The Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report were 
received on 09.11.2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (201 6-17) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 22.03.2017.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 22 March, 2017 
 1 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (201 5-16) on ' Production of Coal Bed Methane ', which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Mi nistry in respect of all the 11 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 5, 9 and 11 (Total 4) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Reco. No. NIL 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 6 
(Total 1)                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10 (Total 6)               
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (i ncluded in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

7 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Reassessment of CBM  
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that while formulating the strategy for CBM exploration and 
production, the information dockets and data packages were prepared for very 
limited areas by Geological Survey of India (GSI). The computation was done 
primarily on empirical basis  reconciling the s ame with meag re data available on 
gas desorption. The assessment of the CBM was done in the nineties and on the 
basis of such data, the Directorate -General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), Central 
Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL)  and the Geological Survey 
of India (GSI) had undertaken a joint assessment exercise and had 
prognosticated 91.8 TCF of CBM in the Country. Using the same data 33 blocks 
were awarded for commercial extraction of CBM gas. After that no exercise to 
assess the new CBM potential in the country has been undertaken so far. The 
Committee feel that the previous assessment and prognostication needs review 
and there is an urgent need for reassessment of CBM availability in the country 
for better understanding of CBM potential. Out of the total 33 blocks awarded, 
only 4 blocks have reached to exploration phase and 4 have been relinquished 
and 14 are under relinquishment by the operators mostly on account of poor 
CBM potential. One reason for poor performance of CBM pro jects could be the 
offering of CBM blocks on the basis of inadequate prognostication data about 
CBM. The Committee observe that despite availability of huge coal reserves and 
associated CBM, the Government have not taken up the CBM exploration 
programme se riously. Moreover, the reassessment of CBM potential has not 
been included in ‘Reassessment of Hydrocarbons Resources' exercise being 
undertaken by DGH. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need of better 
prognostication of CBM availability in the en tire 56 thousand sq. km. area of 
Gondwana Basin and therefore, recommend that reassessment of CBM must be 
included in the ongoing hydrocarbon reassessment exercise of the DGH along 
with CMPDIL and GSI and necessary funds may be allotted for the purpose". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"MOPNG agrees to the recommendation o f Standing Committee for 
Reassessment of CBM in Indian sedimentary basins. DGH is currently preparin g 
a proposal for carrying out the reassessment of CBM reserves in India in 
consultation with experts from GSI, CMPDIL and DGH . Government has been 
continually monitoring progress of the CBM production and making all out efforts 
to enhance the production. In process to explore and exploit more CBM reserves 
Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries has been granted right for 

8 
 
exploration of CBM in their allotted coal blocks. Policy for co -development of 
CBM and coal is under consideration in the Ministry". 
7. The C ommittee had stressed upon the need for an urgent initiative for 
better prognostic ation of CBM gas in the entire 56000 square kilometer 
Gondwana basin  in the country  and had recommended that re -assessment of 
CBM must be included in the ongoing hydrocarbon reassessment exercise  being 
undertaken by the DGH along with CMPDIL and GSI and also for allocation of 
adequate funds for the purpose. In its reply, though the Ministry has conveyed its 
agreement to the recommendations of the Committee but no c ommitment has 
been shown towards completion of re-assessment exercise of CBM reserves in 
the country  under a fixed time-frame. The  Ministry has  also not allocated any 
specific budget for that purpose . The Committee feel  that the task is very 
important one and needs to be completed on priority in a time -bound manner.   
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to persuade the DGH to finalize 
the proposal  for reassessment of CBM reserves in sedimentary basins to be 
completed within a  fixed time fra me and the outcome alongwith expenditure 
planning in this regard may be conveyed to the Committee.  
Recommendation No. 4 
Inter-Ministerial Coordination Mechanism for CBM  
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the CBM extraction involves coordination among 
various agencies like Ministry of Coal, Directorate General of Mines and Safety 
(DGMS) in Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Environment and 
Forests for clearances, etc. The Committee also note that due to o verlapping 
issues, many of the CBM blocks have been stuck for the last two decades. This 
indicates a serious lack of coordination mechanism among the different 
Ministries. However, during the last two years, there has been an improvement in 
coordination and MoPNG has constituted a core group on 22.12.2015 under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Exploration) in the MoPNG comprising 
representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, ONGC and DGMS. The Committee, 
however, feel that there is a need for institutional ized mechanism at higher level 
and therefore, recommend that an inter -ministerial Committee at Secretary level 
may be formed in order to resolve the issues between different agencies". 
 

9 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"In a meeting of Committee of Secretaries on 23.11.2015 it was decided that 
MoPNG will constitute a Core Group under the chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (Exploration) comprising representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, 
ONGC and DGMS to examine the po ssibility of simultaneous yet safe extraction 
of CBM as well as coal from the same block. Committee has formulated draft co-
development agreement and has obtained views of all stakeholders. Core -
Committee will finalize co-development agreement shortly. Once co-development 
agreement is formulated, MoP&NG will review the progress and act accordingly".  
10.  The Committee  had observed that for coordination among all the 
concerned Ministries related to CBM extraction, a core group was set up by the 
MoPNG under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Exploration) and felt the need 
for an inter -Ministerial Committee at Secretary level  in order to resolve various 
outstanding issues among different agencies relating to CBM extraction.  
 In its reply,  the Ministry has stated that a core group under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (exploration) has been formed which 
includes the  representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, ONGC and DGMS to 
explore the possibility of simultaneous and safe extraction of CBM and Coal  from 
the same block. The Committee are satisfied to note that  the co-development 
agreement is being finalised by the core Committee following which MoPNG will 
review the progress and act accordingly.  The Committee urge upon the Ministry 
to implement the same as soon as agreement is  finalized in order to augment the 
CBM production in the country. The Committee may be informed about the action 
plan of the Ministry after review of the progress in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 5 
Awarding of new and Relinquished CBM Blocks  
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that after formulation of CBM policy in 1997 and using the 
assessment data prepared by GSI in the late 1990s, four rounds of bidding for 33 

10 
 
CBM blocks were held in the year 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2008 were awarded. 
Out of these 33 blocks, four have been relinquished while eighteen more CBM 
blocks are under relinquishment. Of these, five are being relinquished on account 
of delay in obtaining statutory  licenses while thirteen are being relinquished due 
to poor CBM prospects. In the existing policy, the allocation of block was done for 
a specific end use purpose and therefore, allottees of coal blocks are not allowed 
to explore CBM in their coalfields. T he Committee also note that since 2008, no 
new blocks have been awarded and henceforth, the new blocks for CBM would 
be awarded under the new Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP), 
which will entitle right over all hydrocarbon resources existing in that block or 
contract area. The Committee feel that there is a need for awarding of new 
blocks and re -awarding the blocks relinquished due to delay in getting statutory 
clearances so that work can be started at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry may initiate action to award new CBM blocks in the 
remaining coal mining areas at the earliest under the HELP regime and also re -
awarding of the 5 relinquished blocks". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natur al Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"CBM blocks which are currently under relinquishment due to delay in grant of 
Govt. clearances would be re-awarded under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing 
Policy (HELP) after obtaining in -principle clearances. As regards to offer of new 
CBM blocks, CBM will be covered under HELP and a licensee will have the right 
to extract conventional (crude oil and Natural Gas) and unconventional 
hydrocarbons (CBM, Shale Gas, Tight Oil, Gas Hydrates) from the same 
block/contract area".  
13. The Committee had recommended that Ministry should initiate action to 
award new CBM blocks in the remaining coal mining areas at the earliest under 
the HELP regime and also re-award the 5 CBM blocks that have been relinquished 
by the operators because of delay in grant of statutory clearances.  
 The Commi ttee appreciate the assurance given by the Ministry  that the 
CBM blocks which are currently under relinquishment due to delay in grant of 
government clearance would be re -awarded under Hydrocarbon Exploration 
Licensing Policy (HELP) alongwith new CBM blocks and the licensee will have the 
right to extract conventional (crude oil and natural gas) and un -conventional 
Hydrocarbon (CBM, Shale Gas, Tight Oil, Gas Hydrates) from the same block.  
The Committee, however, would like to urge upon the Ministry to ensur e that all 

11 
 
necessary formalities required for the release of CBM blocks is completed on 
priority basis and in-principle clearances are obtained so that all such blocks can 
be put up for re-awarding under the HELP. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Release of more areas for CBM mining  
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that India has the fourth largest proven coal reserves in the 
world. After the assessment of CBM potential in the nineties and formulation of 
CBM policy i n 1997, several potential CBM blocks were carved out and allotted 
to companies for development. The blocks which were indentified for CBM 
development are Coal blocks where Coal mining was not envisaged for the next 
15-20 years. The Committee further note t hat the country has a total of 52000 sq 
km area under Gondwana basin of which about 26000 sq km area was identified 
for CBM operations. However, in the four bidding rounds in 2001, 2003, 2005 
and 2008, when 33 CBM blocks were awarded, they covered only 166 00 sq km 
area. It means that about 9400 sq km area or about 35% of the originally 
identified area with CBM potential are yet to be released for CBM operations. 
Moreover, in the light of relinquishing of huge identified areas due to poor 
availability of CBM , it is evident that the prognostication done in 16600 sq. km. 
area was also not upto mark for the purpose of CBM availability. So far as the 
production of CBM is concerned, it was 0.625 MMSCMD in 2014 -15 and is 
projected to go up to 5.77 MMSCMD in 2017 -18. The Committee are sure that 
the projected production is much below the potential and expect the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas to set higher targets. The Committee note that since 
late 1990s, no new area has been awarded for extraction of CBM in t he country 
and feel that there is an urgent need to bring in more areas for CBM extraction. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPNG and MoC should jointly 
conduct this exercise and identify new areas that can be released for CBM 
extraction either on standalone or co-development basis". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"Hence forth, CBM will be covered under HELP and a licensee will have the right 
to extract conventional (crude oil and Natural Gas) and unconventional 
hydrocarbons (CBM, Shale Gas, Tight Oil, Gas Hydrates) from the same 
block/contract area.  This is expected to increase  the CBM area, as well.  In 
addition the arrangements for co-development as well as on standalone basis for 
CIL are also being worked out". 

12 
 
 
16. The Committee had pointed out that only 16600 sq. km area , out of total of 
26000 sq. km. area under Gondwana ba sin in the Country has been released for 
CBM exploration . Moreover, because of poor prognostication in the released 
areas, projected production of CBM in the country is much below the potential.  
Accordingly, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should set high 
targets for CBM production  in order to give boost to CBM exploration .  The 
Committee had  also stressed for an  urgent release of  more areas for CBM 
exploration and extraction and had recommended that MoP&NG and M oC should 
work together to identify new potential areas that can be released for CBM 
exploration either on stand alone or co-development  basis.  
 The Committee express their dis pleasure on the vague reply given by the 
Ministry in respect of releasing more areas for CBM extraction without mention of 
any time line for that purpose by setting higher targets for CBM production.  The 
Committee would like to point out th at augmentation of CBM production is an 
important component which can contribute substantially  to reduce import 
dependency of the country . Accordingly, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation that Ministry may take urgent steps for releasing more areas for 
CBM extraction and also formulate a road map for increasing targets for CBM 
production in the country in a realistic manner .  The steps taken in this direction 
may be intimated to the Committee at an early date.  
Recommendation No. 7 
Formula for CBM Pricing 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Coal mining in t he CBM blocks comes under the 
control of the Ministry of Coal and CBM being a natural gas, its pricing is 
determined in accordance with the guidelines of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas. The Committee also note that the prices of CBM were approve d by 
the Government on a case to case basis. As per current data, the domestic CBM 
gas is being sold at US$3.4/MMBTU (in Raniganj East) and at US$15.5/MMBTU 
(in Raniganj South) and at US$6.01/MMBTU from Jharia CBM block. However, 
pricing of CBM has been br ought under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing 

13 
 
Policy (HELP) formulated in 2014 where formula for arriving at the prices for 
natural gas including CBM is given. The Committee observe that under HELP, 
the current price of natural gas comes to around $3.06 MM BTU which appears 
very low as compared to the prices of CBM being charged by the existing 
producers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
formulate a separate pricing and marketing mechanism for CBM keeping in mind 
the various varia bles in CBM operations such as availability of small volume of 
gas, number of drillings required due to low productivity, remote location, 
dewatering etc. and also to incentivize the CBM producers". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"The current CBM pricing is covered under New Domestic Natural Pricing Policy, 
2014. However, changes in the extant CBM policy and CBM contract for early 
monetization of CBM by provide prici ng and marketing freed om to existing CBM 
contractors is under consideration of the Government". 
 
19. The Committee had recommended for formulation of a separate pricing and 
marketing mechanism for CBM keeping in mind the various variables in CBM 
operations such as availability of small volume of gas, number of drillings 
required, low productivity, remote location, requirement of de-watering etc. and 
also for providing  remunerative prices to the CBM producers. In its reply, the 
Ministry has stated that the current CBM pricing is covered under New Domestic 
Natural Gas Pricing Policy, 2014. They have also stated that changes in the extant 
CBM policy and CBM contract for early monetization of CBM by providing pricing 
and marketing freedom to existing CBM contractors is under consideration of the 
Government.  The Committee feel  that in view of the extremely low gas prices 
prevailing currently, the financial viability of CBM producing companies is at risk. 
In order to protect their viability, it is important to provide some sort of pricing 
freedom to the CBM producing companies.  Therefore, they urge upon the 
Ministry to make appropriate changes in the ext ant CBM policy and provide 
appropriate pricing and marketing freedom for CBM gas . The action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard may be informed to the Committee as early as possible.  
 

14 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Allottees of coal blocks getting rights to CBM automatically  
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that as per the existing system of award of CBM blocks, 
there is scope for overlap between companies with one company having rights 
over coal while another company having rights over CBM. This situation is 
unsustainable and has given rise to delays and as a result, production has 
suffered. The Committee further note that the ONGC was given CBM blocks in 
Jharia and Raniganj on nomination basis in 1997 but the producti on in those two 
blocks could not start because of the overlap issues with the ECL, a private coal 
operator in that area. After the cancellation of Coal block by the Supreme Court, 
the coal block has now been given to SAIL and ONGC is hopeful of reaching an  
agreement with them soon to start the production. The Committee, therefore, 
feels that such situation occurs because of lack of clearance for simultaneous 
drilling of coal and CBM even though the same is possible. The Committee are 
disappointed that the M inistry of P&NG and Ministry of Coal have not sorted out 
the issue of overlapping during the last two decades and only in the last two 
years, there seems to be some forward movement. The Committee desire that 
the current licensing policy and the contract p rovisions should be amended to do 
away with separate requirement for an operator to apply for CBM extraction after 
obtaining license for coal mining and vice versa. The Committee recommend that 
Government may formulate a simple procedure to grant coal bloc k allottees, if 
they so desire, rights for extraction of CBM under HELP". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
21. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"The issue of simultaneous exploration and exploitation of co al and CBM has 
been discussed time and again by convening meeting of all concerned. Core 
Committee constituted as per direction of Committee of Secretaries, which 
consists representative from MoP&NG, MoC, CMPDI, SAIL, ONGC, DGH and 
DGMS discussed and deliberated upon the issue. Core Committee is of the view 
that   In order to facilitate simultaneous coal mining and CBM operations in an 
area and to allocate CBM rights to operators of coal blocks is under 
consideration in the Ministry". 
22. The Committee had expressed their disappointment that the issue of 
overlapping of Hydrocarbon rights in blocks owned by different agencies has 
been hanging for a long time and had recommended that Government should 
formulate a simple procedure to grant existing coal block a llottees, if they so 

15 
 
desire, rights for extracting CBM gas under HELP. In its reply, the Ministry has 
stated that the issue is under deliberation among representatives of all the stake -
holders. It has further replied that facilitating simultaneous coal mining and CBM 
extraction in an area and allocating CBM rights to existing coal block operators is 
under consideration in the Ministry. The Committee would like to impress upon 
the Ministry the necessity of early resolution of the issue of providing CBM 
extraction rights to existing coal block allottees as a number of coal blocks fall in 
that category and early decision with regard to the Hydrocarbon rights in the 
blocks among CBM operators will go a long way in increasing CBM production. 
----- 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Comprehensive Policy for Coal Bed Methane 
 The Committee note that the Government had formulated Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) policy in 1997 with an objective of commercial exploration of CBM in the country. 
Under this policy, CBM is explored and exploited under the provisions of Oil Fields 
(Regulation and Development) Act 1948 (ORD Act 1948) and Petroleum & Natural Gas 
Rules 1959 (P&NG Rules 1959), administered by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas (MoPNG). Following the policy, the MoPNG and the Ministry of Coal (MoC) entered 
into an MoU after whic h Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), in close 
interaction with Ministry of Coal and Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL), carved out potential CBM blocks. Four rounds of CBM bidding have been 
undertaken in the year of 2001, 2003, 2005 & 2008 resulting in award of 33 CBM Blocks 
covering 16,613 sq. km. The Committee note that current domestic production of CBM 
is only 1.07 MMSCMD in 2015-16 and expected to increase to 5.77 MMSCMD by 2017-
18. The Committee find that many of the CBM  blocks could not be brought under 
production either due to poor prospectivity or because of the overlap issues relating to 
multiple agencies and the problems of coordination.  
 The Committee feel that the policy pronounced in 1997 has not been able to 
achieve its objective of production of CBM to the promised potential in the country. In 
view of the newer techniques of assessment and exploration and drilling of CBM have 
significantly improved, the Committee, therefore, feel that there is need to formulate a 
new comprehensive CBM policy consistent with developments in regulatory regimes 
and also taking into account the performance of the existing policy. In Committee's view, 
the new policy should address the current lacuna in coordination among different 
agencies as well as issues such as simultaneous mining of coal and CBM, evacuation 
of CBM, use of CBM from existing coal mines, pricing of CBM, making available 
additional acreages for CBM exploration, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should bring out a revised and new CBM policy at the earliest after 
due consultations with various stakeholders. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 MOPNG has formulated a new policy namely , Hydrocarbon Exploration 
Licensing Policy (HELP) which will enable the contractor to explore conventional as well 
as unconventional oil and gas resources including CBM, shale gas/oil, tight gas and gas 
hydrates under a single license. Accordingly, CBM will be covered under HELP and a 
licensee will have the right to extract co nventional (crude oil and Natural Gas) and 
unconventional hydrocarbons from the same block/contract area. 

17 
 
 Henceforth, all CBM exploration and exploitation activities will be taken forward 
under HELP.  DGH is in the process of framing the Model Revenue Sha ring Contract 
(MRSC) under HELP. The lacuna and shortcomings of the current CBM policy as 
mentioned by Standing Committee in its 14 th report is being taken into consideration 
while drafting the MRSC.  It may be prudent to devise an addendum to the extant C BM 
Policy by addressing issues of Co -development of coal mining and CBM operations, 
production of CBM from existing coal mines, availability of additional acreage for CBM 
exploration, etc.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Recommendation No. 5 
Awarding of new and Relinquished CBM Blocks  
 The Committee note that after formulation of CBM policy in 1997 and using the 
assessment data prepared by GSI in the late 1990s, four rounds of bidding for 33 CBM 
blocks were held in the year 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2008 were awarded. Out of these 
33 blocks, four have been relinquished while eighteen more CBM blocks are under 
relinquishment. Of these, five are being relinquished on account of delay in obtaining 
statutory licenses while thirteen are being relinquished due to poor CBM prospects. In 
the existing policy, the allocation of block was done for a specific end use purpose and 
therefore, allottees of coal blocks are not allowed to explore CBM in their coalfields. The 
Committee also note that since 2008, no new blocks have been awarded and 
henceforth, the new blocks for CBM would be awarded under the new Hydrocarbon 
Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP), which will entitle right over all hydrocarbon 
resources existing in t hat block or contract area. The Committee feel that there is a 
need for awarding of new blocks and re -awarding the blocks relinquished due to delay 
in getting statutory clearances so that work can be started at the earliest. The 
Committee, therefore, recom mend that Ministry may initiate action to award new CBM 
blocks in the remaining coal mining areas at the earliest under the HELP regime and 
also re-awarding of the 5 relinquished blocks. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 CBM blocks which are currently under relinq uishment due to delay in grant of 
Govt. clearances would be re-awarded under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy 
(HELP) after obtaining in -principle clearances. As regards to offer of new CBM blocks, 
CBM will be covered under HELP and a licensee will have the right to extract 
conventional (crude oil and Natural Gas) and unconventional hydrocarbons (CBM, 
Shale Gas, Tight Oil, Gas Hydrates) from the same block/contract area.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 

18 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Grant of Timely clearance for CBM mining  
 The Committee note that out of 18 CBM blocks relinquished by the operators out 
of total 33 allotted blocks, as many as five CBM blocks covering about 3868 sq km area 
were relinquished on account of delay in grant of statutory licenses. The Committee 
also note that a total of 30 clearances are required to be obtained by the companies 
which are awarded CBM blocks before they can start their operations. Out of the total of 
30 clearances, 11 are granted by the Central Government or its agencies while the 
remaining 19 clearances are granted by the State governments or their agencies. The 
Committee further note that from exploration t o production phase, average gestation 
period of a CBM block is 13 years assuming timely grant of clearances. The delay in 
granting of clearances adds to the time delay and cost of CBM extraction thereby further 
affecting the viability of CBM. The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
may develop a mechanism to facilitate timely grant of clearances by taking state 
governments onboard in order to expedite the CBM operations in the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 DGH is in the process of setting-up an online portal to observe different stages of 
various CBM projects and to highlight the bottlenecks or impending clearances at 
different levels so as to pro -actively pursue any clearances which have caused 
inordinate delay.  Arrangement for coordinat ion with State Government where 
clearances have to be granted in a timely manner will be made by MoP&NG / DGH.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Recommendation No. 11 
Developing infrastructure for evacuation of CBM  
 The Committee note that the infrastructure required for developing the pipelines 
network to evacuate CBM is not available in the CBM fields located in remote areas. 
However, the Committee also note that Rel iance Industries Limited (RIL) has been 
authorised to lay pipeline between Shahdol in Madhya Pradesh and Phulpur in Uttar 
Pradesh for transporting CBM from RIL operated CBM blocks. Some other pipelines by 
GAIL have also been approved by the MoPNG for CBM t ransportation. The Committee 
feel that since CBM production blocks are in remote areas and there is lack of 
infrastructure in those areas, CBM has to be productively utilized in the neighbouring 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the CBM produ ced in such areas 
where pipelines are not available, may be used in the neighbouring areas for promoting 
City Gas Distribution (CGD) projects or may also be sold to the industries located in 
those areas. The Committee further desire that the MoPNG / MoC sh ould explore the 
possibility of gainfully using the water from the CBM wells due to dewatering after 
appropriate treatment. 
 

19 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 As per Article 18 of the CBM contract the contractor shall have the freedom to 
sell CBM at arms length pr ices in the domestic market. So far as development of the 
infrastructure for facilitating supply of the CBM produced is concerned it is the 
responsibility of the operator to select customer and supply gas accordingly.  However, 
the Domestic Gas Pricing Gui delines, 2014 are applicable presently.  A revised policy 
for CBM pricing & allocation is under consideration in the MoP&NG 
 In case of low salinity and TDS levels in produced water from existing CBM 
blocks, the same is used for irrigation purposes by farm ers in the vicinity. If the salinity 
and TDS levels are high, then the produced water is either treated in Reverse Osmosis 
plants to surface disposal level norms or evaporated by creating salt pits.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Release of more areas for CBM mining  
 The Committee note that India has the fourth largest proven coal reserves in the 
world. After the assessment of CBM potential in the nine ties and formulation of CBM 
policy in 1997, several potential CBM blocks were carved out and allotted to companies 
for development. The blocks which were indentified for CBM development are Coal 
blocks where Coal mining was not envisaged for the next 15 -20 years. The Committee 
further note that the country has a total of 52000 sq km area under Gondwana basin of 
which about 26000 sq km area was identified for CBM operations. However, in the four 
bidding rounds in 2001, 2003, 2005 and 2008, when 33 CBM blocks  were awarded, 
they covered only 16600 sq km area. It means that about 9400 sq km area or about 
35% of the originally identified area with CBM potential are yet to be released for CBM 
operations. Moreover, in the light of relinquishing of huge identified a reas due to poor 
availability of CBM, it is evident that the prognostication done in 16600 sq. km. area was 
also not upto mark for the purpose of CBM availability. So far as the production of CBM 
is concerned, it was 0.625 MMSCMD in 2014 -15 and is projecte d to go up to 5.77 
MMSCMD in 2017 -18. The Committee are sure that the projected production is much 
below the potential and expect the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to set higher 
targets. The Committee note that since late 1990s, no new area has bee n awarded for 
extraction of CBM in the country and feel that there is an urgent need to bring in more 
areas for CBM extraction. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPNG and MoC 
should jointly conduct this exercise and identify new areas that can be released for CBM 
extraction either on standalone or co-development basis. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Hence forth, CBM will be covered under HELP and a licensee will have the right 
to extract conventional (crude oil and Natural Gas) and unconventional hydrocarbons 
(CBM, Shale Gas, Tight Oil, Gas Hydrates) from the same block/contract area.  This is 
expected to increase  the CBM area, as well.  In addition the arrangements for co -
development as well as on standalone basis for CIL are also being worked out. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Reassessment of CBM  
 The Committee note that while formulating the strategy for CBM exploration and 
production, the information dockets and data packages were prepared for very limited 
areas by Geological Survey of India (GSI). The computation was done primarily on 
empirical basis reconciling the same with meagre data available on gas desorption. The 
assessment of the CBM was done in the nineties and on the basis of such data, the 
Directorate-General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), Central Mine Planning and Design 
Institute Limited (CMPDIL) and the Geological Survey of India (GSI) had undertaken a 
joint assessment exercise and had prognosticated 91.8 TCF of CBM in the Country. 
Using the same data 33 blocks were awarded for commercial extraction of CBM gas. 
After that no exercise to assess the new CBM potential in the country has been 
undertaken so f ar. The Committee feel that the previous assessment and 
prognostication needs review and there is an urgent need for reassessment of CBM 
availability in the country for better understanding of CBM potential. Out of the total 33 
blocks awarded, only 4 block s have reached to exploration phase and 4 have been 
relinquished and 14 are under relinquishment by the operators mostly on account of 
poor CBM potential. One reason for poor performance of CBM projects could be the 
offering of CBM blocks on the basis of inadequate prognostication data about CBM. The 
Committee observe that despite availability of huge coal reserves and associated CBM, 
the Government have not taken up the CBM exploration programme seriously. 
Moreover, the reassessment of CBM potential has no t been included in ‘Reassessment 
of Hydrocarbons Resources' exercise being undertaken by DGH. The Committee feel 
that there is an urgent need of better prognostication of CBM availability in the entire 56 
thousand sq. km. area of Gondwana Basin and therefo re, recommend that 
reassessment of CBM must be included in the ongoing hydrocarbon reassessment 
exercise of the DGH along with CMPDIL and GSI and necessary funds may be allotted 
for the purpose. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 MOPNG agrees to the recommendation  of Standing Committee for 
Reassessment of CBM in Indian sedimentary basins. DGH is currently preparing a 
proposal for carrying out the reassessment of CBM reserves in India in consultation with 
experts from GSI, CMPDIL and DGH . Government has been continu ally monitoring 
progress of the CBM production and making all out efforts to enhance the production. In 

23 
 
process to explore and exploit more CBM reserves Coal India Limited (CIL) and its 
subsidiaries has been granted right for exploration of CBM in their al lotted coal blocks. 
Policy for co-development of CBM and coal is under consideration in the Ministry. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Task force for technology sourcing for CBM  
 
 The Committee note that the technology needed for Coal mining from Coal 
blocks and for drilling of coal seams for evacuation of CBM are different. The drilling 
required in the CBM evacuation is directional in nature as the drilling has to follow coal 
seams which is similar to the kind of horizontal drilling used by the Oil PSUs for 
exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas. They however, feel that though 
the technology relating to C BM evacuation is available in the country, it is not being put 
to use particularly where simultaneous extraction of CBM in active coal mines is 
possible because of issues relating to coordination and overlapping of jurisdiction 
among the agencies concerned . The Committee note that ONGC, being the leader in 
exploration technology in crude oil and natural gas in the country, has the capability to 
fulfill such technical requirements whereas, the Coal India Limited (CIL) which has 
received permission to carry o ut CBM extraction in its Coal fields, lack such expertise, 
appropriate drilling technology is required for simultaneous extraction of CBM gas in 
active mines by Coal India which has large Coal blocks in its control and therefore, 
there is a need to look at  the issue of technological requirement with regard to CBM. 
While CIL and ONGC can cooperate in drilling of Coal Bed seams for extraction of CBM 
in CIL Coal blocks for the present, the Committee recommend that an empowered task 
force with appropriate accou ntability be constituted so that appropriate technology can 
be decided upon by Coal India Limited (CIL) to carry out extraction of CBM at the 
earliest from its Coal blocks. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Recommendation of the Committee for constitution of task force is being taken 
up with the Ministry of Coal.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
 
 

24 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Inter-Ministerial Coordination Mechanism for CBM  
 
 The Committee note that the CBM extraction involves coordination among 
various agencies like Ministry of Coal, Directorate General of Mines and Safety (DGMS) 
in Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Environment and Forests for 
clearances, etc. The Committee also note that due to overlapping issues, many of the 
CBM blocks have been stuck for the last two decades. This indicates a serious lack of 
coordination mechanism among the different Ministries. However, during the last two 
years, there has been an improvement in coordination and MoPNG has  constituted a 
core group on 22.12.2015 under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Exploration) in 
the MoPNG comprising representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, ONGC and DGMS. 
The Committee, however, feel that there is a need for institutionalized mechan ism at 
higher level and therefore, recommend that an inter -ministerial Committee at Secretary 
level may be formed in order to resolve the issues between different agencies. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In a meeting of Committee of Secretaries on 23.11.2015 it was decided that 
MoPNG will constitute a Core Group under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary 
(Exploration) comprising representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, ONGC and DGMS to 
examine the possibility of simultaneous yet safe extraction of CBM as we ll as coal from 
the same block. Committee has formulated draft co -development agreement and has 
obtained views of all stakeholders. Core -Committee will finalize co -development 
agreement shortly. Once co -development agreement is formulated, MoP&NG will 
review the progress and act accordingly.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Formula for CBM Pricing 
 The Committee note that Coal mining in the CBM blocks comes under the control 
of the Ministry of Coal and CBM being a natural gas, its pricing is determined in 
accordance with the guidelines of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The 
Committee also note that the prices of CBM were approved by the Government on a 
case to case basis. As per current data, the domestic CBM gas is being sold at 
US$3.4/MMBTU (in Raniganj East) and at US$15.5/MMBTU (in Raniganj South) and at 
US$6.01/MMBTU from Jharia CBM bl ock. However, pricing of CBM has been brought 
under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) formulated in 2014 where 
formula for arriving at the prices for natural gas including CBM is given. The Committee 

25 
 
observe that under HELP, the current price  of natural gas comes to around $3.06 
MMBTU which appears very low as compared to the prices of CBM being charged by 
the existing producers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
formulate a separate pricing and marketing mechanism f or CBM keeping in mind the 
various variables in CBM operations such as availability of small volume of gas, number 
of drillings required due to low productivity, remote location, dewatering etc. and also to 
incentivize the CBM producers. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The current CBM pricing is covered under New Domestic Natural Pricing Policy, 
2014. However, c hanges in the extant CBM policy and CBM contract for early 
monetization of CBM by provide pricing and marketing freed om to existing CBM 
contractors is under consideration of the Government. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Developing Safety Guidelines/Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for 
simultaneous CBM extraction  
 
 The Committee note that as per existing practice, CBM is allowed to be extracted 
only from virgin coalfields. In the active coal mines, the methane gas is v entilated in the 
air as Coalmine Methane (CMM) which is a green house gas which not only damages 
the environment but also results in wastage of valuable natural gas which can be used 
more productively. The Committee note that the coal blocks which were ide ntified in 
1997 for CBM exploration, were awarded on the basis that there will be no mining of 
coal in those blocks for next 20 years. At present, both coal mining and CBM mining are 
being done separately. The Committee also note that simultaneous mining o f coal and 
CBM is being done in other countries and it is possible in India also where sufficient 
areal distances are maintained between coal mining and CBM operations. Such a step 
will not only help achieve our commitments under COP -21 but also augment our natural 
gas production. The Committee further note that DGMS have opined that simultaneous 
operation of coal mines and extraction of CBM from the same mine may be undertaken 
after proper formulation of safety guidelines and development of standard operat ing 
procedures. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of P&NG may develop 
safety guidelines and Safe Operating Procedures (SOPs) for simultaneous production 
of coal and CBM at an early date after thorough consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 

26 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In a meeting of Committee of Secretaries on 23.11.2015 it was decided that 
MoPNG will constitute a Core Group under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary 
(Exploration) comprising representatives of Ministry of Coal, SAIL, ONGC and DGMS to 
examine the possibility of simultaneous yet safe extraction of CBM as well as coal from 
the same block. Committee has formulated draft co -development agreement and has 
obtained views of all stakeholders. Core -Committee will finalize co -development 
agreement shortly. Onc e co -development agreement is formulated, MoP&NG will 
review the progress and act accordingly. 
 Under the draft co-development agreement  it has been proposed that  the coal 
mining operator and CBM contractor will have to submit a co -development plan for 
approval of DGH, CMPDIL and DGMS. All safety management plans as proposed by 
DGMS will have to be adhered to by both parties. In order to facilitate simultaneous coal 
mining and CBM operations in an area and to allocate CBM rights to operators of coal 
blocks. The matter is under consideration in the Ministry. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Allottees of coal blocks getting rights to CBM automatically  
 The Committee note that as per the existing system of award of CBM blocks, 
there is scope for overlap between companies with one company having rights over 
coal while another company having rights over CBM. This situation is unsustainable and 
has given rise to delays and as a result, production has suffered. The Committee further 
note that the ONGC was given CBM blocks in Jharia and Raniganj on nomination basis 
in 1997 but the production in those two blocks could not start because of the overlap 
issues with the ECL, a private coal operator i n that area. After the cancellation of Coal 
block by the Supreme Court, the coal block has now been given to SAIL and ONGC is 
hopeful of reaching an agreement with them soon to start the production. The 
Committee, therefore, feels that such situation occur s because of lack of clearance for 
simultaneous drilling of coal and CBM even though the same is possible. The 
Committee are disappointed that the Ministry of P&NG and Ministry of Coal have not 
sorted out the issue of overlapping during the last two decade s and only in the last two 
years, there seems to be some forward movement. The Committee desire that the 
current licensing policy and the contract provisions should be amended to do away with 
separate requirement for an operator to apply for CBM extraction  after obtaining license 
for coal mining and vice versa. The Committee recommend that Government may 
formulate a simple procedure to grant coal block allottees, if they so desire, rights for 
extraction of CBM under HELP. 
 

27 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The issue  of simultaneous exploration and exploitation of coal and CBM has 
been discussed time and again by convening meeting of all concerned. Core Committee 
constituted as per direction of Committee of Secretaries, which consists representative 
from MoP&NG, MoC, CMPDI, SAIL, ONGC, DGH and DGMS discussed and 
deliberated upon the issue. Core Committee is of the view that   In order to facilitate 
simultaneous coal mining and CBM operations in an area and to allocate CBM rights to 
operators of coal blocks is under consideration in the Ministry. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No. O-19018/8/2016-ONG-I (FTS-44145) dated 08/11/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
22 March, 2017 
1 Chaitra,1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

28 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
Fourteenth Sitting 
(22.03.2017) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 March, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room '62', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Pralhad Joshi    - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
6 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
7 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8 Shri Arvind Sawant 
9 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
10 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
11 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
12 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
13 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
14 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
15 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
4 Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE - I 

29 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16) on the subject 'Production of Coal Bed Methane' 
and adopted the same without any modifications.  
 
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the Report in both 
the Houses of Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee also decid ed to take a study visit after the conclusion of the 
current session of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORUTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2015-16) ON ‘PRODUCTION OF COAL BED METHANE'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 11 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 9 and 11) 
 
4 
 Percentage to Total 36.36% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 6) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 
 
9.10% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10)  
 
6 
 Percentage of Total 
 
54.54% 
 
 
 
 