1 
 
6 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2014-15) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2015/Shravana,1937 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2014-15) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the         First  
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2014-15)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2015 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2015/Shravana,1937 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the  Eighteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014 -15) 
held on 6.8.2015   
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the First Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the S tanding Committee on  
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014 -15) on `Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas’ 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2014-15) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Raju Shetty 
15 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
16 Shri Ravneet Singh 
17 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 

5 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
24 Shri Prabhat Jha 
25 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
26 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
29 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
30 Shri Sharad Yadav 
31 Shri Praful Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S.C.Chaudhary   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director\ 
4. Ms. Sonia Khanna   - Committee Officer 

6 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
First Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject „ Demands for 
Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟. 
2. The First Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok S abha on 16.12.2014. The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
to all the recommendations contained in the First Report were received on 19.03.2015. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2014 -15) considered 
and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 06.08.2015.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of re ference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
6 August,  2015 
 15 Shravana ,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairman,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

7 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2014-15) on „Demand for Grants (2014 -15)' of MoPNG, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2014. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 
24 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 15, 17 and 19 (Total 10) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Com mittee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: - Reco. Nos. 7, 18 and 20  
(Total 3) 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 1, 
4, 5, 10, 21 and 24 (Total 6)        
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 12, 13, 16, 22 and 23 (Total 5)                
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  

8 
 
Recommendation No. 1  
 
Energy Security and Hydrocarbon Sector 
 
1. The Committee in their original report had recommended as follows:  
"The Committee note that the mandate for MoP&NG is exploitation of Petroleum 
Reserves, Production, Supply, Distribution of Petroleum and Petroleum Products, 
strengthening energy security by acquiring oil and gas equity abroad, cre ation and 
administration of strategic petroleum reserves, etc for the country.  The Committee 
further note that activities of MoP&NG touch all sectors of the society in some way.  
Energy consumption is growing steadily over the years as the Government emba rks 
upon high growth rate for achieving its development agenda.  The MoP&NG 
accordingly has a daunting challenge in its hands as at present 80 percent of the 
crude oil demand is met by imports.  The Committee note that while domestic 
production of crude oi l/natural gas is stagnant, the Ministry has been active in 
encouraging PSUs to acquire oil and gas assets abroad.   
 
MoP&NG has many organizations under its administrative control namely Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB), Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA), 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), Directorate General of Hydrocarbon (DGH), 
Centre for High Technology (CHT) etc.  The country is facing several challenges in the 
hydrocarbon sector like stagnant production, technological requirements, skilled 
manpower, conservation measures, safety issues, etc.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that MoP&NG sho uld reappraise the activities of these organizations and 
seek funds from the Government so that these organizations/agencies can expand 
their activities and assist in fulfilling the mandate of the Ministry.   
 
Similarly, the distribution, supply and market ing of petroleum products across the 
nation is a logistical challenge.  Considering the demand for such products, MoP&NG 
should enable people to have the products of their choice in a quick and efficient 
manner.  While subsidy remains a key issue, the Comm ittee recommend, that the 
Ministry should focus on the energy security of the country while ensuring access to 
energy sources at an affordable price to the people in a reasonable timeframe". 
 
 
2. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 "LPG is marketed by OMCs in  5 kg, 14.2 kg, 19 kg, 35 kg and 47.5 kg 
cylinders. Out of these, 5 kg and 14.2 kg cylinders are available for domestic use while 
LPG in 5 kg, 19 kg, 35 kg and 47.5 kg is supplied for industrial/commercial uses. LPG 
is also supplied in LPG Tankers to Industrial customers. LPG marketing for automotive 
use is also allowed in the country since year 2002.  
 
 As on 01.02.15, OMCs cater to over 17.7 crore domestic LPG customers 
through 186 LPG bottling plants spread across the country t hrough a wide network of 
15450 LPG distributors (including 4178 RGGLVs). The coverage of households by 
domestic LPG 67.5% as per Census 2011 (projected households).   
 
 In addition to release of regular domestic LPG connections through 
distributorships, LPG connections are also being released under following categories 
for better accessibility & coverage:  

9 
 
 
(a) Free Trade LPG ( 5 Kg Cylinder): 
 
 
 Government has allowed the sale of 5 kg LPG cylinder with/without Domestic 
Pressure Regulator (DPR) through PSU Oil Marketing companies (OMCs) at retail 
outlets, which are accessible to all and are open for longer hours. The scheme was 
launched to cater to consumers that have emerged in big cities who are mobile and do 
not want a permanent LPG connection but may still r equire it for their needs.  As on 
01.02.2015, the scheme is under operation from  241 retail outlets, 327 distributorship 
points and 192 Kirana stores on industry basis, in 129 cities across the country. 
 
(b) Release of LPG connections to BPL families thru Stat e Government 
 Schemes & under CSR fund of OMC: 
 
 This is a scheme for release of new domestic LPG connection under CSR Fund 
Scheme to BPL cardholders, whose BPL status has been authenticated by local 
administration. Under this scheme, one time grant towards security deposit of one 
cylinder and one Pressure Regulator is funded from the CSR Fund.  
 (c) Subsidy/Under recoveries:  
 
 In order to protect consumers from the impact of fluctuating crude oil prices,  
the international market, the Government continues to modulate the price of PDS 
Kerosene and Subsidized domestic LPG and their prices have not been revised in line 
with the prices in the international market. 
 
 The Government has made the price of Diesel market determined both at 
Refinery Gate and Retail level for all consumers with effect from the midnight of 18-19 
October, 2014.   This would not only facilitate greater competition in the Auto Fuels 
Retail segment and enhance efficiency in service delivery of the oil companies, but 
also bring benefits to consumers.   
 
 Taking into account the ene rgy security concerns of India, the Government, 
through Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL), is setting up Strategic 
Crude Oil Reserves with storage capacity of 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) at three 
locations viz. Visakhapatnam (storage  capacity: 1.33 MMT), Mangalore (storage 
capacity: 1.5 MMT) and Padur (storage capacity: 2.5 MMT) to enhance the energy 
security of the country.  The Strategic Crude Oil Reserves would deal with any 
disruption in the Supply chain due to external reasons.  In exceptional circumstances, 
the buffer stock could also be used to deal with the situation of an abnormal spike in 
the world oil prices.  The Vishakhapatnam rock cavern storage facility is ready to 
receive crude oil from mid of February, 2015.  The two o ther facilities at Mangalore 
and Padur are likely to ready by October, 2015". 
 
3. The Committee  inter-alia had recommended that the Ministry should 
reappraise the activities of organizations like Centre for High Technology (CHT), 
Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB),  Petroleum Conservation Research 
Association (PCRA), Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD)  etc. under its 
administrative control and also ensure energy security of the country with 
access to the public to get  their choice of petroleum product in a quick and 

10 
 
effective manner.   In its reply , the Government has  stated that it has  taken 
several measures towards ensuring access to energy resources at an affordable 
price and to ensure the ir supply to the masses in a quick and efficient manner. 
In this regard, the Committee appreciate that the OMCs have been catering to 
over more than 17.7 crore Domestic LPG connections across the Country and 
new connections are being released every y ear to provide easy access to LPG 
to the public at large.   The Committee note that the government has allowed the 
sale of 5 kg LPG cylinder and  desire that the Ministry should also extend the 
subsidy on this cylinder.  
 
 The Committee are however, constrained to note that the reply of the 
Ministry is silent about the steps taken regarding the reappraisal of activities of 
various organizations such as OIDB, PCRA, OISD and CHT etc. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to reappraise the activities of 
various organizations of the Ministry in a holistic manner and to seek funds from 
the Government  for the  expansion of their activities so that mandate of the 
MoP&NG could be fulfilled .  The Committee also deplore the Ministry for not 
furnishing reply on issues regarding the energy security and recommend that 
the Ministry should spell out the measures taken by it in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Scheme for LPG connection to BPL families 
 
4. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:  
 
"The Committee note that a scheme for issuing LPG connections to BPL families was 
launched by the Government and is being implemented through the Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) funds of six major oil companies. A total of 6,16,190 connections 
have been released so far under the scheme utilizing Rs 81.76 crore of the CSR 
funds. The Committee have further been informed that no targets have been fixed for 
the release of connections under th e scheme by the Ministry. The major hurdle in the 
implementation of the scheme is authentication of the list of beneficiaries by local 
administration in the States/Districts. The Committee expect the MoP&NG to take 
more interest in the scheme by the States  about the role of local administration in the 
implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee desire that wide publicity should be given to the scheme since it is 
meant to benefit poor people. The Committee also recommend  that Ministry/State 
Govts/OMC‟s shou ld fix State -wise and Company -wise targets for release of 
connections under the scheme urgently as to ensure that the benefits of the scheme 
reaches the poor in a time bound manner". 

11 
 
5. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"This Ministry has implemented a scheme to provide LPG connection to BPL families 
w.e.f. 12.01.2010. Under this scheme, one time financial assistance is granted to BPL 
families in rural areas for release of new LPG connection through Rajiv Gandhi Gramin 
LPG Vitaran Yojana (RGGLVY), equivalent to the rate of security deposit for one LPG 
cylinder and one pressure regulator. The cost of Security Deposit and Pressure 
Regulator (at present 1450+150=1600) is met from funds of the OMCs created for this 
purpose by th e contributions from the CSR fund of six major oil companies e.g. 
ONGC, OIL, GAIL, BPCL, HPCL and IOCL. Recently, this scheme has also been 
extended through regular distributors upto 31.03.2015 on pilot basis. In order to make 
the use of LPG affordable to BPL families, release of Domestic LPG connection with 5 
KG cylinder has also commenced from Jan‟15 onwards.  As a result, BPL families of 
Urban and Semi Urban areas are also getting benefitted from the scheme. As on 
01.02.2015, total 8,60,644  new LPG conn ections since inception of the scheme were 
released to BPL families by the Industry, with utilization of Rs.120.84 crores. 
The scheme is being popularized through RGGLVs as well as regular LPG 
distributorships by distribution of   leaflets, display of loca lly designed posters/banners 
etc and display of notice board at the distributorships.  
The Officers at field level are already under instruction to maintain regular follow up 
with local administration for expediting the authentication process and also to g uide 
the distributors and closely monitor their performance in this regard. However, no such 
target can be fixed as release of connection under this scheme requires beneficiary 
authentication by the State Government, which maintains list of BPL families". 
 
6. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry/OMC's should fix 
State and company wise targets for release of connections under the scheme for 
LPG connection s to BPL families to ensure that the benefits of scheme reach 
the poor.  The Ministry in this regard has stated that targets cannot be fixed for 
release of connections under the scheme for LPG connections to BPL families  
as the beneficiary authentication is done by State Government s which maintain 
list of BPL families.   The Committee note t hat so far 8,60,644 connections have 
been issued under the scheme, however, the coverage of targeted total 72 lakhs 
BPL families sti ll appears to be a distant goal .  As the scheme is intended to 
benefit the economically weaker sections of the society,  the Committee take a 
serious note of the slow progress under the scheme and  would like the Ministry 
to coordinate with States to expedite the authentication process so as to extend 
the scheme to more deserving people.   

12 
 
 The Committee, further, are of the view that the authentication procedure 
for issuing LPG connections to BPL families should be simplified and yearly 
targets should be fixed in each State in order to cover whole of the BPL 
population.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier recom mendation 
that the Ministry/State Governments/OMCs should fix State wise and company -
wise targets for release of connections under the scheme on priority basis so as 
to ensure that the benefits of the scheme reaches the poor in the stipulated time 
frame.   
Recommendation No. 5 
Measures to contain subsidy 
7. In their Report, the Committee inter-alia had recommended as under:  
"The Committee note that one of the most important issues faced by the MoPNG and 
the Government is the under -recoveries incurred by OMCs on the sale of petroleum 
products. The Committee also note that the decline in international crude prices is a 
good opportunity to tackle the subsidy burden and effectively control the under -
recoveries borne by OMCs. The Committee further observe that  after the recent 
deregulation in the price of Diesel, the major burden of subsidy for the government is 
on account of sale of two petroleum products i.e. PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG. In 
this regard, the Committee note that for containing the subsidy burden due to domestic 
LPG, measures such as de -duplication of multiple connections, identification and 
cancellation of fake connections, capping of subsidized domestic LPG cylinders, Direct 
transfer of subsidies into the bank accounts have been taken by the Ministry. 
The Committee have been informed that the Modified Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme 
for LPG has been re -launched w.e.f. 15.11.2014 in 54 districts. However, the Direct 
Transfer of Cash Subsidy on kerosene (DTCK) which was to be implemented in 11 
States/UTs, has been implemented only three States namely, Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
and Goa comprising only seven districts, three each from Rajasthan and Maharashtra 
and one from Goa. Once the schemes take off, the diversion of subsidy with regard to 
sale of PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG is expected to come down substantially. The 
Committee recommend that the Modified Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG and DTCK 
should be implemented by the Ministry in a time bound manner in all the districts in the 
country. 
The C ommittee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to their 
recommendations in the 11 th and 16th reports (15th Lok Sabha) regarding exclusion of 
higher income group from subsidy of domestic LPG cylinders. The Committee desire 
that OMCs/MoP&NG should  appeal and launch campaign for voluntarily giving up of 
the LPG subsidy by well off individuals and to create awareness in the public so that 
the people may be encouraged to contribute to welfare of their poor breathren by 
voluntary giving up subsidy.  

13 
 
The Committee would reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like the 
Ministry at the same time to evolve a suitable mechanism to exclude higher income 
group from availing subsidized LPG cylinders". 
8. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"PAHAL (DBTL SCHEME) 
Government of India has re -launched Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG consumer 
(DBTL) scheme namely, `PAHAL‟,  in 54 districts of the country on 15.11.2014 and in 
remaining districts of the country on 1 st January, 2015, covering 15 crore LPG 
consumers across the country. 
LPG consumers who join the PAHAL scheme, will get the LPG cylinders at market 
price and receive LPG subsidy ( as per their entitlement) directly into their bank 
accounts.  All domestic LPG consumers have been given two alternatives in the 
scheme.  If LPG consumer has Aadhaar number, he/ she will have to link it to his/ her 
LPG consumer number and bank account.  Alternatively, he/ she can link his bank 
account directly to his LPG consumer ID.  This alternat ive ensures that no LPG 
consumer is denied subsidy for want of Aadhaar number. 
All LPG consumers who have not joined the scheme, will be given a grace period of 
three months from the date of launch to join the scheme.  During grace period such 
consumers will get LPG as per their entitlement at subsidized price.  Additionally, a 
period of three months beyond grace period known as parking period is given to LPG 
consumers for joining the scheme.  During parking period such consumers will get 
cylinders as per t heir entitlement at market price and subsidy will be kept parked with 
OMCs.  This parked subsidy would be released as soon as consumer joins the 
scheme.  However, if a consumer joins the scheme after parking period, the parked 
subsidy would lapse and consumer will get subsidy from prospective date only. 
The PAHAL scheme aims to prevent diversion of subsidized LPG into commercial 
sector and thereby helps in expanding LPG coverage without increasing subsidy 
burden on Government and to ensure that nobody can m isuse the LPG subsidy of 
genuine LPG consumers.   
 DTCK :-  
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy on Kerosene (DTCK) was initiated based on „in 
principle‟ approval of EGoM dated 8.8.2011. 
A Pilot Project for DTCK was launched in the Block Kotkasim, District Alwar 
(Rajasthan) in December, 2011 by MoP&NG, in collaboration with Government of 
Rajasthan. During the Pilot, subsidy was transferred into the Bank account of PDS 
SKO beneficiaries and PDS SKO was moved at full market price at all points of supply.  
Under the DTCK 2012, a lump -sum one time grant of Rs. 100 Crore for each State 
was to be provided to the states joining the Scheme prior to 31.03.2012. 11 
States/UTs namely, Rajasthan, Madhy a Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Andman & 
Nicobar Islands, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa & Andhra 
Pradesh confirmed their participation in the Scheme within the stipulated period. Out of 

14 
 
these 11 states, only three States i.e. Rajast han, Maharashtra and Goa confirmed 
implementation of  DTCK in their following districts:   
 
 
 
An amount of Rs 10 Crore each was released for establishment of an institutional 
mechanism for direct transfer of subsidy in cash for PDS Kerosene beneficiaries to the 
States of Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa during 2012-13. 
Opt Out Subsidy: 
The Government has launched the  ‘Opt out of subsidy’  scheme which is aimed at 
motivating LPG users who can afford to pay the market price for LPG, voluntarily 
surrender their LPG subsidy.  
Action Plan implemented for the scheme : 
 The Hon‟ble Minister (P&NG) had taken a lead in this scheme and had given up 
the subsidy, setting an example for others. 
 The Chairman/CMD of three OMCs and their Board of Directors also voluntarily 
opted out of subsidy. They have also sent out an appeal to their employees to 
join in nation building movement by giving up subsidy.  
 The H on‟ble Minister (P&NG) has also sent personal letter to employees of 
OMCs who have set an example by giving up subsidy. 
 The consumer opting out the subsidy are being recognized in the scroll of 
Honour given on the website www.mylpg.in    
 The Hon‟ble Minister (P&NG) has already written letters to all Central 
Government Ministers not only requesting them to give up subsidy, but also 
appeal to the employees in their Ministry/department to join the campaign for 
opting out of LP G subsidy.  Similar letters were sent to Chief Ministers of the 
States.  
 
As on 17.03.2015,   over 2 lakh consumers have opted out of LPG subsidy. 
Feasibility of targeting of LPG subsidy based on income/occupation: 
 OMCs electronic database does not consist  of income (PAN)/occupational 
details of the LPG consumer. Therefore, identification of LPG consumers based 
on income or on basis of occupation is difficult to implement through an 
electronic identification mechanism. The only way to implement this would b e to 
gather this information from LPG consumers through self -declaration as is 
being done currently in case of PAHAL to collect bank account/Aadhaar details. 
The self-furnished information may not be authentic & cannot be relied upon for 
determining eligibility of subsidy.  
 LPG connections are issued on household basis while the income is calculated 
on individual basis. Hence, mapping of income of household with LPG 
connection would be difficult.  
States Districts 
Rajasthan Alwar, Ajmer, Udaipur 
Maharashtra Nandurbar, Wardha, Amaravati 
Goa North Goa 

15 
 
 Further, not all LPG customers may be having PAN card or all  PAN card 
holders pay taxes and this tax paying numbers changes every year. 
 Income data is dynamic and inclusion/exclusion under subsidy will necessarily 
need to be dynamic which would be extremely complex. 
 
For the  above reasons income based exclusion of  LPG subsidy is difficult to 
implement". 
9. The Committee had recommended in their 16 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) 
and reiterated in their 1st Report (16th Lok Sabha) that the Direct Benefit Transfer 
for LPG (DBTL) and for Kerosene (DTCK) be implemented i n a time bound 
manner in all the districts of the country.  The Ministry ’s reply has stated that 
DBTL has been implemented all over the country wh ile DTCK is being 
implemented partially only 3 in States at present .  While appreciating the efforts 
of Government  on account of DBTL,  the Committee are  not satisfied  with the 
reply of the Ministry on the aspect of DTCK and would like to reiterate their 
earliest recommendation that DTCK be implemented all over the country at the 
earliest.   
 The Ministry in their repl y have also stated that the Government has 
launched an opt out of subsidy scheme aimed at motivating LPG users to 
voluntarily surrender their LPG subsidy and as on 2 8.07.2015, 13,86,885 
customers have opted out of LPG subsidy.  The Committee appreciate Ministry's 
initiative for appealing to customers to voluntarily give up LPG subsidy and the 
success achieved so far.   
 The Committee had also recommended  the Ministry in their 11 th Report 
and reiterated in their 16 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) and 1 st Report ( 16th Lok 
Sabha)   to evolve a suitable mechanism to identify highe r income groups to 
exclude them from subsidy domain so that the subsidy on LPG can be directed 
towards the needy sections of society .  However, the Ministry  has s hown 
lackadaisical approach in developing such a mechanism  and has relied only on 
income tax data or PAN details.  The Committee, however, of the opinion that the 
Ministry should work towards devising a suitable mechanism to identify and 
exclude the targeted higher income groups which may not necessarily be based 
on the income tax department data . The Committee , therefore, reiterate their 

16 
 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should  adopt innovative approach to  
develop a suitable mechanism to exclu de higher income group from availing 
subsidized LPG cylinders.    
Recommendation No. 10 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) 
 
 
10. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:  
 
"The Committee note that in order to increase the pace of exploration for oil and gas, 
the Government had introduced the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in 1999 
in the country. Under NELP, exploration blocks were awarded to Indian private and 
foreign companies through international competitive bidding process where National 
Oil Companies, viz. ONGC and OIL are also competing on equal footing. The 
Committee also note that so far nine rounds of biddings have been conducted under 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) and 10th round is to be held. The Committee 
further note that due to delay in finalization of contractual regime for exploration, the 
further bidding under NELP is held up for nearly three years. Further, the exploratory 
activities are not  taking off in the blocks awarded under earlier rounds due to lack of 
clearances and disputes in interpretation of contracts. The Committee are seriously 
concerned with the lull in the exploratory activities particularly when domestic 
production is stagnat ing and demand keeps growing. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should finalise the contractual model at the earliest and 
launch of the Tenth NELP round may be done in order to intensify exploration activities 
in the country. The Commit tee desire that new contractual regime should have 
provisions for deallocation of blocks by Ministry in case of inordinate delay beyond 
stipulated time frame in carrying out the exploratory programme". 
11. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“Appropriate provisions shall be made in the new contractual regime as and when 
finalized to ensure timely completion of the exploratory programme.” 
 
12. The Committee had recommended for finalization of new contractual 
regime and launch of X th NELP round at the earliest in order to intensify the 
exploratory activities.  The Committee  while appreciating  the response of the 
Ministry to make appropriate provisions in new contractual regime  are unhappy 
to note the inordinate delay in the launch o f X th NELP round which is causing 
delay in start of new exploratory activities in the country.  The finalization of new 
contractual regime is an important step  for exploratory activities to gain 
momentum and also  towards ensuring energy security for the co untry.  The 

17 
 
Committee, therefore,  would like to be apprised of  the reasons for delay in 
finalization of the new contractual regime and would recommend the Ministry to 
work towards its finalization without any further delay. 
Recommendation No. 12 
Production of Crude oil 
13. The Committee in their original report had recommended as follows:  
 
"The Committee noted with concern that the stagnant domestic crude oil production for 
the years 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 stands at 38.09 MMT, 37.86 MMT and 37.78 
MMT respectively.  Further, the natural gas production for the last three years has also 
been continuously declining at 47.56 BCM, 40.68 BCM and 35.41 BCM . The 
Committee observe that most of the production for upstream PSU companies is 
coming from nomination blocks and under NELP, the commercial production has 
started from only five blocks awarded to private operators i.e. RIL, Niko and GSPC.  
The Committee are further constrained to note that currently there is no commercial 
production from any deep water blo ck operated by ONGC/OIL under the PSC regime.  
The Committee note with serious concern that the production of natural gas from the 
Eastern Offshore asset in the KG basin also shows a declining trend. 
The Committee observe that while the demand of energy re sources is growing every 
year, the domestic production of hydrocarbons has not kept pace with the growing 
demand. Though Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) 
techniques have been applied in various fields and the production has been 
augmented but there is big gap in demand supply scenario. The upstream oil 
companies have informed that the decline and stagnancy are due to aging oil fields 
and lack of new discoveries in recent times. The Committee note that ONGC has also 
relinquished its blocks in Kerala-Konkan region after carrying out exploration works for 
the last 30 years. 
Since the National Oil Companies have a crucial role in achieving self -reliance in 
energy resources, the Committee recommend that the MoP&NG should do a 
comprehensive review and fill the gaps in the exploratory programme of Oil PSUs". 
14. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Discoveries and Production by ONGC & OIL in NELP Blocks: 
ONGC has made 42 hydrocarbon discoveries in various operational NELP Blocks. OIL 
has made two hydrocarbon discoveries. All these discoveries including deepwater by 
ONGC & OIL are in different stages of exploration/appraisal/development and are to 
be put on production as per timelines of the contract. 
ONGC is making serious efforts to monetize the oil & gas discoveries made in NELP 
blocks. Field Development Plan (FDP) has been approved by Management Committee 
(MC) of four onshore NELP discoveries viz. Nadiad -1, West Patan-3, Karanagar-1 and 
Vadatal-1. ONGC ha s applied for Petroleum Mining Lease. As an initiative, in MOU 
parameters, two NELP blocks are considered to be put on production during 2015. 
Decline of natural gas in Eastern offshore  

18 
 
As regards gas production, ONGC has been able to maintain gas production above 23 
BCM from offshore and onshore. During the current year the production is likely to be 
marginally less in view of certain operational set -backs viz.,  restrictions by GAIL due 
to leakage downstream in Bhagodia in April 2014, safety/maint enance issues, 
stoppage of production from Eastern offshore, KG and Cauvery Assets in view of 
safety related issues of GAIL pipeline from 27th  June 2014 onwards.  
Monitoring of Crude oil & natural Gas Production 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is monitoring the progress of crude oil & natural 
gas on weekly and monthly basis.  This is being closely reviewed by the Secretary 
(PNG) in review meetings every month with CMDs of ONGC & OIL and DG, DGH for 
production under PSCs". 
15. Taking a serious note of the stagnant production  of crude oil and natural 
gas  for the last three years, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to 
review the exploratory programme of oil PSUs comprehensively and to fill the 
gaps wherever required.   In its reply, it has been stated that ONGC and OIL have 
made 44 discoveries under NELP regime  which are under development and to 
be put on production as per the timeline of the contract s. The Committee are 
constrained to note that the Ministry do es not appear to be serious in making 
efforts towards enhancing oil and natural gas production in comparison to the 
growing demand in the country. The Committee wish to point out that during the 
period 2007-12, ONGC had made 133 oil and gas discoveries and OIL had made 
35 discoveries. D uring last few years , both the oil PS Us have been announcing 
discoveries of oil & gas  but the crude oil production has not increased.  The 
Committee therefore, take such discoveries with trepidation as no benefit has 
come from these discoveries in terms of production.  
 The Committee are dismayed to note the slow progress made by 
ONGC/OIL in development of new discoveries under NELP regime which is 
affecting domestic production of oil & gas . The Comm ittee are further 
constrained to note that despite monitoring of exploratory programmes on 
weekly/monthly basis by Ministry/DGH, it has not reflected in the increase of  
actual production of  crude oil and  natural gas . The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Ministry must do a comprehensive review of the 
exploratory programmes of oil PSUs to identify loose ends to augment the 
domestic production of Oil and Gas in the country.  

19 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
National Gas Grid 
16. The Committee in their original report had recommended as follows:  
 
"The Committee note that at present, the country is having about 15,000 kms long 
natural gas pipeline infrastructure under operation and the Government has 
announced the establishment of a National Gas Gr id across the country with an 
additional 15,000  kms of pipelines. 
 
The Committee observe that use of natural gas being cleaner, more efficient and safe 
fuel has considerable advantage over traditional fuels.  The completion of gas grid will 
extend the coverage to domestic, industrial consumers and for transport sector across 
the country. The Committee, however, note that authorizations by PNGRB are still 
awaited in respect of the Barauni -Guwahati-Agartala pipeline with a length of 1300 
kms. Further, the wo rk in Kochi -Mangalore pipeline has been stalled due to Right of 
Way (RoW) and regional problems /issues. The Committee also note that the capacity 
utilization of existing natural gas pipelines is very poor and at the same time, the 
availability of natural gas in the country is less than the demand.  
 
National Gas grid is an important project to enable the availability of the natural gas in 
different parts of the country.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the process 
of establishment of National Gas  Grid may be properly planned and implemented in a 
time-bound manner and would expect the Ministry to ensure the availability of natural 
gas alongwith the progress in the completion of pipeline". 
 
17. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"In order to complete the gas grid across the country, Government has envisaged to 
develop additional 15000 Km of gas pipelines. Out of this 15000 Km, PNGRB/GoI has 
already granted authorizations to entities for constructing about 11900 Km  long 
pipelines and PNGRB is in process for granting authorization to a pipeline of about 
1200 Km under its regulatory framework in terms of PNGRB Act,2006. In addition, 
Government has made an effort to complement PNGRB‟s efforts for completing Gas 
Grid an d has identified 3 (three) pipeline sections of total length of 2500 Km for 
development through Public -Private Partnership (PPP) mode with Viability Gap Fund 
(VGF). Out of these 3 pipeline sections,“Ranchi -Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project has 
been approved as the Pilot project for implementation through PPP mode with VGF. 
After successful implementation of above pilot project through PPP mode, 
Government has plan to consider developing Barauni -Guwahati-Agartala pipeline of 
1300 Km along with the Haldia -Paradip/Srikakulam pipeline through PPP mode with 
VGF. With respect to Right of Way (RoW) issues for laying the Kochi -Koottanad-
Bangalore-Mangalore pipeline, the matter is subjudice before the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court and any way forward can be taken subsequent to favourable judgement for the 
pipeline". 
18. The Committee had recommended for establishment of National Gas Grid 
in a time bound manner and  also to ensure availability of Gas for the grid. In its 
reply, the Ministry ha s stated that out of the total length of 15000 kms. 

20 
 
authorizations have already been granted for 11900 kms. by PNGRB/GoI.  
Further, three pipeline projects have been started under PPP mode  with Viability 
Gap Funding (VGF). Though action has been initiated for compl etion of various 
pipeline projects under the grid, the Committee are dismayed to note that the 
issue of sourcing of natural gas in order to ensure availability of gas to the grid 
has not been addressed by the Ministry . The Committee hence desire that the 
Ministry should explore options for ensuring availability of gas to the grid  while 
getting the grid ready, so that full capacity of the natural gas infrastructure 
established with huge expenditure could be utilized. The Committee , therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that along with the establishment of national gas 
grid, the availability of natural gas may also be ensured side by side.  
Recommendation No. 16 
Delay in ONGC additions Limited (OPaL) 
 
19. The Committee in their original report had observed as under:  
 
"The Committee note that the OPaL project is being implemented by ONGC at Dahej, 
Gujarat with a original project cost of about Rs. 21,396 crore. However, due to delay in 
commissioning of the project, the revised estimated pr oject cost now stands at Rs. 
27,011 crore showing a cost escalation of about Rs. 5000 crore. The Committee are 
further constrained to note that the OPaL is rephasing the loan and financing of 
additional debt for the increased cost of the project will further add to the interest being 
paid by the Company. The Committee are dismayed to note that the feedstock plant 
(C2-C3 Extraction Plant) which will provide feedstock to the OPaL project has been 
completed and lying idle. An additional expenditure of Rs. 100 crore is being incurred 
every year to keep the plant operational.  
The Committee have learnt that this project was scheduled for completion in January, 
2014 and has now been slated for completion by August, 2015. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the OPaL project with such a huge expenditure has been delayed 
and therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure that it is completed by the revised 
timeline and necessary steps are taken to tie up the sources of natural gas for running 
the project". 
20. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply: 
"Status update on OPaL  
 As on 31 st December, 2014, the project has achieved 93 % completion 
(with total expenditure of Rs 20,493 crore). 
 Five packages (out of total 17 packages) including the largest package of 
Dual Feed Cracker Unit and Associated Units (DFCU) and the downstream unit 

21 
 
of Dedicated HDPE unit have been mechanically completed. The downstream 
units of Polyethylene Swing unit and Polypropylene unit are nearing mechanical 
completion. The other packages are also nearing mechanical completion. 
 With the availability of utilities and power, pre commissioning activities 
have already commenced so as to start commercial operation by June, 2015. 
 All project related clearances/ statutory approvals and  environmental 
clearance has been obtained.  
 The delay in completion was mainly due to non - performance of three 
work packages (out of seventeen), i.e. Cooling Water System, Integrated Utility 
& Offsite, and Effluent treatment and collection system. OPaL has provided 
financial support to these contractors to improve liquidity to expedite 
completion. The progress on these work packages has improved significantly 
and progress is being closely monitored by ONGC at the highest level to ensure 
achievement of scheduled timelines. 
 Commissioning team from the Licensors and EPC contractor has been 
mobilised from 1 st week of December 2014 for start of pre commissioning / 
commissioning of DFCU. 
 All out efforts are being taken by OPaL for commissioning of the Project 
by June 2015.   
 The gas feed for the Project would be supplied from ONGC‟s C2 -C3 
plant at Dahej. The C2 -C3 plant is mechanically completed and ready for 
commissioning. PLL had signed an agreement with ONGC on  6 th January, 
2015 for extraction of C2 – C3 com ponents from LNG at Dahej.  This 
agreement also required certain amendments to the Gas sale and  Purchase 
Agreement signed between PLL and its three offtakers, GAIL, IOC and BPCL. 
Accordingly, an amendment agreement was signed with GAIL on 3 rd February, 2015.  
Although, the formal amendment agreements with BPCL and IOC are yet to be signed, 
as per the discussion held by PLL with IOCL and BPCL, PLL has given its consent to 
ONGC to commission the plant.  ONGC has already mobilized its turnkey contractor at 
site and are expecting to commission the plant very soon".  
 
21. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to ensure that the OPaL 
project should be completed by the revised timeline and take necessary steps to 
tie up natural gas for the project. The Committee were informed that the project 
had achieved 93% completion by December, 201 4 and efforts were being made 
for ensuring its commissioning by June 2015. However, the Committee have 
now learnt that upto June, 2015 the project has achieved only 95% completion.  
 The Committee take a serious note of the postponement in the timeline of 
the project which  was scheduled for completion by  January, 2014 , shifted to 
June , 2015  and is now expected to be commissioned in  the fourth quarter of 
2015. The Committee are dismayed to note  the non-serious approach of the 
Ministry/ONGC towards implementation of the OPaL project with an investment 

22 
 
of more than Rs. 20,493 crore and would like to know the reasons for delay in its 
commissioning. The Committee while expressing their displeasure for the delay 
in commissioning of OPaL project strongly recommend the Ministry/ONGC to 
ensure its completion at the earliest. 
Recommendation No. 21  
CSR Funds of Oil PSUs 
22. The Committee in their original report had recommended as follows:  
 
"The Committee note  that as per existing guidelines of Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE), PSUs must spend 2 percent of their profit after tax (PAT) under the 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).  The Committee are  constrained to note that 
the targets fixed by the Ministry under corporate social responsibility and the figures 
for the profit after tax have not been furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee further 
note that the spending on CSR initi atives of some Oil PSUs such as ONGC, OIL, 
BPCL and IOCL have increased during 2013 -14 in comparison to the year 2011 -12 
and 2012 -13 but the spending of OVL & HPCL have remained stagnant.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that the spending under CSR i nitiative by GAIL, 
MRPL, CPCL and EIL has decreased during the year 2013 -14 as compared to 2011 -
12 and 2012-13.  
 
The Committee observe  that the activities pertaining to Petroleum and Natural Gas 
sector impact the environment and desire that the Oil PSUs must take initiatives for 
the development of the regions surrounding Oil Installations, plants, exploration 
regions, refineries etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
prevail upon the Oil PSUs and the CSR funds of these companie s should be spent 
fully each year on the welfare activities in a transparent manner". 
 
 
23. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Oil PSUs undertake various CSR activities as per DPE guidelines and Companies 
Act, 2013.  As part of the CSR activities Oil and Gas companies have taken up over 
19,000 toilets under Swachh Bharat - Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan.  Works have been 
awarded for con struction of 7176 toilet blocks, construction works are in progress in 
1331 toilet blocks  and construction has been completed in 49 toilet blocks as of 13 
March 2015. 
The Oil PSU-wise expenditure under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) are as 
under :- 
ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL) : 
It is informed that ONGC Videsh Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of ONGC. Its CSR 
activities are generally carried out by the leader of the consortium (operator) according 
to requirement/guidelines/practices prevailing in the host countries and provisions in 
the PSC/JOA.   Domestic obligation of CSR is undertaken by the Parent company 
ONGC.  Oil PSUs undertake various CSR activities as per DPE guidelines and the 
Companies Act, 2013. 

23 
 
The Company has been undertaking CSR activitie s in and around its projects and 
expenditures work out in excess of its budgetary allocation of 0.5% of Profit after tax 
(PAT) of the Company during previous financial years since 2010-11.  
CSR budget and  the actual expenditure incurred in each year during 2011-12 to 2013-
14 and H-1 of 2014-15 is given below:-  
 (Rs. in Million) 
Financial 
Year 
Net profit 
of the PSU 
(after tax) 
Budgetary provision 
for CSR activities  
(0.5% of net  profit of 
previous year) 
Actual 
Expenditure on 
CSR activities 
CSR expenditure 
as % of net  profit 
of previous year 
2011-12 27212 134.53 239.41 0.89% 
2012-13 39291 136.06 208.27 0.77% 
2013-14 44453 196.45 217.1 0.55% 
H-1 of 
2014-15 
 222.25 116.4*  
 
Oil India Limited (OIL) : 
CSR at Oil India Limited is guided by its' vision of "being a responsible corporate 
citizen deeply committed to socio -economic development in its areas of operations". 
Overall, the company's CSR and Sustainability practices are guided by and 
undertaken keeping in perspective the overarching principles under the DPE 
guidelines (on CSR & Sustainability, 2014) and the Companies' Act, 2013. 
The data on CSR expenditure of Oil India Limited in the past 3 years is provided in the 
table, below : 
CSR Details of the last 3 years of Oil India Limited 
Financial 
Year 
CSR Expenditure 
(INR Crores) 
Profit After Tax  (INR in 
Crores) of previous FY 
Percentage of Profit 
After Tax 
2011-12 50.19 2887.73 1.74% 
2012-13 49.63 3446.92 1.44% 
2013-14 72.89 3589.34 2.03% 
>   The total allocated CSR budget for FY 2014-15 is INR 133.31 Crores 
Engineers India Ltd.(EIL) : 
The EIL's comments/ action taken report on the recommendation No. 21 are as 
follows: 
 • As per DPE Guidelines, 2% of Profit After Tax (PAT) has been allocated 
for CSR activities    in FY 2011-12, FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. 

24 
 
 • In FY 2014 -15, as per Companies Act 2013, the budgetary allocation of 
2% of the average of Profit Before Tax (PBT) made during the three immediately 
preceding financial years has  been earmarked for CSR activities. 
 • Spending under CSR during FY 2013-14 has increased as compared to 
spending during FY 2012-13. 
 • The details of CSR Budget status is given below:- 
          (Rs in lakh) 
Year CSR Budget Amount Committed CSR expenditure 
2011-12 1045 (2% of PAT) 389 942 
2012-13 1273 (2% of PAT) 686 597 
2013-14 1257 (2% of PAT) 1019 649 
2014-15 1660 (2% of PBT*) 1990** 900** 
 
* the average of PBT during the three immediately preceding financial years **as on 
19.2.2015  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) : 
Prior to April 2014, ONGC was allocating CSR fund as per DPE/MOPNG Guidelines. 
Subsequently after the enactment of Companies Act 2013 w.e.f. 01.04.2014 ONGC 
has allotted the CSR funds as per the Act. The year -wise details of the profits of 
ONGC, allocation of CSR funds and its utilization have been tabulated below: 
SI. No. Year Profit after Tax (PAT) 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Funds allocated for  
CSR (Rs. in Crore)  and 
(% of PAT/PBT) 
Fund utilized for  
CSR (Rs. in 
Crore) 
   1. 2011-12 18,924 378.48 (2% of PAT) 121.08 
2. 2012-13 25,123 502.46 (2% of PAT) 262.13 
3. 2013-14 20,296 418.52 (2% of PAT) 341.25 
4. 2014-15 32,897 Average of 
Net Profit of past 
three years 
657.94 (2% of PBT) 336.54 (Upto 
Dec, 2014) 
 
ONGC is always focused to carry out CSR activities mainly in the regions surrounding 
its oil and gas installation, plants, exploratory areas & also promptly addressing the 
environmental concerns suitably.  
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) : 

25 
 
Indian Oil's CSR Policy has been approved for the year 2014 -15 by the Board as per 
Companies Act 2013, Companies (CSR Policy) Rules 2014 and DPE's guidelines on 
CSR & Sustainability. 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) : 
We have taken cognizance of the observations of the Committee and we will continue 
to take initiatives for the development of communities surrounding our installations. 
Refineries, Depots etc. 
It will also be our endeavor to utilize the CSR budget to the maximum extent possible.  
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL): 
Action Taken Report on the Recommendation No.21 in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2014 -15) on "Demands for Grants 
(2014-15) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas" is given below: 
The following are the amounts spent by Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL) 
as against the amount allocated for CSR: 
 
Year Amount Spent  
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Profit Before Tax  
(Rs. in Crore) 
2011-12 372.65 (158.22) 
2012-13 199.43 (1697.69) 
2013-14 101.00 (330.96) 
It is to mention that the above expenditure on CSR is being incurred inspite of loss is 
only to maintain continuing projects. 
As recommended by the Committee, CPCL is taking all initiatives for the development 
of the region surrounding the Refineries. 
 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL): 
"Comments are noted . HPCL has always taken and will continue to take initiatives for 
the development of regions in and around where it operates. It is also a part of the 
Board approved policy that most of our CSR initiatives should be in and around our 
areas of operations." 
 Mangalore Refinery Petrochemical Ltd. (MRPL): 
Details of PAT,  CSR budget as per the then prevailing DPE guidelines & CSR spend 
for the years 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14  as given are below. 
 
Year PBT PAT 5% of 
previous 
CSR budget including 
c/f of unspent from 
Total 
Expenditure 

26 
 
year PAT previous year on CSR 
2010-11 1737 1176 - - - 
2011-12 1320 909 5.88 7.09 3.27 
2012-13 -477 -757 4.54 8.36 4.40 
2013-14 409.7 601.2 0.00 3.96 3.57 
 
The Companies Act 2013 has come into effect from FY 2014 -15 onwards, which 
stipulates that the CSR spend shall be 2% of the average of the preceding 3 years net 
profits, PBT. Prior to that DPE guidelines were prevailing for the purpose of calculating 
the CSR budget i.e.  0.5% of PAT of the previous year. 
CSR expenditure of MRPL is FY 2013 -14 has decreased compared to FY 2011 -12 & 
FY 2012 -13, due to losses incurred in FY2012 -13.  In  FY 2013 -14 the CSR 
expenditure is marginally lower than th e available CSR budget, since the entire CSR 
budget was allocated for the construction of a new wing of Government Ladygosch 
Hospital and the expenditure was made based on the bills received up to FY 2013 -14.  
Unspent amount has been carried forward to the CSR budget of FY 2014-15. 
The MRPL has noted Committees‟ observation that the CSR funds should fully spent 
in each year on the welfare activities & should impact the environment surrounding oil 
installations, plants, exploration region, refineries etc. for compliance. 
24. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to prevail upon Oil PSUs 
for spending their CSR funds fully every year on the welfare activities in a 
transparent manner. While observing the details submitted by the Ministry, the 
Committee note  that in case of O NGC and MRPL, the actual amount spent on 
CSR activities during the last three years is less than the funds available with 
the respective PSU for CSR activities. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
the CSR funds have not been utilized as per the funds available . Since the 
functioning of Oil and gas plants/Installations has an impact on surrounding 
environment, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry  
should impress upon that the CSR funds of oil PSUs should be spent fully each 
year in a transparent manner on welfare activities. 
Recommendation No. 23  
Coal Bed Methane 
25. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:  
 
"The Committee note that the Government of India had formulated a CBM Policy in 
1997 under which its exploration is being carried out. The Committee have been 
informed that till date 33 blocks have been awarded and the commercial production 
has started from Raniganj (south block only ). Further, the present C BM production 

27 
 
stands at 0.45 MMSCMD and the Ministry has claimed that at present pace the 
production is expected to be around 4 MMSCMD by 2016 - 17. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that even after huge investment of Rs.5000 crore and seventeen 
years, the exploratory efforts have not paid off.  The Committee note that India being 
the third largest producer of coal in the world holds significant prospects of recovering 
CBM from its coal beds and the total prognosticated CBM reserves in the country are 
to the tune of 91.8 Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF) spread over 11 States in the country and 
further, around 9.90 TCF reserves have been found recoverable. Since there are 
proven reserves of coal in the country, the Committee feel that the exploitation of CBM 
should b e speeded up. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Ministry 
should intensify the exploratory efforts and production of CBM to achieve the set 
production targets within the stipulated timeframe.  
 
The Committee note that ONGC is the only PSU which is carrying out the exploration 
of Coal Bed Methane which is operating four active blocks in Jharia  and Raniganj. 
The Committee recommend the CBM policy which is under production of CBM from 
various blocks.  The Committee also desire that MoP&NG should pe rmit other oil 
PSUs and more private operators interested in the exploration of thi s untapped 
hydrocarbon resource". 
 
 
26. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Ministry of Coal are in correspondence for 
resolution of various issues especially pertaining to simultaneous exploration and 
exploitation of CBM and coal mining by one single operator from the point of view of 
safety of operations and fast track exploitation of both the resource s viz. CBM and 
coal. 
As per the CBM policy, 1997, the interested private companies and PSUs can 
participate in the bidding round for exploration and exploitation of CBM. Ten CBM 
blocks have been identified for the future round of bidding". 
27. The Committe e in their report had recommended the Ministry to permit 
other oil PSUs and more private operators interested in exploration of CBM.  In 
its reply, the Ministry has stated that it has taken up the matter with the Ministry 
of Coal for engaging a single operator for fast track exploitation of both C oal 
and CBM reserves from the point of view of safety of operations . The Committee 
have further been informed that ten more CBM blocks have been identified for 
future round of bidding. Though the Ministry is offering more blocks for bidding 
and exploration of CBM, the programme for CBM exploitation has not been 
progressing at desired pace over a period of time. With this pace, increase in the 
production from the present 0.45 MMSCMD to 4 MMSCMD in 2016 -17 still 
appears to be a difficult task . The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to increase more private participation and to speed up the 

28 
 
process of exploitation of CBM reserves in order to enhance energy security of 
the country. 
Recommendation No. 24 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) 
28. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:  
 
"The Committee note that ONGC has been carrying out the development of 
underground coal gasification in collaboration with Stochinsky Institute of Mining, 
Russia and MoUs have also been signed with CIL, SCCL, Gujarat Mineral 
Development Corporation and Gujarat Industries Power Corporation Ltd. (GIPCL). The 
Committee further note that the advanced stages of the development are to be carried 
out in the coal blocks for which Vastan block in Gujarat has been chosen.  However, 
ONGC could not get the authority to develop that block due to the condition that 
applicant has to be a State level operator. The Committee have further been informed 
that in addition to Vastan block, other sites were also being evaluated for suitability 
and four sites namely Hodu -Sindhari (R ajasthan), Kurla (Rajasthan), Tadkeshwar 
(Gujarat), Surkha (Gujarat) have been found suitable.  
The Committee are constrained to note that the UCG technology in the country is still 
under developed. The Committee feel that the development of UCG should not  be 
kept limited to Vastan Block and other blocks should also be explored. Further, the 
MoP&NG should take up the matter with concerned State Governments to relax the 
criteria for National Oil PSUs so that the award of the block is not limited to State lev el 
companies only as these companies have more technological expertise with regard to 
development of hydrocarbon reserves. Since huge coal deposits in India can offer 
avenues for Underground Coal Gasification, the Committee also desire that the 
Ministry should review the policy on development of UCG and take effective measures 
for its exploitation at the earliest. The Committee are given to understand that the 
technology for UCG is available with other countries for the past several decades and 
therefore, recommend  that the Ministry/Oil PSUs may explore collaboration with the 
countries experienced in UCG for technology transfer."  
29. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The matters relating to Underground Coal Gasification (UC G) is being dealt with by 
the Ministry of Coal and as such it will be appropriate if this recommendation is dealt 
by the Ministry of Coal." 
 
30. The Committee in their Report, had recommended the MoPNG to take up 
the matter regarding underground coal gasification (UCG) efforts by ONGC with 
concerned State Government  to relax the criteria for National Oil PSUs so that 
the award of block is not limited to the State level companies only since the 
National Oil Companies have more expertise in exploration r elated activities. 

29 
 
The Committee had also recommended for collaboration with countries  having 
expertise in this field  for technology transfer. In its action taken reply,  the 
Ministry informed that the matters relating to Underground Coal Gasification 
(UCG) is being dealt by the Ministry of Coal.  
 The Committee do not accept  the casual reply submitted by the Ministry  
and it appear s that the MoPNG is shying away from its responsibility. The 
Committee are further dismayed to note  that services of ONGC which is an 
experienced company in exploration of resources could not be utilized to the 
benefit of the nation in development of UCG resources because of the criteria 
that allows only State level operators to participate for the bidding in Vasatan 
block in Gujar at. The Committee  in this regard  desire that various State 
Governments should broaden their horizons by giving opportunity to Indian 
companies for development of various natural resources.   
  The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas has an active role in Oil PSUs since ONGC is carrying out development of 
UCG and investment made by it is at stake. Accordingly, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry must initiate efforts towards removing hurdles being faced by 
ONGC so that UCG programme can  progress at desired pace. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and strongly recommend the 
Ministry to review the progress made by ONGC in the field of UCG. 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 2 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) 
 
The committee noted that the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) 
is being set up at Jais,  UP with the objective of creating an Institute of Excellence in 
Petroleum Sector to cater to the educational and training requirements in India with a 
total estimated project cost of Rs. 695 crore.  Due to delay in establi shment of the 
Institute, the academic activities are being conducted in a temporary campus in Rae 
Bareli since 2008.  
The Committee noted that the main reason for the delay in project is the litigation 
process started by the original contractor.  At presen t EIL, Project Management 
Consultant of the Jais Campus project is carrying out the work through a composite 
contract and also has taken up with the contractor for clearing the backlog of the 
Project work.  
The Committee took note  with serious concern that  the budgetary allocations for the 
project could not be utilised during last three years and only 52.6 percent of the work 
has been completed.  The timeline of the project has been sh ifted time and again and 
the I nstitute which was scheduled for completion  in the 11 th Plan is now slated for 
completion in Dec ember 2015.  The Committee take  a serious view on the further 
delay of the project and recommend the Min istry to put in sincere effort with stringent 
monitoring to ensure its completion by the revised ti meline i.e. December 2015.  The 
Committee also recommends that the responsibility may be fixed and penal action 
taken against all concerned including the original contractor for inordinate delay of the 
project.  
Reply of the Government 
After termination of the contract with M/s. Punj Lloyd Limited in May 2013, a new 
Composite Work Contract has been awarded in September 2013 to M/s. NCC Limited 
on the recommendation of the Project Management Consultant, M/s. Engineers India 
Limited.   
Since then the work has been progressing as per the schedule. As on December 
2014, the progress of work achieved is approx. 80% and there has been no backlog.   
As advised by the Standing Committee, RGIPT has put the following monitoring 
mechanism  in place to ensure timely completion of the project:-  
a) Weekly Project Review Meeting (WPRM)  
Improvements has been brought in by the mechanism of WPRM at the site for 
intensifying the monitoring of the project.   While all salient features of the 
project are revi ewed by RGIPT, EIL and the Contractor (M/s. NCCL) specific 
emphasis is now given to have close monitoring of adequate resource 

31 
 
mobilisation and a system of Action Taken Report of the previous meetings has 
been introduced.   
b) Monthly Progress Review (MPR) at Head Quarter  
In addition to the above weekly progress review meetings, a day to day 
monitoring is being done with EIL headquarter and Architect, in which the 
participation is at the level of General Manager (Project), EIL and Advisor 
(Project), RGIPT.  A comprehensive review is made for all action points 
including the issues arising out of the site review meetings.  The emphasis is 
given in such reviews to have a comprehensive catch up plan for any delay in 
the previous months.  
c) Monitoring by Board of Governors (BOG),  RGIPT  
In addition to the above, the progress of the work is tabled in every BoG 
meeting and Board is informed about the status of catch up plan to expedite the 
project implementation.  
d)  Also, the monthly progress report which is be ing sent to the MoP&NG has been 
made more objective oriented to facilitate regular monitoring. The report also 
includes the areas of concern and corrective action taken.  
RGIPT is ensuring that future deadlines are met in all respect.  
The litigation proce ss with M/s. Punj Lloyd Ltd is being heard in the Arbitral 
Tribunal.  The Affidavits of witnesses are under preparation for filing.   
EFC in its meeting held on 24.02.2015 has recommended the following :  
a) The revised cost estimates of Rs. 538 crore for the RGIPT. 
b) Rolling over of Government funds of Rs. 199 crore from 11 th Five Year Plan to 
12th Five Year Plan (Rs. 86 crore already spent in 11 th Plan period out of total 
GBS of Rs. 285 crore) 
c) Additional funding of Rs. 103 crore from Government Budgetary Suppo rt 
(Revised Cost Estimates of Rs. 538 crore – Original Cost Estimates of Rs. 435 
crore = Rs. 103 crore). 
d) RGIPT / EIL will complete the project in 47 acre of land by March, 2016.  No 
time and cost overrun will be allowed further. 
e) RGIPT should look into the possibilities of the self – sustaining revenue model 
using the corpus fund and the student fees for running the Institute. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 

32 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Filling of Strategic storage caverns 
 
The Committee note that underground strategic storage caverns are being built at 
three locations namely i.e. Vishakhapatnam, Padur and Mangalore to have a crude oil 
storage capacity of 5.03 MMT. This project is being undertaken at an estimated capital 
cost of Rs.3958 crore.  The three storage caverns at Vishakhapatnam, Padur and 
Mangalore have achieved more than 95 percent o f completion and Visakhapatnam 
cavern will be ready by February, 2015 and the remaining two by October, 201 5.  
Once the construction of storage caverns is complete, they are to be filled with crude 
oil.  A token amount of rupees one crore has been provided in the budgetary 
allocations for the year 2014 -15.  Since the Vizag cavern is to be ready by February 
2015 and funds would be required to fill with crude oil, the committee recommended 
that MoP&NG should seek funds from Ministry of Finance. 
 
The Committee note that the crude oil filling cost was estimated at Rs.  25000 crore at 
a price of $11 0/bbl. and therefor e recommend that the Ministry should monitor the 
crude oil prices in the international market which fluctuate and seize the suitable 
opportunity for buying crude oil for filling the strategic storage cavern located at 
Visakhapatnam. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. As regards the filling of crude in the underground strategic storage caverns at 
Vishakhapatnam, Padur and Mangalore; t here is a provision of Rs. 4948.00 crore in 
the 12th Five Year.  A token amount of Rs. 1 crore was allocated in B.E. 2014 -15 for 
this purpose, which has been increased to Rs. 2400 crore in RE 2014-15.. 
 
ii. The present conditions are favourable to fill up crude at Visakhapatnam cavern 
as crude price has dropped significantly.  
 
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 20 th January, 2015 
has,  inter-alia, recommended an amount of Rs. 2500 crore for filling the crude in 
Visakhapatnam cavern against the 12 th Plan outlay of Rs.4948 crore under Gross 
Budgetary Support Scheme of Ministry  of Petroleum and natural Gas for Indian 
Strategic   Storage Programme for storage of crude oil by ISPRL.  Rest of the amount 
i.e. Rs.2448 crore may be used for partially filling strategic part of caverns being 
constructed at Mangalore and Padur. Further a ction on the recommendations is being 
taken by the Ministry. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.) Dated 19th March, 2015 
 
 
 
  

33 
 
Recommendation No. 6  
KYC Norms 
 
The Committee in their 11 th and 16 th reports (15 th Lok Sabha) had recommended for 
implementation of Know Your Customer norms for the LPG consumers across the 
country. The Committee note that OMCs have implemented KYC norms and 
consequently as on 01.09.2014 has resulted in blocking of 0.96 crore connection s 
leading to an estimated recurring saving in subsidy of Rs 3353 crore per annum. 
The Committee have been informed by Ministry that KYC on all the customers is not 
possible as large number of connections are to be covered. However, the Committee 
deprecate their approval are not convinced by the Ministry‟s reply as each distributor 
has a limited number of consumers and collection of KYC details at distributor level 
should be easily possible. The Committee are sanguine that KYC exercise would 
further clean up  the system and yield much more saving in the subsidy. The 
Committee are of the view that the KYC process will not only help OMCs to have a 
database of all their customers but also help in deliver better customer services. 
Therefore, the Committee recommen d the Ministry to do KYC exercise of all LPG 
consumers in a phased manner within a stipulated time frame.  
Reply of the Government 
After launch of PAHAL scheme all consumers are being asked to provide either an 
Aadhar number or their bank account for recei ving subsidy. This process in itself 
subjects the LPG consumer to the KYC process of Aadhaar and Bank respectively, 
thus enabling afresh KYC of the LPG consumer. In fact, many LPG customers who 
were using connections in the name of others or in the name of  the person who is not 
alive are now approaching the distributors for regularization of such connections. 
These connections are being regularized after taking KYC, Proof of Address (POA) 
and Proof of Identity (POI). In the process the KYC of LPG database w .r.t. such 
connections is getting done.  
The present practice followed by OMCs for collecting KYCs in case of new 
connections, transfer cases, reactivation (for deactivated customers) and suspect 
multiple connection is continuing and data base is being continually corrected. 
After April 2015, when domestic LPG cylinders would be available only at market  as 
part of PAHAL Scheme ,  all LPG consumers taking subsidy would have undergone a 
de-facto KYC on account  of linkage to Aadhaar or bank account.  
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Seismic survey 
 
The committee notes that 46 percent of sedimentary basin has been assessed for 
hydrocarbon prospects and under the Hydrocarbon Vision 2025, the entire country is 
to be covered by 2025. In many parts of the country, the seismic survey was 
conducted more than two decades back with the then available technology. 
The committee further note that MoP&NG has chalked out a pro posal to carry out data 
Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation (API) at a tentative cost of Rs 6804 crore 
through DGH. The Committee  note that the proposal is to be funded from oil cess 
funds to be provided by Ministry of Finance (MOF) or by ONGC and Oil India Limited 
or OIDB may fund the project during the first year with the funds available with it. The 
committee are of the opinion that this data acquisition, interpretation and processing is 
an important work in the exploratory activities of the coun try and therefore, 
recommend that the MoP&NG should approach the Govt. for allocation of funds and 
ensure that this work is implemented in a time bound manner and Ministry shall closely 
monitor the programme. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2D Seismic Survey of 1.5 million sq.km area covering 24 sedimentary basins of India 
is proposed to be completed by 2020.  This will enable the E&P industry to understand 
the hydrocarbon prospectivity of India and bid for exploration blocks.  Matter has been 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance regarding funding of the project. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated 19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Delay in Exploration Activities in the Awarded blocks 
 
The Committee note that there is delay in exploration activities due to non -availability 
of requisite clearances from different Ministries including Ministry of Defence (MoD), 
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) and other agencies . The  Committee 
note that 73 blocks under New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) for which the 
Ministry of Defence had not allowed exploration activity earlier have since permitted for 
exploration in 64 blocks and nine blocks have been declared as  no go areas. 
The Committee further note that cle arances are awaited from Ministry of Environment 
and Forests in the States of Assam, Manipur, Tripura and Madhya Pradesh for 
exploration activity. The Committee are dismayed to find that certain foreign 
companies have proposed to relinquish 14 exploration blocks due to restrictions 
imposed by the Ministry of Defence  thereby discouraging participation of foreign 
companies. Indian companies are also affected due to delay in clearances from 
Government agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Min istry/DGH 
should ensure that all the necessary clearances are obtained from concerned 

35 
 
authorities for blocks offered for auction so that the companies which emerge 
successful can commence their exploration work at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has already taken in principle clearances from different Ministries for 52 
exploration blocks identified by DGH for offer on bidding.  In future also, prior in -
principle clearance shall be taken before offering blocks for bidding. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 11  
National Data Repository (NDR) 
 
The Committee note that establishment of National Data Repository (NDR) meant for 
storing and maintaining exploration and  production data in a safe and reusable 
manner is in progress. The contracts for commissioning of the NDR and establishment 
of infrastructure for the same have been awarded and is expected to become 
operational by March, 2015. The Committee have been infor med that the proposal for 
launch of Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) is also under consideration with the 
Government. Under the proposed policy, the data for blocks will be made available at 
any time of the year. NDR is an essential requirement for lau nch of OALP. The 
companies would select their own areas of interest for carrying out the exploration and 
OALP will enable the bidders to bid for the blocks on offer all round the year. The 
Committee, considering the benefits of OALP, recommend that the pro gress of NDR 
should be regularly monitored by the Ministry/DGH in order to achieve its scheduled 
completion. 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Data Repository (NDR) is to be ready for trials by March 2015 and for use by 
March 2016.  This will help in implementing Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) 
which will enable self -identification of blocks by E&P operators and also facilitate 
round the year bidding for exploration blocks. The progress of NDR is being monitored 
by the Ministry. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Increasing coverage of PNG/CNG 
 
The Committee note  that the Government has p lanned to increase the CNG/PNG 
coverage across the country to another 51 cities which are under b idding s tage in 
addition to the 23 cities that have already been covered.  These 51 cities have a 
population of more than 5 lakh plus and 26 cities with population between 4 t o 5 lakh 

36 
 
are also to be covered.  The Committee note that the prerequisite for this expansion of 
CNG/PNG coverage is availability of gas and pipelines. 
 
The Committee further note  that the Natural Gas being environment friendly, easy to 
transport and economical has inherent advantages over other hydrocarbon fuel s. The 
City Gas Distribution (CGD) sector has been given priority under the policy of 
allocation of gas.   The Committee, therefore, desire that the City Gas network should 
be expanded by giving more connections in cities under   existing CGD network. The 
Committee also desire that the CGD network should be expanded by the Ministry to 
not only to the cities but also to the rural areas across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to expand the coverage of PNG (Domestic) in the cities under existing CGD 
networks, Government has envisaged to connect 1 crore households in a mission 
mode over a period of 5 years. Government has initiated a process of periodic reviews 
with existing CGD entities for monitoring PNG connection progress. On the basis of 
performance in last 9 months, there is an average increase of 9 -10% in PNG 
(domestic) connections (over the total PNG connections by 31 st March 2014) by 
existing CGD entities in different parts of the country. Petroleum & Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) is  the statutory authority under the PNGRB Act, 2006 for 
granting the authorization to entities for developing CGD networks and monitoring the 
implementation of CGD networks projects. Government has also followed up with 
PNGRB for putting thrust on achieving PNG   Mission   targets   though   their statutory 
provisions under the Act.   
In addition, Government has given the highest priority for domestic gas allocation to 
the PNG/CNG segment of the CGD network for increasing the coverage of PNG/CNG 
across the c ountry. The government policy guidelines provides for domestic gas 
supply to all CGD entities at uniform base price for meeting entire requirement of CNG 
(transport) and PNG (domestic) segments. Further, the Government has made 
provisions for supplying add itional 10% domestic gas to meet the fluctuations of daily 
demand in PNG/CNG segment.   
The following initiatives have been taken to expand the PNG networks :- 
i. The entire district has been considered as a Geographical Area (GA) for the 
development of CGD network so that PNG is made available to rural population 
also. Hence cities having population of more than 5 lakh in the district will 
automatically get covered in the GA. 
ii. PNGRB has invited bids for development of CGD networks in 14 new 
Geographical Areas  in its 4 th round of CGD bidding. PNGRB will be granting 
authorization to the successful entities for developing CGD entities in these 
GAs shortly. 
iii. PNGRB has also issued a public notice for 20 more GAs (districts) for bidding 
under the 5th rounds of CGD bi dding on 19th January 2015. Further, 21 more 
GAs (districts) are also being planned in the next round. 
iv. PNGRB has also identified 30 more G As (Districts) which could have natural 
gas pipeline connectivity and could be covered in subsequent bidding rounds. 

37 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 15  
Delay in projects of Oil PSUs 
 
The Committee note that a number of projects of oil PSUs worth more than Rs. 1000 
crore have been delayed over a period of time. Such projects include the Ankaleshwar 
redevelopment project (Rs. 2189 crore), Improved Oil recovery at Rudrasagar, 
Construction of multipurpose support vessel and OPaL project (Rs. 23000 crore) of 
ONGC, PATA expansion project and Paradip -Raipur-Ranchi pipeline (1793 crore) of 
GAIL. The Committee observe that the PATA project was delayed due to hurdles 
created by the contractor i.e . non -execution of the work and delay in payments to 
labourers, whereas the Pipeline project was delayed due to non -availability of 
necessary clearances.  
The Committee are unhappy to note that delay in high value projects of Oil PSUs 
leads to cost escalation causing losses to the exchequer and also affects the long term 
plans of Petroleum Sector in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should review and find out remedial measures for clearing the same. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry/PSUs should have close liasion with 
State Governments/local authorities/ elected representatives so as to ensure that all 
the stakeholders are on board before the completion of the project and recommend 
that cases where the delay is due to non-execution of work by the contractor, stringent 
penalties must be imposed. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the latest report of December, 2014, there are 36 projects costing Rs. 1000 
crore and above that are under implementation with anticipat ed total cost of Rs. 
1,76,605 crore.  Of these projects under implementation, 24 projects are delayed with 
8 projects pending state level statutory clearances of Forest & Wildlife, Land 
acquisition and RoU issues across various states. 
The progress of all projects is being closely monitored by the Secretary (PNG) every 
month.  CMDs of CPSEs have been asked to fix responsibility  for the delays in each  
project  at the level of concerned functional Directors.  Intermediate milestones have 
been identified and catch-up plans drawn up for all delayed projects.  Further, the 
CPSEs have been advised to adopt a transparent digitalized procurement and contract 
management system. 
The issues relating to other Ministries at the Centre as well as State level issues are 
being taken up the Project Monitoring Group (PMG), Cabinet Secretariat for 
facilitation.  A number of issues have got resolved through PMG Sub -group and State 
level meeting. 
As a result of intensive review and monitoring, 22 major oil & gas sector projects worth 
Rs. 63,480 crore have been completed during the year, as on 31 st January, 2015.  
These include 3 joint venture projects in power & petrochemicals involving oil & gas 

38 
 
CPSEs that have an investment of Rs. 19631 crore.  Another, 15 projects worth Rs. 
58,023 crore are expected to be completed by 31st March, 2015. 
The approved mechanical completion schedule for Petrochemical Expansion Project 
at Pata was February, 2014 and the same has been mechanically completed in 
December, 2014. The Offsite & Utilities have been already commissioned at the site 
and various process units are under pre -commissioning /commissioning. The trial 
production is expected during March 2015. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 17  
Infrastructural constraints at Jawahar Dweep port in import of crude oil 
 
The Committee have learnt that OMCs are incurring huge expenditure on account of 
demurrage costs on domestic ports due to lack of requisite infrastructure.   The 
committee were informed that BPCL and HPCL have been facing multiple constraints 
at Jawahar Dweep Port at Mumbai during the imports of crude due to daft limitations, 
as the port has only Jetty No.  IV   which is very old and needs to b e repaired.  The  
Committee  have also been informed that there is lack of berthing facility for Very 
Large Crude Carriers (VLCC) and due to these draft limitations, HPCL and BPCL are 
incurring additional freight. 
 
The  committee have now been informed that joint meeting between HPCL, BPCL and 
Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) was held wherein the MbPT has indicated their willingness 
to construct Jetty V in collaboration with HPC L and BPCL and requires an investment 
of  Rs. 525 crore.  Once the new jetty is constructed, a major constraint would be 
resolved in the import of crude oil.  While  observing the benefits of the investments  in 
comparison to the demurrages paid by OMCs  every year, the Committee desire that 
HPCL/BPCL and MbPT should work out an action plan for early construction of Jetty V 
at Mumbai Port. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress and current status of Jetty 5 project for infrastructural constraints at 
Jawahar Dweep Port in Mumbai for import of crude oil is as follows :- 
 
i. Oil Industry officials from BPCL & HPCL had detailed meeting with MbPT 
Chairman on 14 th November, 2014 to take forward the Jetty 5 proposal.  It was also 
decided to form a task -force (nominating two members from each company) for clea r 
understanding and formulation/implementation of the project. 
 
ii. MbPT has assigned the technical consultancy job to M/s IIT Chennai to review 
the cost estimates for Jetty 5 and associated facilities. 
 
iii. Oil industry, MbPT and consultant from IIT Chennai had meeting on 12 th 
December, 2014 to discuss details of Jetty 5 project including provision of mirror jetty, 

39 
 
additional pipeline for crude oil import, wharfage calculations, requirement of additional 
reclaimed land etc. 
 
iv. A Director level meeting of BPCL & HPCL was held on 24 th December, 2014 to 
finalize the proposed Jetty 5 related infrastructure wherein it was decided to go ahead 
with Jetty 5 project.   
 
v. The detailed cost estimation from IIT Chennai for the project is awaited.  Once 
the final project cost is available, Board approvals would be obtained by MbPT as well 
as BPCL & HPCL. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
Safety of Oil/Gas Pipelines 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that there has been increase in the 
number of incidents in oil and gas installations and more than 46 such occurances 
have taken place in various plants, pipelines and installations of Oil PSUs during the 
last two years.  The Committee further note that the major fire incidents have occurred 
in the Vizag refinery of HPCL and in GAIL‟s pipeline in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
The Committee feel that the safety of oil installations is of paramount importance and 
any laxity in upkeep/handling of highly inflammable oil and gas products can be a high 
risk to life, property and environment and therefore consider such high number of 
incidents totally unacceptable.  The committee   therefore, recommend that the safety 
mechanisms of the Oil companies should be regularly monitored by the Ministry.  The 
Committee also desire that the oil companies should have a policy of zero tolerance 
and that all incidents including minor ones should be thoroughly investigated and 
accountability fixed. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards the monitoring of Safety Mechanisms of the Oil companies is concerned, 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) on behalf MoPNG carries out regular monitoring 
of safety system of Oil companies in the areas of downstream refining, marketing 
operation, mid-stream (pipelines) and exploration & production (E&P) operations and 
recommends measures for up-gradation of same.  
 
OISD while formulating safety standards, also carries out intensive field level Safety 
audits of the establishments of such industry. The basic purpose of the same is to 
identify the gaps in the safety systems in those establishments and suggest measures 
to the industry so that no untoward incident takes place in their installations. Findings 
of the audits and improvement actions are not only discussed in threadbare at Plant 
level and shared with the Head of the respective organizations but also regular 
communications are sent to the Chairman/CMDs/CEOs of the organization to sensitize 

40 
 
them on safety aspects and implement improvement actions/safety audit 
recommendations in a time bound schedule with intimation to OISD.  
 
The progress of implementation of the safety aud its recommendations is closely 
monitored by OISD to expedite the compliance with follow ups with industry on regular 
basis. 
 
OISD has further strengthened the safety audits of the industry to effectively monitor 
the safety systems by the specially focusing  critical areas like; implementation of work 
permit system & SOPs, identification of potential operational hazards and suggests 
critical measures for enhancement of Process Safety, safety instrumentations, assets 
integrity, electrical safety using LOTO sys tem, Maintenance & inspections and 
adopting Management of change procedure (MOC) and analysis of incidents.  
 
In this connection, MoP&NG has sent a communication on 10.07.2014 to the industry 
emphasizing compliance of outstanding OISD audit recommendations  and their 
inclusion in the Board Agenda. During past consecutive years, there is increase in the 
numbers of safety audits conducted by OISD with the objective to enhance safety 
management system by industry through their Internal Audit system.  
 
Safety recommendations are also monitored with Industry at higher level  i.e „Steering 
Committee‟ where members are drawn both from PSU & Private Oil & Gas Industry.  
Safety mechanism is monitored at highest level in the Safety Council Meeting chaired 
by Secretary, P&NG.  
 
As regards the investigations of incidents/accidents, OISD carries out thorough 
investigations to identify the basic & root cause (s) and the remedial actions are 
communicated to industry for implementation to prevent the recurrence of su ch 
incidents.  
 
So for the incidents at HPCL Vizag Refinery & Gail Tatipaka are concerned, these 
were got investigated through the Multidisciplinary Committee & High Power 
Committee in association with OISD. The findings & recommendations were circulated 
to all industry to take proactive remedial measures.  Implementation status is also 
monitored by MoP&NG for ensuring compliance. The findings are also utilized as a 
feedback mechanism for updation of OISD standards.  
 
Secretary, MoPNG has directed CMDs of O il PSUs to make a functional director 
responsible  for ensuing adherence to safety standards and safe operations. 
 
After fire incident at Tatipaka ,  GAIL‟s installation,  special review was taken by Joint 
Secretary (Ref), MOP&NG with the Oil & Gas Industry  (PSU as well Private/JVs) on 
23.07.2014 on Safety integrity and healthiness of various pipelines including cross -
country pipelines, jetty pipelines, non -piggable pipelines SPM & sub -sea pipelines. 
Actions drawn are monitored for implementation.  
 
The Mini stry has adopted the policy of Zero tolerance toward any breach of safety 
management systems and as regards the fixing responsibility is concerned, any 

41 
 
breach in safety systems and practices leading to incidents is viewed seriously and the 
Functional Direc tor concerned would be held accountable for such incidents. The 
regional unit heads (GM/EDs) would similarly be held responsible for violation of any 
of the laid down Engineering, Operation and Maintenance practices including non -
compliance with statutory requirements and audit findings.  
 
 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation No. 7  
Utilisation of Budget Outlays 
 
The Committee noted that there is skewed utilization of budget outlays by various oil 
PSUs compare to the previous financial years. In some of the PSUs there is huge 
variation between budget estimates and revised estimates and further, there is under 
utilization of even the revised budget estimates. 
The Committee observed that for the year 2013 -14 under the head Exploration & 
Production (E&P), actual expenditure of Indian Oil Corporation is 985 percent of 
Budget Estimates. Similarly, the actual expenditure of Oil India Limited under E&P 
has been about 327 percent of the Budget Estimates. The Committee further 
observe that in case of HPCL and MRPL, there is underutilization of funds under the 
head refinery and marketing. The Committee are unhappy to find that  in most of the 
oil PSUs, the Budget Estimate and the actuals have wide variance and even the 
Revised Estimate which is generally arrived at during the course of the year has also 
significant variation with the actual fund utilization in most of the years.     
The Committee expect the oil PSUs, some of them Navratnas, to be more serious in 
their budgetary exercises and revamp their budgetary planning mechanism so that 
such flawed estimates are avoided. The Committee also recommend that a stringent 
system should be put in place to ensure that budget projections are achieved in the 
stipulated timeframe for effective planned activity. 
Reply of the Government 
ONGC: 
During the year 2013 -14, against the BE and RE of Rs.35,049.23crore and 
Rs.35,049.06crore respecti vely for Plan capital expenditure, the actual Plan 
Expenditure by ONGC was  Rs.32,469.54 crore. The major reasons for shortfall are on 
account of the following: 
(a) Delay in progressive execution of some of the capital schemes like B193 cluster 
field developmen t, offshore grid interconnectivity project, cluster 7 field 
development, B 127 cluster development and Assam Renewable Project. 
(b) Delay in LAQ. (Rs.825 Crore) for land for Tapti Daman. 
(c) Vashista-S1 Terminal works package could not be awarded due to court case . 
Other packages could also not be finalized due to deviations taken by the 
contractor. (Shortfall Rs 649 Crore). 
(d) C Series well head platform tender has been delayed due to deviation taken by one 
of the bidders. Pipeline tender was re -tendered due to disclosure of price by one of 
the bidders and non matching of the price by L-1 bidder. (Shortfall Rs.447 crore). 

43 
 
(e) Conversion of SagarPragati for whichwork award is in process. This was delayed 
since after opening of price bid, one of the bidders M/s AFCONS appro ached IEM 
and then High court. (Shortfall Rs.445 crore). 
(f) Assam Renewal Project: Execution delays due to slow progress of work by the 
contractor. (Shortfall Rs.334 crore). 
(g) B 127 Cluster development: Delay in award of project (pipeline component) as one 
of the bidders approached Mumbai High Court for opening of their price bid, which 
was dismissed by court. Project was later re -awarded on 08.05.2013. (Shortfall 
Rs.523 crore). 
OIL 
The Revised Estimate for 2013 -14 was Rs.10,439 crore against the initially appr oved 
Budget Estimate of Rs.3,529 crore. Actual Plan Expenditure during the year 2013 -14 
was Rs.9,351 crore.The reason for the variation between Budget Estimates and 
Revised Estimate under exploration and production by Oil India Limited (OIL) during 
2013-14 was due to excess utilization of funds for acquiring assets abroad which was 
not taken into account while preparing the plan outlay due to inherent uncertainties 
involved in „Mergers and Acquisition‟ transactions.  
IOCL 
Out of the total CAPEX Plan Outlay of Rs.11276.76  crores for 2013 -14 of IOCL, 
Budget Estimate (BE) and Revised Estimate (RE) of IOCL in exploration and 
production  (E&P) during 2013 -14 was Rs.689.00 crore and Rs.708.80 crore 
respectively. Actual Expenditure of IOCL in E&P activities during  2013-14 was 
Rs.6789.28 crore. This variation is mainly due to the following reasons: 
(a) Acquisition of 10% stapled participating interest in Pacific Northwest LNG Project 
(10% interest in each of upstream, downstream and LNG off take commitment) 
located in British Columbia (BC), Canada. IOCL submitted RE 2013 -14, along with 
Annual Plan 2014 -15 in January, 2014. As the approval of Cabinet Committee of 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) for investment towards this acquisitionwas not available by 
that time, the provision could not be kept in RE 2013 -14 also.Approval of CCEA was 
received on 21st February 2014, after which, payment was made in March, 2014.  
(b) For petrochemical sector Rs.407.58 crore was spent against BE Rs.1153.76 crore 
due to(i) r eduction of Rs.290.00 crore in “Coal/Coke gasification and Acetic Acid 
Project at Gujarat”. This project was shelved  due to economic viability. (ii)reduction 
of Rs.200.00 crore in “Paradip Petrochemicals Phase -I, Polypropylene Project” due 
to delay in approval although, the project was approved in March, 2014 and (iii) 
reduction of Rs.178.60 crore in “Naphtha Cracker Pr oject in Panipat” due to delay in 
finalization of extra claims, final bills and contract closures.  
Reason for variation in exploration and production sector was acquisition of “Acquisition 
of 10% stapled participating interest in Pacific Northwest LNG Pro ject (10% interest in 
each of upstream, downstream and LNG off take commitment) located in British 
Columbia (BC), Canada” from PETRONAS. 
 

44 
 
HPCL 
Budget Estimate (BE) and Revised Estimate (RE) of HPCL during 2013 -14 were Rs. 
3724.84 crore and Rs. 2485.53 cro re respectively. The expenditure during 2013 -14  
was lower in refinery and marketing due to following reasons: 
(a) Mumbai Refinery additional tankage project at Calico land was held up due 
to environmental embargo, that had an impact of Rs. 84 crore. 
(b) Contribution to JVs has following impact: 
(i) Revision in requirement of Rajasthan Refinery Project for year 2013 -14, 
an impact of Rs. 436.84 crore. 
(ii)  Revision in requirement for JV companies for cross country pipelines with 
GSPL/IOC/BPC due to delay in environmental clearances & delay in 
appointment of Competent Authority for Right of Uses (RoU) for pipeline, an 
impact of  Rs. 124 crore. 
(c) Diesel Hydro-treaterVizag Refinery (DHT-VR) payments scheduled for 2013 -14 
were moved to 2014-15, having an impact of Rs. 250 crore. 
MRPL 
Budget Estimate of MRPL approved by Board during 2013 -14 was Rs.1916.44 crore, 
this was further enhanced by Planning Commission to R s.2524.48 crore. However, 
this outlay was reduced to Rs.1542.84 crore in Revised Estimate (RE). 
BE was made considering the mechanical completion/commissioning schedule of 
various phase -III units & facilities then available which was in turn based on the 
completion schedule of captive power plant given by BHEL. Due to delay by BHEL in 
execution of Captive Power Plant (CPP), the commissioning/trial run of mechanically 
complete units could not be taken up and this resulted in shortfall in payments to 
vendors that were due at commissioning stage.  
BPCL  
During 2013 -14, against BE of Rs.4747.74 crore and RE of Rs.3618 crore, the actual 
expenditure was Rs.4374 crore. Actual expenditure against the plan outlay was 120.9% 
of RE and 92.12% of BE. Major reasons in va riation of actual funds utilization were d elay 
in setting up new continuous catalytic reformer (CCR) and replacement of Crude 
Distillation Unit/ (CDU)/ Vacuum Distillation Unit (VDU) at Mumbai Refinery due to delay 
in getting environment clearance and in getting LOI from PNGRB for two pipelines. 
NRL 
Actual expenditure in 2013 -14 was Rs.372.14 crore against BE Rs.368.88 crore i.e. 
actual expenditure was slightly higher by 0.88%.  
BalmerLawrie 
Budget Estimate for BalmerLawrie during 2013 -14 was Rs.70 crore, t hat is same as 
Revised Estimate. Actual Expenditure during 2013 -14 was Rs.119.55 crore that is 
170.7% of BE. The proposed expenditure was towards enhancement of information 
technology to manage the operation as also to get competitive advantage in the 
existing areas of operations. 

45 
 
CPCL 
The BE for 2013 -14 was Rs.299.27 crore and RE Rs.192.00 crore while actual 
expenditure incurred during 2013 -14 was Rs.228.60 crore. This was primarily due to 
the following reasons: 
In one Project “New 42”Crude Pipeline”, physical activities could not be started due to 
delay in obtaining clearance of MoRTH for laying of the pipeline below paved shoulder 
and service road for a total distance of about 7.5 kms in the Road Projects, connecting 
Chennai Port and Ennore Port. This  has affected financial progress of about Rs.100 
crore.  
GAIL 
During 2013 -14, BE was Rs.7511 crore and RE was Rs.5482 crore against which 
actual expenditure was Rs.4070 crore. The reasons for shortfall are as follows: 
(a) Pipeline: Actual Expenditure on pipeline during 2013 -14 was Rs.659 core against 
the BE and RE of Rs.1776 crore and Rs. 868 crore respectively. The actual 
expenditure is 37% of BE and 76% of RE. Shortfall in the expenditure was mainly 
due to problems related to ROU and land acquisitions.  
(b) Exploration &Production: Actual Expenditure in E&P activities during 2013 -14 
was Rs.449 crore against the BE and RE of Rs.518 crore and Rs.464 crore 
respectively. The actual expenditure was 87% of BE and 97% of RE.  Variations in 
the actual expenditure took place due to delay in obtaining statutory clearances, 
force majeure, bad weather condition for seismic acquisition, down hole 
complications etc. 
(c) City Gas Distribution: Actual Expenditure on City Gas Distribution during 2013-14 
was R s.12 core against the BEand RE of Rs.40 crore and Rs.171 crore 
respectively.Equity investments in the City Gas Distribution projects are primarily in 
the nature of equity infusion to various joint ventures and subsidiaries. The planned 
expenditure in RE 2013-14 was worked out based on the projection on prospective 
growth in City Gas distribution business and fund requirement of these companies. 
Investments planned by GAIL Gas in BE 2013-14 through loan/internal accrual was 
later planned through equity/inter nal accrual mode while framing the RE 2013 -14.  
The reasons for shortfall were as follows: 
(i)   The investment that was planned to be  made by way of equity infusion in M/s 
TNGCL, M/s GGL, M/s AGL  & M/s BGL that was  delayed  due to delay in financial 
closure of these companies. The financial closure were hampered due to waning of 
interest on part of prospective investors due to high price of LNG, longer pay back 
period & regulatory developments etc. 
(ii)   Demand received from GAIL Gas Ltd for Equity cont ribution was less when 
compared to estimates because of less drawl from its Joint ventures. 
 
(d) Business/Project Development: Actual Expenditure in Business/Project 
Development during 2013 -14 was Rs.419 core against the BE and RE of Rs.2042 
crore and Rs.977 c rore respectively. Due to change in scenario in LNG sourcing 
business, GAIL could achieve the prime objective of sourcing LNG without making 

46 
 
any investment in the LNG projects resulting in less utilization of CAPEX than 
planned at the budget stage. 
(e) Petrochemical Projects:  Actual Expenditure on petrochemical projects during 
2013-14 was Rs.2531 core against the BE and RE of Rs.3135 crore and Rs. 3002 
crore respectively. Variations are due to slow progress of some of the contractors 
on account of their financial constraints.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 18  
Performance of Imperial Energy Asset of OVL 
 
The Committee note with serious concern that the Imperial Energy asset of ONGC 
Videsh Limited (OVL) acquired in January, 2009 with an investment to the tune of 2.1 
billion dollars has not been found productive.  Production levels achieved so far have 
not been found commensurate with the estimated levels at the time of acquisition.  The 
Committee have been informed that the deviation from the estimated production is 
mainly due to complexities of the reservoir which have been identified after operating 
the fields and all efforts to ramp up the production from this asset like dep loyment of 
new technologies in specific areas for mitigation of the risk have been applied but of 
no avail. 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that OVL has made huge investment in such a 
geographically complex asset without assessing its ability to pro duce prior to 
investment.  The Committee further note that OVL which has been acquiring assets 
abroad has discovered the complexities in reservoir after acquiring it which is totally 
unacceptable.  This has led to waste of time and investments. 
 
The Committee would like to caution the Ministry/OVL to be prudent and strengthen 
their due diligence procedure in making investments in assets abroad.  The Committee 
also recommend that the accountability of all concerned officials including consultants 
carrying out the appraisal may also be fixed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Post-Acquisition Scenario 
 
Post-acquisition by ONGC Videsh (OVL), Imperial Energy adopted a development 
plan, which resulted in increased production from 6,260 bopd (year end 2008) of 
approx. 19,5 00 bopd by mid -2011. However, the achieved production levels were 
significantly lower than the levels estimated at the time of acquisition.  
 
The major technical challenge before Imperial Energy is to exploit the tight reservoirs 
which hold the majority of  the reserves of the company. This became more evident in 
the course of further development and exploration work after acquisition. In this 
direction, Imperial Energy focused its resources mainly on the lower Jurassic Tyumen 
reservoirs of Maiskoye and tigh t reservoirs in Snezhnoye and Kiev -Eganskoye fields. 
Efforts for exploitation of these tight reservoirs were made by deploying technologies 

47 
 
available in the region at that time. This included (i) drilling of horizontal wells with 
multistage surgifrac (up to 4 stages), (ii) Frac completion of more than one horizon in a 
single well, and (iii) Drilling wells in high angle and focusing hydro -frac in multiple 
zones etc. Mixed results were obtained from these efforts in the tight reservoirs. 
However, the efforts made by Imperial Energy did not give the desired results.  
Applicable Fiscal Regime 
The Fiscal Regime applicable to Imperial Energy assets is based on Tax on revenue 
rather than profits and there is no cost recovery element. It gives moderate returns on 
high productivity per well, but becomes negative once the well productivity is moderate 
to low. On an average, Imperial Energy pays an amount of US$ 78/bbl at oil price of 
US$ 100/bbl to the government of Russia in the form taxes. The tax structure is 
structured in such a way that the profit margins are regulated tightly within a narrow 
band. With every USD 1/bbl increase in oil price, Net back price increases by only 
USD 0.15/bbl. 
 
Deferment of major development activities since 2012 
During further review of  Imperial operations, it was felt prudent that prior to 
undertaking any further development drilling activity, the company should focus on 
identifying suitable technology to economically exploit the tight reservoirs. As a result 
of this decision, Imperial Energy has reduced development activity substantially till 
suitable technology is successfully identified to exploit the tight reservoirs. In the 
period between 2009-10 to 2013-14, Imperial Energy drilled only 76 development wells 
against the plan of 587 wells envisaged at the time of acquisition. 
 
Turnaround Plan 
OVL has informed that, in view of the challenges faced by Imperial Energy to exploit its 
locked oil reserves, the company scouted for suitable consulting firms / domain 
experts to identify appropr iate technology to exploit the tight reservoirs and signed a 
Technology Partnership Agreement in Sep‟ 2013 with Liberty Resources (USA), a 
Denver-based E&P Company and one of the global leaders in hydro - fracturing 
technology and completion in tight reserv oirs for testing the technology in one of the 
oilfields.  Imperial Energy has adopted a twofold strategy of (1) Induction of new 
technology used in US and other parts of the world for analogous tight sand reservoirs 
(2) Tap the prospective Bazhenov shale i n the acreages of Imperial. The Bazhenov 
shale, which is the source rock for the whole West Siberian basin, is well spread in the 
acreages of Imperial providing a sizeable upside for improvement of the production 
performance of the project.  
 
Subsequent to the engagement, a team of experts from the technology partner along 
with the Imperial Energy team has reviewed and analyzed the existing G&G data, 
identified suitable technology and initiated pilot studies. 
Based on pre-pilot results, 4 new wells - 2 each for tight sand and Bazhenov shale are 
planned for drilling and testing. Presently, batch drilling of two wells under New 
Technology is in progress. First oil from the pilot well is expected in June, 2015. The 
full-fledged development of the oilfields shall  follow the pilot program based on its 
results. Success of the new technology coupled with recently announced tax benefit 
for producing tight reservoirs could enable Imperial to increase its production level. 

48 
 
Acquisition process 
Imperial acquisition deal h as gone through a three tier approval process i.e. by the 
ONGC Videsh Board, Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS) and Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), following the due diligence carried out by 
technical, legal, financial and tax & account ing consultants of international standing 
and the Company executives. 
Conclusions of Audit Committee of ONGC 
The conclusions of the Audit Committee on observations of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas on the loss incurred by OVL on purcha se of Imperial 
Energy Company, Russia due to unrealistic estimation of oil reserves on various 
issues are as under: 
1. Observation:Did the management of OVL make best efforts to estimate the 
reserves, profile and potential? 
Conclusion: The Committee considered that the efforts made by OVL for estimation 
of reserves were done with validation by external agencies. Even today, the 
reserve estimates are not widely variant; the extraction of the reserves from 
reservoirs is the problem. The genesis of the impasse is clearly the unanticipated 
geological factors which the data available at the time was not adequate to reveal. 
Technology to extract the oil from the tight reservoirs on a commercially viable 
manner is being searched for.  
 
2. Observation:Did the management during acquisition process secure necessary 
approvals from the Board and from Competent Authorities with proper disclosure? 
Conclusion:Between March 2008 and December 2008 (when the final decision to 
acquire was taken in a meeting o f the CCEA Chaired by the PM) the Imperial 
opportunity was posed for discussion by Management in nine Board Meetings. 
There were two meetings of the ECS and two meetings of the CCEA. Records 
indicate that the management had secured approvals from the Compe tent 
Authorities and disclosed relevant details. 
3. Observation:What has been the post -acquisition scene and what has the 
management been doing to access the hydrocarbon reserves? 
Conclusion:The Company is trying to address the issues of technology in extraction 
of reserves from tight reservoirs. The search hopes to yield positive results in the 
application of modified technology to the unlocking of reservoir but credible results 
have to emerge from the ongoing trails. The genesis of the impasse is clearly the  
unanticipated geological factors which the data available at the time was not 
adequate to reveal. In the matter of acquisition of oil and natural gas assets, an 
element of risk exists as both reserve estimation and extraction are swathed in 
probability ca lculations.In this domain, the dividing line between error and 
reasonable accuracy of estimation of extractable resources is very thin. 
 
4. Observation:What could be the lessons for the future from the above? 
Conclusion:The committee suggested for the future the company should  

49 
 
 Mitigate risk through partnering with National Oil Companies (NOCs) and Oil 
majors would be helpful wherever feasible, and need be strategically 
negotiated. 
 Acquisition should factor in the geograp hical area and play, technical 
challenges of the target asset, existing limitations of technology and prospects, 
the holding power of the Company and its resources. Environmental and 
country analysis would need a well-structured robust methodology in view of the 
need to make judgment based on many variables which are not independent of 
each other. 
 Reserve estimation with limited data needs be very conservative, especially for 
reservoirs which require further stimulation to produce. In this case, in hindsight, 
the projected anticipated production profiles at the time of acquisition could 
have been more subdued.  
 It may be considered that the ONGC Group constitute an Independent Expert 
Group which can audit comment on the method of estimation of reserves and 
estimates of reserves (during the pre -acquisition, exploration and development 
phases) so that areas of concern and comfort are professionally flagged at each 
investment decision stage. 
Response of ONGC Videsh Limited 
Low production is mainly due to unfores een geological complexities and Imperial 
Energy considered it prudent to carry out further analysis and appraisal work prior to 
taking up a full-fledged development program and making any major investment. Such 
mid-course corrections during the development  of any field are not uncommon in oil 
industry.  
As a global practice, all E&P consultants invariably include disclaimer on their 
recommendations and give such recommendations based on the available data at any 
given point of time using their domain expertise. Our in-house experts also work on the 
similar principles of best endeavor basis. As such, E&P industry is risk prone. Best 
efforts are made to minimize the risk using the expertise but risk cannot be eliminated. 
Companies take E&P projects based on their risk perceptions and thus fixing individual 
accountability would not be prudent. 
Regarding strengthening of due diligence process, ONGC Videsh has taken certain 
measures like „Zero Based Risk Review‟ (ZBRR) of the projects before approving the 
same. ZB RR exercise identifies potential risks, mitigation measures and the 
unmitigated risks are factored in valuation.       
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
Allocation of Funds to OIDB 
 
The Committee note that OIDB was established under an Act of Parliament for 
promotion of activities related to the development of oil sector in the country and the 

50 
 
activities of the board are to be funded through cess levied on crude oil and  Natural 
Gas.  A part of this cess is given to OIDB for funding its project requirements after due 
appropriation by the Parliament. 
The Committee observe that OIDB is funding various organizations e.g. DGH, OISD, 
PPAC. CHT and PCRA apart from funding vari ous plan schemes of the Ministry such 
at RGIPT and ISPRL.  OIDB is also working on a number of important projects 
including the National gas Hydrates Programme, ISPRL, etc.  The Committee observe 
that activities of OIDB have been restricted as no funds hav e been released by the 
Government to it during the last three years.  The Committee have further been 
informed that OIDB can function effectively only if regular and adequate funds are 
released by the Government and despite repeated requests made by MoP&NG , MOF 
has not released the funds so far.  The Committee also note that OIDB requires 
around Rs. 3000 crore on immediate basis for funding its requirements for the year 
2014-15. 
 
The Committee feel that activities of OIDB should be viewed with more seriousn ess as 
it is related to Oil and Gas sector striving for energy security in national interest.  
Therefore, the Committee, recommend that the MoP&NG should take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance appropriately projecting the fund requirements and pur sue 
for increased allocation to OIDB. 
Reply of the Government 
 The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Finance from time to time ,  but the 
request was not agreed  by Ministry of Finance.  Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
has again written a D.O. letter dated 02.10.2014  to the Finance Minister to reconsider 
the earlier decision and   
(a) To consider transferring at least Rs.3000 crore on immediate basis to 
OIDB to meet its urgent requirement during 2014-15, and  
(b) To agree to devolution of 75% of the co llected cess proceeds to 
OIDB thereafter for enabling it to render unhindered funding for 
meeting its various commitments.   
The request has not been agreed by Ministry of Finance .  MoF, through  FM‟s D.O. 
letter     No. 22 (01)/PF -II/2008 dated 15.01.201 5 has stated that Government has 
been financing various activities from the budget that qualify as development of oil 
industry within the purview of the Act and in view of the emergent situation of the 
energy security, such expenditure is likely to increas e in the near future.  These 
activities are financed from the resources of the Government of which the Cess under 
the Act is a part.  Since Government cannot withdraw itself from these activities, the 
Cess receipts already stand committed.  Any reallocatio n of the Cess resources for 
activities that are not currently financed from these resources will have adverse impact 
on management of fiscal deficit.   However, Finance Minister has suggested that if any 
concrete proposal for financing suitable/appropriate  project having ramifications in 
meeting the energy security of the country are suggested by OIDB, the same would be 
considered by the Ministry of Finance for providing GBS. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 1  
 
Energy Security and Hydrocarbon Sector 
The Committee note that the mandate for MoP& NG is exploitation of Petroleum 
Reserves, Production, Supply, Distribution of Petroleum and Petroleum Products, 
strengthening energy security by acquiring oil and gas equity abroad, creation and 
administration of strategic petroleum reserves, etc for the c ountry.  The Committee 
further note that activities of MoP&NG touch all sectors of the society in some way.  
Energy consumption is growing steadily over the years as the Government embarks 
upon high growth rate for achieving its development agenda.  The Mo P&NG 
accordingly has a daunting challenge in its hands as at present 80 percent of the 
crude oil demand is met by imports.  The Committee note that while domestic 
production of crude oil/natural gas is stagnant, the Ministry has been active in 
encouraging PSUs to acquire oil and gas assets abroad.   
 
MoP&NG has many organizations under its administrative control namely Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB), Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA), 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), Directora te General of Hydrocarbon (DGH), 
Centre for High Technology (CHT) etc.  The country is facing several challenges in the 
hydrocarbon sector like stagnant production, technological requirements, skilled 
manpower, conservation measures, safety issues, etc.  T he Committee, therefore, 
recommend that MoP&NG should reappraise the activities of these organizations and 
seek funds from the Government so that these organizations/agencies can expand 
their activities and assist in fulfilling the mandate of the Ministry.   
 
Similarly, the distribution, supply and marketing of petroleum products across the 
nation is a logistical challenge.  Considering the demand for such products, MoP&NG 
should enable people to have the products of their choice in a quick and efficient 
manner.  While subsidy remains a key issue, the Committee recommend, that the 
Ministry should focus on the energy security of the country while ensuring access to 
energy sources at an affordable price to the people in a reasonable timeframe. 
 
Reply of the Government 
LPG is marketed by OMCs in  5 kg, 14.2 kg, 19 kg, 35 kg and 47.5 kg cylinders. Out of 
these, 5 kg and 14.2 kg cylinders are available for domestic use while LPG in 5 kg, 19 
kg, 35 kg and 47.5 kg is supplied for industrial / commercial uses. LPG is also supplied 
in LPG Tankers to Industrial customers. LPG marketing for automotive use is also 
allowed in the country since year 2002.  
 
As on 01.02.15, OMCs cater to over 17.7 crore domestic LPG customers through 186 
LPG bottling plants spread across the  country through a wide network of 15450 LPG 
distributors (including 4178 RGGLVs). The coverage of households by domestic LPG 
67.5% as per Census 2011 (projected households).   

52 
 
 
In addition to release of regular domestic LPG connections through distributorships, 
LPG connections are also being released under following categories for better 
accessibility & coverage:  
 
(c) Free Trade LPG ( 5 Kg Cylinder) : 
 
Government has allowed the sal e of 5 kg LPG cylinder with/ without Domestic 
Pressure Regulator (DPR) through PSU Oil Marketing companies (OMCs)  at retail 
outlets, which are accessible to all and are open for longer hours. The scheme was 
launched to cater to consumers that have emerged in big cities who are mobile and do 
not want a permanent LPG connection but may still require it for their needs.   As on 
01.02.2015, the scheme is under operation from  241 retail outlets, 327 distributorship 
points and 192 Kirana stores on industry basis, in 129 cities across the country. 
 
(d) Release of LPG connections to BPL families thru State Government 
Schemes & under CSR fund of OMC: 
 
This is a scheme for release of new domestic LPG connection under CSR Fund 
Scheme to BPL cardholders, whose BPL status h as been authenticated by local 
administration. Under this scheme, one time grant towards security deposit of one 
cylinder and one Pressure Regulator is funded from the CSR Fund.  
(c)  Subsidy / Under recoveries :  
 
In order to protect consumers from the impact of fluctuating crude oil prices,  the 
international market, the Government continues to modulate the price of PDS 
Kerosene and Subsidized domestic LPG and their prices have not been revised in line 
with the prices in the international market. 
 
The G overnment has made the price of Diesel market determined both at Refinery 
Gate and Retail level for all consumers with effect from the midnight of 18 -19 October, 
2014.  This would not only facilitate greater competition in the Auto Fuels Retail 
segment and enhance efficiency in service delivery of the oil companies, but also bring 
benefits to consumers.   
 
Taking into account the energy security concerns of India, the Government, through 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL), is setting up Str ategic Crude Oil 
Reserves with storage capacity of 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) at three locations 
viz. Visakhapatnam (storage capacity: 1.33 MMT), Mangalore (storage capacity: 1.5 
MMT) and Padur (storage capacity: 2.5 MMT) to enhance the energy securi ty of the 
country.  The Strategic Crude Oil Reserves would deal with any disruption in the 
Supply chain due to external reasons.  In exceptional circumstances, the buffer stock 
could also be used to deal with the situation of an abnormal spike in the world  oil 
prices.  The Vishakhapatnam rock cavern storage facility is ready to receive crude oil 
from mid of February, 2015.  The two other facilities at Mangalore and Padur are likely 
to ready by October, 2015. 
 

53 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.) Dated 19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 3 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Scheme for LPG connection to BPL families 
 
The Committee note that a scheme for issuing LPG connections to BPL families was 
launched by the Government and is being implemented through the Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) funds of six major oil companies. A total of 6,16,190 connections 
have been released so far under the scheme utilizing Rs 81.76 crore of the CSR 
funds. The Committee have further been informed that no targets have been fixed for 
the release of connections under the scheme by the Ministry. The major hurdle in the 
implementation of the scheme is authentication of the list of beneficiaries by loca l 
administration in the States/Districts. The Committee expect the MoP&NG to take 
more interest in the scheme by the States about the role of local administration in the 
implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee desire that wide publicity should be given  to the scheme since it is 
meant to benefit poor people. The Committee also recommend  that Ministry/State 
Govts/OMC‟s should fix State -wise and Company -wise targets for release of 
connections under the scheme urgently as to ensure that the benefits of the  scheme 
reaches the poor in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has implemented a scheme to provide LPG connection to BPL families 
w.e.f. 12.01.2010. Under this scheme, one time financial assistance is granted to BPL 
families in rural areas for release of new LPG connection through Rajiv Gandhi Gramin 
LPG Vitaran Yojana(RGGLVY),  equivalent to the rate of security deposit for one LPG 
cylinder and one pressure regulator. The cost of Security Deposit and Pressure 
Regulator (at present 1450+150=1600) is met from funds of the OMCs created for this 
purpose by the contributions from the CSR fund of six major oil companies e.g. 
ONGC, OIL, GAIL, BPCL , HPCL and IOCL.  Recently, this scheme has also been 
extended through regular distributors upto 31.03.2015 on pilot basis. In order to make 
the use of LPG affordable to BPL families, release of Domestic LPG connection with 5 
KG cylinder has also commenced  from Jan‟15 onwards.  As a result, BPL families of 
Urban and Semi Urban areas are also getting benefitted from the scheme. As on 
01.02.2015, total 8,60,644  new LPG connections since inception of the scheme were 
released to BPL families by the Industry, with utilization of Rs.120.84 Crores. 
The scheme is being popularized through RGGLVs as well as regular LPG 
distributorships by distribution of   leaflets, display of locally designed posters/banners 
etc and display of notice board at the distributorships.  
The Officers at field level are already under instruction to maintain regular follow up 
with local administration for expediting the authentication process and also to guide 

54 
 
the distributors and closely monitor their performance in this regard. However, no such 
target can be fixed as release of connection under this scheme requires beneficiary 
authentication by the State Government, which maintains list of BPLfamilies. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated 19th March, 2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Measures to contain subsidy 
 
The Committee note that one of the most important issues faced by the MoPNG and 
the Government is the under -recoveries incurred by OMCs on the sale of petroleum 
products. The Committee also note that the decline in international crude prices is a 
good opportunity to tackle the subsidy burden and effectively control the under -
recoveries borne by OMCs. The Committee further observe that  after the recent 
deregulation in the price of Diesel, the major burden of subsidy for the government is 
on account of sale of two petroleum products i.e. PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG. In 
this regard, the Committee note that for containing the subsidy burden due to domestic 
LPG, measures such as de -duplication of multiple connections, identification and 
cancellation of fake connections, capping of subsidized domestic LPG cylinders, Direct 
transfer of subsidies into the bank accounts have been taken by the Ministry. 
The Committee have been informed that the Modified Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme 
for LPG has been re -launched  w.e.f. 15.11.2014 in 54 districts. However, the Direct 
Transfer of Cash Subsidy on kerosene (DTCK) which was to be implemented in 11 
States/UTs, has been implemented only three States namely, Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
and Goa comprising only seven districts, three each from Rajasthan and Maharashtra 
and one from Goa. Once the schemes take off, the diversion of subsidy with regard to 
sale of PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG is expected to come down substantially. The 
Committee recommend that the Modified Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG and DTCK 
should be implemented by the Ministry in a time bound manner in all the districts in the 
country. 
The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to their 
recommendations in the 11 th and 16th reports (15th Lok Sabha) regarding exclusion of 
higher income group from subsidy of domestic LPG cylinders. The Committee desire 
that OMCs/ MoP&NG shou ld appeal and launch campaign for voluntarily giving up of 
the LPG subsidy by well off individuals and to create awareness in the public so that 
the people may be encouraged to contribute to welfare of their poor breathren by 
voluntary giving up subsidy.  
The Committee would reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like the 
Ministry at the same time to evolve a suitable mechanism to exclude higher income 
group from availing subsidized LPG cylinders. 
 

55 
 
Reply of the Government 
PAHAL (DBTL SCHEME) 
Government of India has re -launched Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG consumer 
(DBTL) scheme namely, `PAHAL‟,  in 54 districts of the country on 15.11.2014 and in 
remaining districts of the country on 1 st January, 2015, covering 15 crore LPG 
consumers across the country. 
LPG consumers who join the PAHAL scheme, will get the LPG cylinders at market 
price and receive LPG subsidy ( as per their entitlement) directly into their bank 
accounts.  All domestic LPG consumers have been given two alternatives in the 
scheme.  If LPG consumer has Aadhaar number, he/ she will have to link it to his/ her 
LPG consumer number and bank account.  Alternatively, he/ she can link his bank 
account directly to his LPG consumer ID.  This alternative ensures that no LPG 
consumer is denied subsidy for want of Aadhaar number. 
All LPG consumers who have not joined the scheme, will be given a grace period of 
three months from the date of launch to join the scheme.  During grace period such 
consumers will get LPG as per their entitlement at  subsidized price.  Additionally, a 
period of three months beyond grace period known as parking period is given to LPG 
consumers for joining the scheme.  During parking period such consumers will get 
cylinders as per their entitlement at market price and s ubsidy will be kept parked with 
OMCs.  This parked subsidy would be released as soon as consumer joins the 
scheme.  However, if a consumer joins the scheme after parking period, the parked 
subsidy would lapse and consumer will get subsidy from prospective date only. 
The PAHAL scheme aims to prevent diversion of subsidized LPG into commercial 
sector and thereby helps in expanding LPG coverage without increasing subsidy 
burden on Government and to ensure that nobody can misuse the LPG subsidy of 
genuine LPG consumers.   
DTCK :-  
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy on Kerosene (DTCK) was initiated based on „in 
principle‟ approval of EGoM dated 8.8.2011. 
A Pilot Project for DTCK was launched in the Block Kotkasim, District Alwar 
(Rajasthan) in December, 2011 by MoP& NG, in collaboration with Government of 
Rajasthan. During the Pilot, subsidy was transferred into the Bank account of PDS 
SKO beneficiaries and PDS SKO was moved at full market price at all points of supply.  
Under the DTCK 2012, a lump -sum one time grant of Rs. 100 Crore for each State 
was to be provided to the states joining the Scheme prior to 31.03.2012. 11 
States/UTs namely, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Andman & 
Nicobar Islands, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa &  Andhra 
Pradesh confirmed their participation in the Scheme within the stipulated period. Out of 
these 11 states, only three States i.e. Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa confirmed 
implementation of  DTCK in their following districts:   
 

56 
 
 
 
An amount of Rs 10 Crore each was released for establishment of an 
institutional mechanism for direct transfer of subsidy in cash for PDS Kerosene 
beneficiaries to the States of Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa during 2012-13. 
Opt Out Subsidy: 
The Government has launched the  ‘Opt out of subsidy’  scheme which is aimed at 
motivating LPG users who can afford to pay the market price for LPG, voluntarily 
surrender their LPG subsidy.  
Action Plan implemented for the scheme : 
 The Hon‟ble Minister (P&NG) had taken a lead in this scheme and had given up 
the subsidy, setting an example for others. 
 The Chairman / CMD of three OMCs and their Board of Directors also 
voluntarily opted out of subsidy. They have also sent out an appeal to their 
employees to join in nation building movement by giving up subsidy.  
 The Hon‟ble Minister (P&NG) has also sent personal letter to employees of 
OMCs who have set an example by giving up subsidy. 
 The consumer opting out the subsidy are being recognized in the scroll of 
Honour given on the website www.mylpg.in    
 The Hon‟ble Minister (P&NG) has already written letters to all Central 
Government Ministers not only requesting them to give up subsidy,  but also 
appeal to the employees in their Ministry/ department to join the campaign for 
opting out of LPG subsidy.  Similar letters were sent to Chief Ministers of the 
States.  
 
As on 17.03.2015,   over 2 lakh consumers have opted out of LPG subsidy. 
Feasibility of targeting of LPG subsidy based on income/occupation: 
 OMCs electronic database does not consist of income (PAN) / occupational 
details of the LPG consumer. Therefore, identification of LPG consumers based 
on income or on basis of occupation is difficult to implement through an 
electronic identification mechanism. The only way to implement thi s would be to 
gather this information from LPG consumers through self -declaration as is 
being done currently in case of PAHAL to collect bank account / Aadhaar 
details. The self -furnished information may not be authentic & cannot be relied 
upon for determining eligibility of subsidy.  
 LPG connections are issued on household basis while the income is calculated 
on individual basis. Hence, mapping of income of household with LPG 
connection would be difficult.  
 Further, not all LPG customers may be having PAN card or all PAN card 
holders pay taxes and this tax paying numbers changes every year. 
States Districts 
Rajasthan Alwar, Ajmer, Udaipur 
Maharashtra Nandurbar, Wardha, Amaravati 
Goa North Goa 

57 
 
 Income data is dynamic and inclusion / exclusion under subsidy will necessarily 
need to be dynamic which would be extremely complex. 
For the  above reasons income based exclusion of LPG subsidy is difficult to 
implement. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March,  2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) 
 
The Committee note that in order to increase the pace of exploration for oil and gas, 
the Government had introduced the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in 1999 
in the country. Under NELP, exploration blocks were awarded to Indian private and 
foreign companies through international competitive bidding process where National 
Oil Companies, viz. ONGC and OIL are also competing on equal footing. The 
Committee also note that so far nine rounds of biddings have been conducted unde r 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) and 10th round is to be held. The Committee 
further note that due to delay in finalization of contractual regime for exploration, the 
further bidding under NELP is held up for nearly three years. Further, the explo ratory 
activities are not taking off in the blocks awarded under earlier rounds due to lack of 
clearances and disputes in interpretation of contracts. The Committee are seriously 
concerned with the lull in the exploratory activities particularly when domes tic 
production is stagnating and demand keeps growing. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should finalise the contractual model at the earliest and 
launch of the Tenth NELP round may be done in order to intensify exploration activities 
in the country. The Committee desire that new contractual regime should have 
provisions for deallocation of blocks by Ministry in case of inordinate delay beyond 
stipulated time frame in carrying out the exploratory programme. 
Reply of the Government 
Appropriate provisions shall be made in the new contractual regime as and when 
finalized to ensure timely completion of the exploratory programme. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated 19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I) 
Reecommendation No. 21 
CSR Funds of Oil PSUs 
 
The Committee note  that as per existing guidelines of Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE), PSUs must spend 2 percent of their profit after tax (PAT) under the  
Corporate Social Responsibility (CS R).  The Committee are  constrained to note that 

58 
 
the targets fixed by the Ministry under corporate social responsibility  and the figures 
for the profit after tax have not been furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee fu rther 
note that the spending on CSR initiatives of some Oil PSUs such as ONGC, OIL, 
BPCL and IOCL have increased during 2013 -14 in comp arison to the year 2011 -12 
and 2012 -13 but the spending of OVL & HPCL have remained stagnant.  The 
Committee are constrai ned to note that the spending under CSR initiative by GAIL, 
MRPL, CPCL and EIL has decreased during the year 2013 -14 as compared to 2011 -
12 and 2012-13.  
The Committee observe  that the activities pertaining to Petroleum and Natural Gas 
sector impact the environment and desire that the Oil PSUs must take initiatives for 
the development of the regions surrounding Oil Installations, plants, exploration 
regions, refineries etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
prevail upon the Oil  PSUs and the CSR funds of these companies should be spent 
fully each year on the welfare activities in a transparent manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Oil PSUs undertake various CSR activities as per DPE guidelines and Companies Act, 
2013.  As part of the CSR activities Oil and Gas companies have taken up over 19,000 
toilets under Swachh Bharat – Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan.  Works have been 
awarded for construction of 7176 toilet blocks, construction works are in progress in 
1331 toilet blocks construction has been completed in 49 toilet blocks as of 13 March 
2015. 
 
The Oil PSU-wise expenditure under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) are as 
under :- 
 
ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL) : 
It is informed that ONGC Videsh Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of ONGC. Its  CSR 
activities are generally carried out by the leader of the consortium (operator) according 
to requirement / guidelines / practices prevailing in the host countries and provisions in 
the PSC/JOA.   Domestic obligation of CSR is undertaken by the Parent c ompany 
ONGC.  Oil PSUs undertake various CSR activities as per DPE guidelines and the 
Companies Act, 2013. 
The Company has been undertaking CSR activities in and around its projects and 
expenditures work out in excess of its budgetary allocation of 0.5% of  Profit after tax 
(PAT) of the Company during previous financial years since 2010-11.  
CSR budget and  the actual expenditure incurred in each year during 2011-12 to 2013-
14 and H-1 of 2014-15 is given below:-  
         
 
 
 

59 
 
 (Rs. in Million) 
Financial 
Year 
Net profit 
of the 
PSU 
(after tax) 
Budgetary 
provision for 
CSR activities 
(0.5% of net 
profit of previous 
year) 
Actual 
Expenditure on 
CSR 
activities 
CSR 
expenditure 
as % of net 
profit of 
previous year 
2011-12 27212 134.53 239.41 0.89% 
2012-13 39291 136.06 208.27 0.77% 
2013-14 44453 196.45 217.1 0.55% 
H-1 of 
2014-15 
 222.25 116.4*  
Oil India Limited (OIL) : 
CSR at Oil India Limited is guided by its' vision of "being a responsible corporate 
citizen deeply committed to socio -economic development in its areas of operations". 
Overall, the company's CSR and Sustainability practices are guided by and 
undertaken keeping in perspective the overarching principles under the DPE 
guidelines (on CSR & Sustainability, 2014) and the Companies' Act, 2013. 
The data on CSR expenditure of Oil India Limited in the past 3 years is provided in the 
table, below : 
CSR Details of the last 3 years of Oil India Limited 
Financial Year CSR Expenditure (INR 
Crores) 
Profit After Tax 
(INR in Crores) 
of 
previous FY 
Percentage of Profit 
After Tax 
2011-12 50.19 2887.73 1.74% 
2012-13 49.63 3446.92 1.44% 
2013-14 72.89 3589.34 2.03% 
>   The total allocated CSR budget for FY 2014-15 is INR 133.31 Crores 
Engineers India Ltd.(EIL) : 
The EIL's comments/ action taken report on the recommendation No. 21 are as follows 
: 
 •    As per DPE Guidelines, 2% of Profit After Tax (PAT) has been allocated 
for CSR activities    in FY 2011-12, FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. 

60 
 
 •     In FY 2014 -15, as per Companies Act 2013, the budgetary allocation 
of 2% of the average of Profit Before Tax (PBT) made during the three 
immediately preceding financial years has  been earmarked for CSR 
activities. 
 •     Spending under CSR during FY 2013 -14 has increased as compared 
to spending during FY 2012-13. 
 •    The details of CSR Budget status is given below: 
          (Rs in lakh) 
Year CSR Budget Amount 
Committed 
CSR expenditure 
2011-12 1045 (2% of PAT) 389 942 
2012-13 1273 (2% of PAT) 686 597 
2013-14 1257 (2% of PAT) 1019 649 
2014-15 1660 (2% of PBT*) 1990** 900** 
* the average of PBT during the three immediately preceding financial years **as on 
19.2.2015  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) : 
Prior to April 2014, ONGC was allocating CSR fund as per DPE/MOPNG Guidelines. 
Subsequently after the enactment of Companies Act 2013 w.e.f. 01.04.2014 ONGC 
has allotted the CSR funds as per the Act. The year -wise details of the profits of 
ONGC, allocation of CSR funds and its utilization have been tabulated below : 
SI. 
No. 
Year Profit after Tax 
(PAT) 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Funds allocated for 
CSR 
(Rs. in Crore) 
and(%ofPAT/PBT) 
Fund utilized for 
CSR 
(Rs. in Crore) 
1. 2011-12 18,924 378.48 (2% of PAT) 121.08 
2. 2012-13 25,123 502.46 (2% of PAT) 262.13 
3. 2013-14 20,296 418.52 (2% of PAT) 341.25 
4. 2014-15 32,897 
Average of Net 
Profit of past three 
years 
657.94 (2% of PBT) 336.54 
(Upto Dec, 2014) 
ONGC is always focused to carry out CSR activities mainly in the regions surrounding 
its oil and gas installation, plants, exploratory areas &  also promptly addressing the 
environmental concerns suitably.  

61 
 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) : 
Indian Oil's CSR Policy has been approved for the year 2014 -15 by the Board as per 
Companies Act 2013, Companies (CSR Policy) Rules 2014 and DPE's guidelin es on 
CSR & Sustainability. 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) : 
We have taken cognizance of the observations of the Committee and we will continue 
to take initiatives for the development of communities surrounding our installations. 
Refineries, Depots etc. 
It will also be our endeavor to utilize the CSR budget to the maximum extent possible.  
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL) : 
Action Taken Report on the Recommendation No.21 in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural  Gas (2014-15) on "Demands for Grants 
(2014-15) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas" is given below: 
The following are the amounts spent by Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL) 
as against the amount allocated for CSR: 
Year Amount Spent  
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Profit Before Tax  
(Rs. in Crore) 
2011-12 372.65 (158.22) 
2012-13 199.43 (1697.69) 
2013-14 101.00 (330.96) 
 
It is to mention that the above expenditure on CSR is being incurred inspite of loss is 
only to maintain continuing projects. 
As recommended by the Committee, CPCL is taking all initiatives for the development 
of the region surrounding the Refineries. 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL) : 
"Comments are noted . HPCL has always taken and will continue to take initiatives for 
the development of regions in and around where it operates. It is also a part of the 
Board approved policy that most of our CSR initiatives should be in and around our 
areas of operations."  
Mangalore Refinery Petrochemical Ltd. (MRPL) : 
Details of PAT,  CSR budget as per the then prevailing DPE guidelines & CSR spend 
for the years 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14  as given are below. 
 
 
 

62 
 
Year PBT PAT 5% of 
previous 
year PAT 
CSR budget 
including c/f of 
unspent from 
previous year 
Total 
Expenditure 
on CSR 
2010-11 1737 1176 - - - 
2011-12 1320 909 5.88 7.09 3.27 
2012-13 -477 -757 4.54 8.36 4.40 
2013-14 409.7 601.2 0.00 3.96 3.57 
 
The Companies Act 2013 has come into effect from FY 2014 -15 onwards, which 
stipulates that the CSR spend shall be 2% of the average of the preceding 3 years net 
profits, PBT. Prior to that DPE guidelines were prevailing for the purpose of calculating 
the CSR budget i.e.  0.5% of PAT of the previous year. 
CSR expenditure of MRPL is FY 2013 -14 has decreased compared to FY 2011 -12 & 
FY 2012 -13, due to losses incurred in FY2012 -13.  In  FY 2013 -14 the CSR 
expenditure is marginally lower than the available CSR b udget, since the entire CSR 
budget was allocated for the construction of a new wing of Government Ladygosch 
Hospital and the expenditure was made based on the bills received up to FY 2013 -14.  
Unspent amount has been carried forward to the CSR budget of FY 2014-15. 
The MRPL has noted Committees‟s observation that the CSR funds should fully spent 
in each year on the welfare activities & should impact the environment surround ing oil 
installations, plants, exploration region, refineries etc, for compliance. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No. 24 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) 
The Committee note that ONGC has be en carrying out the development of 
underground coal gasification in collaboration with Stochinsky Institute of Mining, 
Russia and MoUs have also been signed with CIL, SCCL, Gujarat Mineral 
Development Corporation and Gujarat Industries Power Corporation Ltd. (GIPCL). The 
Committee further note that the advanced stages of the development are to be carried 
out in the coal blocks for which Vastan block in Gujarat has been chosen.  However, 
ONGC could not get the authority to develop that block due to the condi tion that 
applicant has to be a State level operator. The Committee have further been informed 
that in addition to Vastan block, other sites were also being evaluated for suitability 
and four sites namely Hodu -Sindhari (Rajasthan), Kurla (Rajasthan), Tadke shwar 
(Gujarat), Surkha (Gujarat) have been found suitable.  

63 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the UCG technology in the country is still 
under developed. The Committee feel that the development of UCG should not be 
kept limited to Vastan Block and other blocks should also be explored. Further, the 
MoP&NG should take up the matter with concerned State Governments to relax the 
criteria for National Oil PSUs so that the award of the block is not limited to State level 
companies only as these companies have more technological expertise with regard to 
development of hydrocarbon reserves. Since huge coal deposits in India can offer 
avenues for Underground Coal Gasification, the Committee also desire that the 
Ministry should review the policy on development of UCG and take effective measures 
for its exploitation at  the earliest. The Committee are given to understand that the 
technology for UCG is available with other countries for the past several decades and 
therefore, recommend  that the Ministry/Oil PSUs may explore collaboration with the 
countries experienced in UCG for technology transfer.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The matters relating to Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) is being dealt with by the 
Ministry of Coal and as such it will be appropriate if this recommendation is dealt by 
the Ministry of Coal. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated 19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

64 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Production of Crude oil 
 
The Committee note with concern that the stagnant domestic crude oil production for 
the years 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 stands at 38.09 MMT, 37.86 MMT and 37.78 
MMT respectively.  Further, the natural gas production for the last three years has also 
been continuously declining at 47.56 BCM, 40.68 BCM and 35.41 BCM .  The 
Committee observe that most of the production for upstream PSU companies is 
coming from nomination blocks and unde r NELP, the commercial production has 
started from only five blocks awarded to private operators i.e. RIL, Niko and GSPC.  
The Committee are further constrained to note that currently there is no commercial 
production from any deep water block operated by ONGC/OIL under the PSC regime.  
The Committee note with serious concern that the production of natural gas from the 
Eastern Offshore asset in the KG basin also shows a declining trend. 
The Committee observe that while the demand of energy resources is grow ing every 
year, the domestic production of hydrocarbons has not kept pace with the growing 
demand.  Though Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) 
techniques have been applied in various fields and the production has been 
augmented but there is big gap in demand supply scenario.  The upstream oil 
companies have informed that the decline and stagnancy are due to aging oil fields 
and lack of new discoveries in recent times.  The Committee note that ONGC has also 
relinquished its blocks in Kerala-Konkan region after carrying out exploration works for 
the last 30 years. 
Since the National Oil Companies have a crucial role in achieving self -reliance in 
energy resources, the Committee recommend that the MoP&NG should do a 
comprehensive review and fill the gaps in the exploratory programme of Oil PSUs. 
Reply of the Government 
Discoveries and Production by ONGC & OIL in NELP Blocks: 
ONGC has made 42 hydrocarbon discoveries in various operational NELP Blocks. OIL 
has made two hydrocarbon discoveries. All these discoveries including deepwater  by 
ONGC & OIL are in different stages of exploration / appraisal / development and are to 
be put on production as per timelines of the contract. 
 
ONGC is making serious efforts to monetize the oil & g as discoveries made in NELP 
blocks. Field Development Plan (FDP) has been approved by Management Committee 
(MC) of four onshore NELP discoveries viz. Nadiad -1, West Patan-3, Karanagar-1 and 
Vadatal-1. ONGC has applied for Petroleum Mining Lease. As an init iative, in MOU 
parameters, two NELP blocks are considered to be put on production during 2015. 
 

65 
 
Decline of natural gas in Eastern offshore  
As regards gas production, ONGC has been able to maintain gas production above 23 
BCM from offshore and onshore. Dur ing the current year the production is likely to be 
marginally less in view of certain operational set -backs viz.,  restrictions by GAIL due 
to leakage downstream in Bhagodia in April 2014, safety/ maintenance issues, 
stoppage of production from Eastern of fshore, KG and Cauvery Assets in view of 
safety related issues of GAIL pipeline from 27th  June 2014 onwards.  
Monitoring of Crude oil & natural Gas Production 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is monitoring the progress of crude oil & natural 
gas on weekly and monthly basis.  This is being closely reviewed by the Secretary 
(PNG) in review meetings every month with CMDs of ONGC & OIL and DG, DGH for 
production under PSCs. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated 19th March, 2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 13  
 
National Gas Grid 
 
The Committee note that at present, the country is having about 15,000 kms long 
natural gas pipeline infrastructure under operation and the Government has 
announced the establishment of a National Gas Grid across the country with an 
additional 15,000  kms of pipelines. 
 
 The Committee observe that use of natural gas being cleaner, more efficient and safe 
fuel has considerable advantage over traditional fuels.  The completion of gas grid will 
extend the coverage to domestic, industrial consumers and for transport sector ac ross 
the country.  The Committee, however, note that authorizations by PNGRB are still 
awaited in respect of the Barauni -Guwahati-Agartala pipeline with a length of 1300 
kms.  Further, the work in Kochi -Mangalore pipeline has been stalled due to Right of 
Way (RoW) and regional problems /issues. The Committee also note that the capacity 
utilization of existing natural gas pipelines is very poor and at the same time, the 
availability of natural gas in the country is less than the demand.  
 
National Gas grid is an important project to enable the availability of the natural gas in 
different parts of the country.  The Committee, therefore,  recommended that the 
process of establishment of National Gas Grid may be properly planned and 
implemented in a time –bound m anner and would expect the Ministry of ensure the 
availability of natural gas alongwith the progress in the completion of pipeline. 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to complete the gas grid across the country, Government has envisaged to 
develop additional 15000 Km of gas pipelines. Out of this 15000 Km, PNGRB/GoI has 
already granted authorizations to entities for constructing about 11900 Km long 
pipelines and PNGRB is in process for granting authorization to a pipeline of about 
1200 Km under its regul atory framework in terms of PNGRB Act,2006. In addition, 
Government has made an effort to complement PNGRB‟s efforts for completing Gas 
Grid and has identified 3 (three) pipeline sections of total length of 2500 Km for 
development through Public -Private Partnership (PPP) mode with Viability Gap Fund 
(VGF). Out of these 3 pipeline sections,“Ranchi -Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project has 
been approved as the Pilot project for implementation through PPP mode with VGF. 
After successful implementation of above pil ot project through PPP mode, 
Government has plan to consider developing Barauni -Guwahati-Agartala pipeline of 
1300 Km along with the Haldia -Paradip/Srikakulam pipeline through PPP mode with 
VGF. With respect to Right of Way (RoW) issues for laying the Koch i-Koottanad-
Bangalore-Mangalore pipeline, the matter is subjudice before the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court and any way forward can be taken subsequent to favourable judgement for the 
pipeline. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
Delay in ONGC additions Limited (OPaL) 
 
The Committee note that the OPaL project is being implemented by ONGC at Dahej, 
Gujarat with a original project cost of about Rs. 21,396 crore. However, due to delay in 
commissioning of the project, the revised estimated project cost now stands at Rs. 
27,011 crore showing a cost escalation of about Rs. 5000 crore. The Committee are 
further constrained to note that the OPaL is rephasing the loan and financing of 
additional debt for the increased cost of the project will further add to the interest being 
paid by the Company. The Committee are dismayed to note that the feedstock plant 
(C2-C3 Extraction Plant) which will provide feedstock to the OPaL project has been 
completed and lying idle. An additional expenditure of Rs. 100 crore is being incurred 
every year to keep the plant operational.  
The Committee have learnt that this project was scheduled for completion in January, 
2014 and has now been slated for completion by August, 2015. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the OPaL project with such a huge expenditure has been delayed 
and therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure that it is completed by the revised 
timeline and necessary steps are taken to tie up the sources of natural gas for running 
the project. 
 

67 
 
Reply of the Government 
Status update on OPaL  
 As on 31 st December, 2014, the project has achieved 93 % completion (with 
total expenditure of Rs 20,493 crore). 
 Five packages (out of total 17 packages) including the largest package of 
Dual Feed Cracker Unit and Associated Units (DFCU) and the downstream 
unit of Dedicated HDPE unit have been mechanically completed. The 
downstream units of Polyethylene Swing unit and Polypropylene unit are 
nearing mechanical completion. The other packages are also nearing 
mechanical completion. 
 With the availabil ity of utilities and power, pre commissioning activities have 
already commenced so as to start commercial operation by June, 2015.  
 All project related clearances/ statutory approvals and environmental 
clearance has been obtained.  
 The delay in completion was mainly due to non - performance of three work 
packages (out of seventeen), i.e. Cooling Water System, Integrated Utility & 
Offsite, and Effluent treatment and collection system. OPaL has provided 
financial support to these contractors to improve liquidi ty to expedite 
completion. The progress on these work packages has improved significantly 
and progress is being closely monitored by ONGC at the highest level to 
ensure achievement of scheduled timelines. 
 Commissioning team from the Licensors and EPC contr actor has been 
mobilised from 1 st week of December 2014 for start of pre commissioning / 
commissioning of DFCU.  
 All out efforts are being taken by OPaL for commissioning of the Project by 
June 2015.   
 The gas feed for the Project would be supplied from ON GC‟s C2-C3 plant at 
Dahej. The C2 -C3 plant is mechanically completed and ready for 
commissioning. PLL had signed an agreement with ONGC on  6 th January, 
2015 for extraction of C2 – C3 components from LNG at Dahej.  This 
agreement also required certain amen dments to the Gas sale and  Purchase 
Agreement signed between PLL and its three offtakers, GAIL, IOC and BPCL. 
 
Accordingly, an amendment agreement was signed with GAIL on 3 rd February, 
2015.  Although, the formal amendment agreements with BPCL and IOC are  
yet to be signed, as per the discussion held by PLL with IOCL and BPCL, PLL 
has given its consent to ONGC to commission the plant.  ONGC has already 
mobilized its turnkey contractor at site and are expecting to commission the 
plant very soon.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 22 

68 
 
Intensification of Shale Gas exploration 
 
The Committee note that India is known to hold deposits of Shale Gas spread over the 
major basins in India such as Cambay, Assam-Arakan, Krishna Godavari and Cauvery 
basins in the country.  The Committee further note that the Government has 
announced a policy with regard to exploration of shale gas under which National Oil 
Companies have been permitted to explore and develop Shale Gas reserves in the 
country in the blocks provided to them under nomination regime.  The Committee have 
been informed that the ONGC has drilled wells in the Cambay basin for data 
evaluation and assessment of Shale Gas in this region.  It has  further been informed 
by the Ministry that the development of shale gas res erves depends upon the drilling 
of more number of wells. 
 
The Committee observe that the production of Shale gas in U.S. has improved the 
global energy landscape and also impacted the prices of hydrocarbons in the 
international market.  Further, the shale gas availability has also made the energy 
resources affordable.  The Committee note that in India, availability of gas is a major 
concern and crucial for functioning of various projects.  The Committee feel that PSU 
Oil companies should intensify the exploratory efforts in the field of Shale gas and urge 
that more number of wells should be drilled.  The Committee also desire that private 
operators should also be permitted in this field so that the country can benefit from this 
new source of gas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has, on 14.10.2013, notified the policy guidelines for exploration and 
exploitation of shale gas and oil by National Oil Companies (NOCs) in their onland 
Petroleum Exploration Lease (PEL) / Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) blocks a warded 
under the nomination regimes. As per the policy, the NOCs will undertake a mandatory 
minimum work programme in a fixed time frame for shale gas and oil exploration and 
exploitation, so that there is optimum accretion and development of shale gas and  oil 
resources.   
 
Under the first phase of assessment (3 years),ONGC and OIL have been granted 
permission to carry out shale gas and oil exploration and exploitation  activities in 50 
and 5 PEL/PML blocks respectively.  As per the Policy guideline, the com pany shall 
drill, as committed work programme, at least 1 (one) pilot well in single PEL/PML block 
having a contiguous area up to 200 sq.km and at least 2 (two) pilot wells in single 
PEL/PML block having a contiguous area of more than 200 sq. km.   
 
ONGC has committed to drill 57 wells in 50 PEL/PML blocks and OIL has committed 
to drill 7 wells in 5 PEL/PML blocks for Shale gas exploration and exploitation under 
the first assessment phase. ONGC has drilled one well in Cambay Basin, Gujarat 
where coring has been completed. M/s ConocoPhillips of USA has provided technical 
help in well planning and data evaluation stage for the well. Further, ONGC has 
spudded one more well for shale gas & oil exploration in Gandhar area of Cambay 
Basin. In addition, ONGC has collected cores from another 8 wells.  
 

69 
 
A Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) to enable E&P operators including private sector to 
explore and extract all hydrocarbon resources covered under the Oilfields Regulation 
and Development (ORD)Act, 1948 and Petroleum and  natural gas (PNG) Rules, 1959 
under one PEL/PML is under consideration. The uniform licence will enable the 
contractor to explore conventional and unconventional oil and gas resources including 
CBM, shale gas/oil, tight gas, gas hydrates and any other res ource to be identified in 
future which fall within the definition of „Petroleum‟ and Natural Gas” under PNG 
Rules, 1959. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Recommendation No. 23  
Coal Bed Methane 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India had formulated a CBM Policy in 
1997 under which its exploration is being carried out. The Committee have been 
informed that till date 33 blocks have been awarded and the commercial production 
has started from  Raniganj (south block only. Further, the present CBM production 
stands at 0.45 MMSCMD and the Ministry has claimed that at present pace the 
production is expected to be around 4 MMSCMD by 2016 - 17. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that even after huge in vestment of Rs.5000 crore and seventeen 
years, the exploratory efforts have not paid off.  The Committee note that India being 
the third largest producer of coal in the world holds significant prospects of recovering 
CBM from its coal beds and the total pr ognosticated CBM reserves in the country are 
to the tune of 91.8 Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF) spread over 11 States in the country and 
further, around 9.90 TCF reserves have been found recoverable. Since there are 
proven reserves of coal in the country, the Committee feel that the exploitation of CBM 
should be speeded up. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Ministry 
should intensify the exploratory efforts and production of CBM to achieve the set 
production targets within the stipulated timeframe.  
 
The Committee note that ON GC is the only PSU which is carrying out the exploration 
of Coal Bed Methane which is operating four active blocks in Jharia  and Raniganj. 
The Committee recommend that the CBM policy which is under production of CBM 
from various blocks.  The Committee also desire that MoP&NG should permit other oil 
PSUs and more private operators interested in the exploration of this untapped 
hydrocarbon resource . 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Ministry of Coal ar e in correspondence for 
resolution of various issues especially pertaining to simultaneous exploration and 
exploitation of CBM and coal mining by one single operator from the point of view of 
safety of operations and fast track exploitation of both the res ources viz. CBM and 
coal. 

70 
 
As per the CBM policy, 1997, the interested private companies and PSUs can 
participate in the bidding round for exploration and exploitation of CBM. Ten CBM 
blocks have been identified for the future round of bidding. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. G-38011/97/2014-Fin.I (Pt.)  Dated  19th March, 2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
6 August,  2015 
15 Shravana,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairman,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

71 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
 
 EIGHTEENTH SITTING 
(06.08.2015) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday 6 th August, 2015 from 1600 hrs. to 1650 
hrs. in Room No. '139',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shrimati Rama Devi 
4 Shri Elumalai V. 
5 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
7 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
8 Shri Arvind Sawant 
9 Shri Raju Shetti 
10 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
11 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
12 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
13 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
                         RAJYA SABHA 
14 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
15 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
16 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
17 Shri Praful Patel 
 
  

72 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Director 
2. Shri H.Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members. The Committee then 
considered the draft Action Taken Report on the 1 st Report on „Demands for Grants 
(2014-15) of MoP&NG‟. 
 
3.  The Members gave some suggestions for incorporation in the draft Report and 
then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action Taken Report and present/lay the 
same in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject, 
"Ethanol Blended Petrol and Bio -diesel Policy". However, the Members sought some 
more time for going through the draft Report and requested the Hon'ble Chairman to 
cosider the Report in next sitting of the Committee. Hon‟ble Chairman agreed to their 
request and decided to defer the consideration of the Report to next sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

73 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2014 -15) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 24 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 
15, 17 and 19) 
 10 
 Percentage to Total 41.66% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s  (Vide 
Recommendations 7, 18 and 20) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 12.5% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 1, 4, 5, 10,  21 and 
24) 
 
6 
 Percentage of Total 25% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No.  12, 13, 16, 22 and 
23)  
5 
 Percentage of Total 20.83% 
 
 