 
 
 
 
  
8 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Fourth  Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015 -16) held on 
08.12.2015.  
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014 -15) on `Demands for 
Grants (2015 -16) of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas' 
 

 
 
 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2015-16) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Raju Shetty 
15 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
16 Shri Ravneet Singh 
17 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
24 Shri Prabhat Jha 
25 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
26 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Shri Sharad Yadav 
31 Shri Praful Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
 

 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ei ghth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject „Demands for 
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟. 
2. The Fourth Report of t he Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2015.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
to all the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report were received on 27.7.2015. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petrol eum & Natural Gas (2015 -16) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 08.12.2015.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appr eciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 9 December,  2015 
 18 Agrahayana ,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum  and Natural 
Gas (2014-15) on „Demands for Grants (2015 -16)' of MoPNG, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 27.04.2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2015. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 23 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 3,4,5,6,7,9,10,12,13,15,17,19,20,21 (Total 14) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. Nos. NIL  
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos.1, 
2,8,11,14 (Total 5)                       
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final re plies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 16,18,22 and 23 (Total 4)                
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in r espect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Role of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the Indian Economy is growing steadily leading to 
increase in demands for petroleum products by 3.9 percent during A pril – 
December 2014.  However, the Committee note that over 75 percent of its 
demands are met from imports. This has resulted in the import of crude oil to the 
tune of 142.236 MMT during the period April to December 2014.  The Committee 
note that the dome stic crude oil production has been stagnating around 38 
Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) for the last few years and the production of natural 
gas is coming down over a period of time.   
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
mandated with the task of exploration and exploitation of petroleum resources 
within the country has been taking several measures to enhance the supply of 
the hydrocarbon resources.  It has come out with the new formula for gas pricing 
to incentivize the domesti c exploration and production, working on a policy for 
development of marginal fields, gas pooling, shale gas policy, procurement of 
ethanol for ethanol  blended petrol(EBP) Programme, etc.   It is also pursuing 
acquisition of oil and gas assets overseas fo r strengthening the country‟s energy 
security and Indian oil companies are present in around 25 countries. The 
Committee have been informed that strategic crude oil strategic caverns are also 
being built to store crude oil for managing  supply disruptions due to any 
unforeseen events in the global oil and gas market. Even though these measures 
are welcome, the Committee are of the view that improving the domestic 
production of crude oil and natural gas should be the utmost priority for the 
Ministry in order  to reduce dependency on imports from foreign countries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should focus on this 
important goal and take required steps towards achieving this objective". 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:                                         
"During the year 2014-15, the consumption of petroleum products was about 165 
MMT. Annual average growth rate in consumption of petroleum products was 
3.66%.The indigenous crude oil produced in 2014 -15 was 37.464 MMT and of 
which processed in the refineries was about 35.00 MMT. The import of crude oil 
during 2014-15 was 189.434 MMT. Approximately 79% of the domestic demand 
of the crude oil was met from the imports in 2014 -15. Production of natural gas in 
2014-15 was 33.66 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM), which is lower by about 8% of 
target of 36.62 BCM and also lower by 4.94%  than that produced in 2013 -14 
(35.41 BCM). The Government has taken the following initiatives to  increase the 
production of crude oil and natural gas: 

 
 
 
 
A. Enhance production from the existing field by adopting Improved Oil 
Recovery (IOR)/Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) measures using induction of 
latest technology.  
B. Early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries under Production Salary 
Control(PSC) regime has been approved by the Government. This policy has 
addressed rigidities in the timelines of the PSC and has allowed the 
contractors to start production at the earli est. 34 cases have been already 
resolved under this policy framework involving resources worth $ 5 billion.  
C. Marginal Field Policy (MFP) is being formulated to monetize the marginal 
fields of ONGC and OIL which have not been monetized for various reasons i n 
the past. Monetization of these discoveries under this policy through 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) would also help in boosting Oil & Gas 
production of the Country. Lucrative fiscal terms with more autonomy is 
proposed in the policy for making it investor friendly.  
D. A new Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) is being formulated which covers all 
type of hydrocarbons viz. Conventional Oil & Gas, Unconventional 
Hydrocarbons like Shale Oil & Gas , CBM, Gas Hydrate etc. This would help in 
development of all type of hydrocarbons under single license.  
E. Revision of prices of domestic natural gas is expected to incentivize 
production of natural gas in the country. Ministry is also considering providing 
premium for gas discoveries in Deep Water, Ultra Deep Water  and High 
Pressure High Temperature (HPHT) discoveries. 
F. Setting up of National Data Repository (NDR). Physical completion of 
hardware and software has been completed and data population is in 
progress.  
G. Policy approved for exploration and exploitation of Shale Gas/ Shale Oil 
resources by National Oil Companies under the nomination regime. As per the 
policy, ONGC and OIL have identified 50 and 5 blocks respectively. 
Subsequent to Geological and Geophysical (G&G) study, these NOCs will drill 
minimum one well per 200 sq.km. of PML area to assess prospectivity of shale 
Oil/Gas in these blocks. The timeline for assessment and drilling of pilot wells 
is three years which would be completed by October, 2016".  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 
7.      The Committee had recommended MoPNG to give priority to the domestic 
exploration and production of oil and gas in order to reduce the dependence on 
import. In the Acti on Taken Reply, the Ministry has simply informed about the 
multiple steps taken to improve the domestic production of oil and gas which is 
merely a repetition of the work undertaken by the Ministry in the past few years.  
The Ministry has nowhere mentioned anything about the outcome of these efforts 
and the timeline and targets fixed in this regard and specific steps proposed to be 

 
 
 
 
taken to achieve these targets. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and expect the Ministry to accompany f acts with figures and be 
more precise in setting targets under each of the steps enumerated for accrual of 
increased gains in the production of crude oil and natural gas from domestic 
sources in the coming years. 
Recommendation No.2 
Analysis of Plan Allocations 
8. The recommendation of the Committee was as under: 
"The Committee note that the plan outlay of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas for the year 2015-16 is estimated at Rs. 50 crore out of which Rs. 48 
crore have been allocated for Rajiv Gandhi Institute for Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT) at Jais, Rai Barelli, Uttar Pradesh and a token provision of Rs. 1 crore 
each have been made towards ISPRL for strategic crude oil strategic caverns 
and for setting up Petroleum University in Andhra Pradesh  as per the Andhra 
Pradesh Re-Organization Act, 2014. 
The Committee observe that during the year 2014 -15, the RGIPT was allocated 
Rs. 42 crore in the Budget Estimates which was reduced to 1 crore in the 
Revised Estimates but still no money was utilized.  A n amount of Rs.1 crore was 
provided in Budget Estimates (BE) of 2014 -15 for ISPRL to fill up strategic crude 
oil reserves to enhance the energy security in the country. The Committee further 
observe that the Revised Estimates for 2014 -15 show that an amoun t of Rs. 
2400 crore was allotted for this purpose which remained unutilized.  Also a sum 
of Rs. 1 crore allocated on plan side for setting up of a Petroleum University in 
the State of Andhra Pradesh remained unutilized.  
In addition to the budgetary alloca tion for the Ministry, the main activities are 
carried out by the PSUs from the funds generated out of Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and the PSU's Plan Budget  for the year 2015 -16 is 
about Rs. 76,565.46 crore.  The funds are utilized by th e PSU‟s for the activities 
under the Heads Exploration & Production, Refinery & Marketing, Engineering 
etc.  
The Committee are disappointed that the plan allocation of Revised Estimates 
(RE) of Rs. 2402.00 crore under all the three Heads remained unutilize d which 
shows the Ministry in poor light. The Committee expects the Ministry to ensure 
the proper monitoring of the utilization of the budgetary allocations on plan side 
to avoid any underutilization". 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 

 
 
 
 
"During 2014 -15, the proposed RE was Rs.70349.32 crore. However, due to 
some typographical error in the Budget Document 2015 -16, the total RE has 
been printed as Rs.72589.32 crore with RE for OVL Rs.12387.00 crore against 
proposed RE of Rs.10147.00 crore. The total actual utilization during 2014 -15 by 
oil and gas PSUs was Rs.69828.81 crore i.e. 99.26% of Revised Estimates of 
Rs.70349.32 crore (against printed RE of Rs.72589.32 crore which is about 
96.20%).This has been taken up by the Ministry with Budget Division of Ministry 
of Finance. The unutilized RE amount is Rs.530.51 crore. The activity -wise 
actual expenditure during 2014-15 is as follows: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Activities 
2014-15 
Revised Estimates 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Percentage of 
Utilisation to RE 
1. Exploration & 
Production 
51146.92 44731.23 87.46 
2. Refinery & 
Marketing 
16947.76 21805.65 128.66 
3. Petrochemicals 2096.64 3212.14 153.20 
4. Engineering 158.00 79.79 50.50 
Total 70349.32 69828.81 99.26 
 
As regard monitoring of the utilization of the budgetary allocation on plan side, 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is constantly monitoring the status in 
monthly review meetings taken by Secretary (PNG) and also intermittently by 
Hon‟bleMinister of State (I/C), M/o PNG.The com pany-wise reasons for slightly 
lower achievement in utilization of actual funds against RE are as follows: 
Oil Natural Gas Company(ONGC): 
 Less expenditure in case of delayed projects.  
 Lower expenditure on drilling activities as exploratory and development  drilling 
meterage & wells were lower due to non-availability of Charter hired rigs.  
 Deep water operations hampered due to naval exercise & rough weather 
conditions. 
 
 
ONGC Videsh Limited(OVL): 
 Rs.4875 crore was kept in BE and Rs.610 crore in RE for new acquisition during 
2014-15. However, there was no major new acquisition that could get 
materialized during the year. 
 Savings of US$ 35 million due to early completion of development wells in BC -10 
Brazil.  
 General delay in activities in Venezuela due to ca sh flow and contractual 
challenges. 
 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL): 

 
 
 
 
 Shortfall in expenditure under petrochemical sector due to the project “Coal/Coke 
Gasification and Acetic Acid Project at Gujarat ”Refinery was dropped as the 
project was not found viable. 
 
GAIL INDIA Ltd.(GAIL): 
(1) Exploration and Production:  This includes all segments, other than 
petrochemicals, including Pipelines, Business Development projects, Exploration 
and Production, City Gas distribution: The shortfall in plan CAPEX is due to: 
 Less capital expenditure in pipelines of Rs.466  crores than planned due to:  
i) hindrance due to Right of Use(ROU) problems, especially in 
Tamil Nadu and Kerala mainly in Kochi -Koottanad-Bangaluru-
Mangalore Phase -II.  Further, progress in  replacement of 
pipelines in KG Basin with planned expenditure of approx Rs.100 
crores in RE has also been affected due to ROU issues; 
ii) statutory permissions and contractual issues especially in 
VijaipurKota Pipe Line (VKPL) spurlines ;  
iii) consumer tie-up awaited for some pi pelines esp BNPL Spur 
lines (Uttaranchal) 
 Shortfall due to lack of investable Merger and Acquistion (M&A) 
opportunities Rs.100 crore. 
 Shortfall in equity investment in Gail Gas by approximately Rs.120 crore. 
 Shortfall in E&P segment by Rs.100 crore as  les s cash call was received 
from operators 
 
(2) Petrochemical segment: 
 Time lag in payment vis -à-vis actual progress in Petrochemical expansion project 
and slow progress of some of the contractors due to financial constraints resulting 
in shortfall of approx. Rs.180 crore 
 
 Non approval of Phenol Acetone Project by the Board thereby leading to CAPEX 
shortfall of approx. Rs.340 Crore. 
 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL): 
 
Lower investment in Joint Venture projects due to: 
 The proposed amount of Rs.740 crore for Rajasthan Refinery could not be 
utilized as the projects is under review by the State Government of Rajasthan,  
 Rs.538 crore allocated for subsidiary company  M/s Prize Petroleum for 
acquisition of discovered/produci ng E&P blocks was revised to Rs.62 crore. 
However, funds requirement has been met through debt funds,  
 Rs.188 crore allocated for JV project of LNG terminal at Chhara, Gujarat due to 
change in terms of reference (TOR) conditions, environmental clearance go t 
delayed and hence FEED for LNG terminal could not be carried out in 2013 -14 
as envisaged. 

 
 
 
 
 Rs.137 crore allocated for JV Project of cross country Gas Pipelines with 
GSPC/BPC could not be utilised due to delay in getting Right of Way(ROW) 
approvals and environmental clearance. 
 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL): 
 Crude oil Pipeline Project: The planned expenditure of Rs.100 crore for laying 
42” New Crude Pipeline could not be incurred for want of clearances from 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  
 Mounded Bullets: The Budget estimate break up was based on the project 
approved cost of Rs.279 crore, whereas the expenditure became lower due to 
the lesser awarded contract value of Rs.199 crore.Delay in sand availability in 
the region due to restriction by State Government. 
 Resid Upgradation Project: Project hindrances due to „Brown field Project 
Nature” like less space availability for fabrication/storage, underground - 
redundant pipes & cables and restricted radiography permit timings etc. lowered 
the physical progress which resulted in lower financial progress.  
 
Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. (NRL): 
 Against BE of Rs.177.65 crores, there has been a shortfall in actual expenditure 
by Rs.74.88 crores. This shortfall in actual expenditure was primarily due to less 
than anticipated expenditure against the Wax project. For the Wax project, BE 
was provided at Rs.154.65 crores, against which actual expenditure was 
Rs.89.57 crores (shortfall by Rs.65.08 crores) primarily due to deferment in 
commissioning of the proj ect from first quarter to fourth quarter of the financial 
year. 
 
Balmer Lawrie & Company: 
 
The company has made a further commitment to increase CAPEX to the tune of 
Rs.74.09 crore as on 31.03.2015, which includes an amount of Rs.72.00 crore 
towards the equity contribution in the Joint Venture with Vishakhapatnam Port 
Trust (VPT) could not be ma de due to delay in finalization of the land lease 
agreement with VPT".  
 
10. The Committee had taken note of the underutilization of plan allocations of 
Revised Estimates of Rs. 2402 crore by MoPNG during 2014-15 and had therefore, 
recommended the Ministry  to ensure the proper monitoring of the utilization of 
the budgetary allocations on plan side to avoid any underutilization during 2015 -
16. However, the Ministry in its reply has only stated about the normal procedure 
being followed in the Ministry for mon itoring of budgetary allocation at Secretary 
and Minister level without any mention of specific steps being taken to ensure the 

 
 
 
 
full utilization of plan allocation.  Simultaneously, the Ministry has also informed 
about some typographical error in the Budge t Document 2015 -16.   As per 
corrected data,  the actual utilisation of plan allocation by oil and gas PSUs was 
to the tune of 99.26 percent of Rs.70349.32 crore resulting in slight 
underutilization of Rs.530.51 crore over RE. The Committee however note th at 
99.26 percent is the cumulative percentage utilization comprising the expenditure 
under all activity heads.  Actual utilisation during 2014 -15 under the head 
Exploration & Production and Engineering were pegged at 87.46 and 50.50 
percent only. A signifi cant shortfall in actual utilisation under these heads is a 
matter of concern and not an indicative of the balanced utilisation of the 
allocation. In Committee's view underutilization of allocations directly impacts the 
domestic crude oil and natural gas p roduction. This rather reflects lack of proper 
and pragmatic planning on part of MoPNG/PSUs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to be more prudent in their preparation of estimates as 
well as sincere in utilization of budgetary allocation to avoid such shortfall in 
utilisations of the funds. 
Recommendation No. 8 
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy for PDS Kerosene (DTCK) 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the Ministry has launched DTCK scheme for 
transferring cash subsidy into the bank accounts of SKO beneficiaries under PDS 
was launched as a pilot project in the block Kotkasim, District Alwar, Rajasthan in 
December, 2011 by MoP&NG. In 2012, it was decided that a lump sum one time 
grant of Rs. 100 crore would be given for each joining State. The scheme is to be 
implemented by state Governments and consequently, 11 States/UTs namely 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Andaman & Nicobar Island, 
Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa and Andh ra Pradesh 
confirmed their participation in the scheme. However the Committee have been 
informed that till date only 3 states viz. Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa have 
confirmed implementation of DTCK. Direct Cash transfer of subsidy in 
consumer‟s accounts is an effective tool in better targeting of intended 
beneficiaries and checking diversions. The Committee opine that the DTCK 
scheme should not remain confined to few blocks or states or few UTs rather be 
expeditiously implemented in the remaining states/U Ts in coordination with 
respective state governments without causing further delay. The Committee 
desire that a road map with timeline for extending DTCK across the country be 

 
 
 
 
prepared primarily focusing on areas in states where the kerosene demand is 
high. The Committee desire that the Ministry should also ensure the easy 
availability of non-PDS kerosene in the open market". 
12.  In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:                                         
"The Direct Cash Transfe r of Subsidy for Kerosene(DTCK) was launched in 
2012. 11 States/UTs namely Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, 
Andaman & Nicobar Island, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, 
Goa and Andhra Pradesh confirmed their participation in t he scheme. Out of 
those, only 3 states viz. Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa have confirmed 
implementation of DTCK in a few districts. Since, the distribution of kerosene is a 
matter in the domain of the State Governments/UT Administration, the State 
Governments/UT Administration  are being addressed in this regard.   
On the issue of ensuring the easy availability of non -PDS Kerosene in the open 
market, it is stated that existing Kerosene wholesalers of Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) and parallel marketers ar e allowed to market non -PDS 
Kerosene to small consumers. However, with a view to ease the availability of 
non-PDS Kerosene for sale in the open market, the Government has amended 
the Kerosene (Restriction on Use and Fixation of Ceiling Price) Order, 1993. By 
virtue of this amendment, all the activities of storage, transportation and sale of 
non-PDS Kerosene have been freed of regulatory control.  This is expected to 
reduce demand for diverted PDS Kerosene by improving availability of non -PDS 
Kerosene in the  open market and will thus meet the demand of Kerosene for 
various legitimate end uses for the industry and for individual consumption at 
market price".  
13.   The Committee had noted that  the Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy for 
Kerosene (DTCK) scheme intended for transferring cash subsidy into the bank 
accounts of SKO beneficiaries under PDS and only  3 states out of the total 11 
joining states/UTs had confirmed implementation of DTCK. The Committee had 
therefore, desired for expeditious implementation of DTCK in the remaining 
states/UTs in coordination with respective state governments.        
                      The Ministry has informed that this scheme is being implemented only in a 
few districts of these three States and the State Governments/UT A dministration 
are being addressed by MoPNG in this regard , as the distribution of kerosene is 
in the domain of the State Governments/UT Administration. The reply has 
nowhere hinted upon any measures suggested/devised by MoPNG to expedite 
the implementation  of DTCK throughout the country.  The Committee do not 

 
 
 
 
concur with this approach of  Ministry. The MoPNG being at the helm of affairs 
cannot get away from the responsibility of delays in implementation of such an 
important scheme. Successful implementation  of DTCK scheme, launched by 
MoPNG to ensure reach of every rightful beneficiary to the subsidised kerosene 
under PDS is the collective responsibility of MoPNG and State Governments. The 
scheme can prove to be a significant step forward in curbing adultera tion, 
diversion and misappropriation of this important petroleum product. The 
Committee therefore reiterate their recommendation of expeditious coverage of 
remaining  states under the scheme in a time bound manner and desire that a 
state-wise follow up rep ort be submitted to this Committee within a period of 
three months. 
Recommendation No. 11 
Recovery factor 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that in the Exploration and Production programmes, the 
recovery factor achieved by the exploration companies in the fields is an 
important factor to assess its effectiveness. The Committee are dismayed to note 
that the recovery factor o f ONGC & OIL for crude oil and of OIL for Natural Gas 
are considerably low in comparison to the International Standards. As against the 
international benchmark range of Recovery Factor of 35 -40 percent for oil 
reservoirs and 55 -70 percent for gas reservoir s, the current recovery factors of 
ONGC and OIL in respect of crude oil are as low as 27.01 percent and 23.23 
percent. In case of Natural Gas, ONGC is able to maintain it around 54.26 
percent, whereas recovery factor of Oil India Limited for Natural Gas is around 43 
percent which is not as good as ONGC. This is a matter of great concern as both 
the upstream oil companies have not been able to recover the oil as per global 
standards.  
The Committee note that E&P companies are adopting multipronged strategies  
to enhance recovery factor and undertake various IOR/EOR schemes to improve 
the Recovery factor and for arresting the declining trend of oil production. The 
Committee further note that every year, upstream oil companies claim new 
discoveries and simultane ously undertake IOR/EOR schemes to harness 
incremental oil but even then the recovery factor shows no sign of improvement 
.The Committee have been informed by ONGC that the existing  recovery factor 
is not satisfactory and want to take it to global levels of 40 percent for ONGC. 

 
 
 
 
The Committee desire that OIL should also take serious measures to improve the 
recovery factor of crude oil and gas from its fields.  
The Committee recommend that E&P companies should undertake concerted 
efforts including technology  measures needed to enhance the performance of 
their aging fields so as to improve the present recovery factor of the companies 
to international level".  
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:- 
"ONGC puts concerted efforts to i ncrease the performance and to improve its 
recovery factor through various corrective measures/technologies to achieve its 
recovery factor up to the level of Global standards which is also one of the 
Strategic Goal of ONGC. The Salient measures taken to en hance global 
recovery factor are as under: 
 
 Aggressive IOR/ EOR development schemes:  
 
 In-situ combustion in heavy oil fields of Balol, Santhal, Lanwa Fields 
 Polymer flood in Sanand Field 
 Alkali Surfactant Polymer (ASP)  chemical EOR Pilots in Viraj, Jhalora and 
Kalol 
 Miscible gas injection in Gandhar field 
 Implementation of WAG ( EOR process)  in GS -11 and GS -9 sand of 
Gandhar 
 
 Integrated rolling redevelopment plans  
 
 Implementation of schemes in MHN, MHS, Heera and Neelam fields 
 Improving Water Injection 
 MEOR Applications 
 
 Indigenously developed cost effective microbial EOR technique is also 
being applied to improve production from wells of Ahmedabad, Mehsana and 
Assam fields. 
 Hi-tech drilling/ completion/ stimulation 
 
 In-fill drilling of hi-tech wells including horizontal, high angle, multilayer and 
multilateral wells.  
 Hydro Fracturing and multi stage hydro fracturing in tight reservoirs 
OIL 
 
OIL has taken measures for enhancing recovery factor of its field through various 
IOR/EOR schemes.  OIL is also looking for induction of advanced state -of- the-

 
 
 
 
art technology in line with International E&P companies to improve the recovery 
factors in its mature fields". 
 
16. The Committee in their recommendation had expressed th eir disappointment 
over the low recovery factors of ONGC and OIL  and had recommended these 
PSUs to undertake concerted efforts including technological upgradation  needed 
to enhance the performance of their ageing fields to improve the recovery factor. 
The Committee note that notwithstanding the elaborate measures taken by both 
the companies to increase upon their performance, the reply does not mention 
whether there is any improvement in recovery factor or not in the aftermath of 
these measures being imple mented. The Committee also expect the Ministry's 
reply to provide the details of the projections for the increase in the performance 
and exact improvement in recovery factor post implementation of these 
measures. The Committee, reiterate their recommendation and desire these PSUs 
to put in their earnest efforts to bring about  the requisite improvement in 
recovery factor by keeping clear -cut targets and for real assessment of the 
effectiveness of the measures being undertaken. 
Recommendation No. 12 
Rig availability 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that rigs are the key equipment for carrying out exploration 
and production activities. ONGC for its onshore exploration activities has a total 
of 69 rigs in which 68 are owned and 1 has been hired on charter hire basis. 
However, this appears to be in marked contrast with the rigs deployed in offshore 
areas, where out of the 33 rigs, 25 are charter hired rigs and only 8 are owned by 
ONGC. The Committee further observe that as per sta tus submitted by ONGC, 
there are no purchases in pipeline for rigs. As regards OIL, the total number of 
drilling rigs available are 18 with 9 owned rigs and 9 charter hired rigs. 
 
The Committee note that the idle time for the charter hired rigs is quite hi gh for 
both the upstream oil companies with OIL accounting for 25 percent idle time and 
ONGC at 26 rig months involving huge financial loss. This idle time has been 
incurred due to some avoidable and manageable constraints like rigs waiting for 
logistics a nd waiting on locations on ready sites which affects the productive 
period of rigs.  
 

 
 
 
 
The Committee understand that Oil India Limited (OIL) has contracted rigs for 
KG-ONN-2004/1 in the area of Thanelanka in East Godavari District which is 
lying idle due to lack of proper planning in the work location causing huge loss to 
the company. The Committee deprecate such lackadaisical attitude of the 
company and desire that all such cases of hired rigs lying idle should be looked 
into and a report submitted to them within a period of one month.  
 
The Committee recommend that upstream oil companies should concentrate in 
effective planning and management of exploration programmes so 121 as to 
ensure optimum utilisation of rigs. The Committee have noted that some of the  
offshore rigs which have been hired on contract basis at a cost of more than Rs. 
1000 crore for a period of 3 years. The Committee would also like ONGC to 
embark on a programme to systematically increase its owned offshore rigs fleet 
to reduce the dependence on the hiring of the offshore rigs. The Committee also 
desire that the upstream oil companies strive to achieve the productivity level of 
rigs inline with international benchmark". 
 
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"Delay in mobilization of Rig in KG Basin 
OIL has plan to drill a well  in a riverine island near Lanka Thanelanka village of 
East Godavari District  in the State of Andhra Pradesh. OIL has completed all the 
civil works in December 20 14 except the retaining wall for protection from the 
floods on the riverside of the plinth.  The only means of approaching the location 
is using a bridge IRC Class B (158 m length).  
 
Just prior to actual rig movement to the location in January 2015, the v illagers of 
Thanelanka in a letter addressed to the District Collector, East Godavari District 
listed out a number of demands including construction of a retaining wall from the 
national highway to the bridge along the irrigation canal for a distance of ab out 
4.9 km and also submitted a resolution not to allow the movement of the rig and 
rig related materials over the bridge. 
  
Subsequently, Revenue Divisional Officer (RDO), Amalapuram and District 
Collector East Godavari District convened meetings on 05.02 .2015 and 
24.02.2015 respectively to convince the villagers about the utilization of the 
bridge. However, the villagers have vehemently opposed the same in the 
meeting.   
 
The matter has been appraised to The Chief Secretary, Govt. of AP, Hyderabad 
in a me eting on 23.02.2015 and also requested his intervention. OIL is 
continuously pursuing the matter with the concerned authorities for earlier 
resolution of the problem. 
 
Procurement  of offshore rigs by ONGC 

 
 
 
 
In view to reduce dependency on the hiring of the offshore rigs, ONGC has a 
plan to increase ONGC own jack -up rigs from 6 to 10 numbers and Floater rigs 
from 2 nos to 3 nos.  
 
Increasing productivity level of drilling rigs 
ONGC is in process of strengthening Benchmarking Norms. Further efforts are 
being made by inducting newer technologies to achieve the productivity level of 
rigs in line with international benchmark.   
 
As far as OIL is concerned, drilling as a part of E & P activity involves operation 
in very remote areas, adverse geological & environmental conditions. OIL has 
been taking proactive actions to curb the idle time of drilling rigs and thereby 
cutting down the well cost and improving the efficiency of the drilling operations. 
 
As desired by the committee, a report on cases of hired rigs lying idle has been 
submitted to Lok Sabha Secretariat  vide this Ministry‟s letter No.G -
38011/47/2015-Fin.I dated 10-07-2015". 
 
19. The Committee had noted the considerable insufficiency of owned offshore 
drilling rigs in ONGC fleet against the hired rigs and had therefore recommended 
ONGC to go for systematic increase of its owned offshore rigs to reduce 
dependence on the hired offshore rigs. The Committee are pleased to note fr om 
the reply of the Ministry that ONGC have decided to increase their jack -up rigs 
from 6 to 10 and Floater rigs from 2 to 3 numbers for offshore exploration. After 
purchase of these rigs the total count of the offshore rigs would be 13 and it 
would proportionately cut down the need of hiring drilling rigs. The Committee, 
however, note that for this purpose they have not prepared any timeline.  
Moreover even after getting these rigs the number would still fall considerably 
short of the ONGC requirement for offshore exploration. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the rig purchases to suit E&P requirements, should be done 
under a fix time frame and it should be a continuous exercise by ONGC/OIL 
instead of spending the huge capex of upstream oil companies on  charter hired 
rigs. 
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Development of Marginal Fields 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that till 2007, ONGC had 165 marginal fields with estimated 
quantum of oil/gas reserves of 1691.863 MMT (O+OEG) in  place & 431.544 
MMT (O+OEG) ultimate reserves, and in the year 2014, a total of 201 fields were 
grouped as marginal fields by the company. Besides this, OIL has 6 marginal 
fields in state of Assam which are to be monetised. The production from these 
fields contributed about 8 percent of total crude oil production of ONGC during 
2013-14. The Committee further note that there are certain economical 
constraints in development of marginal fields and hence these are commercially 
unviable. ONGC has made a reques t that fiscal incentives be provided to make 
the development of these fields economical. The Committee note that ONGC has 
so far awarded 25 marginal oil and gas fields on service contract for their 
development. The Committee note that Ministry is mulling over the introduction of 
policy for marginal fields of NOCs to speed up the development of hydrocarbon 
discoveries from these fields. The Committee desire that process of policy 
formulation for marginal fields must be expedited and suitable incentives be 
included in the policy after studying of the pros and cons. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress made in the matter at the earliest". 
 
21. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"Union Cabinet on 02.09.2015 approved the Marginal Fields Policy (MFP) for 
developments of hydrocarbon discoveries made by National Oil Companies 
ONGC and OIL which could not be monetized for many years due to various 
reasons such as isolated locations, small size of the re serves, high development 
costs, technological constraints, fiscal regime etc. 
69 hydrocarbon discoveries made by ONGC and OIL have been identified for 
award through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) process. The evaluation 
for award of blocks will be  made in a transparent manner based on the fixed 
quantifiable parameters for biddable fiscal package to the Government and 
committed work programme for the offered block. 
This policy will give rights to oil companies for exploration and production of both,  
conventional and non -conventional hydrocarbons. Regulation of the awarded 
blocks will be through proposed revenue sharing contract designed on the 
philosophy of `Ease of Doing Business' requiring minimum regulatory burden for 
monetising these fields. 
  

 
 
 
 
The policy has been notified by the Ministry".  
 
22. The Committee are pleased to note that Government has approved the 
Marginal Field Policy for development of hydrocarbon discoveries made by 
ONGC and OIL and the same has been notified by the Ministry on 14.10.2015.  The 
evaluation procedure for award of 69 hydrocarbon discoveries through 
International competitive bidding process is to be started for these blocks. The 
Committee note that as a new initiative, policy provides for the combined right of 
oil comp anies for exploration and production of conventional as well as 
unconventional oil and gas reserves including CBM, shale gas/oil, gas hydrates 
etc. The Committee desire that the process of awarding these blocks within a 
time frame  be initiated soon to brin g about the earliest fruition of hydrocarbon 
blocks.   
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Coal Bed Methane 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that our country has the fourth largest proven coal reserves 
in the world  and holds significant prospects for exploration and exploitation of 
Coal Bed Methane.  The estimated CBM reserves in the country are about 92 
Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF).  The Committee further note that so far 33 CBM blocks 
have been awarded under four CBM rounds and  the total prognosticated CBM 
reserves in these 33 blocks is about 63.3 TCF of which so far only 9.9 TCF has 
been established.  But commercial production has commenced from only 1 CBM 
block i.e. Raniganj (South) and total CBM production is about 0.76 MMSCMD. 
 
 
The Committee further note that as on date, 8 CBM blocks have entered 
development phase, 5 CBM blocks are in exploration phase and 4 CBM blocks 
are awaiting granting of PEL from state government.  The Committee are not 
happy with the slow pace of the exploration and exploitation of CBM.  After the 
first commercial production started in the year 2007, the commercial CBM 
production has not yet picked up.  The Committee desire that development 
activities in CBM areas be pursued by MoP&NG with State author ities on regular 
basis. 
 
 
The Ministry has informed that in view of the recent judgment passed by Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court cancelling the allocation of coal blocks, certain issues are being 
re-examined and further MoP&NG and Ministry of Coal are in correspondence for 

 
 
 
 
resolution of various issues pertaining to simultaneous exploration and 
exploitation of CBM and Coal Mining by one single Operator from the point of 
view of safety of operations and fast track exploitation of both the resources viz. 
CBM and Coal.  The Committee desire that MoP&NG should pursue the issues 
with MoC to arrive at acceptable solution to give a fillip to CBM exploration". 
 
24. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply  in this 
regard: 
"As per CCEA's approval dated 19.12.2013 and subsequent directions of 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on 10.07.2015, this ministry is in the process of 
notifying the right of exploration and exploitation of CBM to CIL and its 
subsidiaries from the Coal bearing areas under their Mining Lease. Notification is 
to be issued shortly. 
 In this respect it is also informed that the Ministry of Coal (MoC) has already 
 conveyed the decision of CoS to CIL vide letter dated 29.07.2015".  
 
25. The Committee had recommended that the MoP&NG should work towards 
early resolution of issues pertaining to simultaneous exploration and exploitation 
of CBM and Coal Mining by one single operator and MoP&NG should pursue with 
Ministry of Coal to arrive at a  solution to give fillip to CBM production in the 
country.  The Ministry has informed that it is in the process of notifying the right 
of exploration and exploitation of CBM to CIL and its subsidiaries from coal 
bearing areas under their mining lease will be issued soon. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts of the Ministry for pursuing the matter and desire that once 
the notification is issued, a roadmap for exploration of CBM should be prepared 
by CIL and the same should be strictly adhered to in order to achieve desired 
results in a time bound manner.  
 The Committee however, note that the reply of Ministry is silent about 
giving permission for simultaneous exploration of CBM and Coal Mining to 
operators other than Coal India Limited. The Committee are not  satisfied with this 
and desire that other operators in this field should also be allowed to explore 
both CBM and Coal simultaneously. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the Ministry's view in this regard. 
 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
National Gas Grid 
26. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"In order to complete the National Gas Grid, Government has identified various 
gas pipeline sections of total length of about 15000 kms in addition to existing 
15000 kms. Out of this, 3 pipeline sections of to tal length of about 2670 kms are 
under consideration to be implemented through Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode. The Committee further note that one of these pipelines namely Ranchi -
Talchar-Paradip pipeline has been identified by MoP&NG as a pilot pro ject for 
developing through PPP mode. GAIL has been appointed as the sponsoring 
authority. The Committee note that GAIL has completed route survey and market 
demand survey and DFR is under preparation. The PPP agreement is expected 
to be executed by December 2015 depending on the success of this pilot project, 
other pipeline projects would be implemented. The Committee desire that 
MoP&NG should monitor the development of this pilot project closely and step in 
to sought out issues wherever required as the success of this project is crucial for 
future pipeline projects to be implemented by this PPP mode".  
27. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"In order to complete the National Gas Grid, Government has iden tified various 
pipeline sections of the total length of about 15,000 Km in addition to existing gas 
pipeline infrastructure in the country. Out of this additional 15,000 km, three 
pipeline sections of about 2670 km have been identified by MoPNG for 
development through PPP mode with Viability Gap Funding (VGF). Out of these 
three pipeline sections, “Ranchi -Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project has been 
approved as the pilot project for implementation through PPP mode with VGF. 
The remaining two pipeline sections  will be considered for implementation 
through PPP mode after successful implementation of the pilot project. 
 
MoPNG has appointed GAIL as the Sponsoring Authority for implementing 
“Ranchi-Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project through PPP mode. GAIL has 
submitted application to Department of Economic Affairs for IIPDF funding for 
pre-project activities/project structuring. Reconnaissance route survey and 
market demand survey has been completed by GAIL. Detailed Feasibility Report 
(DFR) for the project is under preparation and is expected to be completed 
shortly. GAIL has floated the tender for appointment of Financial cum 
Transaction and Legal Adviser (TA) for recommending project structuring and 
bidding for selection of private parties and the same is also expe cted to be 
appointed at the earliest. Besides, MoPNG is also facilitating PNGRB to approve 
the project structuring and bidding process for selection of private party as 
envisaged in VGF scheme for the pilot project to be implemented through PPP 
mode". 
 
 

 
 
 
 
28.    The Committee note that out of the upcoming pipeline network of  15,000 km 
three pipeline sections of  total length of 2670 km have been identified for 
development through PPP mode with  Viability Gap Funding (VGF ) by MoPNG. 
One Pipeline section nam ely “Ranchi-Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project has been 
approved for laying as a pilot project. The Committee have been informed that 
GAIL as sponsoring authority for implementing this pipeline segment is in 
process of completing its pre project activities. The Committee would like to point 
out that implementation under PPP mode with VGF is a new concept and 
outcome of this project will be keenly watched across the other sectors of 
economy too. Therefore the Committee desire that MoPNG /MoF/GAIL should 
ensure the successful and timely implementation of this project". 
 
Recommendation No.18 
Setting up of Barmer Refinery 
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that a new grassroot refinery of 9 MMT capacity is being 
setup at Barmer, Raj asthan by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited and 
Government of Rajasthan having 74 percent and 26 percent equity respectively 
in the venture. The refinery is expected to commence its functioning within 48 
months after receipts of all statutory clearan ces, including environmental 
clearance. However it has been informed that project activities are presently on 
hold owing to the pending various project related issues by end of March 2015. 
Besides this, minutes of meeting of Expert Appraisal Committee of M inistry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF), held regarding the public hearing of MoEF for 
environmental clearances are also awaited. Since setting up of refinery was 
intended since long for better monetization of the locally produced crude oil from 
the Barm er oil field and for extending benefits to the native population, the 
Committee recommend for early resolution of the issues pertaining to setting up 
of refinery".  
30. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Government of India has accorded its approval for setting up of a 9 MMTPA 
Greenfield Refinery-cum-Petrochemical Complex in Barmer District of Rajasthan 
in September 2013 as a Joint Venture between HPCL and Government of 
Rajasthan at an estimated capital c ost of Rs.37,229 Cr. (2013 -Q1 prices) with a 
construction time frame of 48 months from the zero date of the project i.e. after 
receipt of all statutory clearances, including Environmental Clearance. The 
HPCL-Rajasthan Refinery Limited (HRRL) has been incor porated in September 

 
 
 
 
2013 as a Joint Venture Company of HPCL and Government of Rajasthan 
(GOR) with HPCL holding 74% equity and GOR holding 26% equity.  
Subsequently, Finance Department, GOR in February 2014 advised that the 
project is to be reviewed by th e Cabinet sub -committee for final decision about 
the project.  Consequent to GOR‟s decision to review the project, the project 
activities have been put under hold. 
In a meeting taken by Secretary, MoP&NG with GOR and HPC officials in 
December 2014, a Commi ttee consisting of Dir -Finance and Dir -Refineries from 
HPCL and Principal Secretary Finance and Principal Secretary – Mines & 
Petroleum from GOR was constituted to discuss the various project related 
issues and submit a report.  The above Committee has hel d 3 meetings so far. 
Meanwhile, GOR engaged M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers (PWC) to advise 
them on the project.  PWC submitted its draft report in the first week of May 2015 
to GOR and HPCL forwarded its comments thereon to GOR on 12.6.2015.  
MoP&NG had appr oved extension of time upto 30.6.2015 for submitting 
Committee report.  The Committee is yet to submit its report. In the meanwhile, 
GoR through HPCL has requested further extension of time for the Committee to 
finalize and submit report.   
Environmental Clearance: Public Hearing was conducted by Rajasthan State 
Pollution Control Board in May 2014. The Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of 
MoEFCC held a meeting in February 2015 and sought additional information on 
various aspects of the project. Inputs pertaining to Salt Miners‟ Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (R&R) have been sought from Govt. of Rajasthan. The proposal 
shall be resubmitted to EAC for Environmental Clearance after compilation of 
desired information". 
31. The Committee note that the setting up  of Barmer refinery is being 
reviewed and project activities are presently on hold. A Committee consisting of 
HPCL officials and state government officials of Rajasthan have been constituted 
to discuss various project related issues. The Committee desire t hat impasse 
affecting the progress of project should soon be resolved. The Committee would 
like to await the outcome of this exercise and final replies of the MoPNG 
regarding setting up of refinery at Barmer.   
Recommendation No.19 
Performance of Refineries 
32. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the Indian Refinery industry has established itself as 
major player globally with a refining capacity of 215 MMTPA in the country. The 

 
 
 
 
PSU refineries have a capacity of 120 MMTPA, priv ate sector refineries account 
for 80 MMTPA capacity and JV refineries have a capacity of 15 MMTPA. The 
refinery performance is generally assessed on various key performance areas 
(KPA) like energy efficiency index, process utilization, transportation fuel,  
production cost, margins etc. The Committee note that wide performance gaps 
have been registered in PSU Refineries and most of them have come in last 
quartile in respect of key parameters.  
The Committee note with concern that CPSE refineries have been fo und lagging 
considerably on key performance areas vis -a-vis their Asian and global 
counterparts particularly in key areas like energy efficiency, operational costs, 
Gross Refining Margins, transportation of fuels and production costs etc. In view 
of the fa ct that India is emerging as a refinery hub and expanding its refining 
capacities with successive additions, the Committee strongly feel that an upkeep 
and efficient performances of the existing refineries must not be ignored. In 
Committee‟s view, PSU refineries should be a demonstration of energy efficiency 
measures in the country.  
The Committee while noting that the refineries have started taking a number of 
measures to improve upon their performance in the deficient areas, recommend 
that requisite technologies and knowhow be sourced to upgrade the performance 
parameters to bring them at par with the global refineries". 
33. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in this 
regard: 
"a) Indian PSU Refineries are taking number o f steps to improve upon 
their performance in the deficient areas, as under : 
 Energy Intensity Index 
 Power generation through condensing turbine stopped, leading to 
substantial energy saving in Refinery. 
 
 Source of hydrogen for VGDS has been changed to CRU  which leads to 
shutting down of HGU & improvement of EII. 
 Improvement of steam traps performance by dynamic optimisation through 
expert agency. 
 Replacement of the old energy inefficient units with the state of art new 
efficient units through Integrated Refinery Expansion Project  
 Actions initiated to explore import of cheaper grid power for Refinery 
operation instead of power generation from Captive Power Plant (CPP) 
using liquid or Gaseous fuel in Refinery 
 Over the years, the PSU refineries in India have adopted and 
implemented number of energy efficiency improvement measures to 
reduce the Energy Consumption. The average Specific Energy 

 
 
 
 
Consumption of PSU refineries has been brought down from 76.4 in 2005 -
06 to 62.0 in 2014-15. 
  Process Utilisation and Operational Availability 
 Improving the run -length between planned turn -arounds of major process 
units 
 Strengthening of inspection and monitoring system to improve 
plant/equipment reliability 
 Improving Overall Asset Integrity and Reliability  
  Gross Refinery Margin Improvement 
 The refineries have gradually changed from a simple hydro -skimming / 
thermal cracking refinery to complex refineries with combination of major 
secondary processing units like Fluid Catalytic Cracking (FCC), 
Hydrocracker (HCU), Delayed C oker (DCU), Catalytic Reforming (CRU) 
along with Hydrogen generation and Hydro -treatment facilities. Retrofitting 
existing configuration of refineries to handle high „Sulphur‟ & heavy 
„opportunity crude oil‟ for upgrading bottom of the barrel to valuable 
distillates and improved refinery margin for the future. 
 The average distillate yield (% wt. on crude) of PSU refineries has 
improved from 73.3 % in 2005-06 to 78.5 % in 2014-15. 
 
  b) Refinery Modernisation 
 Indian refineries are adopting modern technologies for production of 
petroleum products and upgrade the technologies in line with the International 
trend and as per the requirement. 
 The details of modern technologies employed in the refineries is given below : 
 Apart from primary processing t echnologies, viz., Crude Oil Fractionation by 
Atmospheric Distillation and Vacuum Distillation for initial separation, 
following are the major modern process technologies employed across PSU 
refineries for producing petroleum products : 
 i) Secondary/Upgradation Technologies for yield improvement  
 Thermal cracking processes, viz., Visbreaking, Delayed Coking 
 Fluidised Catalytic Cracking, INDMAX Technology 
 Hydrocracking 
 ii) Quality Upgradation Technologies : 
 Catalytic Reforming, Isomerisation, Alkylation, Prime G for meeting the quality 
specifications of Petrol w.r.t. octane number, benzene content, aromatics, 
olefins, sulphur, distillation etc. 
 Diesel Hydro-desulphurisation (DHDS), Diesel Hydro-treating (DHDT) for diesel 
for reduction of sulphur & PAH (Pol y Aromatic Hydrocarbons) and cetane 
number improvement 

 
 
 
 
  iii) Petrochemical Integration: Naphtha cracker, Polypropylene 
 production etc".  
34.   The Committee note that a number of technological upgradation measures 
have been taken by PSU refineries to improve their key Performance areas 
namely Energy Intensity Index, Process Utilisation and Operational Availability, 
Gross Refinery Margin and have over the years successfully  improved its 
performance in these key areas. The yield however has not increase d in the 
requisite quantum as the PSU refineries are still several notches below the 
international benchmark. Though the average Specific Energy Consumption of 
PSU refineries has been brought down in an effective manner from 76.4 in 2005 -
06 to 62.0 in 2014 -15, the average distillate yield of PSU refineries has only 
improved to 78.5 percent in 2014 -15 from 73.3 percent in 2005 -06 by the 
introduction of a number of technological advancements. The Committee desire 
PSUs to identify the bottlenecks in its refineries and carry out modernisation on a 
continuous basis through enhanced allocation of funds for this purpose and 
regular monitoring  to achieve the desired outcome in the performance of 
refineries. 
Recommendation No.22 
Centre for High Technology (CHT) 
35. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that Center for High Technology is a specialized agency 
entrusted with the responsibility of assessing future technology requirement for 
acquisition , development and adoption in the field of ref inery processes, 
petroleum products, additives, storage and handling of crude oil/gas and other 
products. The organisation hires officers and staff from oil companies on 
deputation basis to carry out its activities. The organisation get its funding 
through grants from OIDB and expenditure towards performance improvement 
programme are borne by concerned refineries. Apart from this, expenses on 
performance benchmarking studies are shared by CHT and PSU refineries. The 
agency for fulfilling its various objecti ves carry out regular monitoring and 
performance evaluation of refineries, undertake performance improvement 
programmes on centralized basis, joint energy audits and provides centralised 
technical assistances, performance benchmarking of refineries, knowle dge 
dissemination, refinery technology meets, workshops. It also coordinate funding 
of research work in refining and marketing areas and pursues programmes of 
Scientific Advisory Committee on Hydrocarbons (SAC) and Hydrogen Corpus 
Fund. The Committee obser ve that CHT is primarily focusing on activities and 

 
 
 
 
projects pertaining to refinery sector and extending its expert guidance and 
support to improve upon the performances of refineries. However, the Committee 
recommend that CHT should slowly diversify and u ndertake Research & 
Development projects pertaining to upstream sector to function as a guidepost 
for adopting new and advance technologies".  
36. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"It is a considered view of MoP&NG that CHT s hall take up technical and other 
R&D projects of downstream Hydrocarbon sector. However, the recommendation 
of the Committee regarding involving CHT in upstream sector  has been noted".  
37.    The Committee had recommended for undergoing diversification o f the 
activities of the Centre for High Technology and develop it into an organisation 
undertaking Research & Development projects for upstream as well as 
downstream sector. The Committee however are not satisfied with the replies as 
the Ministry has simpl y put forth its views without mentioning  the credible 
reasons for not endowing CHT with additional responsibility to extend the benefit 
of its R&D services to upstream sector.  The Committee are of the view that if 
CHT cannot be entrusted with R&D activit ies of upstream sector, then there may 
be a separate agency catering to R&D requirements of upstream oil companies. 
The Committee desire the Ministry to be more receptive and open minded for any 
constructive suggestions and giving a serious effort to weigh  the possibilities. 
The Committee wish to be updated regarding the follow up action taken on the 
matter at the earliest.      
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 3 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) 
 
The Committee note that Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology is being set up 
at Jais, UP to cater to educational and training requirements of Petroleum Sector.  The 
Institute is running its academic acti vities from a temporary makeshift campus at Rae -
Bareli since 2008.  The Committee are concerned to note that RGIPT has suffered 
delays in its progress due to various reasons.   
The total estimated cost of the project has escalated to Rs. 695.58 crore as ag ainst the 
initially approved estimates of Rs. 435 crore in the year 2007.  The committee note that 
the construction could not be completed due to failure of the contractor and the contract 
was terminated in May 2013.  A new contractor has been engaged in S eptember 2013 
for carrying out the composite works for completion of the campus and the project was 
achieved 86 percent progress in March 2015. The Institute is now expected to achieve 
its completion by March 2016. The project which was scheduled to be com pleted in the 
XI plan is still lying unfinished and has suffered considerable cost and time spills over.  
The Committee have been informed that EFC meeting held on 24.2.2015 has approved 
the total revised cost estimates of Rs. 538 crore and the rolling ove r of Rs. 199 crore 
from XI plan to XII plan. Rs. 48 crore has been allocated for the financial year 2015 -16.  
The Committee desire for an effective utilization of allocated funds in the current fiscal 
to complete the planned activities in the Project and t he Committee recommend that 
Ministry should stick to the commissioning deadlines set for RGIPT and postponement 
should be avoided at any cost.  The Committee also note that there was a plan for 
setting up of a RGIPT Centre in Shivsagar, Assam.  The Committee desire that the work 
on setting up of RGIPT Centre at Shivsagar be expedited and necessary allocations 
therefore, sought from the Ministry of Finance.  
Reply of the Government 
RGIPT Jais Project  
EFC meeting has cleared the proposal for Revised Cost Est imates of Rs. 538 crore and 
rolling over of Rs. 199 crore from 11th FYP to 12th FYP and approval of competent 
authority to the EFC recommendation has also been received.  Rs. 48 crore allotted for 
financial year 2015-16 is being released.  
RGIPT Assam Project 
EFC / SFC note for additional fund of Rs. 92 crore is being prepared.  
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Strategic Storage of crude oil reserve - Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves 
Limited (ISPRL) 
The committee note that in order to enhance the country„s oil security, a special 
purpose vehicle namely, Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) has 
been formed as a wholly owned subsidiary of OIDB, which is establishing strategic 
caverns with capacity of 5.33 MMT at three locations in the country viz. 
Vishakhapatnam (1.33MMT), Mangalore (1.5MMT) and Padur (2.5MMT) respectively in 
Phase-I. The Committee further note that the Vishakhapatnam cavern has been 
completed and is ready to receive the crude oil supplies.  Other two caverns are also 
expected to be ready by October, 2015. 
 During the year 2014 -15, a sum of Rs.2400 crore was provided under Revised 
Estimates for purchase of crude oil for filling up the storage cavern.  The Committee 
have been informed that this money was allotted on 31 st March, 2015 and only Rs. 600 
crore out of Rs. 2400 crore was permitted to be drawn.  The allotted amount could not 
be utilized due to procedural technicalities as this sum was included  in Capital Head by 
Ministry to which CAG which pointed out that  the money should ha ve been included 
under the Revenue Head. However, the Ministry have informed the Committee that 
OMCs have placed an order for one VLCC cargo of crude and they would be 
reimbursed through supplementary grants during the current year. 
 The Committee, however , take serious note of the lapse of resulting in non -
utilization of allocations funds for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should be  more cautious in future in taking action on time and utilize 
the allocations for purchase of crude oil to store in the strategic storage caverns to take 
advantage of low prices in the international market. 
 The Committee deplore the lack of understanding over technicalities on the head 
under which the expenditure is to be incurred by the conc erned Department/agency 
losing sight over the larger issue of buying crude oil for strategic caverns at lower 
international rates.  This is a classic case where the procedures are held sacrosanct 
over the purpose and the funds were allowed to lapse.  The C ommittee would strongly 
expect all concerned Departments/ Ministries to introspect and facilitate smooth 
functioning.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 31 st 
March, 2015 has inter -alia decided that the entire cost for filling crude oil in 
Visakhapatnam cavern will be met by the Government of India against the 12th Plan 
outlay of Rs. 4948 crore under the GBS Scheme of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
for the  Indian Strategic Storage Programme for storage of crude oil by ISPRL. The 
remaining amount would be used for filling up the strategic part of the caverns which are 
being constructed at Mangalore and Padur.  

 
 
 
 
2. Pursuant to the decision of Ministry of Finan ce, Department of Expenditure 
agreed to make a provision of Rs.2400 crore in the first supplementary of 2014 -15 and  
approved an  amount of Rs.600 crore to be paid as advance to ISPRL for 
implementation of the project out of the RE -2014-15 provision on 31s t March, 2015.  
However, due to non -approval of the relevant debitable Head by the Office of 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India (C&AG), the said amount could not be released.  
3.  Thereafter, MoPNG requested Ministry of Finance to advise on the correct  
Budget Head to be used so as to enable drawl of amount as and when funds are made 
available. Budget Division, MoF advised that classification of expenditure on payment to 
ISPRL for strategic crude oil reserve as capital expenditure is based on the princip le to 
build up and maintain the strategic crude oil reserve.  As the crude oil reserve is to be 
maintained consistently, it is appropriate to classify the expenditure as capital 
expenditure rather than revenue expenditure. Being capital expenditure, it is 
inappropriate to classify the expenditure as Grants-in-Aid (whether grants-in-aid general 
of grants for creation of capital assets) at the final tier of classification.  Budget Division 
of Ministry of Finance has advised MoP&NG to apprise the Office of C&AG of the above 
rationale for classifying the expenditure as capital expenditure and to request that Office 
to consider maintaining this classification as capital expenditure as proposed earlier.  
Accordingly, approval of Budget Division has been sought for  opening of heads of 
accounts on 24.07.2015. 
4. In the meanwhile, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd and Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation agreed to bring 2 VLCCs each for filling the crude in Visakhapatnam cavern 
after arrival of the 1 st VLCC, the filling at the Vi shakhapatnam cavern commenced on 
14th June, 2015.  
5. Also, MoP&NG has noted the recommendations of the Committee for compliance 
in future.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
OM Ni. G-38011/47/2015- Fin. I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No. 5 
Petroleum University in Andhra Pradesh 
The Committee note that in terms of Schedule 13 of Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation 
Act, 2014, Government of India is to establish a Petroleum University in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh.  In this regard, Government of And hra Pradesh has identified a land 
measuring 150 acres in Subhavam Mandal, Vishakhapatnam and a letter has also been 
sent to RGIPTon 16.3.2014 to take further action for acquiring and transferring the land 
from Government of Andhra Pradesh to establish the University.  University Grants 
Commission has also been approached by RGIPT for setting up the university.  RGIPT 
has also submitted a DPR for Rs. 855 crore to MoP&NG.  
The Committee note that a provision of 1 crore was allotted under RE for the purpose of  
Petroleum University during the year 2014-15 remained unutilized. For the current fiscal 

 
 
 
 
also, Rs 1 crore has been allocated for establishing the university.  The Committee 
recommend those formalities for acquiring and transferring the land from Government of 
Andhra Pradesh to Petroleum University be pursued with adequate sincerity for 
expediting the process.  The Committee further desire that necessary allocations may 
be sought for this purpose as and when required during the year.  
Reply by the Government 
Rs. 1.00 crore allocated as token provision in FY 2014 -15 for establishment of 
Petroleum University in Andhra Pradesh, could not be released since the appraisal by 
EFC had not been done. The EFC proposal will be prepared once the land is 
identified/acquired Government of Andhra Pradesh has been requested to identify the 
land. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-20 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Analysis of Non-Plan Allocations 
The Committee observe that the non -plan outlay of the Ministry for the year 2015 -16 is 
estimated to be Rs.30,075.55 crore.  The Non Plan Budget for 2015 -16 primarily 
comprises of Rs.21140 crore for LPG subsidy under Direct Benefit Transfer on LPG 
(DBTL) scheme and Rs.660 crore for paying other subsidies  for LPG including NE 
region and Rs.200 crore for Project Management Expenditure.  The Committee note 
that this year, under -recoveries on sale of petroleum products mainly on domestic LPG 
cylinders and PDS kerosene have been replaced by subsidy on sale of domestic LPG 
cylinder by direct cash transfers in consumers account under DBTL programme of the 
government.  In this connection, a token provision of Rs.1 crore has been kept for the 
purpose of Kerosene subsidy under Direct Transfer  (DTCK) project, besides  keeping 
Rs.7999 crore payable under the Head „Kerosene‟ subsidy for NE region.  Further 
Rs.16.40 crore for Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) and Rs.2.09 
crore for Society for Petroleum laboratory have been earmarked for them respectively. 
Also, an allocation of Rs.27.06 crore has been kept for Secretariat -Economic services 
for the Ministry.  Further, Rs.20 crore and Rs.10 crore have been allocated as Grant in 
Aid to State and UT‟s respectively for Establishment of institutional mechanism for direct 
transfer of subsidy in cash for PDS Kerosene beneficiaries.  The Committee note that 
the Head under DBTL for LPG has been provided Rs.  21,140 crores for the current 
year.  The Committee observe that if the cost of LPG goes up, the subsidy element  of 
the cylinder would also go up and accordingly more funds may be required under this 
Head of account.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should keep 
a strict vigil over the fund outgo under this head and take necessary action as and when 
required so that the consumers should not be put into difficulties for getting subsidy for 
purchase of domestic LPG cylinders. 
 

 
 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
MoPNG has earmarked Rs.16.40 crore for Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) for BE 2015-16 against their proposal of Rs.22.06 crore. This has been 
done after scrutinizing head-wise details of RE 2013-14 and BE 2014-15. Thus, relevant 
steps are taken to keep vigil over the outgo of funds to PNGRB. 
Reply with regard to DBTL to LPG consumers 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Further, this Ministry is keeping 
a strict vigil over the fund outgo under this head and will review the matter at RE stage. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No.7 
Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG consumers (DBTL) 
 The Committee note that the DBTL Scheme named „PAHAL‟ meant for 
transferring LPG subsidy in consumer‟s bank accounts has been launched across the 
country from 01.01.2015. The Minist ry has informed that the DBTL scheme is the 
largest direct transfer scheme in the world has received adequate response from 
around 81.8 percent i.e. 11.89 crore of the 14.54 crore of active consumers. The 
Committee further note that Government has successf ully achieved its target of 
enrolling 80 percent of the consumers before 01.04.2015. The Committee find that 
albeit overall target for enrolment of consumers have been achieved, it is found that in 
states like Mizoram, Nagaland, Manipur & J&K less than 50 percent consumers have 
enrolled. The Committee have noted that a number of measures have been taken to 
facilitate and ease out difficulties being faced by consumers in the process to enroll in 
the DBTL Scheme. 
 The Committee have been informed that though generally the subsidy amount is 
transferred electronically into consumer‟s account within 48 hours, however due to 
involvement of several stakeholders like distributors, Banks and National Payment 
Corporation of India (NPCI) in the subsidy transfer process , the actual crediting of the 
subsidy amount may get sometimes delayed. The Ministry should ensure that genuine 
LPG consumers who do not have bank accounts are covered under Jan Dhan Yojna so 
as to receive the subsidy in their bank accounts. Besides devisi ng methods and 
procedures for containing increase the enrollment rate in the lagging states and make 
the DBTL Scheme successful by achieving highest degree of consumer satisfaction. 
The Committee desire that Ministry/OMCs should also continue the KYC proce ss to its 
logical conclusion to eliminate multiple and fake connections in individual/household 
consumers. The Committee also recommend that in order to provide better service to 
consumers, the Ministry/OMCs should increase the number of LPG distributorshi ps in 
areas which have more than optimum number of LPG consumers with the existing 
distributors.  

 
 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
OMCs have informed that as on 08.06.2015, 13.15 (85.5 %) crore consumers out of 
total 15.38 crore active consumers have joined the „PA HAL‟ scheme. The details of 
consumers enrolled under DBTL scheme in the states of Mizoram, Nagaland, Manipur 
& J&K as on 08.06.2015,  are as under :-  
S. No. Name of State CTC %   
( as on 08.06.2015 ) 
(i) Jammu & Kashmir 73.6 % 
(ii) Nagaland 60 % 
(iii) Manipur 68.5 % 
(iv) Mizoram 52.7 % 
 
Considering the local terrain and connectivity, districts of Kinnaur, Lahul and Spiti in 
Himachal Pradesh and Leh and Kargil in Jammu &  Kashmir and some areas in North -
East States have been granted DBTL exemption to avoid the inconvenience to the 
consumers. Further, under Jan Dhan Yojna, zero deposit accounts are opened, this will 
enable the customer from all sections of society to join the scheme.  
On the issue of KYC, OMCs have informed that they are collecting and digitizing KYCs 
at the time of releasing new connections. OMCs are also carrying intercompany de -
duplication by sharing the Master consumer data with NIC (both for existing an d 
incremental data). Results of de -duplication are being published and the LPG 
connections belonging to suspect list are subjected to KYC formalities. The connections 
found as multiple connections are blocked after verification.  
With regard to increasing the number of LPG distributorships in areas which have more 
than optimum number of LPG consumers with the existing distributors, it is stated that 
setting up of LPG distributorships is a continuous process and involves identifying of a 
suitable location. New LPG distributorships are planned by the OMCs when an existing 
LPG distributor reaches a refill ceiling limit prescribed for the particular market under the 
restructuring plan. Feasibility studies are also conducted by the OMCs for setting up 
new LPG dis tributorships considering various parameters like LPG coverage, 
penetration of LPG in the areas, viability of   existing distributorships, distance from   the 
nearest distributor, potential families which could convert LPG etc. The feasible 
locations are then taken up for rostering and advertisement for selection of distributors.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Production of crude oil and Natural Gas 
 
The Committee note that the production of crude oil & natural gas in the first three years 
of 12th Plan i.e. during 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 was not in the line with the 

 
 
 
 
projected targets and there was a continuous shortfall. In case of crude oil, prod uction 
was only to the tune of 37.8 MMT, 37.7 MMT and 30.3 MMT (upto January 2015) 
against the projected projections of 42.3 MMT, 45.5 MMT and 44.76 MMT respectively 
during the above -mentioned period. The production levels of natural gas were 
40.67BCM, 35.406BCM and 28.81BCM (upto Jan 2015) against targets of 52.27BCM, 
61.55 BCM and 70.06BCM respectively during the above period.  
 
The Committee have been informed that cumulative factors are responsible for the 
decline in crude oil and natural gas production  of ONGC. These include delay in 
development of New & Marginal Fields (NMFD), less than planned production due to 
drilling complications in D -1 field, marginal shortfall due to delay in redevelopment 
schemes and less than anticipated oil gain from new deve lopment wells under MHN 
Phase-II scheme etc. In case of OIL, the lower levels of crude oil production have been 
attributed to ageing fields that have crossed their peak period, bandhs and blockades 
and environmental problems are the other main reason for shortfall in production.  
 
The Committee have been informed that ONGC is making all out efforts to minimize the 
natural decline by implementing various IOR/EOR scheme and field re -development 
projects and these efforts have started showing results. The Comm ittee desire that 
ONGC/OIL should also focus on the development and improving the performance of 
aging, marginal and small fields of the companies having potential of contributing 
significantly to the production of crude oil/natural gas. The Committee also  regret to 
note in the Odalaveru area of KG basin, ONGC has awarded the contract even before 
acquiring the land in the area which may result in uncertainty of the project.  
 
The Committee would also like to point out that due to lesser subsidy sharing by 
upstream companies will make more funds available with them. The Committee desire 
that Government/upstream oil companies analyse the E&P strategies which needs 
reappraisal and fresh insights. As the flagship exploration PSU company, ONGC has 
the onerous res ponsibility and should invest more in the exploration and production 
activities to increase the domestic crude oil and natural gas production. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that upstream oil PSUs should concentrate on E&P activity 
more vigorously and bring in latest techniques to fill the gaps wherever required so that 
the domestic production can be increased. 
 
Reply by the Government 
A. Strategy adopted by ONGC and OIL to augment  oil & gas production 
 
The strategy adopted by ONGC and OIL to augment production from their offshore and 
onshore fields are given as under: 
 
ONGC  
Implementation of IOR/ Redevelopment Schemes:   
ONGC has successfully implemented several IOR schemes to augment oil and gas 
production from major offshore and onshore producing fields since 2000-01.  

 
 
 
 
In continuation to the efforts being made to further improve the recovery factor, ONGC 
Board has approved two major Projects during the FY (2014 -15) –“Mumbai High North 
Redevelopment Ph -III Project” with an investment of Rs. 5706 Cror e in June 2014 
envisaging 6.997 MMT of oil & 5.253 BCM of Gas by 2030 and “Mumbai High South 
Redevelopment Ph-III Project” with an investment of Rs.6069 Crores in November 2014 
envisaging 7.547 MMT oil and 3.864 BCM gas by the year 2030. 
 
Also, to boost ga s production, ONGC Board has approved “Enhanced recovery from 
Bassein field through Integrated Development of Mukta, Bassein and Panna 
Formations” in November 2014 with an investment of Rs.4620 Crores envisaging an 
incremental production of 18.83 BCM of ga s, 1.97 million cubic metre of condensate 
and 0.183 MMT of oil by the year 2027-2028. 
 
Fast track monetization of Marginal Fields  
ONGC is developing new and marginal fields on fast track to augment the oil and gas 
production. ONGC is developing small / ma rginal fields which are not viable for on 
standalone basis through cluster concept.   
 
Some of marginal field  put in production in last few years include NBP (D -1), SB-11, C-
24 cluster, B -22 cluster, B -193 cluster, Vasai East, B -46 cluster, North Tapti, B HE/BH-
35, SB-14 & Cluster-7 etc. Further a number of marginal fields under WO -16 cluster, B-
127 cluster and C-26 cluster are under various stages of implementation and likely to be 
put on production in coming years. 
 
Also, ONGC has approved “Daman Developm ent Project” (C -24 Addl & B -12 fields) in 
August 2014 with an investment of Rs.6086 Crores with cumulative gas & condensate 
production of 27.67 BCM and 5.01 million cubic metre respectively by 2035. 
 
Development of fields in Eastern Offshore  
ONGC is giving major thrust to develop discoveries made in the Krishna Godavari basin 
in Eastern offshore which is a promising basin with various discoveries like G1/GS -15, 
Vasishtha, S1, GS-29, G-4-6 and KG-DWN-98/2 etc.  
 
ONGC is vigorously pursuing to d evelop these fields as early as possible and these 
prominent discoveries are being developed under 4 projects namely Integrated 
development project of G1 & GS -15; Vasishtha & S1 integrated development project; 
Development of northern discoveries in KG -DWN-98/2 Block and Project Manik (GS -29 
& G-4-6).  
 
The shallow water field GS-15 is already on production since 2011 and  ONGC has also 
commenced production from its first deep water well in G -1 field from Nov‟2013 with 
other fields will be put on production in coming years.  
 
As regards gas production, ONGC has been able to maintain gas production around 18 
BCM from offshore fields in spite of decline from matured fields including major gas 
producing Bassein field through above efforts. During the FY 2014 -15 the production is 
less in view of certain operational constraints viz., restriction from GAIL due to leakage 
in downstream at Bhagodia in April 2014, safety/ maintenance issues of exposed 
portion of 42” Bassein-Hazira pipeline in July 2014 and stoppage of gas production from 

 
 
 
 
Eastern offshore in view of safety related issues of GAILs pipeline from 05 -July 2014 to 
the end of October 2014. 
 
In onshore ONGC is taking all possible efforts to monetize the discoveries made in NELP 
blocks. Three NELP blocks; West Patan-3, Karanagar-1 and Vadatal-1 have been put on 
production in March 2015 and other onshore NELP discoveries such as Nadiad, 
Madanam are in the process of monetization through fast track development. 
 
Various activities such as work over jobs, well stimulation, artificial optimization, reservoir 
monitoring and reservoir pressure maintenance are being carried out on routine to limit 
the base decline. Notwithstanding the constraints of mature fields and sharp decline in 
base production, all out efforts are being made to increase crude oil production. Some of 
the initiatives being taken to enhance production from onshore fields are as under: 
 
1. Comprehensive redevelopment of Gamij Field through „Stage Gate‟ process is 
under progress. 
 
2. Fast track development of Malleswaram field in Cauvery Asset. 
 
3. Fast track development of Nagayalanka JV block of KG onshore. 
 
4. Development of HP/HT reservoirs in Cauvery and Rajahmundry Assets through 
outsourcing of services from International companies / experts. 
 
5.  Technology Induction/adoption/absorption and engaging international experts in 
the area of Drilling, Well completion, Artificial lift, Well stimulation etc. is being 
done regularly according to the technical requirement of the wells / fields and 
feasibility. 
 
6.  Assam Renewal Project (Group A): The project envisages revamping and up -
gradation of surface facilities in Lakwa and Lakhmani fields. The surface facilities 
older than 20 years needed to be replaced for uninterrupted operation for next 25 
years. The project is expected to be completed by March 2016. 
 
7. Pipeline Replacement Project, Ahmedabad: Project envisages replacement of old 
and aging internal pipes used for crude supply and water injection, 43 segments & 
229 Km length. The project is likely to be completed by July 2016. 
 
OIL 
In order to enhance production of Oil & Gas, Oil India Limited (OIL) has taken the 
following initiatives:  
 
1. Implementation of IOR/EOR Scheme 
 So far, around 26 reservoirs have been subjected to IOR/EOR scheme 
mainly water injection. 
 
 Currently, water injection is being undertaken in 13 reservoirs in 5 fields 
(Greater Nahorkatiya, Moran, Greater Jorajan, Greater Shalmari and 

 
 
 
 
Central small Field with an injection rate of 9380 Klpd through 40 injection 
wells). 
 
 Drilling of add itional water injection wells in 3 more reservoirs, and to 
augment surface infrastructures for enhancement of wa ter injection has 
been planned. 
 
  Initiated water injection for the first time in an Eocene reservoir on a pilot 
scale.  
 
 In-house Reservoir simulation studies were carried out and on the basis of 
same it was recommended that water injection be initiated in Makum -North 
Hapjan as well as Dikom -Chabua fields to maintain the pressure and fill the 
voidages. The process to create the required surfac e infrastructure has 
been initiated. Presently, reservoir simulation study is in progress for 
Bhogpara and Shalmari reservoirs for field re-development options. 
 
 To strategically manage increasing volumes of produced water and to 
reduce the volumes of fres h water from shallow aquifer, a study has been 
undertaken for carrying out Produced Water Re -injection (PWRI) to achieve 
targeted voidage replenishment ratios. Success of these projects may lead 
to their Field implementation in the future. 
 
 As part of  Enh anced Oil Recovery (EOR) initiative, a Joint Industry Project 
(JIP) with Herriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK on 'Improved Oil Recovery 
by Carbonated Water Injection(CWI) has been initiated at Lab scale. 
 
 Studies are also underway to select candidates fo r possible implementation 
of Alkaline Surfactant Polymer (ASP) flooding for which two reservoirs have 
been short listed.  
 
2.  Horizontal Drilling campaign 
 Improved productivity / recovery from the reservoirs by drilling Horizontal 
wells in Makum - North Hapjan reservoir. 
 
 Initiated the study by reputed international consultants for identification of 
optimal locations for horizontal/infill wells in a few selected reservoirs in 
other areas. 
 
3. Field Re -development study by Reputed International Consultant:  A Field re -
development study has been conducted by M/s FOROIL, France using their new 
proprietary technology for increasing productivity from the ageing Greater 
Tengakhat Field. The Consultant will assist OIL in reviewing implementation 
parameters every 6 months for a period of 3 years. Plan for field implementation 
within 2015. 
 
4.  Advanced E&P technology like Radial Drilling (RD), Extended Reach Drilling 
(ERD) as well as Multilaterals are also being under consideration to drain 
hydrocarbon potential from the hitherto inaccessible reserves. 
 

 
 
 
 
5. Chemical water shut off technology, for shut off of tending produced water is 
planned in selected reservoirs. 
 
6.  Induction of more artificial lifting system like ESP, SRP etc. have been carried 
out. 
 
7. Stimulation services like hydraulic fracturing, matrix acidization etc. have been 
implemented.  
 
Enhancement of Natural Gas Production by OIL  
 
 Drilling campaign of non-associated gas wells has been taken up for current 
& coming years. 
 
 New gas well completion policies have been adopted - completion of high 
volume production of gas wells. 
 
 Infrastructure development as Central Gas Collection Station (CGGS) at 
Madhuban, Duliajan and Filed Gathering Station (FGS) at Chabua has been 
completed 
 
 Gas pipeline from Baghjan to Duliajan is nearing completion. 
 
B. ONGC awarded the contract even before acquiring the land in the Odalarevu 
area of KG Basin   
 
 An extent of 246.68 acres of land has been earmarked by APIIC (Andhra 
Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation) and taken over by ONGC on 
03.10.2012 for Eastern Offshore Projects of which assigned land is 74.18 
acres wherein the proposed VA & S1 facilities are to be developed.  
 
 The local revenue authorities have recently paid the compensation to the 
beneficiaries of the land and payments for land measuring 58.105 acres 
have been made by the district revenue authorities.  
 
 As such 58.105 acres of the land has been released for the  project and 
the work of the project S1-VA onshore terminal has started from 8.5.2015.  
 
 For balance land, the remaining payments are being made. 
 
C. Under-recoveries of Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) on petroleum products             
Due to reduction in i nternational crude prices and also measures taken by the 
Govt. like deregulation of diesel, Direct Benefits Transfer for LPG (DBTL) 
Consumers Scheme, total under -recoveries of Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
on petroleum products have reduced significantly to Rs. 72,314 Crore 
(provisional) during 2014 -15 against  Rs. 1,39,870 Crore during 2013 -14.  As a 
result, petroleum subsidy has reduced considerably. ONGC‟s share of under -
recoveries has reduced from Rs. 56,384 crore in FY 2013 -14 to Rs.36,300 crore 
in FY 2014-15.   In case OIL, under recovery in 2014-15 was Rs.5,523 crore.  
 

 
 
 
 
D. Investment on Exploration & Production 
 
With increased thrust on exploration, development and production of Crude oil 
and natural gas, ONGC Board has approved a Plan Expenditure(Capex) of Rs. 
36,249 crore in 2015 -16. In case OIL, projected Plan Outlay in 2015 -16 is about 
Rs.3,918 crore.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No. 10 
Seismic survey & Drilling 
The Committee note that there has been considerable shortfall in the 2D and 3D 
seismic acquisition of ONGC, as during the year 2013 -14, against the target of 10109 
sq. km., 3D seismic surveys was carried out only for 8371 sq. km. Similarly, exploratory 
drilling has also fell short of the targets particularly for all the 2 years i.e. 2012 -13 and 
2013-14 where against the target of 155 and 153 wells only 108 & 106 wells 
respectively were actually drilled. Similarly, OIL has also registered considerable 
shortfall in exploratory drilling targets. The Committee would like to point out that 
targets for exploratory wells of ONGC and OIL have 119 been stagnant during the 
period 2011-12 to 2013-14 at about 155 wells and 33 wells respectively.  
 
In Committee's view, seismic surveys and exploratory drilling is the sine qua non of any 
sound E&P programme of a company and these should be planned and implemented 
with all due diligence. The Committee in their previous reports have time and again 
emphasized the importance of  these activities in the exploration programme of the 
upstream companies. The Committee once again reiterate that ONGC and OIL should 
put in all efforts to adhere to their committed targets in E&P programmes and for this 
the NOCs may carry out review of th eir exploration targets vis -a-vis achievement on 
quarterly basis to effectively carry out exploration activities. 
 
Reply by the Government 
ONGC and OIL are regularly monitoring exploration and production activities on daily, 
weekly, monthly and quarterly basis.   
In addition, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is also monitoring  the progress of E&P 
activities on quarterly basis. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No. 12 
Rig availability 
The Committee note that rigs are the key equipment for carrying out exploration and 
production activities. ONGC for its onshore exploration activities has a total of 69 rigs in 
which 68 are owned and 1 has been hired on charter hire basis. However, this ap pears 
to be in marked contrast with the rigs deployed in offshore areas, where out of the 33 

 
 
 
 
rigs, 25 are charter hired rigs and only 8 are owned by ONGC. The Committee further 
observe that as per status submitted by ONGC, there are no purchases in pipelin e for 
rigs. As regards OIL, the total number of drilling rigs available are 18 with 9 owned rigs 
and 9 charter hired rigs.  
 
The Committee note that the idle time for the charter hired rigs is quite high for both the 
upstream oil companies with OIL account ing for 25 percent idle time and ONGC at 26 
rig months involving huge financial loss. This idle time has been incurred due to some 
avoidable and manageable constraints like rigs waiting for logistics and waiting on 
locations on ready sites which affects the productive period of rigs.  
 
The Committee understand that Oil India Limited (OIL) has contracted rigs for KG -ONN-
2004/1 in the area of Thanelanka in East Godavari District which is lying idle due to lack 
of proper planning in the work location causing huge loss to the company. The 
Committee deprecate such lackadaisical attitude of the company and desire that all 
such cases of hired rigs lying idle should be looked into and a report submitted to them 
within a period of one month.  
 
The Committee recommend that upstream oil companies should concentrate in effective 
planning and management of exploration programmes so as to ensure optimum 
utilisation of rigs. The Committee have noted that some of the offshore rigs which have 
been hired on contract basis at a cost of more than Rs. 1000 cro re for a period of 3 
years. The Committee would also like ONGC to embark on a programme to 
systematically increase its owned offshore rigs fleet to reduce the dependence on the 
hiring of the offshore rigs. The Committee also desire that the upstream oil co mpanies 
strive to achieve the productivity level of rigs in line with international benchmark. 
 
Reply by the Government 
Delay in mobilization of Rig in KG Basin 
OIL has plan to drill a well  in a riverine island near Lanka Thanelanka village of East 
Godavari District  in the State of Andhra Pradesh. OIL has completed all the civil works 
in December 2014 except the retaining wall for protection from the floods on t he 
riverside of the plinth.  The only means of approaching the location is using a bridge 
IRC Class B (158 m length).  
 
Just prior to actual rig movement to the location in January 2015, the villagers of 
Thanelanka in a letter addressed to the District Collector, East Godavari District listed 
out a number of demands including construction of a retaining wall from the nation al 
highway to the bridge along the irrigation canal for a distance of about 4.9 km and also 
submitted a resolution not to allow the movement of the rig and rig related materials 
over the bridge.  
 
Subsequently, Revenue Divisional Officer (RDO), Amalapuram and District Collector 
East Godavari District convened meetings on 05.02.2015 and 24.02.2015 respectively 
to convince the villagers about the utilization of the bridge. However, the villagers have 
vehemently opposed the same in the meeting.   
 

 
 
 
 
The matter h as been appraised to The Chief Secretary, Govt. of AP, Hyderabad in a 
meeting on 23.02.2015 and also requested his intervention. OIL is continuously 
pursuing the matter with the concerned authorities for earlier resolution of the problem. 
 
Procurement of offshore rigs by ONGC 
 
In view to reduce dependency on the hiring of the offshore rigs, ONGC has a plan to 
increase ONGC own jack-up rigs from 6 to 10 numbers and Floater rigs from 2 nos to 3 
nos.  
 
Increasing productivity level of drilling rigs 
 
ONGC is in process of strengthening Benchmarking Norms. Further efforts are being 
made by inducting newer technologies to achieve the productivity level of rigs in line 
with international benchmark.   
 
As far as OIL is concerned, drilling as a part of E & P activity involves operation in very 
remote areas, adverse geological & environmental conditions. OIL has been taking 
proactive actions to curb the idle time of drilling rigs and thereby cutting down the well 
cost and improving the efficiency of the drilling operations. 
 
As desired by the committee, a report on cases of hired rigs lying idle has been 
submitted to Lok Sabha Secretariat  vide this Ministry‟s letter No.G -38011/47/2015-Fin.I 
dated 10-07-2015. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 Development of Marginal Fields 
The Committee note that till 2007, ONGC had 165 marginal fields with estimated 
quantum of oil/gas reserves of 1691.863 MMT (O+OEG) in place & 431.544 MMT 
(O+OEG) ultimate reserves, and in the year 2014, a total of 201 fields were grouped as 
marginal fields by the company. Besides this, OIL has 6 marginal fields in state of 
Assam which are to be monetised. The production from these fields contributed about 8 
percent of total crude oil production of ONGC during 2013 -14. The Committee further 
note that there are certain economical constraints in development of marginal fields and 
hence these are commercial ly unviable. ONGC has made a request that fiscal 
incentives be provided to make the development of these fields economical. The 
Committee note that ONGC has so far awarded 25 marginal oil and gas fields on 
service contract for their development. The Commit tee note that Ministry is mulling over 
the introduction of policy for marginal fields of NOCs to speed up the development of 
hydrocarbon discoveries from these fields. The Committee desire that process of policy 
formulation for marginal fields must be expe dited and suitable incentives be included in 
the policy after studying of the pros and cons. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made in the matter at the earliest. 

 
 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
The policy for marginal fields is under formulation by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas.  A draft CCEA Note was circulated for inter -ministerial consultations. Currently, 
comments received from the concerned Ministries and Departments are under 
examination in the Ministry/DGH.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.15 
Revival of Biecco Lawrie Ltd. (BLL) 
The Committee in their 23rd Report (15th Lok Sabha) had recommended that Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas should explore the possibility of revival of Biecco Lawrie 
Limited (BLL). The Ministry has informed that the decision of closing down of BLL is 
being reviewed to give  one more chance of revival to the company. OIDB, the major 
stakeholder of the company, has been directed to provide special loan  of Rs. 12.00 
crore to revive the compay. Further, BLL is also trying to get support of Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) to get sufficient work load for lubricant filling operations and 
sufficient electrical maintenance work. BLL has also requested MoPNG to request 
Ministry of Power to assign work on Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) and Integrat ed Power Development Scheme (IPDS) on nomination basis. 
The Committee are pleased to know about the decision of the government to give BLL 
another chance to revive. The Committee recommend the MoPNG should take up the 
request of BLL with Ministry of Power for assignment of work under DDUGJY and IPDS 
work. The Committee hope that the management and employees of BLL would also rise 
to the occasion and use this revival opportunity to the fullest to bring the company out of 
sickness. The Committee may also be apprised of the developments in the matter.  
Reply by the Government 
OIDB being the major stakeholder of the company, has been directed to provide special 
loan of Rs. 12.00 crore to revive the company. BLL has requested this Ministry to 
request Ministry of Power to assign work on Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) and Integrated Power Development Scheme (IPDS) on nomination basis. 
This Ministry had forwarded the request of BLL to Ministry of Power for their 
consideration.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
City Gas Distribution Project 
The Committee note that presently City Gas Distribution network is operational in 49 
Geographical Areas (GA) of the country.  It has been informed that, so far 4 bidding 
rounds have been held by Petroleum  and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) for 
awarding authorization to develop CGD network in the various Geographical Areas (GA) 
throughout the country.  As per current status, bidding has started for 20 Gas/District in 
the 5th round and bidding for 26 G as under 6th round is expected to commence from 
June/July 2015.  Gas identified for 5th and 6th rounds already have natural gas pipeline 
connectivity.  In addition to this, 106 Gas have been identified by PNGRB in the regions 
not having pipeline connectivity to be offered in the future bidding rounds. 
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that as per details furnished the 
actual PNG domestic connections against the targets are far below and remained 
stagnant in many Geographical Areas during last two years.  The Committee deplore 
the lackluster approach of the Government in this regard and desire that the coverage 
of PNG domestic connections be sufficiently increased and hurdles in the existing GA‟s, 
if any, in the implementation be remove at the earliest.  The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry and PNGRB should ensure that while they stick to the targets of increasing 
the GA‟s to develop CGD network, should also ensure availability of adequate natural 
gas for the purpose and increase coverage of  PNG domestic Connection in the existing 
GA‟s.  The Committee also desire that the capacity utilization of existing gas pipeline 
network be improved particularly like the Bengaluru -Dabhol pipeline network which has 
very low capacity utilization. 
Reply by the Government 
Under the PNGRB Act, 2006, PNGRB is the statutory authority for granting the 
authorization to entities for developing City Gas Distribution (CGD) networks and 
monitoring the implementation of CGD network projects in a specified Geographical 
Area (GA) of the country. PNGRB identifies GAs for inclusion in CGD bidding rounds 
depending on natural gas pipeline connectivity/natural gas availability. So far, PNGRB 
has held 5 round of bidding for awarding authorization to develop CGD networks. 
Accordingly, there are now 57 GAs which have been covered under CGD network in 15 
States and UTs. The 6th round of CGD bidding is planned to commence by July, 2015. 
Subsequent to the 6 th round of CGD bidding, almost all the GAs in the country having 
natural gas pipeline connectivity are expected to get covered. 
Regarding the penetration of domestic PNG connections in a given GA, PNGRB is 
monitoring the targets vs. achievements of the authorized entities and is taking action, 
wherever permissible, as per Regulation s. Besides, the progress of achievement of the 
targets is monitored by PNGRB through quarterly and annual progress reports 
submitted by entities. 
Further, in order to ensure adequate availability of domestic gas to PNG (domestic) 
sector, Govt., alongwith C NG (transport), has accorded PNG (domestic) sector highest 

 
 
 
 
priority in the matter of allocation of domestic gas. Presently, the entire requirement of 
CGD entities for PNG (domestic) and CNG (transport) is met through domestic gas 
based on preceding six mon th consumption data submitted by PPAC. Moreover, GAIL 
has been allowed to supply 10% additional domestic gas in order to meet the fluctuation 
in demand of PNG (domestic) and CNG (transport). 
As regards improving the pipeline utilization, Govt. has recently  approved two different 
schemes for increasing the consumption of gas by Fertilizer (Urea) sector and Power 
sector, which will help in improving the gas pipeline utilization.    
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No.19 
Performance of Refineries 
The Committee note that the Indian Refinery industry has established itself as major 
player globally with a refining capacity of 215 MMTPA in the country. The PSU 
refineries have a capacity of 120 MMTPA, private sector refineries account for 80 
MMTPA capacity and JV refineries have a capacity of 15 MMTPA.  The refinery 
performance is generally assessed on various key performance areas (KPA) like energy 
efficiency index, process utilization, transportation fuel, production cost, margins etc.  
The Committee note that wide performance gaps have been registered in PSU 
Refineries and most of them have come in last quartile in respect of key parameters. 
 The Committee note with concern that CPSE refineries have b een found lagging 
considerably on key performance areas vis -a-vis their Asian and global counterprarts 
particularly in key areas like energy efficiency, operational costs, Gross Refining 
Margins, transportation of fuels and production cost etc.  In view of  the fact that India is 
emerging as a refinery hub and expanding its refining capacities with successive 
additions, the Committee strongly feel that upkeep and efficient performances of the 
existing refineries must not be ignored.  In Committee‟s view, PSU  refineries should be 
a demonstration of energy efficiency measures in the country. 
 The Committee while noting that the refineries have stated taking a number of 
measures to improve upon their performance in the deficient areas, recommend that 
requisite t echnologies and knowhow be sourced to upgrade the performance 
parameters to bring them at par with the global refineries. 
Reply by the Government 
a) Indian PSU Refineries are taking number of steps to improve upon their 
performance in the deficient areas, as under: 
 Energy Intensity Index 
 Power generation through condensing turbine stopped, leading to 
substantial energy saving in Refinery. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Source of hydrogen for VGDS has been changed to CRU which leads to 
shutting down of HGU & improvement of EII. 
 
 Improvement of steam traps performance by dynamic optimisation through 
expert agency. 
 
 Replacement of the old energy inefficient units with the state of art new 
efficient units through Integrated Refinery Expansion Project.   
 Actions initiated to explore i mport of cheaper grid power for Refinery 
operation instead of power generation from Captive Power Plant (CPP) 
using liquid or Gaseous fuel in Refinery. 
 
 Over the years, the PSU refineries in India have adopted and 
implemented number of energy efficiency im provement measures to 
reduce the Energy Consumption. The average Specific Energy 
Consumption of PSU refineries has been brought down from 76.4 in 2005 -
06 to 62.0 in 2014-15. 
  Process Utilisation and Operational Availability 
 Improving the run -length between planned turn -arounds of major process 
units 
 Strengthening of inspection and monitoring system to improve 
plant/equipment reliability 
 Improving Overall Asset Integrity and Reliability 
 Gross Refinery Margin Improvement 
 The refineries have gradually changed from a simple hydro -skimming / 
thermal cracking refinery to complex refineries with combination of major 
secondary processing units like Fluid Catalytic Cracking (FCC), 
Hydrocracker (HCU), Delayed Coker (DCU), Catalytic Reforming (CRU) 
along with Hydrogen generation and Hydro-treatment facilities. Retrofitting 
existing configuration of refineries to handle high „Sulphur‟ & heavy 
„opportunity crude oil‟ for upgrading bottom of the barrel to valuable 
distillates and improved refinery margin for the future. 
 
 The average distillate yield (% wt. on crude) of PSU refineries has 
improved from 73.3 % in 2005-06 to 78.5 % in 2014-15. 
 
b)  Refinery Modernisation 
  Indian refineries are adopting modern technologies for production of petroleum 
products and upgrade the technologies in line with the International trend and as per 
the requirement. 
  The details of modern technologies employed in the refineries is given below : 
  Apart from primary processing technologies, viz., Crude Oil Fractionation by 
Atmospheric Distillation and Vacuum Distillation for initial separation, following are 

 
 
 
 
the major modern process technologies employed across PSU refineries for 
producing petroleum products: 
  i)  Secondary/Upgradation Technologies for yield improvement: 
 Thermal cracking processes, viz., Visbreaking, Delayed Coking 
 Fluidised Catalytic Cracking, INDMAX Technology 
 Hydrocracking 
  ii)  Quality Upgradation Technologies: 
 Catalytic Reforming, Isomerisation, Alkylation, Prime G for meeting the 
quality specifications of P etrol w.r.t. octane number, benzene content, 
aromatics, olefins, sulphur, distillation etc. 
 Diesel Hydro -desulphurisation (DHDS), Diesel Hydro -treating (DHDT) 
for diesel for reduction of sulphur & PAH (Poly Aromatic Hydrocarbons) 
and cetane number improvement 
  iii) Petrochemical Integration: Naphtha cracker, Polypropylene production etc.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.20 
Implementation of Recommendations of MB Lal Committee 
The Committee note that M.B. Lal Committee constituted in the aftermath of the 
Jaipur fire accident in October, 2009, had given 118 recommendations in their Report.  
Out of these 118 recommendations, 5 were specially meant for policy matters and the 
major chunk of these i.e. 113 recommendations were meant for implementation in oil 
installations to make and safer equip them with latest safety systems and technology. 
 
The Committee note that 95 percent of these recommendations have been 
implemented and others are in advance stage of implementation in more than 300 oil 
installations.  The Committee desire that implementation of remaining 5 percent 
recommendations be pursued on regular basis for their early c ompletion.  The 
Committee further note that one of the important recommendations awaiting 
implementation pertains to giving statutory status to Oil Industry Safety Directorate 
(OISD) to make it an umbrella regulatory authority for whole petroleum and natur al gas 
industry.  The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to initiate the process in this 
respect at the earliest which would give enhanced autonomy and effective supervisory 
powers to OISD, for monitoring all safety related issues of petroleum sector. 
The Committee further note that inviting tenders, placing and finalization of 
purchase orders for safety equipments are internal matter of OMCs and companies are 
free to decide terms and conditions of tender in line with specification of items as per 

 
 
 
 
guidelines formulated by OISD in this regard.  The Committee, however, would like 
OISD to play a proactive role in monitoring and supervising the procurement procedures 
of the companies to bring in more transparency, compliance and discipline.  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should ensure procurement procedure are not 
tailor made for proprietary items and promote competition in the interest of economy. 
Reply by the Government 
The compliance status of recommendations of M .B. Lal Committee 
recommendations is one of the priority items on the agenda of MOP&NG/OISD. The 
status of implementation has improved from 95% to 98% due to sustained follow up and 
regular review meetings held at MoP&NG/OISD. The pending recommendations are at 
advanced stage of execution.  
On the recommendation of the committee regarding giving enhanced autonomy 
and effective supervisory powers to OISD for monitoring safety related issues, MoP&NG 
is already seized of the matter and a proposal to constitute Pe troleum & Natural Safety 
Industry Board for regulation of safety in Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry in India 
has been brought before Committee of Secretaries(CoS).  This Bill is presently under 
discussion in the CoS.  Two meetings of CoS have already ta ken place wherein the 
issues related to transfer of jurisdiction from agencies under Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and Ministry of Commerce and Industry (PESO) and PNGRB had been 
raised.  MoP&NG‟s views on the said issues have been placed with the CoS for further 
discussions in the next meeting. 
Regarding role for OISD in monitoring and supervising the procurement 
procedures of OMCs, it is submitted that procurement is the function of Oil &  Gas 
companies and OISD role is to standardized safety procedures and specifications. 
Further, to promote competition and avoid proprietary, OISD is undertaking various 
technology improvement initiatives from time to time.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Recommendation No.21 
Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA) 
 
The Committee note that PCRA is engaged in promoting energy conservation and 
efficiency improvement measures in various sectors of ec onomy and assisting 
Government in formulating policies and strategies for petroleum conservation. PCRA 
conducts various field activities to reach the target groups by carrying out awareness 
campaigns, energy audits, fuel oil diagnostic studies, institution al training programme, 
workshops, driver training programme, youth programme etc. Besides these 
educational campaigns, national and international networking for carrying out various 
energy conservation activities, research & developments for optimum utilis ation of 
energy and reduction of pollution in different sectors of economy through development 
and demonstration of new and improved equipment /appliances are also organised. 
PCRA is adopting multipronged approach to effectively disseminate its message of 

 
 
 
 
petroleum conservation and trying to reach different sections of society which may help 
in conserving fuel and reducing overdependence on traditional fuels. The Committee 
desire that in this endeavour, PCRA should also include the elected representatives o f 
local bodies, legislative assemblies and parliamentarians to give their efforts the 
necessary force and fillip. The Committee feel that in a country like ours which depends 
on imports to meet the demand for the 80 percent of hydrocarbon requirements, the role 
of PCRA is crucial to encourage the household and industrial consumers to conserve 
the fuel. Therefore, the Committee recommend that PCRA should conduct a feedback 
on its awareness campaigns and make necessary changes in its methods and expand 
its activities to reach more consumers. The Committee desire that PCRA should focus 
on agriculture sector for using gas or solar energy instead of diesel in tube wells / water 
pumps to benefit the farmer. 
 
Reply by the Government 
PCRA engineers and its empanelle d experts reach the targeted groups with energy 
conservation programmes. These activities are designed to cover a large spectrum of 
socio-economic profile of our country in different sectors viz. Industry, Transport, 
Domestic, Agricultural and Commercial. 
 
2. One of the core mass awareness activities of PCRA is Oil and Gas Conservation 
Fortnight (OGCF) celebrated every year during in 2nd Fortnight of January. During the 
fortnight, PCRA and Oil Industry undertake various mass awareness activities in 
different sectors of economy viz., Transport, Industry, Agriculture, Commercial and 
Household, to spread the message of Oil & Gas conservation and to educate the 
masses on the methods to achieve it. Minister of P&NG, Govt. of India and elected 
Members of State Leg islative Assemblies (Chief Ministers/Minsters/MLAs etc.) and 
elected parliamentarians are actively involved in their states during the OGCF 
programmes to give impetus to the efforts on petroleum conservation 
 
3. Further, communication has been circulated t o the field offices to invite the 
elected representatives of local bodies, legislative assemblies and parliamentarians to 
various other programmes of PCRA to give their efforts the necessary force and fillip. 
 
4. Regarding conducting a feedback on this awa reness campaigns, PCRA has 
taken following steps:  
 For major programmes, impact assessment surveys are being carried out 
through experts and necessary modifications in the programmes are done based 
on the feedback. 
 During the field activities, feedbacks and suggestions are obtained from the 
participants and the organizations for improvement of the programmes.  
 Suggestions received during the Executive Committee and Governing Body 
Meeting, are also incorporated in various programmes of PCRA.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 1 
Role of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
The Committee note that the Indian Economy is growing steadily leading to increase in 
demands for petroleum products by 3.9 percent during April - December, 2014. 
However, the Committee note that over 75 percent of its demands are met from imports. 
This has resulted in the import of crude oil to the tune of 142.236 Mil lion Metric Tonnes 
(MMT) during the period April to December 2014. The Committee note that the 
domestic crude oil production has been stagnating around 38 MMT for the last few 
years and the production of natural gas is coming down over a period of time. 
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas mandated with 
the task of exploration and exploitation of petroleum resources within the country has 
been taking several measures to enhance the supply of the hydrocarbon resources. It 
has come out with the new formula for gas pricing to incentivize the domestic 
exploration and production, working on a policy for development of marginal fields, gas 
pooling, shale gas policy, procurement of ethanol for ethanol blended petrol(EBP) 
Programme, e tc. It is also pursuing acquisition of oil and gas assets overseas for 
strengthening the country‟s energy security and Indian oil companies are present in 
around 25 countries. The Committee have been informed that strategic crude oil 
strategic caverns are also being built to store crude oil for managing supply disruptions 
due to any unforeseen events in the global oil and gas market. Even though these 
measures are welcome, the Committee are of the view that improving the domestic 
production of crude oil and  natural gas should be the utmost priority for the Ministry in 
order to reduce dependency on imports from foreign countries. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should focus on this important goal and take 
required steps towards achieving this objective. 
Reply by the Government 
During the year 2014 -15, the consumption of petroleum products was about 165 MMT. 
Annual average growth rate in consumption of petroleum products was 3.66%.The 
indigenous crude oil produced in 2014 -15 was 37.464 MMT  and of which processed in 
the refineries was about 35.00 MMT. The import of crude oil during 2014 -15 was 
189.434 MMT. Approximately 79% of the domestic demand of the crude oil was met 
from the imports in 2014 -15. Production of natural gas in 2014 -15 was 3 3.66 Billion 
Cubic Metre (BCM), which is lower by about 8% of target of 36.62 BCM and also lower 
by 4.94% than that produced in 2013 -14 (35.41 BCM). The Government has taken the 
following initiatives to increase the production of crude oil and natural gas: 
H. Enhance production from the existing field by adopting Improved Oil Recovery 
(IOR)/Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) measures using induction of latest 
technology.  
 

 
 
 
 
I. Early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries under Production Sharing 
Contract(PSC) regime has been approved by the Government. This policy has 
addressed rigidities in the timelines of the PSC and has allowed the contractors to 
start production at the ear liest. 34 cases have been already resolved under this 
policy framework involving resources worth $ 5 billion.  
 
J. Marginal Field Policy (MFP) is being formulated to monetize the marginal fields of 
ONGC and OIL which have not been monetized for various reason s in the past. 
Monetization of these discoveries under this policy through International 
Competitive Bidding (ICB) would also help in boosting Oil & Gas production of the 
Country. Lucrative fiscal terms with more autonomy is proposed in the policy for 
making it investor friendly.  
 
K. A new Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) is being formulated which covers all type of 
hydrocarbons viz. Conventional Oil & Gas, Unconventional Hydrocarbons like 
Shale Oil & Gas , CBM, Gas Hydrate etc. This would help in development o f all 
type of hydrocarbons under single license.  
 
L. Revision of prices of domestic natural gas is expected to incentivize production of 
natural gas in the country. Ministry is also considering providing premium for gas 
discoveries in Deep Water, Ultra Deep Water and High Pressure High 
Temperature (HPHT) discoveries. 
M. Setting up of National Data Repository (NDR). Physical completion of hardware 
and software has been completed and data population is in progress.  
 
N. Policy approved for exploration and exploitation of Shale Gas/ Shale Oil resources 
by National Oil Companies under the nomination regime. As per the policy, ONGC 
and OIL have identified 50 and 5 blocks respectively. Subsequent to Geological 
and Geophysical(G&G) study, these NOCs will drill minimum one well per 200 
sq.km. of PML area to assess prospectivety of shale Oil/Gas in these blocks. The 
timeline for assessment and drilling of pilot wells is three years which would be 
completed by October, 2016.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Analysis of Plan Allocations 
The Committee note that the plan outlay of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
for the year  2015-16 is estimated at Rs. 50 crore out of which Rs. 48 crore have been 
allocated for Rajiv Gandhi Institute for Petroleum Technology 112 (RGIPT) at Jais, Rai 
Barelli, Uttar Pradesh and a token provision of Rs. 1 crore each have been made 
towards ISPRL f or strategic crude oil strategic caverns and for setting up Petroleum 
University in Andhra Pradesh as per the Andhra Pradesh Re-Organization Act, 2014.  

 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that during the year 2014 -15, the RGIPT was allocated Rs. 42 
crore in the Budget Estimates which was reduced to 1 crore in the Revised Estimates 
but still no money was utilized. An amount of Rs.1 crore was provided in Budget 
Estimates (BE) of 2014 -15 for ISPRL to fill up strategic crude oil reserves to enhance 
the energy security in th e country. The Committee further observe that the Revised 
Estimates for 2014 -15 show that an amount of Rs. 2400 crore was allotted for this 
purpose which remained unutilized. Also a sum of Rs. 1 crore allocated on plan side for 
setting up of a Petroleum University in the State of Andhra Pradesh remained unutilized. 
In addition to the budgetary allocation for the Ministry, the main activities are carried 
out by the PSUs from the funds generated out of Internal and Extra Budgetary 
Resources (IEBR) and the PSU ‟s Plan Budget for the year 2015 -16 is about 76565.46 
crore. The funds are utilized by the PSU‟s for the activities under the Heads Exploration 
& Production, Refinery & Marketing, and Engineering etc. 
 The Committee is disappointed that the plan allocation  of Revised Estimates 
(RE) of Rs.2402.00 crore under all the three heads remained unutilized which shows 
the Ministry in poor light.The Committee expects the Ministry to ensure the proper 
monitoring of the utilization of the budgetary allocations on plan s ide to avoid any 
underutilization. 
Reply by the Government 
During 2014 -15, the proposed RE was Rs.70349.32 crore.However, due to some 
typographical error in the Budget Document 2015 -16, the total RE has been printed as 
Rs.72589.32 crore with RE for OVL Rs. 12387.00 crore against proposed RE of 
Rs.10147.00 crore. The total actual utilization during 2014 -15 by oil and gas PSUs was 
Rs.69828.81 crore i.e. 99.26% of Revised Estimates of Rs.70349.32 crore (against 
printed RE of Rs.72589.32 crore which is about 96. 20%).This has been taken up by the 
Ministry with Budget Division of Ministry of Finance. The unutilized RE amount is 
Rs.530.51 crore. The activity-wise actual expenditure during 2014-15 is as follows: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
 
Activities 
2014-15 
Revised Estimates  
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Percentage of 
Utilisation to RE 
Exploration & Production 51146.92 44731.23 87.46 
Refinery & Marketing 16947.76 21805.65 128.66 
Petrochemicals 2096.64 3212.14 153.20 
Engineering 158.00 79.79 50.50 
Total 70349.32 69828.81 99.26 

 
 
 
 
As regard monitoring of the utilization of the budgetary allocation on plan side, the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is constantly monitoring the status in monthly 
review meetings taken by Secretary (PNG) and also intermittently by Hon‟ble  Minister of 
State (I/C), M/o PNG.  The company -wise reasons for slightly lower achievement in 
utilization of actual funds against RE are as follows: 
Oil Natural Gas Company(ONGC): 
Less expenditure in case of delayed projects.  
Lower expenditure on drilling activities  as exploratory and development drilling 
meterage & wells were lower due to non-availability of Charter hired rigs.  
Deep water operations hampered due to naval exercise & rough weather conditions. 
ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL): 
Rs.4875 crore was kept in BE an d Rs.610 crore in RE for new acquisition during 2014 -
15. However, there was no major new acquisition that could get materialized during the 
year. 
Savings of US$ 35 million due to early completion of development wells in BC-10 Brazil.  
General delay in activities in Venezuela due to cash flow and contractual challenges. 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL): 
Shortfall in expenditure under petrochemical sector due to the project “Coal/Coke 
Gasification and Acetic Acid Project at Gujarat”Refinery was dropped as t he project was 
not found viable. 
GAIL INDIA Ltd.(GAIL): 
Exploration and Production: This includes all segments,other than 
petrochemicals,including Pipelines, Business Development projects, Exploration and 
Production, City Gas distribution: The shortfall in plan CAPEX is due to: 
Less capital expenditure in pipelines of Rs.466  crores than planned due to:  
hindrance due to Right of Use(ROU) problems, especially in Tamil Nadu and Kerala 
mainly in Kochi -Koottanad-Bangaluru-Mangalore Phase -II. Further, progress in 
replacement of pipelines in KG Basin with planned expenditure of approx Rs.100 crores 
in RE has also been affected due to ROU issues; 
statutory permissions and contractual issues especially in VijaipurKota Pipe Line 
(VKPL) spurlines ;  
consumer tie-up awaited for some pipelines esp BNPL Spur lines (Uttaranchal) 
Shortfall due to lack of investable Merger and Acquistion (M&A) opportunities Rs.100 
crore. 

 
 
 
 
Shortfall in equity investment in Gail Gas by approximately Rs.120 crore. 
Shortfall in E&P segment by Rs .100 crore as  less cash call was received from 
operators 
Petrochemical segment: 
Time lag in payment vis -à-vis actual progress in Petrochemical expansion project and 
slow progress of some of the contractors due to financial constraints resulting in 
shortfall of approx. Rs.180 crore 
Non approval of Phenol Acetone Project by the Board thereby leading to CAPEX 
shortfall of approx. Rs.340 Crore. 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL): 
Lower investment in Joint Venture projects due to: 
The proposed amount o f Rs.740 crore for Rajasthan Refinery could not be utilized as 
the projects is under review by the State Government of Rajasthan,  
Rs.538 crore allocated for subsidiary company  M/s Prize Petroleum for acquisition of 
discovered/producing E&P blocks was rev ised to Rs.62 crore. However, funds 
requirement has been met through debt funds,  
Rs.188 crore allocated for JV project of LNG terminal at Chhara, Gujarat due to change 
in terms of reference (TOR) conditions, environmental clearance got delayed and hence 
FEED for LNG terminal could not be carried out in 2013-14 as envisaged. 
Rs.137 crore allocated for JV Project of cross country Gas Pipelines with GSPC/BPC 
could not be utilised due to delay in getting Right of Way(ROW) approvals and 
environmental clearance. 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL): 
Crude oil Pipeline Project: The planned expenditure of Rs.100 crore for laying 42” New 
Crude Pipeline could not be incurred for want of clearances from Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways.  
Mounded Bullets: The Budget estimate break up was based on the project approved 
cost of Rs.279 crore, whereas the expenditure became lower due to the lesser awarded 
contract value of Rs.199 crore.Delay in sand availability in the region due to restriction 
by State Government. 
ResidUpgradation Project: Project hindrances due to „Brown field Project Nature” like 
less space availability for fabrication/storage, underground - redundant pipes & cables 
and restricted radiography permit timings etc. lowered the physical progress wh ich 
resulted in lower financial progress.  
 

 
 
 
 
Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. (NRL): 
Against BE of Rs.177.65 crores, there has been a shortfall in actual expenditure by 
Rs.74.88 crores. This shortfall in actual expenditure was primarily due to less than 
anticipated expenditure against the Wax project. For the Wax project, BE was provided 
at Rs.154.65 crores, against which actual expenditure was Rs.89.57 crores (shortfall by 
Rs.65.08 crores) primarily due to deferment in commissioning of the project from first 
quarter to fourth quarter of the financial year. 
Balmer Lawrie & Company: 
The company has made a further commitment to increase CAPEX to the tune of 
Rs.74.09 crore as on 31.03.2015, which includes an amount of Rs.72.00 crore towards 
the equity contribution in the Joint Venture with Vishakhapatnam Port Trust (VPT) could 
not be made due to delay in finalization of the land lease agreement with VPT.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy for PDS Kerosene (DTCK) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has launched DTCK scheme for 
transferring cash subsidy into the bank accounts of SKO beneficiaries under PDS was 
launched as a pilot project in the block Kotkasim, District Alwar, Rajasthan in 
December, 2011 by MoP&NG. In 2012, it was decided that lump sum one time grant of 
Rs. 100 crores would be given for each joining State. The scheme is to be implemented 
by s tate Governments and consequently, 11 States/UTs namely Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Andaman & Nicobar Island, Jharkhand, Himachal 
Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa and Andhra Pradesh confirmed their participation in 
the scheme. However, the Committee have been informed that till date only 3 states viz. 
Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa have confirmed implementation of DTCK. 
 Direct Cash transfer of subsidy in consumer‟s accounts is an effective tool in 
better targeting of intended beneficiaries and checking diversions. The Committee opine 
that the DTCK scheme should not remain confirmed to few blocks or states of few UTs 
rather be expeditiously implemented in the remaining states/UTs in coordination with 
respective state governments without causing further delay. The Committee desire that 
a road map with timeline for extending DTCK across the country be prepared primarily 
focusing on areas in states where the kerosene demand is high. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry should also ensure t he easy availability of non -PDS kerosene in the 
open market.  
 

 
 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
The Direct Cash Transfer of Subsidy for Kerosene(DTCK) was launched in 2012. 11 
States/UTs namely Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Andaman & 
Nicobar Island, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Pudducherry, Kerala, Goa and Andhra 
Pradesh confirmed their participation in the scheme. Out of those, only 3 states viz. 
Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Goa have confirmed implementation of DTCK in a few 
districts. Since, the di stribution of kerosene is a matter in the domain of the State 
Governments/UT Administration, the State Governments/UT Administration are being 
addressed in this regard.   
On the issue of ensuring the easy availability of non -PDS Kerosene in the open market, 
it is stated that existing Kerosene wholesalers of Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) and 
parallel marketers are allowed to market non -PDS Kerosene to small consumers. 
However, with a view to ease the availability of non -PDS Kerosene for sale in the open 
market, the Government has amended the Kerosene (Restriction on Use and Fixation of 
Ceiling Price) Order, 1993. By virtue of this amendment, all the activities of storage, 
transportation and sale of non -PDS Kerosene have been freed of regulatory control.  
This is expected to reduce demand for diverted PDS Kerosene by improving availability 
of non-PDS Kerosene in the open market and will thus meet the demand of Kerosene 
for various legitimate end uses for the industry and for individual consumption at market 
price.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Recovery factor 
The Committee note that in the Exploration and Production programmes, the recovery 
factor achieved by the exploration companies in the fields is an important factor to 
assess its effectiveness. The Committee are dismayed to note that the recovery factor 
of ONGC & OIL for crude oil and of OIL for Natural Gas are c onsiderably low in 
comparison to the International Standards. As against the international benchmark 
range of Recovery Factor of 35 -40 percent for oil reservoirs and 55 -70 percent for gas 
reservoirs, the current recovery factors of ONGC and OIL in respect of crude oil are as 
low as 27.01 percent and 23.23 percent. In case of Natural Gas, ONGC is able to 
maintain it around 54.26 percent, whereas recovery factor of Oil India Limited for 
Natural Gas is around 43 percent which is not as good as ONGC. This is a matter of 
great concern as both the upstream oil companies have not been able to recover the oil 
as per global standards. 
The Committee note that E&P companies are adopting multipronged strategies to 
enhance recovery factor and undertake various IOR/EOR sc hemes to improve the 
Recovery factor and for arresting the declining trend of oil production. The Committee 

 
 
 
 
further note that every year, upstream oil companies claim new discoveries and 
simultaneously undertake IOR/EOR schemes to harness incremental oil b ut even than 
the recovery factor shows no sign of improvement .The Committee have been informed 
by ONGC that the existing recovery factor is not satisfactory and want to take it to global 
levels of 40 percent for ONGC. The Committee desire that OIL should also take serious 
measures to improve the recovery factor of crude oil and gas from its fields.  
The Committee recommend that E&P companies should undertake concerted efforts 
including technology measures needed to enhance the performance of their aging fi elds 
so as to improve the present recovery factor of the companies to international level. 
Reply by the Government 
ONGC 
ONGC puts concerted efforts to increase the performance and to improve its recovery 
factor through various corrective measures/technolog ies to achieve its recovery factor 
up to the level of Global standards which is also one of the Strategic Goal of ONGC. 
The Salient measures taken to enhance global recovery factor are as under: 
 
 Aggressive IOR/ EOR development schemes:  
 In-situ combustion in heavy oil fields of Balol, Santhal, Lanwa Fields 
 Polymer flood in Sanand Field 
 Alkali Surfactant Polymer (ASP)  chemical EOR Pilots in Viraj, Jhalora and 
Kalol 
 Miscible gas injection in Gandhar field 
 Implementation of WAG ( EOR process)  in GS -11 and GS-9 sand of 
Gandhar 
 
 Integrated rolling redevelopment plans  
 
 Implementation of schemes in MHN, MHS, Heera and Neelam fields 
 
 Improving Water Injection 
 
 MEOR Applications 
 
 Indigenously developed cost effective microbial EOR technique is also 
being applied to improve production from wells of Ahmedabad, Mehsana 
and Assam fields. 
 
 Hi-tech drilling/ completion/ stimulation 
 
 In-fill drilling of hi-tech wells including horizontal, high angle, multilayer and 
multilateral wells.  
 
 Hydro Fracturing and multi stage hydro fracturing in tight reservoirs 
 

 
 
 
 
OIL 
OIL has taken measures for enhancing recovery factor of its field through various 
IOR/EOR schemes.  OIL is also looking for induction of advanced state -of- the-art 
technology in line with International E&P companie s to improve the recovery factors in 
its mature fields. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Coal Bed Methane 
The Committee note that our country has the fourth largest proven coal reserves in the 
world  and holds significant prospects for exploration and exploitation of Coal Bed 
Methane.  The estimated CBM reserves in the country are about 92 Trillion Cubic Feet 
(TCF).  The C ommittee further note that so far 33 CBM blocks have been awarded 
under four CBM rounds and the total prognosticated CBM reserves in these 33 blocks is 
about 63.3 TCF of which so far only 9.9 TCF has been established.  But commercial 
production has commenced from only 1 CBM block i.e. Raniganj (South) and total CBM 
production is about 0.76 MMSCMD. 
The Committee further note that as on date, 8 CBM blocks have entered development 
phase, 5 CBM blocks are in exploration phase and 4 CBM blocks are awaiting grant ing 
of PEL from state government.  The Committee are not happy with the slow pace of the 
exploration and exploitation of CBM.  After the first commercial production started in the 
year 2007, the commercial CBM production has not yet picked up.  The Committ ee  
desire that development activities in CBM areas be pursued by MoP&NG with State 
authorities on regular basis. 
The Ministry has informed that in view of the recent judgment passed by Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court cancelling the allocation of coal blocks, certai n issues are being re -
examined and further MoP&NG and Ministry of Coal are in correspondence for 
resolution of various issues pertaining to simultaneous exploration and exploitation of 
CBM and Coal Mining by one single Operator from the point of view of sa fety of 
operations and fast track exploitation of both the resources viz. CBM and Coal.  The 
Committee desire that MoP&NG should pursue the issues with MoC to arrive at 
acceptable solution to give a fillip to CBM exploration. 
Reply by the Government 
MoPNG is actively pursuing with Ministry of Coal to resolve the various issues to 
enhance CBM production in the country. In the last meeting held with Ministry of Coal 
on 10.3.2015, Ministry of Coal agreed to consider allocation of some cancelled Coal 

 
 
 
 
Blocks (by Supreme Court) overlapping CBM Blocks to CIL on nomination basis. It is 
the constant endeavor of this Ministry to settle the unresolved issues expeditiously. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
National Gas Grid 
In order to complete the National Gas Grid, Government has identified various gas 
pipeline sections of total length of about 15000 kms in addition to existing 15000 kms.  
Out of this, 3 pipeline sections of total length of about 2670 kms are under consideration 
to be implemented through Public Priva te Partnership (PPP) mode.  The Committee 
further note that one of these pipelines namely Tanchi -Talchar-Paradip pipeline has 
been identified by MoP&NG as a pilot project for developing through PPP mode.  GAIL 
has been appointed as the sponsoring authority .  The Committee note that GAIL has 
completed route survey and market demand survey and DFR is under preparation.  The 
PPP agreement is expected to be executed by December 2015 depending on the 
success of this pilot project, other pipeline projects would b e implemented. The 
Committee desire that MoP&NG should monitor the development of this pilot project 
closely and step in to sought out issues wherever required as the success of this project 
is crucial for future pipeline projects to be implemented by this PPP mode. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
In order to complete the National Gas Grid, Government has identified various pipeline 
sections of the total length of about 15,000 Km in addition to existing gas pipeline 
infrastructure in the country. Out of this additional 15,000 km, three pipeline sections of 
about 2670 km have been identified by MoPNG for development through PPP mode 
with Viability Gap Funding (VGF). Out of these three pipeline sections, “Ranchi -Talcher-
Paradip” pipeline project has been approve d as the pilot project for implementation 
through PPP mode with VGF. The remaining two pipeline sections will be considered for 
implementation through PPP mode after successful implementation of the pilot project. 
 
MoPNG has appointed GAIL as the Sponsorin g Authority for implementing “Ranchi -
Talcher-Paradip” pipeline project through PPP mode. GAIL has submitted application to 
Department of Economic Affairs for IIPDF funding for pre -project activities/project 
structuring. Reconnaissance route survey and mark et demand survey has been 
completed by GAIL. Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) for the project is under 
preparation and is expected to be completed shortly. GAIL has floated the tender for 
appointment of Financial cum Transaction and Legal Adviser (TA) for  recommending 
project structuring and bidding for selection of private parties and the same is also 
expected to be appointed at the earliest. Besides, MoPNG is also facilitating PNGRB to 

 
 
 
 
approve the project structuring and bidding process for selection of private party as 
envisaged in VGF scheme for the pilot project to be implemented through PPP mode. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.18 
Setting up of Barmer Refinery 
 The Committee note that a new grassroot refinery of 9 MMT capacity is beign 
setup at Barmer, Rajasthan by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited and 
Government of Rajasthan having 74 percent and 26 perce nt equity respectively in the 
venture.  The refinery is expected to commence its functioning within 48 months after 
receipts of all statutory clearances, including environment clearance.  However it has 
been informed that project activities are presently o n hold owing to the pending various 
project related issues by end of March 2015.  Besides this, minutes of meeting of Expert 
Appraisal Committee of Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), held regarding the 
pubic hearing of MoEF for environmental clear ances are also awaited.  Since setting up 
of refinery was intended since long for better monetization of the locally produced crude 
oil from the Barmer oil field and for extending benefits to the native population, the 
Committee recommend for early resolut ion of the issues pertaining to setting up of 
refinery. 
Reply by the Government 
 Government of India has accorded its approval for setting up of a 9 MMTPA 
Greenfield Refinery -cum-Petrochemical Complex in Barmer District of Rajasthan in 
September 2013 as a Joint Venture between HPCL and Government of Rajasthan at an 
estimated capital cost of Rs.37,229 Cr. (2013 -Q1 prices) with a construction time frame 
of 48 months from the zero date of the project i.e. after receipt of all statutory 
clearances, including En vironmental Clearance. The HPCL -Rajasthan Refinery Limited 
(HRRL) has been incorporated in September 2013 as a Joint Venture Company of 
HPCL and Government of Rajasthan (GOR) with HPCL holding 74% equity and GOR 
holding 26% equity.  
Subsequently, Finance D epartment, GOR in February 2014 advised that the 
project is to be reviewed by the Cabinet sub -committee for final decision about the 
project.  Consequent to GOR‟s decision to review the project, the project activities have 
been put under hold. 
In a meeting  taken by Secretary, MoP&NG with GOR and HPC officials in 
December 2014, a Committee consisting of Dir -Finance and Dir -Refineries from HPCL 
and Principal Secretary Finance and Principal Secretary – Mines & Petroleum from 

 
 
 
 
GOR was constituted to discuss the various project related issues and submit a report.  
The above Committee has held 3 meetings so far. Meanwhile, GOR engaged M/s Price 
Waterhouse Coopers (PWC) to advise them on the project.  PWC submitted its draft 
report in the first week of May 2015 to G OR and HPCL forwarded its comments thereon 
to GOR on 12.6.2015.  MoP&NG had approved extension of time upto 30.6.2015 for 
submitting Committee report.  The Committee is yet to submit its report. In the 
meanwhile, GoR through HPCL has requested further exte nsion of time for the 
Committee to finalize and submit report.   
Environmental Clearance: Public Hearing was conducted by Rajasthan State Pollution 
Control Board in May 2014. The Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEFCC held a 
meeting in February 2015 an d sought additional information on various aspects of the 
project. Inputs pertaining to Salt Miners‟ Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) have 
been sought from Govt. of Rajasthan. The proposal shall be resubmitted to EAC for 
Environmental Clearance after compilation of desired information. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No.22 
Centre for High Technology(CHT) 
 The Committee note that Centre for High Technology is a specialized agency 
entrusted with the responsibility of assessing future technology requirement for 
acquisition, development and adoption in the field of refinery processes, petroleum 
product, additives, storage and han dling of crude oil/gas and other products.  The 
organization hires officers and staff from oil companies on deputation basis to carry out 
its activities.  The organization get its funding through grants form OIDB and 
expenditure towards performance improve ment programme are borne by concerned 
refineries.  Apart from this, expenses on performance benchmarking studies are shared 
by CGT and PSU refineries.  The agency for fulfilling its various objectives carry out 
regular monitoring and performance evaluation  of refineries, undertake performance 
improvement programmes on centralized basis, joint energy audit s and provides 
centralized technical assistances, performance benchmarking of refineries knowledge 
dissemination, refinery technology meets, workshops.  I t also coordinate funding of 
research work in refining and marketing areas and pursues programmes of Scientific 
Advisory Committee on Hydrocarbon (SAC) and Hydrogen Corpus Fund. 
 The Committee observe that CHT is primarily focusing on activities and projec ts 
pertaining to refinery sector and extending its expert guidance and support to improve 
upon the performances of refineries.  However, the Committee recommend that CHT 
should slowly diversify and undertake Research & Development projects pertaining to 
upstream sector to function as a guidepost for adopting new and advance technologies. 

 
 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
It is a considered view of MoP&NG that CHT shall take up technical and other 
R&D projects of downstream Hydrocarbon sector. However, the recommendat ion of the 
Committee  regarding involving CHT in upstream sector  has been noted.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.23 
Transactional Gas Pipeline Projects  
The Committee note that the Government is presently pursuing two international gas 
pipeline projects namely Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) and Iran -
Pakistan-India(IPI) to augment supply of natural gas to the country.  In respect of TAPI 
pipeline, all the major issues have been resolved including the finalization of transit fee 
on which a broad consensus has been reached among the four countries.  However, 
the Committee have been informed that as per requiremen t of project structure, efforts 
are underway for selecting a technically competent and financially capable Consortium 
leader by the four stakeholder countries.  The first gas flow through this pipeline is 
estimated to start with in three years from the dat e of the induction of consortium 
partner which is likely to materialise by March 2016.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry/Government to pursue this project on priority basis to push for an early 
finalisation of the consortium leader as this will pace u p the progress and benefit all the 
stakeholders. 
The Committee also note that IPI project has suffered quite a delay in its finalization 
owing to non resolution of several issues related to the contract.  The International 
sanctions over Iran has also sign ificantly hampered the progress of the project.  In the 
light of changing international scenario, the Committee desire that the Ministry pursue 
the project at the highest level. 
Reply by the Government 
Turkmenistan – Afghanistan – Pakistan – India (TAPI) Pipeline project 
India is pursuing the Turkmenistan – Afghanistan – Pakistan – India (TAPI) Pipeline 
project to receive Natural Gas supply from the Yolotan Osman (Galkynysh) fields in 
Turkmenistan. The 1814 kms of pipeline will carry 90 MMSCMD of natural ga s, of which 
India and Pakistan will receive 38 MMSCMD each and Afghanistan‟s share is 14 
MMSCMD. Afghanistan has indicated that it will be taking volumes to the tune of 1.5 – 4 
MMSCMD. Volumes not taken by Afghanistan may be equally shared between India 
and Pakistan. GAIL has conveyed its willingness to Turkmengas to hold bilateral 

 
 
 
 
negotiations for taking up additional gas not contracted by Afghan Party and 
discussions in this regard are being held. The landfall point of the pipeline in India will 
be at Fazilka (Punjab).  
With ADB support, preliminary feasibility study was carried out by M/s Penspen, U. K. in 
2003 and a desktop update was done in April 2008. The cost of the project was 
estimated to be around USD 7.6 billion. 
Two Government level agreements h ave been signed for the TAPI Project namely Gas 
Pipeline Framework Agreement (GPFA) and Inter Governmental Agreement (IGA) 
among the four member countries in Dec.‟ 2010. Further, an Operations Agreement 
detailing metering, allocation and nomination aspects  has been signed among the 
parties in Jul‟ 2014. The Transit Fee payable to the transiting countries has been 
broadly agreed. 
As per the project structure, the 4 TAPI Parties will select and induct a technically 
competent and financially capable Consortium Leader.  
Asian Development Bank (ADB) was appointed the Transaction Advisor (TA) on 19th 
November, 2013.   The scope of TA includes formation of TAPI Ltd., selection of the 
Consortium Leader (CL) and undertaking certain project development activities such as 
Detailed Feasibility Study and Route survey.  
Road shows were held in September 2012 at Singapore, New York and London for 
understanding the prerequisites of the companies willing to join the TAPI Pipeline 
Project as Consortium leader and Financiers. Th e Road Shows made it clear that no 
international company would be interested in becoming Consortium Leader (CL) without 
upstream participation. Subsequently, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and ADB requested 
Turkmenistan to consider upstream participation by  the CL, so that the TAPI Pipeline 
Project could move forward. During the 17th SC meeting, Turkmenistan informed that a 
shortlist of prospective Consortium Leaders will be provided by the Turkmen Party by 
October/ November 2013 for consideration as the pot ential Consortium Leader for the 
Pipeline Consortium Company. 
During the 18th SC meeting, Turkmen party provided a shortlist comprising of one name 
and that of M/s. TOTAL of France. Turkmen party stated that M/s. TOTAL has 
expressed interest in becoming th e Consortium Leader provided both Turkmen party 
and M/s. TOTAL are able to agree on a suitable upstream model within the framework 
of Turkmen law.  
During the 19th SCM, it was decided to initiate a dialogue with other potential CLs for 
the TAPI project. During this meeting and also during the 27th Technical Working Group 
meeting, Turkmen party stressed that the participation in the upstream on a service 
contract basis is available only for the consortium leader of the TAPI pipeline project. 
In Nov‟ 2014 the  pipeline consortium SPV called TAPI Pipeline Company Limited 
(TPCL) was incorporated in „Isle of Man‟. Formed by the four TAPI countries with equal 
shareholding, TPCL would be responsible for building and operating the TAPI Pipeline.  

 
 
 
 
During the 20th SCM held in Feb‟ 2015, timelines were discussed for identification and 
selection of CL. Timelines were also set for the Turkmen side to sign the MoU with M/s. 
TOTAL and to confirm acceptability or otherwise on the inclusion of two companies 
(M/s. China Petrole um Pipeline Bureau (CPPB) and M/s. RT Global Resources) in the 
shortlist of potential CLs. The four TAPI entities agreed to select a Consortium Leader 
for the project by 1st September 2015. 
During the 21st SCM held in Mar‟ 2015, Turkmen Party informed that  MoU between 
them and M/s. TOTAL has been initialed. During this meeting, Turkmen Party also 
confirmed that M/s. RT Global Resources (a subsidiary of Rostec) is acceptable as a 
potential CL. 
Recently, the Turkmen Party has informed that CPPB has indicated that they are not 
going to join the bidding for TAPI Pipeline Consortium Leader. Accordingly, now two 
companies are in the race to become Consortium Leader for TAPI project. 
The Consortium Leader would be selected through a competitive solicitation process . 
ADB is currently preparing the bidding document for issuing to the two shortlisted 
companies. The first gas flow from the pipeline is expected to start within 3 years from 
execution of Consortium Agreement, which is envisaged to be signed by March 2016. 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) pipeline 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) pipeline was planned for transportation of natural gas from 
South Pars gas fields of Iran to Pakistan and India. The pipeline would have capacity to 
transport 60 MMSCMD of Natural Gas which would  be equally (30 MMSCMD each) 
supplied to India and Pakistan. The total length of the pipeline up to Indian border would 
be approx. 2135 KMs (1100 KMs within Iran and the rest within the territory of 
Pakistan). The pipeline was proposed to enter India in Rajasthan near Barmer. 
 
Various Trilateral and Bilateral Joint Working Group meetings were held between Iran, 
Pakistan and India to finalize the issues like transportation cost, transit fee, price review, 
and governing law/seat of arbitration & delivery poin t. Inter-Government Agreement & 
Joint Co -operation Declaration were also discussed. No JWG meeting has been held 
since April 2008. 
 
During the visit of Iranian President to India, Hon'ble PM handed over a Non Paper to 
Iranian President on 29.04.2008. In response, a Non paper was received from Iranian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The issues included in the Non papers among others were 
(a) Project execution methodology, (b) Obligations of parties so as ensure Security of 
the Project and (c) Trilateral mecha nism for reaching an agreement with the aim of 
securing the delivery of gas at Pakistan - India Border. During the visit of Hon'ble 
Foreign Minister to Iran on 01.11.2008, Indian side handed over a letter from Hon'ble 
Minister, P&NG addressed to H.E. Minist er of Petroleum, Islamic Republic of Iran 
highlighting the  following:- 
 

 
 
 
 
a.  Trilateral Mechanism :  India welcomed Iranian suggestion to establish a trilateral 
mechanism with the aim of securing the delivery of gas at Pakistan - India border. 
Pakistan bears the responsibility for security of Gas. 
 
b.  Project Execution :  Each country develops the gas pipeline within its own 
country except for Pakistan leg of the project should be executed by a consortium of 
technically competent and financially capable international companies. 
 
c.  Price Review Clause : As per India's view, no price review mechanism is required 
as the Price formula already has linkages with JCC price. 
 
d.  Gas Sourcing :  Iran has to ensure that the development plan of South pars 
phases 19 , 20, and 21(Source for IPI Gas) is synchronized with the supply of gas 
through the IPI pipeline. Further, the reserves need to be certified from an 
internationally reputed accredited agency and submit the reserves certificate before 
signing the GSPA. 
 
Due to the unresolved issues and in light of the US sanctions on Iran, India has not 
participated in any further meetings. 
 
As per media reports, we understand that Pakistan and Iran have signed the GSPA and 
Inter Govt Framework Agreement in 2009 for supply o f 23 MMSCMD gas. Delivery of 
gas was expected to start after 5 years from signing the contract. However, it is further 
understood that Pakistan has not yet commenced the construction of their portion of 
pipeline. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/47/2015-Fin.I Dated 27-07-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
9 December, 2015 
 18 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTH SITTING 
(08.12.2015) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8 December, 2015 from 1700 hrs. to 
1800 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Ravneet Singh 
15 Shri Rajesh Verma 
16 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
17 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
18 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
RAJYA SABHA 
19 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
20 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
 
 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the 4th Report on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of MoPNG' and adopted the 
same with some minor modifications.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report on 
the 5 th Report on the subject 'National Auto Fuel Policy' a nd adopted the same without any 
modification.  The Committee then authorised the Chairman to present/lay both the Reports to 
the Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee also decided to undertake study visit in connection with 
examination of the subjects selected du ring the term (2015 -16) and authorized the 
Hon'ble Chairperson to finalize the same.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015 -16) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 23 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3,4,5,6,7,9,10,12, 
13,15,17,19,20 and 21) 
 14 
 Percentage to Total 60.86% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s (NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 1, 2,8,11 and 14) 
 
5 
 Percentage of Total 21.74% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No.  16,18, 22 and 23)  
4 
 Percentage of Total 17.40% 
 