 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA  
   
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
'FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE 
GENERAL OF HYDROCARBONS (DGH)' 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2016 /  Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 


 
 
2 
 
CP&NG No. 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE 
GENERAL OF HYDROCARBONS (DGH) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  06.05.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  06.05.2016 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2016/ Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 
 


 
 
3 
 
 CONTENTS  
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)  (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 REPORT  
 PART-I  
 Introductory  
(i) Evolution of DGH and Its Functions and Responsibilities 7 
(ii) Activities and Achievements of DGH 18 
(iii) Post of Director General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 31 
(iv) Staff Strength of DGH 32 
(v) Training in DGH 37 
(vi) Funding of DGH 40 
(vii) Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 44 
(viii) Exploration of Shale Oil and Gas 44 
(ix) Review of exploration programme by DGH 46 
(x) Exploratory Activities and Production Sharing Contracts 56 
(xi) Production in KG-D6 basin 64 
(xii) IOR/EOR schemes monitoring by DGH 66 
(xiii) Practical Difficulties in the Implementation of Production Sharing 
Contracts 
71 
(xiv) Dispute Settlement by DGH 74 
(xv) Site Restoration Activities under PSC 79 
(xvi) Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) 81 
(xvii) National Data Repository and DGH 88 
(xviii) New initiatives by DGH 89 
(xix) Survey of Unapprised Areas of Indian Sedimentary Basins 89 
(xx) Multi-client Speculative Survey through Service Providers 90 
(xxi) Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 91 
(xxii) Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 document for Northeast India  91 
(xxiii) Efforts of DGH to explore and develop alternate source of Energy 92 

 
 
4 
 
(xxiv) Efforts by DGH and role of DGH in developing CBM 93 
(xxv) Efforts by DGH and role of DGH in developing Shale gas 95 
(xxvi) Current Status of Gas Hydrates 96 
(xxvii) Efforts by DGH and role in developing Gas hydrates 96 
 
PART- II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  ............... 97 
 ANNEXURES  
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee (2014 -15) held 
on 19.01.2015 
111 
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2015 -16) held 
on 18.11.2015. 
113 
ANNEXURE III Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2015 -16) 
held on 04.05.2016. 
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (2015 -16) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Smt. Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Smt. Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Raju Shetty 
15 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
16 Shri Ravneet Singh 
17 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Vacant1 
23 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
24 Shri Prabhat Jha 
25 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
26 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Shri Sharad Yadav 
31 Shri Praful Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Additional Director 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala Committee Officer 
                                                           
1 Since Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar retired from Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2016. 

 
 
6 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas  (2015-16) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf , present 
this Thirteenth Report on 'Functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH)'. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas at their sittings held on 19.01.2015 and 18.11.2015. 
3. The Com mittee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
04.05.2016. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Directorate General of Hydrocarbons for placing their 
views before them and furnishing the information desired in connection with 
examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 04 May,  2016 
 14 Vaisakha,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                            Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
    

 
 
7 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Introductory 
With an increasing socio-economic development in the country, there will be a 
growing demand for energy. India‟s energy security has to ensure continuous 
availability of energy at competitive prices to support its economic growth and mee t the 
energy needs of its h ouseholds with safe, clean and affordable forms of energy. The 
requirement of energy is expected to rise with development and growth in the country. 
The growth in industrial sector and the drastic fall in in ternational crude oil prices have  
increased the d emand for petroleum products.  Current hydrocarbon demand is much 
more than the domestic crude oil and natural gas production. Given the limited domestic 
availability of crude oil and natural gas, the country is dependent on import s to meet 75 
per cent of its domestic requirement.  To bridge the gap between supply and demand , it 
is necessary to accelerate exploration and production activities of hydrocarbon 
resources in the country. 
 
The Exploration and Production sector has been opened up with the  
implementation of New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) and Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) Policy.  These policies have provided a level playing field to private investors by 
giving same fiscal and contract terms as applicable to National Oil Companies (NOCs) 
for the offered exploration acreages. It was in this context, the need was felt to establish 
an agency that could effectively supervise the activities of all E&P companies from the 
private and joint venture sectors in the national interests.  
Evolution of DGH and Its Functions and Responsibilities 
1.2 In 1990s the need to have an appropriate agency to regulate and oversee 
upstream activities in petroleum exploration and production sector was felt by the 
Government. Subsequently, various  Committees headed by experts have 
recommended for the creation of an autonomous conservation board and an 

 
 
8 
 
independent regulatory body for the sound management of hydrocarbon resources in 
the country.  Accordingly, the  Government of India set up Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons ( DGH) through a cabinet resolution in the year 1993 and it functions 
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  
1.3 While submitting the details  on the evolution of DGH since inception along with 
the functions and responsibilities being carried out by DGH, the Ministry has furnished 
the following information: 
"During early nineties, the Government of India, in the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas had under consideration, the need to have an appropriate ag ency to 
regulate and oversee the upstream activities in the petroleum and natural gas 
sector and also advise the Government in these areas. The committee headed 
by late Dr. A. B. Dasgupta, which had reviewed the management of the Bombay 
High reservoir, had  recommended the creation of an autonomous conservation 
board to oversee and review that oilfield development programmes conform to 
sound reservoir engineering practices in line with national interests. 
Subsequently, the committee headed by late Sh. P. K. Kaul, which examined 
ONGC‟s organizational structure, also recommended the establishment of an 
independent regulatory body called the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons. 
Moreover, the upstream petroleum sector was largely a monopoly of public 
sector compa nies till then and the sector was at that time being increasingly 
opened up to new operating companies in the private and joint sectors.  Thus a 
need was felt to establish an agency that could effectively supervise the activities 
of all these companies in the national interest. Taking all the above into 
consideration, Government of India, decided to set up a Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas.DGH was set up through a Govern ment Resolution 
dated 8th April, 1993. 
The objective of the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons was set to promote 
sound management of the Indian petroleum and natural gas resources having a 
balanced regard for the environment, safety, technological and economic aspects 
of the petroleum activity. 
The Directorate General was originally assigned the following functions and 
responsibilities as per the Government Resolution:- 
 a)  To provide technical advice to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
on Issues relevant to the exploration and optimal exploitation of hydrocarbons in 
the country and on the strategy of taking up exploration and exploitation of oil 
and gas reserves abroad by the national oil companies; 

 
 
9 
 
 b)  To review the exploration programmes of  companies operating under 
Petroleum Exploration Licences granted under the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1948 and the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 with a 
view to advising Government on the adequacy of these programmes; 
 c)  To reass ess the hydrocarbon reserves discovered and estimated by the 
Operating companies in discussion with them; 
 d)  To advise the Government on the offering of acreages for exploration to 
Companies as well as matters relating to relinquishment of acreages by 
Companies; 
 e) To review the development plans for commercial discoveries of 
hydrocarbon reserves proposed by the operating companies and advise 
Government on the adequacy of such plans and the exploitation rates proposed 
and matters relating thereto; 
 f)  To review and audit concurrently the management of petroleum reservoirs 
by operating companies and advise on any mid course correction required to 
ensure sound reservoir management practices in line with the optimal 
exploitation of reserves and the conservation of petroleum resources; 
 g)  To regulate the preservation, upkeep and storage of data and samples 
pertaining to petroleum exploration, drilling, production of reservoirs etc. and to 
cause the preparation of data packages for acreages on offer to companies; 
 h)  To advise Government on the laying down of safety norms and framing 
Regulations on safety in oil field operations, prescribe pollution control measures 
and assist in inspection and periodic safety audit.  
Later on, Government assigned the safety related function to Oil Industry 
Safety Directorate (OISD).  
(i) All other matters incidental thereto and such other functions as may be 
assigned by Government from time to time. 
  Government assigned some additional fu nctions also to DGH, like 
issuance of Essentiality Certificates, implementation of NELP and CBM policies, 
Contract Management and Monitoring of PELs and MLs under nomination 
regime. 
  DGH was subsequently designated to exercise the following powers and 
functions of Central Government through Gazette Notification dated 1 st 
September 2006: 
(i) Review and monitor the exploration programme and development plans 
for commercial discoveries of hydrocarbons reserves proposed by licensee or 
lessee with a view to opti mizing hydrocarbon recovery from a reservoir in 
accordance with generally accepted international petroleum industry practices; 
 

 
 
10 
 
(ii) Review the management of petroleum reservoirs by licensee or lessee 
and advise them on any action which may ensure proper manage ment of the 
petroleum reservoirs including their conservation in accordance with generally 
accepted international petroleum industry practices; 
 
(iii) To ask for and maintain in a readily retrievable form all geo -scientific data, 
reports and information from lic ensee or lessee and store and preserve data and 
samples pertaining to petroleum exploration, drilling, production and connected 
operations; 
 
(iv) Review the reserves discovered by the licensee or  lessee in accordance 
with generally accepted international petroleum industry practices; 
 
(v) To lay down norms for declaration or announcement of discoveries by 
licensee or lessee; 
 
(vi) To exercise the power of the Central Government as given in Rules 
24,25,26,27 and 30 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959; 
 
(vii) To monitor oil and gas production and royalty or any other charges or fees 
or levies, and where applicable, cost petroleum, etc, due to the Central 
Government in receiving accurate royalty and other statutory charges by the due 
date. 
 
Provided that in case where the Central Government has signed a Production 
Sharing Contract or a contract or an agreement for exploration and production of 
hydrocarbons, the powers and functions shall be discharged by Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons in accordance and consistent w ith the respective 
Production Sharing Contract or contract or agreement". 
 
1.4 When the Committee specifically enquired as to how does DGH carry out the 
functions of sound management of hydrocarbon resources in the country, the Ministry 
submitted the following facts in its written reply: 
"DGH has dedicated internal technical departments to deal with the contractual, 
geo- technical, environmental and economic aspects of the exploration and 
production activities of the country. The review/vetting/approval and monitoring of 
all such aspects is being carried out in pursuance with the PSC provisions and/or 
concerned extant guidelines/directives. The concerned stakeholders are also 
involved for clarification in case of requirement. Also, If required the independen t 
consultants are being hired to review and provide expert advice on a given 
technical issue. 
The various technical sections at DGH are as under: 

 
 
11 
 
i. Production Sharing Contract (Contractual Matters within the purview of PSCs in 
exploration phase) 
ii. Producing Fi elds (Contractual Matters within the purview of PSCs in 
development & production phase) 
iii. National Oil Company Monitoring (NOC) (Matters concerning with review of 
exploratory and development operations of NOCs within nomination regime) 
iv. Geology & Geophysics i ncluding Petrophysics  (All technical matters related to 
geological and geophysical aspects ) 
v. Reservoir (All technical matters related to reservoir, production profile etc.) 
vi. Production (All technical matters related to production) 
vii. Geophysical Data Acquisit ion (Matters concerning with geophysical data 
acquisition) 
viii. Field Development Plan (FDP) (Matters concerning with field development plan 
and declaration of commerciality (DOC) in blocks and fields) 
ix. New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) (Identification, pr eparation of data 
packages for prospective areas to be offered for exploration and development) 
x. Alternate Energy (Matters concerning with National Gas Hydrate Program & 
Shale Gas) 
xi. Coal Bed Methane (CBM) (Matters concerning with CBM) 
xii. Drilling & Safety (Matters concerning with drilling operations and safety) 
xiii. Environment (Matters concerning with environmental issues) 
xiv. National Data Repository (NDR) (Matters concerning with the set up and 
implementation of NDR) 
xv. Materials Management (Matters concerning with material management) 
xvi. Human Resources (HR) & Administration (Admn.) (Matters concerning with HR & 
Admn.) 
xvii. Essentiality Certificate (EC) (Matters concerning with review and grant of EC) 
xviii. Legal (Matters concerning with legal issues) 
xix. Information Technology (IT) (Matters concerning with IT) 
xx. Contract Finance (Matters concerning with the financial aspects of the contracts) 
Primary responsibility for seeking the environment clearances lies with the 
operators. The operator has to apply to MOEF for seeking relevant cle arances, 
as per article 14 of PSC. The DGH plays the role of facilitator, in case the 
operator brings to the notice of DGH the hurdles being faced in obtaining these 
clearances".  
1.5 In regard to any differences existing in the E&P technology being used i n 
continental shelf and other areas depending upon the subsoil structures, the Ministry 
has submitted the following details: 
"Continental shelf is a broad, relatively shallow submarine terrace of continental 
crust forming the edge of a continental landmass . It typically extends from 
the coast to depths of 100 –200 metres (330 –660 feet). It is gently inclined 

 
 
12 
 
seaward at an average slope of about 0.1°. The average width of continental 
shelves is about 65 km (40 miles). Almost everywhere the shelves represent 
simply a continuation of the continental landmass beneath the  ocean margins. 
Accordingly, they are narrow, rough, and steep off mountainous coasts but broad 
and comparatively level offshore from plains. Continental shelves are usually 
covered with a layer of  sand, silts, and silty muds. Their surfaces exhibit some 
relief, featuring small hills and ridges that alternate with shallow depressions and 
valley like troughs.  
The major E &P Technologies used in Oil and Gas operations are related to 
seismic data acquisition/processing/interpretation, well drilling, completion, 
testing and facilities related to production of oil and gas. The subsoil structures of 
oil and gas are at varied depth and spatially dis tributed. In on -land areas, these 
structures are below the ground and in offshore areas, below sea bottom overlain 
by water (at varied water depths). Therefore, due to varying terrain and logistic 
conditions thereof, the available technologies in continent al shelf areas including 
deepwater and other on-land areas are different.  
The E&P technology used in continental shelf and deep offshore areas are 
different in the sense of equipments used over and under the water such as 
seismic vessels with steamers, oc ean bottom cables(OBC) surveys for seismic 
acquisition, offshore Jack -up and floater rigs for drilling of wells, completion of 
sub-sea wells and processing facilities/platforms for production of oil and  gas.  
However, on the other hand, in on -land areas t he surface related E & P 
technologies for acquiring seismic data by laying seismic cables on the ground, 
deploying on-land drilling rigs of varying capacities for drilling and completion of 
wells and installation of production facilities in on -land part an d laying of 
transportation pipelines for oil & gas are used for exploration and Production 
activities.  
The use of E&P technology in continental shelf and other onland areas also 
varies in terms of cost and availability of the suitable technologies specifi c to the 
particular areas".  
1.6 When asked as to whether DGH has been modelled on any organisation of any 
other country, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
"DGH was established after studying and suitably modifying the structure, 
functions and responsib ilities of various regulatory authorities around the globe 
with special focus on Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) of Norway". 
1.7 When asked to clarify the role of DGH as a regulator , the representative of the 
Ministry during the oral evidence held on 18.11.2015, stated as under: 

 
 
13 
 
"Actually, we call it a regulator but frankly speaking this is not a regulator. Even 
the Cabinet Note on the basis of which  the DGH was set up says that it is 
basically a technical arm of the Ministry.  It is an attached office of the Ministry.  
Even it functions do not talk of regulation because an appeal over a regulator lies 
in some court and there is no such thing here."    
1.8 Clarifying further on the issue d uring the oral evidence, the representative of the 
Ministry also stated as under:  
 "For certain functions (downstream sector), PNGRB is a regulator.  For other 
 functions (upstream sector), there is no regulator". 
1.9 When asked as to whether DGH could appropriately be called as an independent 
upstream regulator when funding and manpower requirements are being met from other 
organizations and would it not be appropriate to restructure DGH into a Multi -Member 
Board to make it more efficient for proper discharge of its mandate , the Ministry 
submitted the following information:   
 
"DGH functions under the Administrative Control of Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas and carries out regulatory and contract management functions on 
behalf of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
It is commonly understood that, a Regulator  is deemed to be independent if 
appeals against its decision lie to a body independent of the Govt. e.g. CCI, 
PNGRB, CERC etc.  In that sense DGH is not independent.  The upstream 
regulators in all countries function under the control of the respective 
Governments. The role of a regulator gains importance in situations where there 
is no level playing field. The NELP and CBM policies have already ensured a 
level playing field for all including the Private and Public Sector.   
 
DGH has been delegated with adm inistrative and financial powers for its 
operations as per stipulations of the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas from time to time.  Vide notification of 1 st September, 
2006 DGH has been delegated the powers and functions to monitor the 
upstream petroleum operations in India in accordance with the Oil Fields 
(Regulations and Development) Act, 1948 and the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Rules, 1959.  DGH is part of the Management Committee and performs review, 
advisory and approval functions on important matters such as annual work 
programmes and budgets and performance thereof; proposals for surrender or 
relinquishment of parts of the contract area, proposals for de velopment plan; 
determination of development area, audit of blocks, claims for or on behalf of or 
against the contractor in excess of limits fixed.  Further, delegation of powers as 
necessary for effective functioning of DGH is under consideration.  In vie w of the 

 
 
14 
 
submission made above, it is not felt necessary to restructure DGH in a Multi 
Member Board". 
 
1.10 When asked as to what kind of powers are under contemplation for delegation to 
DGH, the Ministry submitted the following information: 
"Government has empowered DGH to decide upon many issues on the basis of 
recommendations of the Management Committee related to the operationalization 
of Production Sharing Contract.  Govt. has recently issued guidelines for 
relaxation of timelines for submission of FDP , DoC and exemption of work 
program including reduction of area where approvals are not given by Govt. 
agencies for more than two years. Govt. has increased the limit for approving 
legal expenditure for arbitration cases abroad under production sharing con tracts 
from 50.00 lakhs to Rs. 10.00 crores.  Further, DGH has been advised to review 
all delegated powers to it and suggest whe re there is necessity  for any further 
delegation". 
1.11 When the Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry is satisfied with the 
performance of DGH so far , the Secretary of Ministry of P&NG during the oral evidence 
held on 19.01.2015 submitted the following facts before the Committee: 
“Sir, on the general question on the assessment of the performance of the 
Director General , Hydrocarbons, both DG(H), myself and my colleagues agree 
that the performance could and should have been much better.  There is no 
doubt about it.  
The DG(H) gets the exploration done through companies.  We have to look at 
why the companies have not perf ormed the way they should have.  Our primary 
company for exploration and which still produces most of the oil and gas is 
ONGC.  My assessment is, there could be differences of opinion, somewhere 
they lost their focus on exploration in the last few years”.  
1.12 On the above issue, the Secretary, MoP&NG further clarified as under: 
“Sir, they went into diversification.  They went into petro chemicals; they went into 
refineries.  If the same money was put into exploration would have made a lot of 
difference.   Look at the number of exploratory wells which the US does and the 
number of exploratory wells we do.  These are basics.   On 2D and 3D survey, 
even today, about slightly less than 60 per cent of the sedimentary basins are not 
covered by any kind of survey.   We are putting into place a plan to survey 
everything. At least, we should know what it is. But I am happy to say that ONGC 
in the last few months has sanctioned major projects and they are expected to 
increase their gas production by 80 per cent in the next four years.  These are 

 
 
15 
 
long term things.  What is not being done in t he last 8 to 10 years, the impact is 
being felt now.  On what they are doing now, the impact will be felt four years 
down the line”.  
 
1.13 On being asked about the observations/recommendations made by the Kelkar 
Committee set up by the Ministry of P&NG on DGH has submitted following details: 
"The observations / recommendations made by Kelkar Committee in their report 
on DGH are quoted as under: 
DGH to become an independent regulator for the upstream oil and gas 
sector 
At present, the multiple roles of government as policy maker, regulator and 
operator lead to conflicts of interest and dampen investor confidence in the 
sector. This creates the need for an independent and transparent regulatory 
mechanism. Hence, the DGH should be transitioned from its cur rent role of being 
an advisor to being an independent regulator for the upstream oil and gas sector. 
Empowerment of regulator, along the lines of SEBI 
The asset base of the securities market in India, at approximately USD 1.5 
trillion, is equivalent to the  market value of established hydrocarbon reserves in 
India. The comparable asset base emphasizes the need for a robust and 
transparent regulatory framework for the upstream oil and gas sector, similar to 
that of the securities market under the purview of S ecurities Exchange Board of 
India (SEBI). The DGH should be given, as is the case of SEBI, quasi judicial 
powers accompanied by an Appellate Tribunal for fast and effective dispute 
resolution. The status of the head of the DGH should be at par with that of  other 
empowered regulator heads in the country, such as SEBI, TRAI etc. 
Capability building for the effective function of the DGH 
To ensure that the DGH can operate effectively, it should be empowered with an 
independent financing and staffing mechanism. The funds required for day to day 
operations must be made available automatically, on a formulaic basis, through 
the OID (Oil Industry Development) cess. The DGH should be established as a 
multi-member, multidisciplinary body with professional teams that h ave expertise 
in different domains such as legal, environmental, financial and technical. The 
DGH should further have the flexibility in its charter to access global experts, and 
maintain a permanent cadre at competitive remuneration rates. The DGH should 
also be developed as a knowledge centre or knowledge hub that acts as a 
central repository for best practices, geo -scientific data on Indian basins (through 
creation and maintenance of NDR), state -of-the-art technologies available locally 

 
 
16 
 
or globally etc. The head of the DGH must have a fixed tenure of five years and 
retirement age as per the norms of other similar regulators". 
 
1.14 When the Committee specifically asked about the implementation status of the 
recommendations of Kelkar, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The report of the Kelkar Committer is under examination in the Ministry.  
However, some of the recommendations of the committee were already under 
consideration & execution even before the final report was submitted. 
 
The two major recommendations of Kelkar Committee which have been 
accepted by the Govt. are setting up of National Data Repository (NDR) and 
Appraisal of Un-appraised area of Indian Sedimentary Basins. The National Data 
Repository has been commissioned in the office of  DGH and data loading is in 
progress. Further, the job work  for appraisal of sedimentary area has been 
assigned to NOCs.  Remaining recommendations are under consideration of 
Govt". 
1.15 In the same context, when the Committee specifically wanted to know about 
steps that have been taken to develop the DGH as robust, transparent and independent 
regulator for upstream oil and gas sector as recommended by the Kelkar Committee , 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
"By constituting a in house committee, a study was done by DGH on various 
upstream regulatory bodies existing worldwide. A report was prepared in 
December 2014 and submitted to MOP&NG for consideration.  Based on the 
report, MOP&NG felt it necessary to deliberate the issue with an expert 
consulting organization for more details.  Accordingly, DGH has been advised to 
appoint an expert consultant in the field to provide a report on restructuring of 
DGH to meet the regulatory environment in the current context by studying the 
current structure and mandate of D GH vis -à-vis similar set up in other oil 
producing countries.  DGH is in the process of hiring a consultant for this job".  
1.16 When enquired about non -regulatory functions per formed by DGH, the Ministry 
has submitted as under: 
"Some of the major non–regulatory functions being performed by DGH are: 
1. To provide technical advice to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 
issues relevant to the exploration and optimal exploitation of hydrocarbons in the 
country. 

 
 
17 
 
2. To advise the Government on the offering of  acreages for exploration to 
Companies as well as matters relating to relinquishment of acreages by 
Companies. 
3. Issuance of Essentiality Certificates 
4. Implementation of NELP and CBM policies by way of conducting the bidding 
rounds. 
5. Generation of additional g eo-scientific data base in poorly explored sedimentary 
areas of the country through speculative and other modes of surveys or 
information drilling. 
6. To ask for and maintain in a readily retrievable form all geo -scientific data, 
reports and information from licensee or lessee and store and preserve data and 
samples pertaining to petroleum exploration, drilling, production and connected 
operations. 
7. Various geo -scientific studies pertaining to Indian basins on conventional and 
unconventional Oil and Gas.  
 
1.17 While analysing the functions of DGH, what the Committee wanted to know 
about the composition of the Advisory Council constituted to give advice to DGH on 
various activities under its domain and specific powers and responsibilities, the Ministry 
submitted the following information: 
 
"The composition of the last Advisory Council is as under: 
1. Shri P. Shankar, IAS (Retired), Chairman 
2. Shri E. Desa, Member, (Ex Director, National Oceanographic Institute, 
 Goa) 
3. Shri I.B. Singh, Member, (Professor of Geology, Lucknow University) 
4. Shri B.B. Bhattacharya, Member, (Professor, Indian National Academy of 
 Engineering (INAE) 
5. DG, DGH – Member Secretary 
 
The role of Council is advisory in nature. The order constituting the Advisory 
Council is not specific about its powe r and responsibilities . The matter of 
reconstitution of Advisory Council is under consideration of the Government". 
 
1.18  When asked about the position of power and responsibilities of Advisory Council 
and whether it is simply a recommendatory authority or has got some specific say in 
certain matters, the Ministry clarified as under: 
"Advisory Council has no specific responsibilities. It comprises of eminent 
scientist/ administrators in the field of oil & gas and performs advisory role mainly 

 
 
18 
 
on technical issues. Advisory Council is a recommendatory authority and 
technical proposals are presented to the members of Advisory Council for their 
advice".  
1.19 Further, in regard to certain changes that have be en envisaged in Advisory 
Council of DGH, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
"DGH has proposed reconstitution of Advisory Council in view of increasing focus 
on alternate energy such as Shale Gas and Gas Hydrate. The proposal is under 
consideration of Govt. for induction of new members".  
 
1.20 Asked by the Committee regarding the procedure of appointment of Members to 
the Advisory Council, the representatives of  the Ministry during the oral evidence on 
18.11.2015 submitted the following: 
"The Advisory Council is appointed by the Government. Basically, it comprises 
very eminent and expert people in the upstream sector. So, currently, the 
Advisory Council is chaire d by a former Secretary (Petroleum). There are three 
members who are representing the academics, research and the actual expertise 
in the upstream sector”. 
1.21 Further clarifying about the recommendations of the advisory council are binding , 
the representatives of the Ministry submitted as under during the oral evidence: 
“Although it is written as Advisory Council, yet, so far, around 22 meetings 
happened. All the suggestions which have been given by the Advisory Council 
have been accepted as they are by the DGH. In fact, whenever we go ahead with 
all major projects, for the speculative seismic survey, first we present it to the 
Advisory Council. Once the Advisory Council got the concept approved, then only 
we bring it to the Administrative Co uncil for approval. For all the big projects, 
some state-of-the-art projects, new jobs or some activities, we first approach the 
Advisory Council, we take their approval. Although it is advisory in nature, yet 
whatever recommendations they have submitted t o us, that is a kind of binding 
on us”. 
Activities and Achievements of DGH 
1.22 When the Committee wanted to know about  major activities/achievement s 
undertaken by DGH, the Ministry furnished the following details: 
"Major Accomplishments of DGH are as under: 

 
 
19 
 
i. Monitoring of Production Sharing Contracts:  DGH monitors the 
execution and management of the Production Sharing Contracts on behalf of 
GOI through Management Committees set up for each block/field. This involves 
in-depth review of annual work progra mmes, project monitoring, calculation of 
reserves and production profile, making simulation model of the field, review and 
approval of development plan, budget and safety management system.  
Presently there are total 131 active PSCs which includes 12 Pre -NELP PSCs, 92 
NELP PSCs and 27 Production Sharing Contracts executed with Private 
companies/JV under Producing Fields regime.   
ii. Field Development, Reservoir and Production Monitoring:  DGH 
reviews the reserves of new discoveries through internal scientific s tudies so that 
accurate reserves are estimated. So far 213 hydrocarbon discoveries have been 
made in PSC regime. These discoveries are under various phases of appraisal 
and development. The details are as under:  
Total Oil and Gas discoveries in PSC regime (Pre-NELP & NELP) 213 
                                 (a)   Oil Discoveries in PSC regime 107 
                                 (b)   Gas Discoveries in PSC regime 106 
Discoveries on Production 31 
Discoveries under development 22 
Discoveries for which commerciality established (DoC reviewed) 50 
Discoveries for which commerciality proposal(DoC) submitted 26 
Discoveries in early stage, DoC to be submitted 21 
Discoveries to be monetized falling in ML areas 29 
Discoveries not perused/relinquished 34 
iii. Award of acreages for exploration activities in NELP:   New 
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was formulated by the Government of India, 
with Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) as a nodal agency, during 
1997-98 to provide a level playing field to both Public and Private sector 
companies in exploration and production of hydrocarbons.  
Under NELP, which became operational in February 1999, acreages are offered 
to the participating companies through the process of open global competitive 
bidding. The first round of offer of blocks was in the year 1999 an d the latest 
ninth round in 2010. In nine bidding round, 360 exploration blocks have been 
offered and 254 blocks have been awarded till 31.03.2013. Oil and Oil-Equivalent 
Gas (O+OEG) in place reserve accretion under NELP is approximately 745 
MMT. 
iv. Coal Bed Methane (CBM)  - CBM blocks were carved out by DGH in 
close interaction with Ministry of Coal (MOC) & Central Mine Planning and 
Design Institute (CMPDI). Till date, four rounds of CBM bidding have been 

 
 
20 
 
implemented by MOP&NG under the CBM policy resulting in  award of 33 CBM 
blocks (including 3 blocks on Nomination/FIPB route) which covers 16,613 Sq.km 
out of the total available coal bearing areas for CBM exploration of 26,000 sq.km. 
Total prognosticated CBM resource for awarded 33 CBM blocks, is about 62.4 
TCF (1767 BCM), of which, so far, 9.9 TCF (280.34 BCM) has been established 
as Gas in Place (GIP). CBM production has started since July 2007 and current 
production is around 0.6 MMSCMD from 3 CBM blocks. Seven more CBM blocks 
are expected to start commercia l production in near future. The total CBM 
production is expected to be around 4MMSCMD by end of 12t h plan as per XII 
plan document. 
v. National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP)  - Steered by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, DGH is technically coordinati ng National Gas 
Hydrate Program (NGHP) which is a consortium of National E&P companies, 
namely ONGC, GAIL, OIL, IOC and national research institutions NIO, NIOT and 
NGRI. During the period 1998 to 2003, data of Krishna Godavari Basin 
(offshore), Cauvery Basin (offshore), Gulf of Mannar and Western offshore were 
studied for assessing Gas Hydrate prospectivity. These studies provided 
technical support in formulating NGHP Expedition -01 program, wherein 21 sites 
(39 holes) were drilled / cored in Indian offshor e in 2006 using the ship Joides 
Resolution. 
The NGHP technical committee is planning to locate an ideal gas hydrate 
bearing sand in the channel levee system by drilling several of the identified 
locations in the areas KG & Mahanadi deepwater areas during NGHP 
Expedition-02. This would be followed up by taking pilot production testing under 
NGHP- 03. The steering committee has approved for the NGHP-02 expedition for 
coring/drilling/LWD/MWD/WL of 40 wells at 20 sites in Indian Offshore. In 
addition, a region al gas hydrate prospect map was generated for KG and 
Mahanadi basin by integrating the bathymetry derived from 3D seismic data 
along-with seismic attributes near the sea floor, BSR zones with identified 
prospective sites. 
vi. Review & Monitoring of Petroleum Exploration Licences (PELs)- DGH 
reviews the Petroleum Exploration Licences (PELs) held by National Oil 
Companies on nomination basis. DGH also monitors the progress and work 
programme in these PELs and also the Petroleum & Mining Lease (PML) areas. 
Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PEL) were awarded to NOCs viz. ONGC and 
OIL prior to the announcement of NELP.  
At present, ONGC holds 12 PEL acreages covering an area of 42,825.50 Sq. 
kms. on nomination basis. OIL holds 5 PEL acreages under nomination covering 
an area of about 1238.75 Sq. kms.   

 
 
21 
 
vii. Shale Oil and Gas - A systematic approach has been initiated by DGH 
under MOPNG since 2010 to identify, characterize and prioritize the Indian 
sedimentary basins for focused Shale Oil /Gas exploitation and also to assess 
and establish the potential of fields. 
A Multi Organizational Team (MOT) of DGH, ONGC, OIL, GAIL has been formed 
by MOPNG to analyze the existing data set and suggest methodology for Shale 
Oil & Gas development in India. Technical studies have been conducte d by 
ONGC and Central Mine Planning and Design Institute (CMPDI), Ranchi to 
identify prospective areas in several Basins / Sub Basins. 
Govt. of India has announced “Policy Guidelines for Exploration and Exploitation 
of Shale Oil and Gas by National Oil Companies under Nomination regime” in 
October 2013. 
viii. Oil Shale - Oil Shale prospectivity has been mapped in selected Assam -
Arakan Basin areas where Oil resources are estimated to be around 400 MMT of 
oil upto a depth of 500m in selected areas in Assam-Arakan Basin 
A MoU has been signed between IOCL, R&D centre, Faridabad and DGH related 
to feasibility studies for Oil Shale as nonconventional fossil fuel, characterization, 
recovery of oil and its characterization, economic aspect of oil shale processing. 
Oil Shale samples have been provided to IOCL, R&D centre by DGH 
ix. Geo-scientific Data Generation - In order to acquire geophysical data in 
poorly explored and unexplored areas, the Government has formulated a new 
policy for Geo -scientific data generation in Indian  sedimentary Basins. GoI on 
2014 has approved the Data Policy and agreement to carry out Non -exclusive 
Multi-Client Geo-scientific surveys/activities relating to hydrocarbons in Offshore 
and/or On -land part of India. The offer to undertake such studies thr ough non -
exclusive Multi -client Business Model is open throughout the year. The data 
acquired through these surveys are to be studied by DGH scientists & engineers 
and based on the interpretations, data dockets and data packages will be 
prepared. These dat a can be purchased and referred to by E&P companies for 
studying the prospectivity of various blocks.  So far seven proposal have been 
received which will be acquiring more than one lakh LKM of 2D seismic data in 
offshore areas.   
DGH has carried out diffe rent geophysical surveys till date with either 
Government funding or Joint Speculative Surveys or Non -exclusive Multi -Client 
Speculative Surveys in different sedimentary basins of India in both onshore and 
offshore India. To cover the 48% of un -appraised area of the sedimentary basins 
of India under 2D survey, DGH is executing a project through ONGC and OIL 
which will be completed in the next 5 years.  

 
 
22 
 
x. Monitoring of Production and reserves accretion -DGH reviews the 
reserves of new discoveries through intern al scientific studies so that accurate 
reserves are estimated. So far 213 hydrocarbon discoveries have been made in 
PSC regime. These discoveries are under various phases of appraisal and 
development. The details are as under:  
The break -up of hydrocarbon reserves explored under PSC regime as on 
01.04.2014 are as under: 
Companies 
Initial In-Place Ultimate Reserve Balance Recoverable 
Reserves (MMT) (MMT) (MMT) 
Oil Gas O+OEG 
Oil 
(MMT) 
Gas 
(BCM) 
O+OEG 
(MMT) 
Oil 
(MMT) 
Gas 
(BCM) 
O+OEG 
(MMT) (MMT) (BCM) (MMT) 
Pvt/JV 972 1318 2290 214 715 929 109 554 663 
 
O+OEG- Oil and Oil Equivalent of Gas 
 
Reserves Replacement Ratio (RRR) & Reserves to Production (R/P) Ratios as 
on 01.04.2014 
 
 
 Category R/P (Years) RRR 
India  Oil 18 0.85 
Gas 40 1.91 
Pvt./JV Cos. under PSC 
Regime 
Oil 9 1.44 
Gas 58 3.74 
 
Crude oil Production in the Country (Figures in Thousand Metric Tonnes) 
 
State/Source  2008-09  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  2012-13  2013-14  
Share of PSUs  28834 28427 28003 27559 26222 25712 
Share of Private/JV  4674 5263 9682 10527 11640 12076 
 % Share of PSUs  86.05% 84.38% 74.31% 72.36% 69.26% 68.04% 
%Share of 
Private/JV  
13.95% 15.62% 25.69% 27.64% 30.74% 31.96% 
 
Gas Production in the Country (Figures in MMSCMD) 
 
State/Source 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Share of PSUs  67.9 69.9 69.7 71.1 71.8 71 
Share of Private/JV  22.1 60.2 73.4 59.2 39.7 26 
 % Share of PSUs  75.44% 53.69% 48.71% 54.57% 64.45% 73.20% 
%Share of Private/JV  24.56% 46.24% 51.29% 45.43% 35.64% 26.80% 
 

 
 
23 
 
1.23 The Committee expressed their concern  over the stagnant domestic crude oil 
production and asked about the reasons for the decline of cru de oil production since 
2008-09. The Ministry furnished the following details: 
"All the oil and gas fields of ONGC and OIL have been discovered in their 
nomination regimes during late 70s and early 80s in Mumbai Offshore, Gujarat, 
Assam, Tamilnadu and Rajasthan. These fields have been on production since 
last three decades and have cr ossed their peak production level. Now, NOCs 
have started IOR/EOR in these ageing fields to maintain the production level. 
Whereas, the private/JV companies started their exploration in late 90s and put 
their finds on production only in last 15 years. Most  of the fields have reached 
their peak production level in last 5 years.  
ONGC is developing their discoveries made in NELP -I bid round which is 
expected to be put on production in next 3 to 4 years. Oil and gas production is 
therefore likely to increase a fter the discoveries made in NELP are put on 
production".  
1.24 On being asked to define Ultimate Reserves (MMT) & Balance Recoverable 
Reserves (MMT), the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Ultimate Reserves is that part of the established hydrocarbon initially in place, in 
terms of weight (Million Metric Ton MMT) or in terms of volume (Barrels BBL) in 
a reservoir, which is anticipated to be commercially recoverable with suitable 
exploitation strategy based on the operating drive mechanism within a pre -
determined period.  
If the reservoir has been partially exploited at any point of time by producing 
some volume of it, then deducting this volume from the ultimate reserves is the 
recoverable re serves which are expressed either in weight (MMT) or volume 
(BBL) terms". 
1.25 When asked to furnish the details of oil and gas discoveries made by various 
national oil companies and private companies in the country during the last 5 years and 
also about t he number of such discoveries that have been verified/confirmed by DGH, 
the Ministry submitted the following details:  
"The details of oil and gas discoveries made by various National Oil Companies 
and Private companies in the country during the last 5 years are as under: 
 

 
 
24 
 
i. Under PSC Regime, during the last 5 years (2010-11 to 2014-15), 71 discoveries 
have been notified by National Oil Companies & Private Companies under PSC 
regime, as on 01.03.2015 and are given below: 
 
S.NO. Name of Operator No. of Discoveries 
1 ONGC  33 
2 OIL  2 
3 GSPC 6 
4 CAIRN  13 
5 RIL 10 
6 FOCUS  2 
7 JOGPL 2 
8 NAFTOGAS  1 
9 INTERLINK PETROLEUM 1 
10 JAY POLYCHEM (INDIA) PVT. LTD. 1 
TOTAL 71 
 
The discoveries have been notified as per relevant article on “Discoveries, 
Development & Production and Natural Gas” of PSC. The discoveries are 
notified, appraised and developed as per provisions in the PSC.  
 
ii. Under nomination regime, during the last 5 y ears (FY 2010 -11 to 2014 -15), 69 
discoveries by ONGC and 30 Discoveries by Oil India Ltd. have been made 
which are as under: 
 
Sl. No. Year No. of Discoveries by ONGC No. of Discoveries by OIL 
  PEL PML Total  PEL PML Total  
1 2010-11 13 7 20 0 6 6 
2 2011-12 7 7 14 0 7 7 
3 2012-13 7 5 12 1 5 6 
4 2013-14 0 10 10 1 3 4 
5 2014-15 3 10 13 0 7 7 
 Total   69   30 
 
All above mentioned discoveries have been validated by DGH". 
 
1.26 When asked to furnish about the current norms for declaration of announcement 
of discoveries and commerciality thereof by licensees or lessee, the Ministry elaborated 
as under: 
"a)  As per PSC article on “Discovery, Development and Production” if and 
when a discovery is made; the Operator has to inform the Management 
Committee and Government. Thereafter, Contractor runs tests to determine 
whether the discovery is of Potential Commerci al Interest and merits appraisal. 
Subsequent to appraisal of the Discovery, Contractor and submit a Declaration of 
Commerciality (DOC) to Management Committee (MC) for review. Thereafter, 

 
 
25 
 
Field Development Plan (FDP) is submitted to Management Committee (M C) for 
approval. There are timelines, stipulated in the PSC, which are adhered to for 
submission and examination & MC approval of all the documents. 
b) In the May 2006, Government of India announced guidelines for 
announcement of Discoveries under PSC regi me. The policy was announced for 
laying out a uniform system for announcing a new Discovery to the public.  The 
Guidelines are to be followed by all E&P companies working in India under 
production sharing regime. As per the guidelines, specified parameters  under 
different formats can be announced to public at different stages of development. 
These formats are as given below: 
 
i) Format- A: to be submitted by the contractor to Management Committee when 
a new Discovery has been made in the block and where the PCI of the Discovery 
is yet to be established. 
ii) Format- B: to be submitted by the contractor to Management Committee after 
detailed testing of Discovery and if Discovery is found to be of Potential 
Commercial Interest (PCI) and merits appraisal. 
iii) F ormat-C: to be submitted by the contractor to Management 
Committee/Government after the appraisal is complete and Discovery is declared 
as commercial and needs development for exploration of Oil and Gas. 
IV) Format -D: to be submitted by the contractor to M anagement 
Committee/Government after Development plan is approved by Government/the 
Management Committee" 
1.27 Further, on being asked about the kind of tests/appraisals made by DGH to 
independently assess the reserves estimated by operators in oil and gas  fields, the 
Ministry submitted the following information: 
"After the notification of Discovery as per PSC, tests are conducted to 
ascertain whether the Discovery is of Potential Commercial Interest (PCI).  
After establishing that Discovery is of Potential  of Commercial Interest, 
Appraisal of the Discovery is carried through the implementation of the 
appraisal programme. Thereafter, the Operator submits Declaration of 
Commerciality (DOC) and finally Field Development Programme (FDP) is 
submitted. 
i. In-place volumes and recoverable reserves are established by the Operator 
during submission of Declaration of Commerciality (DOC) and Field 
Development Programme (FDP) as per the development strategy.  These 
volumes are established by the Operator based on the indu stry practices and 
is based on Geological - Geophysical, Reservoir and Petrophysical studies 
carried out for the Discoveries and is generally as per Petroleum Resource 
Management System - PRMS (SPE,AAPG,WPC) Guidelines. The in -place 
volumes and reserves esta blished by the Operator are evaluated at DGH 
based on in-house G&G, Reservoir and Petro-physical studies. 

 
 
26 
 
ii. In May 2006, Government of India announced Guidelines for "Uniform System 
of Classification of Hydrocarbons Resources/Reserves. The Guidelines were 
issued for all the E&P companies working in India which were in line with 
SPE/AAPG/WPC system which was subsequently upgraded to PRMS. 
iii. The Operator submits statement of Reserves annually to DGH in the 
prescribed format. The statement is submitted as on 31st March of every 
Financial Year. The same is examined at DGH and put up to the Management 
Committee for its consideration. 
iv. As per Guidelines issued by Government in May 2006, the Contractor has to 
audit the reserves by third party every 3/5 years depending upon the volume of 
the reserves.  
In addition to above, once the reserves are submitted at DGH, it is reviewed as 
following: 
 Volumetric Method: Net Reservoir Volume is calculated from the net pay maps 
received from the operator (Area x Net Pay), which when multiplied with 
average porosity and average hydrocarbon saturation (Depending upon values 
obtained at the well in the reservoir section) and dividing by formation volume 
factor of the given reservoir, gives the Inplace estimate. The equation is 
provided below: 
Hydrocarbon In place = (Volume*avg. porosity*avg. hydrocarbon saturation) / 
Formation volume factor 
 Stochastic Method: Software working on principal of Monte Carlo is used for 
derivation of the in -place volumes. A range of values (min and max) for ne t 
pay, porosity, saturation is provided in the software along with the reservoir 
area. The software uses these values for multiple iterations and finally gives 
three figures -Minimum, Mean and Maximum. Out of these Mean Value is 
generally considered. 
 Geocellular model: Interpreted reservoir top and bottom are used for grid 
preparation (container). Interpreted faults are modelled into the grid. The grid 
so generated is used for property modelling which includes facies modelling, 
Net to Gross modelling, porosity and saturation modelling. The facies, porosity 
and saturation values obtained at well point are extrapolated throughout the 
grid using secondary variable like seismic inversion or any other attribute 
which has good correlation with the well data. The pr operties so derived are 
finally used for estimation of in  place with the inbuilt algorithm provided in the 
software". 

 
 
27 
 
1.28 On being enquired about the steps involved in the exploration development & 
production of prospective field s and the role and duti es of DGH in each of the stages, 
the Ministry submitted the following information: 
"The following steps are involved in the exploration, development and production 
of the prospective field along with role and function of DGH at each stage:  
a) Subsequent to award of the block, the contractor carries out the 2D & 3D seismic 
surveys as per minimum work programme and additional 2D & 3D surveys if 
required to identify prospective location to drill exploratory wells as per Minimum 
Work Programme (MWP).  If the drillin g of exploratory wells proved to be Oil or 
Gas bearing well then it is called a Discovery. The contractor notifies the 
discovery to DGH & Management Committee as per provisions of PSC.  
 
Role of DGH - The exploratory locations so identified by contractor ar e reviewed 
at DGH from G&G point of view. DGH also send its representative to witness the 
testing in the discovery well.  
 
b) Based on testing in the well along with other G&G, Petro -physical, Reservoir, 
Production & Drilling data, contractor submit an apprai sal programme to know 
the lateral extent of the discovery and to know the characteristics of the 
discovery.  
 
Role of DGH - The appraisal programme as submitted by contractor is reviewed 
technically by DGH and Management Committee. 
 
c) Based on the results of implementation of appraisal programme, the contractor 
submits a report to DGH/MC to declare the discovery a “Commercial Discovery”.   
Role of DGH- The Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) proposal as submitted by 
contractor is examined at DGH. The parameters like Oil & Gas in Place 
(OIIP/GIIP), Recoverable Reserves, Development Wells, Production profile, 
Development strategy, Techno -economics analysis  are reviewed at DGH and 
then it is deliberated by Management Committee to declare the discovery as 
Commercial Discovery.  
 
d) After the “Declaration of Commerciality (DoC)” of discovery, the contractors 
submit a detailed plan of development generally called a Field Development Plan 
(FDP) to Management Committee for approval.  
 
Role of DGH -The FDP so submitted by contractor is examined at DGH. The 
FDP contains details on Oil & Gas in Place (OIIP/GIIP), Recoverable Reserves, 
Expected Production Profile, Wells required for development, Facilities & pipeline 
required for development, Development strategy, Estimates of Capex /Opex and 
Techno-economic analysis. The report is examined at DGH and then it is 
deliberated by Management Committee for approval of FDP.  
 

 
 
28 
 
e) Subsequent to approval of FDP by Management Committee, the work 
programme as approved by Management Committee is implemented by the 
contractor to commence production of Oil & Gas from the field.  
 
Role of DGH- Work Programme and Budget for development as app roved in the 
FDP is approved by the MC annually after its examination at DGH. 
 
f) After the field is put on production, its production performance and reservoir 
health is continuously monitored at DGH. Any midterm correction like revival of 
sick wells, additional development proposal is submitted by the contractor to 
Management Committe e for approval to improve & optimise the Oil & Gas 
production from the field.     
 
A flow chart depicting the phases in the lifecycle of fields with discoveries, non 
associated Gas reservoir and Oil and associated Gas reservoir respectively are 
attached at Annexure- 2". 
 
1.29 When the Committee enquired as to whether DGH has the necessar y 
infrastructure and management information system to monitor and supervise exploration 
and production programmes in the country, the Ministry provided the following details: 
"Infrastructure- In terms of infrastructure, DGH has adequate number 
workstations, desktops, laptops and printers available in superior working 
conditions to carry out work as per various requirements. Proper internet and 
telephone connectivity is also in -place to ensure adequate communicability of 
DGH with other national or international stakeholders. 
Management Information System - DGH is well equipped with IT enabled 
services to assist in monitoring and supervising the exploration and production 
programme in the country.  Such systems, which are being used geotechnical 
studies and data management are as under: 
i. In-House PSC Data Management Application - An in -house developed 
database application is used to monitor and supervise important PSC data 
management activities of DGH  in order to prepare a single integrated quality 
controlled database of major PSC data that can be used as a single point 
reference by all nodal officers and co-ordinators of DGH.  
 
ii. G&G Application Systems - DGH is having integrated working environment of 
geologist, geophysicist, reservoir engineer and drilling engineer with state of art 
technology to take care of seismic interpretation, 3D reservoir modeling, petro 
physical interpretation, simulation and well designing. The systems works with 
geo scientific software Geo frame, Petrel, Interactive petro physics, Eclipse etc. 
The G&G software are used by DGH G&G Centre for all technical review related 
to NELP, FDP, Reservoir monitoring, review of locations and Gas Hydrates. 
 

 
 
29 
 
iii. Virtual Reality Center - The cutting edge 3D Visualization technology was 
introduced to PSC with the commissioning of the Virtual reality Center.  With this 
technology, geoscientists can analyse and interpret seismic data, well logs and 
reservoir properties simultaneously, “walkin g through” a 3D representation of 
underground rock structures. Interpreters can scan multi -attribute/ multivolume 
seismic, well and cultural data, and reservoir models.  
This breakthrough technology is being utilized to facilitate review of development 
plans, locations and related G&G aspects. The 3D volume visualization will aid 
the team of Geoscientists to accelerate the workflow of evaluating the proposals 
for exploratory and development locations, Commerciality declarations, Appraisal 
programs, Developm ent plans submitted by the Operators for various PSC 
blocks. 
 
iv. Essentiality Certificate Monitoring System (ECMS) - The EC department in 
DGH has been using an online workflow based system viz Essentiality Certificate 
Monitoring System (ECMS). DGH is currently using a JSP -Oracle based web 
enabled workflow system for issuing Essentiality Certificate to E&P operators for 
facilitating exploration activities related to the exploration and production 
programme in the country.  
 
v. National Data Repository (NDR):  National Data Repository (NDR) is a 
government sponsored data bank to preserve and disseminate Oil and Gas 
information and data in order to promote and regulate exploration and 
development activities in the country. It shall be used for the purpose of storage, 
preservation, and distribution of seismic (Pre -Stack & Post Stack), Velocity, Well, 
Production, Archive Gravity, Magnetic, Electromagnetic and related technical 
information. 
 
vi.  Implementation of E -office (File Tracking System):  The need for creating 
necessary infrastructure to monitor and supervise the exploration and production 
programme by implementing a File Moveme nt System for conducting office 
procedures electronically is under process and expected to transform DGH 
functioning to a more efficient mode.  
 
vii. Restructuring of DGH Website:  DGH is in the process of restructuring its 
existing website www.dghindia.org strictly in line with the Guidelines for Indian 
Government Website. The web site will be bilingual both in English and Hindi. 
The site will have all the accessibility features to  persons with disabilities as laid 
down within the above guidelines. The site will also have a backend database 
whose partial dataset will be in constant synchronization with DGH‟s in -house 
MIS database". 
  
1.30 The Committee observe d that New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was 
expected to attract investments in the exploration and production sector in the country. 
However, during the last 15 years of NELP, desirable investments have not  been 

 
 
30 
 
materialized to the extent expected . In that  regard, when the Committee  asked as to 
whether the regulatory framework and decision making mechanism of DGH is partly 
responsible for that, the Ministry clarified as under: 
"The NELP has definitely triggered the investment in E&P activities from both 
National & Intern ational players though may not to the extent of expectations. 
The awarding of 254 exploration blocks in nine rounds of NELP reflects the 
interest shown by both public sector & private sector companies which has given 
them the opportunity to compete on equal terms.  
Before NELP, only 35 E&P companies were active but under NELP regime, the 
number of participating companies increased to 117 (11PSUs, 58 Private & 48 
foreign companies). 
A sum of more than US$ 23.92 Billion invested (US$ 14.49 Billion on explorat ion 
and US$ 9.42 Billion on development) in the NELP regime so far till 31.03.2014.  
However, few of the reasons for investment falling short of expectation are listed 
below: 
i. Fiscal stability & other issues– In some cases, certain incentives like tax benefits 
are withdrawn at later stages and issues raised by different ministries after the 
awarding of blocks send wrong signals to the investors.  
 
ii. In the present Cost recovery model of NELP, gover nment monitoring is done 
upto finer and specific details which consume time; therefore exploratory work is 
affected. 
 
iii. Due to micro monitoring of the projects to protect the Government share of profit 
leads to disputes and arbitrations. 
 
iv. In NELP there is no  incentive for operators to keep the exploration cost low to 
delay/avoid sharing the profit with Government, which is after recovering all the 
costs. 
 
v. Offer of acreages only from time to time & not round the year basis or as per the 
preference of the contr actors.  Bidders have no choice in proposing acreages of 
their choice. Time of offering the block is the choice of Government. 
 
vi. Limited data availability in data packages of some blocks".  
 
1.31 When enquired about the role of DGH which undertakes safety studies while 
reviewing exploration programme of the company and the safety related functions 
assigned to Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), the Ministry submitted as under: 

 
 
31 
 
"Government of India, decided to set up a  Directorate General of Hydrocarbons 
(DGH) under the administrative control of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas through a resolution dated 8th April, 1993. 
 
As per above resolution, DGH was originally assigned to advise Government on 
the laying do wn of safety norms and framing Regulations on safety in oil field 
operations, prescribe pollution control measures and assist in inspection and 
periodic safety audit.  
 
Later on, Government of India vide notification dated 18.06.2008 had assigned 
the safety in offshore oil field operations related function to Oil Industry Safety 
Directorate (OISD). Petroleum & Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore Operations) 
Rules, 2008 were n otified by Govt. of India in June, 2008 for regulation of safety 
in offshore exploration, production& drilling activities and matters connected 
therewith.   
 
OISD has been designated as competent authority to exercise powers and 
functions as stipulated in Petroleum & Natural Gas (Safety in Offshore 
Operations) Rules, in June 2008.  
 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, DGMS, is the Regulatory Agency under the 
Ministry of labour and employment, Government of India in matters pertaining to 
occupational safety , health and welfare of persons employed in mines (Coal, 
Metalliferous and oil-mines) relating to Onland operations.    
However, in line with the provisions provided in PSCs the safety and 
environmental aspects are being monitored by OISD in coordination with DGH". 
Post of Director General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 
1.32 The Committee noted that the post of Director General of Hydrocarbons has 
been lying vacant for a long time. In the same context, they wanted to know  the details 
of all the Director Generals (full time/in charge) of DGH along with the tenure  of each 
one, the Ministry submitted the following details: 
Sr. 
No. 
Name DESIGNATION DURATION 
From To 
1 Dr. Avinash 
Chandra 
Advisor ( Exp) MOPNG & DG-DGH May-1993 Dec-1998 
DG-DGH 15-Jan-1999 30-Sep-2003 
2 Shri G. C. Saxena GM (Geophysics) & Acting DG-DGH 01-Oct-2003 Oct-2004 
3 Shri V. K. Sibal DG-DGH 01-Nov-2004 Oct-2009 
4 Shri S. K. 
Shrivastava 
Director (Operations ) Oil India Limited 
& Additional Charge DG-DGH 
Nov-2009 Feb-2010 
DG-DGH 25-Feb-2010 April -2012 
5 Shri A. Girdhar Joint  Secretary  (E) MOP&NG   
& Addl. Charge of DG-DGH 
01-May-2012 11-Jun-2012 

 
 
32 
 
6 Shri R.N.Choubey DG-DGH 12-Jun-2012 05-Feb-2014 
7 Shri B.N.Talukdar DG-DGH 06-Feb-2014 30-Jun-2015 
8 Shri A.P. Sawhney Addl. Secretary  MOP&G &  Additional 
charge, DG-DGH 
01-Jul-2015 Till date 
 
1.33 The Committee also sought clarification as to whether the post of DGH is a 
technical one or an administrative one  and the steps being taken to fill up the post , the 
representative of the Ministry during the oral evidence stated as under: 
“It is technical, Sir, except for Mr. Choubey from the administrative service who 
was posted for a year. Otherwise, the post of DGH has been filled up by the 
technical people. And even today the rule which has been approved in 
consultation with DOPT and UPSC provides for technical people with experience 
in the upstream sector only to be eligible for the post of DGH. The advertisement 
has been issued recently”.  
1.34 Further, elaborating on the issue during the oral evidence, the representatives of 
the Ministry submitted the following: 
“There were no recruitment rules earlier for the post of Director General of 
Hydrocarbons actually. Last time when an incumbent was posted, it was 
stipulated that there should be recruitment rules in place before the next 
recruitment process starts actually. And that framing of recruitment rules took 
more than the expected time because we wanted certain provisions to be made”.  
1.35 When specifically asked as to when will the post be filled up by the Government, 
the Ministry submitted the following in its written reply:  
"The tenure of previous Director General  ended on 30.06.2015.  Thereafter, 
Additional Secretary, MoP& NG has been entrusted with additional charge of 
DGH with the approval of ACC, w.e.f. 01.07.2015.  While approving the 
appointment of last incumbent, ACC had directed to frame Recruitment Rules 
(RRs) before making further appointment to the post of DGH.  In  pursuance of 
the direction of ACC, RRs to the post of DGH has been finalized and circular 
inviting application has been issued in employment news, leading news papers 
and posted on MoP&NG website.  Last date for receiving application is 
20.12.2015.  Thereafter, selection process will be followed".  
Staff Strength of DGH 
1.36 When a sked to give details with regard to the actual and sanctioned staff 
strength of DGH, the Ministry has stated as under: 

 
 
33 
 
"At present, DGH has actual strength of 187 out of which 7 Officers are slated for 
repatriation w.e.f. 01.06.2015 as against rationalized sanctioned strength of 255 
as approved by the Administrative Council of DGH. The Administrative Council 
however had decided to restrict the strength to 220 for implementation un der 
phase-I". 
1.37 Further, when enquired about the  existing procedures adopted by DGH for 
obtaining officers on deputation from oil PSUs and also  as to whether there is any fixed 
number of staff to be deputed from ONGC and OIL, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The deputation of officers from Oil PSUs is done to DGH is in consultation with 
CEOs  of various Oil PSUs.  Current manpower strength  of DGH is of  220 
officers. The officers are normally posted 80 % from  ONGC and 20% from 
remaining Oil PSUs such as OIL,  IOCL, GAIL and HPCL etc". 
1.38 DGH has been strengthening itself by obtaining officers on deputation from 
various Oil PSUs during the period of 2012-13 to 2014-15 as under:  
Sl. No. Financial Year No. of Officers on deputation 
1.  2012-13 112 
2.  2013-14 146 
3.  2014-15 182 
 
Strength of executives on deputation from PSUs to DGH has increased from 112 
in 2012-13 to 182 in 2014-15 (as on 01.12.2015).  
Following steps have been taken to strengthen DGH in multi disciplinary domains 
like legal, environmental, financial and technical fields: 
 In order to facilitate collective decision making on substantive issues, an 
Executive Committee of DGH comprising of DG, DGH as its chairman, Executive 
Directors (EDs) and FA & CAO has been constituted. 
 In order to meet shor tage of executives, Advisors /Consultants have been 
engaged in order to strengthen multidisciplinary domains like legal, environment, 
finance and technical disciplines. 
Two  legal professionals, one finance professional, one senior level professional 
in th e field of environment retired from Ministry of Environment , one technical 
professional  and one  retired  Major General from Indian army  having adequate 
experience have  been engaged  as  consultants /advisors on contract basis  to 
meet the  experienced manpower requirement . 

 
 
34 
 
 Contract Finance department has been strengthened with a total manpower 
strength of 12 
 Efforts are being made to obtain few additional experienced professionals of 
various technical disciplines like geology, geophysics, reservoir, p roduction etc 
from PSUs on deputation. 
 In order to supplement the efforts of  strengthening  DGH  and to tide over the 
manpower  shortage, entire  installation of  hardware , software  and National 
Data Repository solution build  up  and its operationaliza tion has been 
outsourced for next five years to M/s  Halliburton. DGH scientists, engineers and 
technicians have been fully associated with M/s Haliburton for building up 
competence in NDR operations in order to enable DGH to ultimately take over 
the task itself.  
 Manpower deployment has been optimized leading to better efficiency. 
 An outside consultant is being hired for undertaking detailed study on 
organizational restructuring of DGH, its funding and staffing pattern keeping in 
view its current mandate". 
1.39 Asked by the Committee as to  whether DGH is able to run efficientl y even at the 
staff strength of  187 employees as against the sanctioned strength of 255, the Ministry 
submitted the following details: 
"As per the existing arrangement, posts in DGH are to be filled in through the 
staff drawn on deputation/ tenure basis mainly from oil sector PSUs, DGH staff 
gets repatriated from time to time after completion of their deputation term. This 
process results in periodic rotation and substitution of old e xperienced staff with 
newly posted staff from PSUs. DGH is dependent on PSUs for its staff 
requirements. Because of their own operational requirements and commitments 
as also the large attrition of staff over the years, it is often not possible for PSUs 
to spare their well experienced and field trained staff for deputation/ secondment 
to DGH to meet the entire additional demand of DGH staff. In view of the above 
constraints, phase wise filling up of posts was envisaged for DGH to enable 
PSUs to spare and re cruit additional manpower for postings in DGH after they 
get few years experience of field working. 
 Further, Staff strength of 255 was envisaged keeping provisions for increased 
 work load.  
a. On account of expected future exploration bidding rounds of NELP /ULP, CBM 
and Shale Gas which are to come up  in near future . Also under the proposed 
Open Licensing System, it is expected that there will be  round the year open 

 
 
35 
 
bidding system which would need increased staff strength which is yet to be 
implemented. 
b. Increased work load after full operationalization of NDR under setup in DGH. 
c. Implementation of new Speculative Multi -client Geo-scientific survey project and 
massive 2D Seismic work in yet to be appraised areas. The activity has recently 
begun. 
d. Increased focus on technical work and Gas Hydrate research and exploration 
programme. 
Remaining 35 posts (over and above 220) for the next phase were to be filled in 
after commencement of the ab ove activities. Presently, work  on s ome of the 
above activities has already been initiated. With the acceleration of pace of these 
activities, DGH needs to be strengthened to its full sanctioned strength of 255 
shortly. 
Presently, the work load is being managed through optimization of  available 
manpower". 
1.40 The Committee wanted to know different categories of posts and eligibility criteria 
for each of these and also whether these posts are filled up on deputation or on contract 
basis. Further, the Committee enquired as to whether people from the industry/open  
market are eligible to get appointed  to which  the Ministry furnished the following 
information: 
"DGH has an approved organisational structure and positions are spelt out in the 
structure. To fit into these positions officers are deputed from the PSUs 
belonging to categories of post of Director E -9 to E -1. The details as per 
approved organogram of DGH are as under: 
 
i. Five positions of Deputy Directors General (DDGs) of the levels equivalent of 
Group General Managers (E -8) or Executive Directors (E -9) in ONGC /OIL or 
equivalent level in other Oil PSUs   
 
ii. 8 positions of the level equivalent of General Managers (GMs E -7) in ONGC/OIL 
or equivalent level in other Oil PSUs.  
 
The eligibility for the deputation is indicated by DGH in terms of level and 
discipline as per the requirement in terms of sanctioned strength. All the posts in 
DGH are filled on deputation. People from industry / open market are not eligible 
for appointment in DGH as DGH has no staff cadre of its own". 
 
1.41 The Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas had in their 15 th report 
(15th Lok Sabha) recommended DGH to have its own manpower. The Ministry in its 

 
 
36 
 
Action Taken Notes stated that ONGC and OIL would be allowed to recruit and deploy 
its personnel at DGH on long term basis.  
 When asked about action taken in this regard , the Ministry submitted the 
following information: 
"Administrative council of DGH has taken a decision to ask ONGC and OIL for 
recruitment of officers at induction level and post them in DGH on long 
secondment /semi permanent basis. It was also decided to continue with existing 
deputationist till DGH attains its strength in totality.  ONGC posted 19 officers in 
DGH after induction at E -1 level. The other decisions taken in the Standing 
committee is under implementation".  
1.42 Asked as to w hether DGH has any plans to create its own cadre , the Ministry 
stated as under in its written reply:  
"It has been decided to hire a consultant to study the systems adopted by various 
similar agencies worldwide and including the best  possible model to be adopted 
in India for DGH including staffing pattern".  
1.43 When asked as to whether there is any mechanism to check that decisions taken 
by the staff drawn from public sector companies do n ot favour their parent companies, 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
"There is no possibility of decision taken by the staff drawn from oil industry on 
deputation / tenure basis becoming in favour of parent companies as they are 
required to take decisions in terms of well defined contractual pr ovisions, rules, 
regulations, policy and guidelines. Thus, there is least scope for discretionary 
decisions by the staff in favour of parent companies. Further , the decisions are 
reviewed at various levels within DGH before being recommended".  
 
1.44 Enquired as to whether DGH has powers to hire services of experts and whether 
any efforts have been made to facilitate hiring of their services, the Ministry submitted 
the following reply: 
"DGH has been delegated powers by the Government to hire services o f experts 
and for rendering legal advice / services in the requisite areas. In case the cost of 
services rendered is beyond the powers of Director General - DGH, specific 
approvals are obtained from the Government on case to case basis".  
 

 
 
37 
 
Training in DGH 
1.45 In response to the specific query  about the training/capacity building programme 
that is being conducted by DGH to enable its officials to perform their responsibility 
more efficiently, the Ministry has furnished following information: 
"An internal tr aining and development (T&D) policy has been developed and 
implemented at DGH. The objective of the policy is to assess individual training 
and development needs and to provide T& D opportunity to enhance Knowledge 
and skill to the Officers on subject matter. The various trainings and exposures 
provided to Officers are outlined as under: 
 
 As DGH is manned by deputationists from different PSUs, necessary 
arrangements are done so that  officers avail T&D opportunity from their parent 
organisation as per the training calendar followed by different PSUs.  
 
 In-house training is also being organised by inviting technical experts from 
various domains while ensuring that large number of DGH p ersonnel are 
benefitted from such exposure. 
 
 Besides DGH personnel are exposed to different technical seminars/conferences 
and training organised annually. Officials are also sent abroad for the specific 
technical training suitable to DGH‟s requirements. 
 
 Emphasis is also given for paper and poster presentations at various 
academic/technical forums within the country and overseas as a knowledge and 
image building measure.  
 
 Safety training are provided to the DGH officials before attending the on board 
vessel duty to provide the knowledge and skill to build confidence needed to 
survive life and death situations, reacting appropriately to avoid/overcome 
dangerous situations, engress safely from the ditched helicopter and survive till 
rescued.  
 Some management  training programmes are also selected for over all 
development of the personnel so that the quality of service rendered by DGH to 
all the stakeholders in E&P sector of India can be met".   
 
1.46 Further, when the Committee wanted to know about the funds spent on training 
during last 3 years, the Ministry furnished the details as under: 
Year Expenditure on Training (Rs. In Lakhs) 
2011-12 33.35 
2012-13 1.43 
2013-14 19.69 
 

 
 
38 
 
1.47 When asked about the reasons for significant reduction of  expenditure by DGH 
on training  of officials  during the last two years as compared to previous years , the 
Ministry furnished the following information: 
"The trainings in DGH are mostly of technical nature. The need of training is 
identified for a particula r officer and then the same is imparted through external 
training Institutes. Since DGH is manned by the officers who are on deputation to 
DGH from various Oil PSUs, most of them are experienced and have undergone 
such trainings before joining DGH and may not require basic trainings. 
Sometimes parent PSUs themselves send their officers posted in DGH on 
training as per respective PSU‟s training policy.  Moreover, ONGC and OIL have 
agreed to impart all the technical trainings at no cost basis to their officer s posted 
in DGH at par with other officers posted in their respective organization s. In such 
cases DGH need not incur expenditure directly.  
1.48 Asked as to whether the composition and details of the team of officials/experts 
of DGH entrusted with the responsibility of reviewing the expl oration programmes of 
companies meet the required experience and expertise for the job entrusted to them, 
the Ministry has furnished the following reply: 
"Production Sharing Contract (Exploration) team consisting of 48 officials/experts 
of DGH are entrusted with the responsibility of reviewing the exploration 
programmes of Exploration blocks awarded during Pre -NELP and NELP Bidding 
rounds. 
Production Sharing Contract (Exploration) team is headed by GGM Level (E -8) 
officer with field experience of 36+ years, supported by  7 Coordinators of DGM 
Level( E -6) officer with average field experience of  28+ years and 40 Nodal 
officers ( E1- E6) with  average field experience of  15+ years. These officers are 
having basic qualifica tion of geo -sciences, geo -chemistry, engineering with 
additional qualification of MBA and PhD. These officers have field experience of 
different facets in onshore and offshore areas.  
Further, Production Sharing Contract (Exploration) team seeks advice fro m other 
technical teams in DGH consisting of officials/experts like Geology & Geophysics, 
Geophysical Data Acquisition, Logging, Drilling, Legal and Contract Finance etc. 
while reviewing the exploration programmes of Exploration blocks". 
1.49 Also, asked as to whether DGH has expert workforce to supervise work in areas 
like Shale gas, CBM, NGHP etc. as these are in nascent stage in the country, the 
Ministry has submitted following details: 

 
 
39 
 
"DGH has requisite Geoscience workforce to supervise work in areas like Shale 
Gas, CBM, Gas Hydrate etc. In addition to this, DGH has MoUs with various 
national and international agencies to monitor/supervise the implementation of 
work in areas like Shale gas, CBM and NGHP.  
E&P Activities in CBM are similar to that of conventional Oil and Gas. Various 
NOCs, Private companies are involved in E&P activity of CBM in India. DGH has 
a dedicated team to monitor and supervise the work carried out in CBM blocks. 
DGH seek technical advice of Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
(CMPDI) wherever it is deemed necessary. 
Shale gas activities are carried out by M/s. ONGC and M/s. OIL in India; the 
National Oil Companies have adequate manpower and expertise in carry ing out 
the exploration activities. Besides, the NOCs seek help/advise from various 
service providers of international repute to carry out the exploration related 
activity. 
Gas Hydrate activities are still in R&D stage in India and ONGC has issued the 
Letter of Award to M/s Japan Drilling Company for the execution of NGHP 
Expediton-02. ONGC has sufficient manpower and technical expertise to 
implement the project. DGH with its current workforce is able to monitor the 
activity carried out by ONGC". 
1.50 Regarding programmes being conducted by DGH in research and development 
activities to create expert workforce in this industry, the Ministry has stated as under: 
"DGH is imparting state of the art training to its staff from time to time to create 
expert work force. Staffs trained in DGH serve the industry after 
repatriation/transfer /separation from DGH".  
 
1.51 When asked as to whether any  MoUs being signed and collaborative efforts 
being made by DGH with other countries to improve knowledge and expertise of  their 
personnel working in DGH, the Ministry submitted the information as under: 
 
"DGH on behalf of Government has  signed MOUs with different countries for 
knowledge sharing and dissemination".  
 
1.52 On being enquired about any constraints faced by DGH in any area of its 
functioning, the Ministry has submitted details as under: 
 
"The constraints being faced by DGH in area of its functioning may be 
categorised as under: 

 
 
40 
 
1. Challenges in contract management  due to shortcomings in existing Production 
Sharing Contracts. 
2. Manpower Challenges – since DGH has no permanent cadre of its own, all 
working employees are being drawn on deputation from various PSUs. Every 
PSU has a repatriation policy which requires its employees to be repatriated back 
to them after certain duration.  As a result of this system, DGH is facing the 
problem of lack of experienced officers due to their repatriation and 
comparatively less experienced officers available majorly for the work rela ted to 
roles and responsibilities of DGH".  
Funding of DGH 
1.53 When enquired as to how  DGH get s funds to carry out its activities  and also 
whether it receives money by way of fees in its account,  the Ministry submitted the 
following details: 
"As per DGH resolution, the expenditure of the Directorate General will be fully 
funded by grants from Oil Industry Development Board. DGH plans all its 
activities, which are reflected in the budget required for various activities, staff 
salaries, establishment and other miscellaneous expenditure which is budgeted 
and approved by the Administrative Council of DGH.  Once approved, the fund is 
released by OIDB.   
DGH does not receive any money by way of fees etc. in its account" 
 
1.54 Further, regarding the annual budgetary allocation, the representative of DGH 
has submitted the following information:  
"Our fund is very limited. It is hardly Rs. 100 crore per year on an average, even 
less than that. In the last five years, our achieveme nt has been 92 per cent, 91 
per cent, almost 100 per cent.  This year, it would be more than 95 per cent.  Our 
budget is mostly salaries for our people coming from ONGC, OIL, and other 
PSUs.  Rest of the budget is with the contracting companies, PSUs and 
operators.  Our own budget is very limited." 
1.55 The Committee  enquired as to whether DGH finds the present funding 
arrangements appropriate and adequate to c arry out its various activities, and requires 
any measures to augment the resources, the Ministry submitted its written reply as 
under: 

 
 
41 
 
"The present funding arrangement of DGH through OIDB grants is considered 
appropriate and adequate to carry on its various activities". 
1.56 When enquired about the plans by the Government to allocate separate 
budgetary grants for DGH for its financial autonomy, the Ministry stated as under: 
"A consultant is being hired by DGH to study the practice being adopted 
worldwide and submit a report. One of the terms of reference is to study the 
present financial structure and suggest the best suitable modalities. Government 
may review constitution of DGH based on the recommendations of the consultant 
hired". 
1.57 When asked about the reasons for variations in secretarial expenditure during 
the last three financial years, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Funds allocated under “Secretarial Expenditure” are mainly on account of 
reimbursement of salary & allowances of deputationists, to Oil PSUs  from where 
officials have been deputed to DGH,  against actual disbursement by them. The 
detail of the same is as under: 
 (Figures in INR Lacs) 
Financial Year Salary & 
Allowances 
Other Routine 
Administrative Exp. 
Total Secretarial 
Expenditure 
2011-12 2200.00 1451.00 3651.00 
2012-13 4500.00 1237.00 5737.00 
2013-14 1847.64 1016.16 2863.80 
 
The increase in “Secretarial Expenditure” in the year 2012-13, was mainly due to 
reimbursement of arrears of salary & allowances of deputationists and also 
increased manpower in DGH. 
Further, decrease in “Secretarial Expenditure” in the year 2013 -14 is due to non -
reimbursement of salary & allowances of last two quarters, which was, however, 
subsequently cleared in the next Financial Year and was accordingly allocated in 
next year‟s budget".  
Funds allocated and Expenditure 
2009-10 
  
(Rs./lac) 
 
Sl. No. Budget sub head/primary head Funds allocated 
2009-10 (RE) 
Expenditure 
2009-10 
%  
Utilisation 
1 2 3 4 
98.15 A Revenue     
A1 E&P Activities 1295.00 1249.45 
A2 Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 1200.00 1188.73 

 
 
42 
 
A3 PSC Arbitration & Audit 361.00 355.67 
A4 Secretarial Expenditure 3078.00 3121.88 
B Capital 185.00 89.82 
    6119.00 6005.55 
2010-11 
    
Sl. No. Budget sub head/primary head Funds allocated 
2010-11 (RE) 
 Expenditure 
2010-11 
%  
Utilisation 
1 2 3 4 
89.13 
A Revenue     
A1 E&P Activities 151.00 140.24 
A2 Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 1709.55 998.83 
A3 PSC Arbitration & Audit 410.00 525.45 
A4 Secretarial Expenditure 3464.00 3471.23 
B Capital 115.00 78.08 
    5849.55 5213.83 
2011-12 
    
Sl. No. Budget sub head/primary head Funds allocated 
2011-12 (RE) 
 Expenditure 
2011-12 
%  
Utilisation 
1 2 3 4 
92.44 
A Revenue     
A1 E&P Activities 488.00 207.74 
A2 Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 988.00 930.32 
A3 PSC Arbitration & Audit 605.00 604.95 
A4 Secretarial Expenditure 3651.00 3632.17 
B Capital 90.00 6.71 
    5822.00 5381.89 
2012-13 
    Sl. No. Budget sub head/primary head Funds allocated 
2011-12 (RE) 
Expenditure 
2011-12 
%  
Utilisation 
1 2 3 4 
91.34 
A Revenue     
A1 E&P Activities 22.00 21.35 
A2 Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 98.00 98.74 
A3 PSC Arbitration & Audit 1215.00 1141.41 
A4 Secretarial Expenditure 5737.00 5247.57 
B Capital 107.00 48.44 
    7179.00 6557.51 
2013-14  
    Sl. No. Budget sub head/primary head Funds allocated 
2011-12 (RE) 
 Expenditure 
2011-12 
%  
Utilisation 
1 2 3 4 
100.00 A Revenue     

 
 
43 
 
A1 E&P Activities 0.00 0.00 
A2 Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 8.35 8.35 
A3 PSC Arbitration & Audit 701.05 701.05 
A4 Secretarial Expenditure 2863.80 2863.80 
B Capital 33.37 33.37 
    3606.57 3606.57 
 
1.58 When asked to explain reasons for gradual lowering of fund allocations over the 
last few years towards E& P activities and promotion of hydrocarbon activities by DGH 
ultimately leading to nil allocation in the year 2013 -14, the Ministry furnished information 
as under:  
"E&P Activities 
An amount of Rs. 361 Lakhs was allocated in BE 2013 -14 but after review the 
same were allocated as nil in RE 2013-14. The main reasons were as under: 
(i) Oil Shale Study – Oil Shale Study was planned on the basis of initial work 
completed in North-East areas.  The exploitation of oil shale needs mining of rock 
and then scrubbing the oil shale associated in the rocks through chemical and 
mechanical process.  The volume of oil recovered from this fischer tropes 
method is very less and needs further R&D efforts.  The study was planned in the 
FY 2013 -14 with the help of IOCL R&D Lab for which Rs. 300 Lakhs were 
allocated. However, after the detailed technical deliberation in DGH it was 
suggested to gather further data before carrying out the study. Thus, the budget 
has been carried forward to the next financial year.   
(ii) API in Category III & IV Basins – A token provision of Rs. 10 Lakhs was 
made in the budget BE 2013-14 for carrying out reconnaissance survey initially in 
identified category III and category IV basins.   Later, a decision was taken in the 
Govt. to carry out the geo-scientific activity of 2D data Acquisition Processing and 
Interpretation in Category III & IV Basins with the help of ONGC and OIL. The 
funding mechanism for this survey is yet to be finalized pending which the budget 
utilization under this category  was Nil in the year 2013 -14 and was carried 
forward to BE 2014-15.  
(iii) National Data Repository – An amount of Rs. 50.00 Lakhs was allocated 
for purchase of consumables in BE 2013 -14 but could not be used as the 
contract f or NDR was signed in March 2014 . The amount so approved will be 
utilized once the data population phase of NDR is complete and consumables 
are required for operationlization of NDR. However, the budget is not used but 
the activity is continuing and expected to complete by March 2016.  

 
 
44 
 
Promotion of Hydrocarbon Activities 
The budget under this head is being kept mainly for promotion of bidding rounds 
in India and around the world.  Based on the previous experience an amount of 
Rs 1750 La khs was allocated in BE 2013 -14 considering the next bid round 
activities.  However, Rangarajan Committee suggested that Govt. should move 
away from production sharing contract to revenue sharing contract and the 
decision in this regard is yet to be taken.  Hence, after review, the budget was re -
allocated as Rs. 8.35 Lakhs in RE 2013-14. The main reasons are as under: 
(i) NELP-X - BE 2013 -14 for NELP -X & CBM -V was approved for Rs 1200 
Lakhs and Rs 200 Lakhs respectively. The same was however not announced by 
GoI in FY 2013-14 and hence carried forward to FY 2014-15.  
(ii) Shale Oil & Gas - expenditure of Rs 200 Lakhs on Shale Gas Round I was 
not considered as Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved 
Shale Oil/Gas Policy only for NOCs. Further ONGC had not  charged for Rs 70 
Lakhs allocated for the study of sedimentary basins. An amount of Rs 80 Lakhs 
allocated for social impact study was carried forward to FY 2014 -15 as the same 
was required to be done by NEERI. This has resulted in nil allocation in the FY  
2013-14. 
Hence, it can be seen that the required activities did not stop despite 
downgrading the budget under the head promotion of hydrocarbon activities". 
Exploration of Shale Oil and Gas 
1.59 When the Committee wanted to know about  the salient features of „Policy 
Guidelines for exploration & exploitation of Shale Oil & Gas by national oil companies 
under nomination regime formulated in October 2013, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"MoP&NG announced policy for shale gas and oil exploration and exploitation by 
National Oil Companies in nomination blocks. 
 
As per policy guidelines, ONGC and OIL have to carry out Shale Gas and Oil 
exploration in 50 and 05 blocks respectively for assessment under Phase -I. 
ONGC is carrying out Shale G as and Oil exploration activities in Cambay, 
Cauvery, Krishna -Godavari and Assam and Arakan Basins. OIL INDIA Ltd. is 
carrying out Shale Gas and Oil exploration activities in Assam and Rajasthan 
basins. In phase II and III ONGC will carry out exploration i n 75 & 50 blocks 
respectively. Oil India will carry out exploration in 5 blocks each in Phase  II and 
III. 
 
During the Assessment Phase (three years), the Company shall drill, as 
Committed Work Program, at least 1 (one) Pilot well in single PEL/PML block 
having a contiguous area up to 200 sq. km and at least 2 (two) Pilot wells in 

 
 
45 
 
single PEL/PML block having a contiguous area of more than 200 sq. km. These 
wells constituting the Committed Work Program shall penetrate the target shale 
horizon(s) to assess the potential for Shale Gas and Oil. 
 
Upon completion of Assessment Phase, the Company shall prepare an estimate 
of potential production of Shale Gas and Oil envisaged to be achieved vis -a-vis 
WP, if any, and submit Field Development Plan (FDP) to DGH within a period of 
12 (twelve) months. The yearly production profile with number of producing wells 
shall also be submitted. 
 
Upon submission of the yearly production profile vis -a-vis WP, the Company 
shall commence development activities within 6 months.  
 
Under Shale Gas Policy, during the first assessment phase ONGC has to drill 
around 57 wells in all 50 blocks and OIL has to drill around 6 wells in all 05 
blocks along with EIA study including sourcing of water and its subsequent 
disposal, G&G studies, Coring, Hydro-fracturing, Geo -chemical studies, Geo -
mechanical/Geo-Hazard/Geo-technical studies and Resource Assessment for 
Shale Gas and Oil".  
1.60 Thereafter, the Committee enquired about  the findings by Multi Organisation 
Team analyzing the existing data set and suggesting methodologies for the 
development of shale oil & gas in India , the Ministry provided the following information  
in this regard: 
"A Multi Organizational Team (MOT) of DGH , ONGC, OIL, GAIL was formed by 
MOPNG to analyse the existing data set and suggest methodology for Shale Gas 
development in India.  
 
MOT, based on scrutiny of geo -scientific data has identified six prospective 
basins for first phase of Shale Gas exploratio n, namely, Cambay, Krishna 
Godavari onland, Cauvery onland, Assam -Arakan and Indo -Gangetic Basin. 
Based on these findings, ONGC and OIL have  been asked to start shale gas 
exploration work under the policy framework". 
 
1.61 When asked as to whether any cooperation has been planned with countries like 
Canada which is into shale resources development or some other pioneers in the fields, 
the Ministry has submitted the following information: 
"Presently there is no MOU with Canada for sharing the experience & expertise 
in the areas of Shale Gas exploration and development.   However, a MOU has 
been signed between the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) and 
the Department of State (DOS), Govt. of USA to provide a framework for the 
exchange of knowledge  & expertise between DOS and MoP&NG in the areas 

 
 
46 
 
concerning shale gas resource characterization and assessment in India . The 
details of cooperative activities are: 
● Shale Gas Resource Assessment 
● Technical studies  
● Regulatory Framework Consultation  
● Investment promotion" 
 
 Review of exploration programme by DGH 
While going into the details of exploration and development programmes of 
companies being reviewed by DGH, the  Ministry submitted the following details:  
Operator Type Operator 
Foreign Bengal Energy International Inc. 
  BHP Billiton Pty. Ltd. 
  BP Exploration (Alpha) 
  British Gas Exploration and Production (India) Ltd. 
  Cairn Energy India Pty Ltd. 
  Deep Energy Llc 
  ENI (India) Ltd. 
  Geo-Global Resources Inc. 
  Geo-Petrol International Inc. 
  Hardy Exploration & Production (India) Inc. 
  Heramac Ltd. 
  Joshi Tech. Inc. 
  Naftogaz 
  Niko Resources Limited. 
  OAO Gazprom 
  Oilex-NL Holdings Ltd 
  Okland Offshore Holdings Ltd. 
  Petrogas 
  Premier Oil North East India. 
  Santos International Operations Pty. Ltd. 
Private Adani Welspun Exploration Ltd. 
  Assam Company Ltd.  
  Essar Oil Ltd. 
  Focus Energy Ltd. 
  Geo Enpro 
  Harish Chandra (India) Ltd. 
  Hindustan Oil Exploration Company Limited. 
  Hydrocarbon Resource Development Company Ltd. 

 
 
47 
 
  Interlink Petroleum Ltd. 
  Jay Polychem (India) Ltd. 
  Jubilant Oil & Gas Private Limited. 
  Mercator Petroleum Private Limited. 
  Omkar Naturals Resources Pvt. Ltd. 
  Pan India Consultants 
  Pratibha Oil and Natural Gas Pvt.  Ltd. 
  Prize Petroleum Company Ltd. 
  Quest Petroleum Pvt. Ltd. 
  Reliance Industries Ltd. 
  Sankalp Oil and Natural Resources Ltd. 
  Selan Expl. Tech. Ltd. 
  Sintex Oil & Gas Pvt. Ltd.  
  Vasundhara Resources Ltd. 
PSU Bharat Petro Resources Ltd 
  GAIL (India) Limited. 
  Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
  Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 
  National Thermal Power Corporation 
  Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. 
  Oil India Ltd. 
 
1.62 When specifically asked as to whether the exploratory activities o f ONGC/OIL 
were reviewed by DGH and if so, its findings, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The exploratory activities of ONGC/OIL blocks under PSC regime are reviewed 
by DGH as part of their  annual work program and budget. There are 40 active 
exploratory blocks with ONGC and 11 active exploratory blocks with OIL. A 
committed work program as pursuant to the applicable PSC of a block is 
reviewed/approved and monitored for actual work done in a given financial year.  
If at the end of the exploration phase the actual work done is found to be short of 
the committed work program, then DGH determines the cost of unfinished work 
program and invokes for payment to the Government".    
1.63 What the Committee further wanted to know about the compliance status of the 
recommendations on upstream PSUs i.e. ONGC/OIL as reviewed by DGH during the 
last three years, the Ministry furnished the information as under: 

 
 
48 
 
"Each exploration Block awarded in PSC regime has a committed work program 
pursuant to its PSC. It is reviewed/approved and monitored for actual work done 
in a given financial year. Contractors while adopting the best practices in Oil and 
Gas operations generally comply with their committed work program. 
However in case the committed work program has not been completed by any 
given contractor in a block, then DGH reviews for the reasons thereof and in 
case of inadequate or insufficient premise,  cost of unfi nished work program is 
determined and the same is sought from the Operator". 
1.64 The Committee observed that an amount of Rs. 5,29,40,555.00 was remaining to 
be paid by the block operators who had failed to fulfill MWP. In that  regard, when 
enquired as to what kind of action was taken to recover that  standing payment from 
contractors, the Ministry submitted the following information: 
"The following actions are taken at DGH to recover the standing payment from 
the contractors who failed to fulfill MWP: 
1. Letters and reminders have been sent to the concerned contractors for 
timely submission of the standing payment. 
2. Meetings have been organized with operators for early resolution of any 
dispute or difference of opinion ensuring prope r clarity for both contractors and 
DGH. 
3. In case of any major dispute regarding the payment legal action is being 
contemplated in due cognizance of MoP&NG". 
 
1.65 When the Committee specifically enquired a bout the amount of bank guarantee 
that was being sought from PSC contractor to ensure compliance with the committed  
work programme and whether that amount wa s sufficient to recover the cost of 
unfinished work programme if accrued later and moreover, whether any move was 
under way to increase the same, the Ministry submitted the following details: 
"The PSC Contractors are required to submit bank guarantee annually for 35% of 
the estimated expenditure on the annual exploration program, in PSCs falling up 
to NELP VII. In NELP VIII and NELP IX PSCs, th e Contractors are required to 
give a one-time bank guarantee for 7.5% of the estimated expenditure in respect 
of the entire exploratory work program commitment.  
The bank guarantee, which is not being computed on the total estimated 
expenditure in respect of the committed work program, may not be sufficient to 

 
 
49 
 
recover the cost of unfinished work program in cases where substantial 
proportion of committed work program is not completed.  
If it is desired to recover the cost of unfinished work program entirely from the 
bank guarantee, the Contractor  may be required to furnish  bank guarantee in 
respect of the estimated expenditure on the entire committed work program. The 
amount of bank guarantee in such scenarios may be very high that may 
discourage investors fr om participating in the bidding. Hence PSC envisages 
obtaining the bank guarantee for a lesser amount but that may be  adequate to 
serve as deterrent  to non serious operators from participating in the NELP 
bidding round. 
Presently, there is no proposal in h and to enhance the bank guarantee amount, 
as it may adversely impact investment in the sector". 
1.66 While going into further details of the methodology of cost computation of 
unfinished work programme, inherent defects in the method and steps th at have be en 
taken to remove those defects,  the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Up to NELP V II PSCs, if the Contractor failed  to complete the committed 
exploratory work program, the Contractor is required to pay to Government an 
amount that would be required to complete the committed work program, within 
60 days following the end of the relevant exploration phase. When the Contr actor 
fails to pay the amount or pays a lesser amount, MOP&NG based on the 
technical validation done by DGH advises the Contractor to pay the amount as 
required by the PSC. 
Contractors had challenged the methodology used in arriving at the amount 
demanded from the Contractor. Different methods of computation were 
suggested by different Contractors.  
In order to  minimize the discretionary part in the determination of cost of 
unfinished work program, MOP&NG framed a policy dated 17 th December 2007 
for determination of cost of unfinished work program based on dry -well principle. 
DGH does the technical evaluation of the amount in respect of the unfinished 
work program based on the expenditure actually incurred on a similar well and 
the amount is duly approved by  the MOP&NG before communicating to the 
Contractor. 
However difficulties continue to persist and legal enforcement of the collection of 
the amount of unfinished work program remains a constraint. Wherever possible, 
the amount has been recovered by invoking the bank guarantees". 

 
 
50 
 
1.67 When further enquired  as to how the exploration programmes are reviewed and 
also the parameters considered in such exercise, the Ministry submitted the following 
information: 
"Exploration programs of companies are reviewed considering technical 
parameters, technology applications, quantum of work and timelines. Mainly the 
parameters considered for evaluating the exploration program are: 
2D seismic Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation (API) (in Line kilometres) 
3D seismic API (in Square kilometres) 
Reprocessing of seismic data 
Drilling of Exploratory and Appraisal wells, (Meterage) 
Geo-scientific surveys (Magneto -telluric, gravity, Aero -magnetic, Controlled 
Source Electro-Magnetic surveys, etc)  
Environmental impact assessment and Safety studies". 
 
1.68 When asked about the factors that are considered while converting a PEL into 
PML along with company and year wise details of the PELs converted to PML during 
the span of (2008-09) to (2014-15) that has been vested with the authority to allow such 
conversion, the Ministry submitted the following information: 
"Subsequent to hydrocarbon lead/ discovery in any nominati on PEL, on request 
of operator,  the part or whole area of PEL is converted to PML after technical 
evaluation of the exploration  inputs, estimated reserves and production plans 
etc.,in the proposed PML area. The details of PELs converted partly/whole to 
PMLs are tabulated in Annexure-I.  
Such conversion proposals are technically evaluated at DGH and 
recommendations are forwarded to MoP&NG for consideration. MoP&NG review 
the proposals and if found appropriate, recommends the grant to concerned 
State Govt., which finally issues the grant order, if agreed". 
1.69 The Committee observed that as per information provided in respect of review of 
nomination PELs by DGH, a steep fall was evident in the number of PELs blocks of 
ONGC & OIL reviewed by DGH during the last 5 years reflecting in the dis coveries 
made in these PELs. In that  regard, the Committee enquired about the reasons behind 
that and asked about the efforts undertaken to remedy the same , the Ministry submitted 
the information as under: 

 
 
51 
 
"The National Oil Companies were carrying out exploration activities since early 
50s in the area awarded to them on nomination basis.  Govt. brought national 
policy for exploration in early 90s where initially marginal fields of ONGC  / OIL 
were bidded out  through international competitive bidding. Lat er, in New 
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) all the areas were bid through open 
competitive bidding. NELP has a defined structure for exploration period and 
development of discoveries whereas there were  no timelines defined for 
exploration work in the nomination areas of NOCs. 
To bring parity, it was decided by the Govt. to fix the timelines for exploration in 
nomination PELs and complete the committed exploration work in given 
timeframe. The NOCs were allowed to keep only discovery and development 
area and to relinquish remaining PEL area.  The PELs which did not get any 
exploration success in stipulated time were relinquished after the expiry of their 
grant period. The part or the whole PEL, which had the hydrocarbon 
lead/discovery got converted to PMLs  from time to time. Therefore there is a fall 
in number of PELs but corresponding increase in number of PMLs every year. 
Moreover activities in some of the balance PELs are stagnant due to  non-
availability of necessary permissions from MoD, MoEF&CC and other authorities. 
Presently the active nomination PELs are very few in numbers. ONGC & OIL had 
to relinquish the remaining PELs with no hydrocarbon lead/discovery after expiry 
of grant period. The reviews are being done half yearly and will be done in the 
current five year plan also". 
1.70 When the Committee enquired as to w hether the regulatory function s of DGH is 
same for all companies under different regimes of exploration by the G overnment, the 
Ministry clarified as under: 
"Under PSC regime DGH regulates the exploration activities of the company in 
terms of respective contracts, Oil Fields (regulation and Development) act 1948, 
PNG Rules 1959 and related policies and guidelines whereas activities under 
nomination regime are regulated by DGH only in terms o f Oil Fields (regulation 
and Development) act 1948, PNG rules and related policies and guidelines".  
 
1.71 When specifically asked about  the steps taken to streamline the procedure of 
methodologies being adopted to compute investment multiple affecting adversely GoI 
take, DGH stated the following:  
“The formula for the computation of the Investment Multiple has been defined 
and made part o f the PSC so as to avoid any possible ambiguities. The formula 
adopted in the PSC is based on similar global practices.   In the initial rounds of 
NELP contracts, the profit share payable to the Government shifts in a step -

 
 
52 
 
ladder curve when the Investment Multiple increases. In some PSCs with the 
increase in Investment Multiple the Government share of profit increases sharply.  
In KG -DWN-98/3, the profit share of Government increases from 28% to 85% 
when the Investment Multiple increase from less than 3.0 to more than 3.0. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From NELP VII onwards, the profit share of Government is made on a positive 
linear scale thereby avoiding step-ladder curve”. 
 
1.72 Asked as to how DGH ensure adherence to the approved field development plan 
for checking delays for commencement of production after approval of FDP in absence 
of any provisions for fixing timeline, the Ministry submitted the following details: 
“Firstly, it is the duty of the operator to follow the timelines given in the PSC for 
approval to th e FDP of a certain discovery. The obligation to carry out 
expeditious petroleum operations by the operator is enshrined in the PSC. It is 
envisaged that contractor in their own interest will expedite development. 
 
Further, DGH on its part has a system of regularly conducting a quarterly meeting 
with the operators wherein FDP implementation is also discussed. 
 
However, there is no specific provision in the PSC to handle the issue of delayed 
implementation of the FDP by the operator. Notwithstanding this fact , DGH/MC/ 
MoPNG stresses upon the operator to carry out timely implementation of the FDP 
by way of: 
 
1. Approvals of annual Work Program & Budgets, which includes 
components of FDP. 
2. Discussion as agenda point in MC meetings 
3. Quarterly meetings at DGH" 
 
1.73 Further, the Committee note d that the applicability of tax holiday under IT Act in 
respect of gas produced by contractor awarded by NELP-VII had come under ambiguity 
due to lack of clarity in the definition of mineral oil. However, as per the Oil fields 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Investment Multiple
Government share
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0 1 2 3 4 5
Investment Multiple
Government share

 
 
53 
 
(Regulation & Development) Act, 1948, „mineral oils‟ include natural gas and petroleum.  
When the Committee enquired as to whether contractors are getting any tax holiday 
under IT Act, the Ministry had submitted the following information: 
"Section 80 (IB) (9) of the Income Tax Act granted 100% deduction of profit 
earned from production of „mineral oil‟ for a period of initial 7 years of production, 
for the purpose of income tax computation. Contractors were availing the tax 
benefit for produ ction of both oil and gas. However the Finance Bill 2008 
amended the term mineral oil not to include natural gas.  
As per finance Act 2011, natural gas produced from NELP VIII and CBM IV 
blocks also would be eligible for tax exemption but the 7 -years tax exemption will 
cease to be applicable to contract awarded after 31st March 2011". 
1.74 On being enquired about essentiality certificate issued by DGH on import of 
drilling machines, consumables and other goods, the  Ministry has furnished following 
details: 
"As per Notification No.21 /2002 dated 1.3.2002 issued by the Central 
Government, the Director General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is empowered to 
issue Essentiality Certificate for exemption of duty for import of goods for E&P 
operations in India. 
In this regar d GOI has issued three notifications which allow duty free import of 
goods for E&P operators. These three notifications are as follows:  
1. Notification No. 21/2002 customs dated 01.03.2002 amended vide notification 
No. 26/2003 – customs dated:-01.03.2003 (oil & natural gas exploration). 
2. Notification No. 26/2003 customs dated: - 01.03.2003 (coal bed methane 
exploration). 
3. Notification  No.12 /2012 –Customs  dated the 17th March, 2012. 
 
The old serial numbers related to categories of items pertain to the older 
Notification No. 21/2002 customs dated 01.03.2002 which has been changed to 
new serial numbers as per the Notification  No.12 /2012 –Customs  dated the 
17th March, 2012. The details are provided as under: 
Old S.No New S.No. Description 
214 
 
356 Goods required for PEL/ML blocks granted by Government of India or 
state Government to ONGC/OIL on notification basis.  
215 
 
357 Parts and raw materials required for manufacture of goods for offshore 
operation.  
216 
 
358 Goods required in connection with petroleum operations under taken 
under specified contracts (Pre-NELP)  

 
 
54 
 
217 359 Goods required for blocks under NELP.  
218 360 Goods required in connection with (CBM operations).  
 
Enquired about details of the pending projects awaiting approval from DGH and 
also the reasons for delay in grant of approval, and also the system in place for 
granting approvals to operators, the Ministry has provided following information: 
"All proposals/projects submitted at DGH are reviewed as per the prescribed 
timelines of PSC after which they are put forth for the review /approval of 
MoP&NG /MC as required. The status of current ongoing proposals at DGH is as 
under: 
Work program and budgets and other proposals  – For e ach Block/field 
awarded in PSC regime a work program in pursuant with its PSC is submitted by 
the contractor. It is reviewed at DGH and coordinated for the approval from 
Management Committee (MC) before the start of next financial year i.e. by 31st of 
March. Currently there are 39 Producing fields in development regime and 92 
active blocks /fields in exploration regime for which the work program and Budget 
proposal has been received and reviewed. All these proposals are lined up for 
review/approval by MC be fore 31 st March 2015 out of which 47 exploration 
blocks, 2 producing fields and 1 CBM block has already been accorded MC 
review/approval.  
Field Development Plans (FDP) & Declaration of Commerciality (DoC)  – A 
significant number of FDP & DoC proposals are being received at DGH which 
are being reviewed by concerned technical sections in a time bound manner as 
prescribed by the PSC. The review process is expedited by means of personal 
interaction of DGH and Contractor representatives and any delay on Contract or‟s 
part is expeditiously followed up to ensure timely examination of the projects. A 
total of 2 proposals for FDP and 3 proposals of DoC are under examination at 
DGH. They shall be reviewed and put up for MC approval well within the 
prescribed timelines as per PSC".  
1.75 Asked to furnish details as to how many exploration blocks are presently awaiting 
clearances from other Ministries, the Ministry has submitted the following details: 
"As far as clearance from Ministry of Defence is concerned presently there is no 
block awaiting clearance.  There were 73 exploration blocks which were having 
issues related to clearance and were considered by Cabinet Committee of 
Investment (CCI) have been cleared. Nine blocks were considered in no go area, 
where no further activities are allowed.  However, the blocks in these areas were 
already relinquished and no exploration activities are pending.  Remaining 64 
blocks were cleared with the intervention o f CCI either with or without certain 
stipulated conditions".   

 
 
55 
 
1.76 Further, being enquired about any inter-ministerial institutional framework where 
such clearances are discussed and differences sorted out, the Ministry provided the 
following information: 
"An Inter Ministerial committee was formed by MoP&NG on the directives of 
Cabinet Secretariat as per O.M.No. 491/2/1/2012 -Cab.III dated 4th May 2012. 
The mandate of the Committee was to get one time all inclusive clearances for 
the exploration blocks from  different Ministries/agencies prior to as well as later 
than offer of blocks for E&P activities related to oil and gas, CBM, Shale Gas, Oil 
Shale, Gas Hydrate in onshore and offshore areas for the activity of survey, 
drilling and development work. The Committee comprises of:- 
a) Cabinet Secretary                                                -  Chairman 
b) Home Secretary                                                   -  Member 
c) Foreign Secretary                                                -  Member 
d) Defence Secretary                                                 -  Member 
e) Secretary, D/o Research & Development (MOD)   - Member 
f) Secretary,  Dept. of Space                                     -  Member 
g) Secretary, M/o Forests & Environment                  -  Member 
h) Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs                  -  Member 
i) Secretary, M/o Coal                                               -  Member 
j) Secretary, M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas              -  Member Convenor 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons was inducted as special invitee."  
1.77 When specifically enquired as to whether MoP&NG/DGH had  taken into account 
the concerns of other Ministries while offering of blocks under NELP and laying 
conditions of exploration, the Ministry furnished the following details: 
"Before offering the Blocks for E&P activities DGH carves out large prospective 
areas sedimentary basin -wise and  send it to different Ministries/agencies like 
MOD, MHA, MOEF, MEA, DOS and Survey of India for their clearance. After 
getting clearance from these Ministries/agencies final blocks are carved out for 
final offer in the NELP rounds. Conditions for exploration in these blocks are 
given to operator at the time of intention of award of block for exploration. Also all 
conditions for exploration are given in writing to the operator at the time of Notice 
Inviting Tender/award of lease. 
Before offering the Blocks for bidding under NELP, in principle clearance is 
obtained from different ministries/department including MOEF and MOD , based 
on block coordinates, protected areas etc. However, after bidding, the operator 
has to apply directly to MoEF for various clearances depending on final  block 
location with coordinates , details of  activities  proposed  etc". 

 
 
56 
 
Exploratory Activities and Production Sharing Contracts 
1.78 When enquired as to h ow does the Government/ DGH ensure  the achievement 
of projected production levels provided in Production Sharing Contracts , and the 
process/steps followed by the Govt./DGH in the event of non-achievement of the  
committed or targeted production, the Ministry submitted the following information: 
"Presently there are  39 fields on production in PSC regime.  All the companies 
are required to submit their production forecast for the year in the beginning. This 
production profile is to be approved by the Management Committee.  The profiles 
submitted by companies are evalua ted in DGH in line with the approved 
development plan and past performance.  The actual production against the 
approved targets is continuously monitored by way of daily/weekly/monthly 
reports submitted by the operator from the producing blocks/fields  
In case of lesser production against envisaged targets the reasons for shortfall 
are sought from the operator for review at DGH and the companies are 
suggested for applicable mid course correction. If required the Ministry is 
informed for necessary interventi on on behest of DGH with a view to ensure 
uninterrupted production as per the approved targets". 
 
1.79 On being enquired as to w hether DGH has legal officials in the organization to 
vet and interpret Production Sharing Contracts, the Ministry stated as under: 
"All the officers in DGH are on deputation from Oil PSUs.  Presently, 4 officers 
from legal discipline from PSUs and 1 consultant from legal background are 
working in the legal department of DGH to vet and interpret Production Sharing 
Contracts including vetting of all other documents".  
1.80 Also, enquired about the presence of officials in DGH with finance background to 
deal with financial aspects in Production Sharing Contract s, the Ministry has submitted 
as under: 
"Yes, presently there are 11 officers from finance discipline deputed from Public 
Sector Undertakings and 1 consultant from finance background to deal and 
analyse financial aspects in the Production Sharing Contracts". 
1.81 When specifically a sked about the decision making mechanism available for 
taking decisions in DGH, the Ministry stated as under: 

 
 
57 
 
"There is a proper chain of monitoring and supervision of exploration and 
Development (including production) activities at DGH which starts with the nodal 
officer appointed for a particular given block/field of exploration/ production 
regime and culminated internally at the apex of management which consists of 
executive directors and DG, DGH. The usual chain of monitoring and other 
decision making mechanisms in practice are described as under: 
 All the technical, contractual, miscellaneous proposals submitted by operator are 
received by the concerned Nodal officers. Nodal officers initiate the process of 
examination/review/vetting of the proposal providing other required details 
through their concerned coordinators. 
 After being reviewed by Coordinator for the adequacy of information of the 
proposal, they are forwarded to the concerned technical department depending 
upon the nature of proposal/request received from the operator by the 
coordinator assigned to the nodal officer. The various technical sections at DGH 
are as under: 
i. Production Sharing Contract (Contractual Matters within the purview of PSCs in 
exploration phase) 
ii. Producing Fields (Contractual Matters within the purview of PSC s in 
development & production phase) 
iii. National Oil Company Monitoring (NOC) (Matters concerning with review of 
exploratory and development operations of NOCs within nomination regime) 
iv. Geology & Geophysics including Petrophysics  (All technical matters relat ed to 
geological and geophysical aspects ) 
v. Reservoir (All technical matters related to reservoir, production profile etc.) 
vi. Production (All technical matters related to production) 
vii. Geophysical Data Acquisition (Matters concerning with geophysical data 
acquisition) 
viii. Field Development Plan (FDP) (Matters concerning with field development plan 
and declaration of commerciality (DOC) in blocks and fields) 
ix. New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) (Identification, preparation of data 
packages for prospective areas to be offered for exploration and development) 
x. Alternate Energy (Matters concerning with National Gas Hydrate Program & 
Shale Gas) 
xi. Coal Bed Methane (CBM) (Matters concerning with CBM) 
xii. Drilling & Safety (Matters concerning with drilling operations and safety) 
xiii. Environment (Matters concerning with environmental issues) 
xiv. National Data Repository (NDR) (Matters concerning with the set up and 
implementation of NDR) 
xv. Materials Management (Matters concerning with material management) 
xvi. Human Resources (HR) & Administration (Admn.) (Matters concerning with HR & 
Admn.) 
xvii. Essentiality Certificate (EC) (Matters concerning with review and grant of EC) 

 
 
58 
 
xviii. Legal (Matters concerning with legal issues) 
xix. Information Technology (IT) (Matters concerning with IT) 
xx. Contract Finance (Matters concerning with the financial aspects of the contracts) 
 During the review by concerned technical sections (s), additional information may 
be sought internally or from the Operator. If required, concerned representatives 
of the companies are also called for personal interaction for clarification of 
queries and expediting the review/approval process. 
 After due examination by be concerned technical section(s) the 
recommendations are forwarded to the coordinator.  These recommendations 
are put forth for informat ion, review and approval to the concerned head of 
department to which the proposal/request pertains.  
 All major contractual, technical and miscellaneous recommendations firmed up 
are put up before respective concerned Executive Director and/or Director 
General. Subsequently these decisions are communicated to the Operator, 
MOPNG as the case may be. 
 Apart from above, the Administrative Council of DGH approved the formation of 
Executive Committee (EC) of DGH for enabling collective decisions on 
substantive issues including advice on  policy & review matters arising from time 
to time.   It was envisaged that EC would consist of Dy. Director Generals from 
exploration, reservoir and development, technical, legal and finance and will be 
headed by Director Genera l, DGH as its Chairman.  At present though there are 
no Dy. Director General level officers, EC is being run by the next level officers. 
 Also, for quick, uniform and just resolution of complex contractual issues like 
Force Majeure and Excusable delay, a de dicated core group has been identified 
who review the case and put forth their recommendations before the Apex 
management before final approval at DGH". 
1.82 When asked as to whether the Govt. has empowered Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons to decide on the basis of recommendations of the Management 
Committee related to the operationlisation of Production Sharing Contracts (PSC), the 
Ministry provided the following information: 
"In order to debottleneck  the existing Production Sharing Contract ( PSC), 
recently “Policy Framework for Relaxations, Extensions and clarifications at the 
Development and Production stage under PSC regime for early Monetization of 
hydrocarbon discoveries” has been approved by Government of India.   This is a 
reform initiative whi ch has helped in monetization of some of the pending 
discoveries, led to resolution of various long pend ing operational issues which 
were hampering E&P operations and create better climate for investment.   These 

 
 
59 
 
reforms do not change the basic structure of the PSC and have been approved in 
the overall interest of the energy security of the country. DGH has been 
empowered to take various decisions based on the Management Committee 
(MC) approval.  
The salient features of this Reform Measure are as follows: 
 Extension of Appraisal period for submission of Declaration of Commerciality 
(DOC) in respect of Hydrocarbon discovery. 
 Extension of time period for submission of Field Development Plan (FDP) after 
review of DOC by the Management Committee. 
 Reduction in Mini mum Work Program (MWP) in case a block or its part is not 
available for exploration activities consequent to denial of permission by 
Government Agencies. 
 Swapping of 2D and 3D Seismic Minimum Work Programme, on the request of 
the operator. 
 In cases where t he committed Minimum Work Programme of any particular 
exploration phase is not completed, entry into subsequent exploration phases, 
would be permitted after paying cost of unfinished MWP of previous phases. 
 Condoning delays in submission of notice for entering into next phase. 
 Condoning delays in submission of Annual Work Programme and Budget and the 
Appraisal work programme. 
 Permission for drilling of Appraisal Wells after submission of DOC. 
 Probing additional reservoirs during appraisal programme. 
 Acceptance of discoveries for which notification to the Government has not been 
made or notification for testing has not been provided as prescribed. 
DGH has resolved more than 40 long pending issues after adoption of these 
guidelines".  
1.83 When asked as to whether the role of Management Committee i s delaying the 
work in case of disagreement in Management Committee, the Ministry submitted 
submitted as under: 
"The Management Committee has representatives from contractors & 
Government. 

 
 
60 
 
Functions of Management Committee (MC):  
MC is basically a  reviewing authority and it has  advisory functions in various 
matters as defined in the PSC.   There are a number of areas defined in the PSC 
where MC has to accord approval / decisions in   important   matters. For the 
sake of brevity    listed below are only few parameters where MC has to take the 
decisions:  
(a) MC Review and approval of matters: MC will review and approve matters 
relating to  
(i) Annual Work Programme & Budget in respect of Exploration Operations as well 
as Development Operations, Production Operations   & any revision or 
modification thereto 
(ii) Proposals for surrender or relinquishment  of any part  of the Contract area by the 
Contractor (iii) Proposals for an Appraisal Programme or revision or additions  
thereto and the declaration of a discovery as a commercial discovery in case of  
Exploratory Blocks and proposals for the approval of the Development Plan or 
revision to a  Development plan,   
(i) Determination of Development area  
 
(ii) Appointment of Auditors    
 
(iii) Matters referred by Government to the MC for its considerations and reasoned 
opinion etc.   
 
(b) Methodology of operations/ decision making of the MC:  The broad 
methodology   of operation/ decision making by MC are as under:  
(i) MC shall not take  any decision without obtaining  prior approval of the  
Government  where such  approval is required  under the Contract  or any 
applicable  law ( including rules and regulations) of India .  The MC shall obtain 
such approval /decision an d convey the same to Contractor with utmost 
expedition.  
(ii) MC shall meet atleast once in every six months during Exploratory Period & 
thereafter atleast once in three months.  
(iii) Notice for MC meeting to be issued atleat 28 days prior to the date fixed  
(iv) All matters requiring  approvals of the MC shall be generally approved by a 
unanimous vote of the MC members. ( In case of disagreement   there are   
methods  defined in the  PSC  to resolve)  
From above, it may be noted that the Management Committee has a set of   
procedures, directives & authority to accord approval / decision in the various 
issues / activities.  

 
 
61 
 
Thus it is imperative that  unless  a decision/approval is accorded against an  
issue  which  has been forwarded to MC  for approval/decision, the  subs equent 
operations/ activities/action  cannot be carried forward  and  thus  it might result 
in delay.  The approvals may sometimes get delayed on account of differing 
views amongst the MC members.  
Furthermore, as per terms of reference,  MC shall not take   any decision without 
obtaining  prior approval of the  Government  where such  approval is required  
under the Contract  or any applicable  law ( including ru les and regulations) of 
India. Thus, MC may  at times has  to wait for the approval of the Governm ent    
without which MC is not empowered to take decision which may delay or uphold 
the work". 
1.84 Stringent time lines in PSC for various activities from exploration to development 
exist and if violated cannot easily be resolved.  When the Committee sought to know 
whether there was any plan to review PSC, the Ministry submitted the following details:  
"Under the NELP regime, timelines are specified in the respective Production 
Sharing Contracts (PSCs) for various activities from dis covery to development, 
such as: 
i) Notification of Discovery. 
ii) Declaration of Potential Commercial Interest. 
iii) Appraisal of Discovery. 
iv) Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) for review by the Management Committee 
(MC), comprising of the representatives of the contractors and the Government. 
v) Submission of Field Development Plan (FDP). 
vi) Commencement of Development after approval of FDP by MC. 
The above timelines may vary for different NELP rounds. The Contractor is 
required to adhere to the above timelines specifi ed in PSC as a water tight 
compartment. As a reform measure, “Policy Framework for Relaxations, 
Extensions and clarifications at the Development and Production stage under 
PSC regime for early Monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries” has been 
approved by GOI.  These reform initiatives would help in monetization of some of 
the pending discoveries, lead to resolution of various long pending operational 
issues which are hampering E&P operations and create better climate for 
investment.  The salient features of this Reform Measure are as follows:- 
 Extension of Appraisal period for submission of Declaration of Commerciality 
(DOC) in respect of Hydrocarbon discovery. 

 
 
62 
 
 Extension of time period for submission of Field Development Plan (FDP) after 
review of DOC by the Management Committee. 
 Reduction in Minimum Work Program (MWP) in case a block or its part is not 
available for exploration activities consequent to denial of permission by 
Government Agencies. 
 Swapping of 2D and 3D Seismic Minimum Work Programme, on the r equest of 
the operator. 
 In cases where the committed Minimum Work Programme of any particular 
exploration phase is not completed, entry into subsequent exploration phases 
would be permitted after paying cost of unfinished MWP of previous phases. 
 Condoning delays in submission of notice for entering into next phase. 
 Condoning delays in submission of Annual Work Programme and Budget and the 
Appraisal work programme. 
 Permission for drilling of Appraisal Wells after submission of DOC. 
 Probing additional reservoirs during appraisal programme. 
 Acceptance of discoveries for which notification to the Government has not been 
made or notification for testing has not been provided as prescribed. 
These proposals are expected to yield the following benefits: 
 Monetization of some of the discoveries which are struck because of expiry of 
timelines.   
 Additional discoveries in the appraisal period. 
 Improvement in investment climate because of resolution of disputes between 
the contractors and the Government. 
 Enhancement of production of oil and gas from these blocks. 
 Preparation of a more robust FDP. 
Major achievements of this policy as on 31.03.2015 are: 
a. Under this policy about forty (40) long pending issues have been resolved since 
the commencement of the policy.  This has enabled early monetization of Oil and 
gas discoveries in 2 blocks of GSPC, 2 blocks of ONGC and 1 block of Focus. 
b. The decision taken in accordance with policy will further help in drilling appraisal 
wells after submission of DoC in five blocks of  ONGC namely CY -ONN-2004/2, 

 
 
63 
 
AA-ONN-2001/1, KG -DWN-98/2, MN-DWN-98/3 and MN -OSN-2002/2. This will 
also help in probing additional reservoir extent and submission of robust field 
development plan in three blocks. 
c. There were 12 blocks where clearances were no t accorded in entire block area 
or in part of block area because of overlapping with special economic zone, 
reserve forest, naval exercise area, DRDO danger zone, national parks and firing 
range of Defence. The cases in 11 blocks have been resolved and the  case in 
one block is under consideration. 
d. The policy framework has also helped in taking technical decisions based in 
merits for swapping of 2D seismic work program with 3D seismic work program 
and vice-versa in five blocks". 
 
1.85 On being asked about th e contractor of the block being responsible to abide by 
the PSC provision for maintenance of ecological balance in coastal areas where 
exploration and p roduction activities take place and the nodal agency to ensure 
ecological balance during such operation period, the Ministry submitted the following 
information: 
"The Article -14 of the PSC relates to the  Protection   of the Environment and 
stipulates  various steps to be initiated  by the operator including compliance with 
requirements of applicable laws, employment of modern oil field practices for 
prevention and reduction of environmental damage.  
The upstream oil companies are required to obtain the Environmental 
Clearances (EC) from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MOEF&CC) under the Environmental Impact Assessment  (EIA) Notification, 
2006 and Clearance under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, if diversion of forest 
land is involved.  For seeking EC, the operator has to submit the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Report directl y to MoEF&CC and follow the detailed 
procedure mandated in the EIA notification, 2006.  Similarly, for forest land 
diversion cases, the Rules framed under the Forest Act are followed. 
The Exploration and Production of Oil and Natural Gas are governed by th e 
provisions of the EIA notification, 2006 of the MoEF&CC. Environmental 
Clearance (EC) is given to the operator under this notification with necessary 
environmental mitigation measures for ecological conservation. The compliance 
to these conditions is monitored by MoEF&CC". 
 
 

 
 
64 
 
Production in KG-D6 basin 
1.86 When specifically asked about the current status of KG -D6 production of natural 
gas and the adherence of the contractor to the advice of DGH, the Ministry provided the 
following information: 
"Natural Gas is being produced from MA & D1-D3 field of KG-DWN-98/3 field. On 
25.11.2015, the gas from MA field was 4.04 MMSCMD (approx.) and from D1 -D3 
field it was 6.47 MMSCMD (approx.). The commercial production of gas from D1 
& D3 gas fields commenced o n 1st April, 2009. The oil and gas production from 
MA field commenced w.e.f. 17th September, 2008. 
Contractor has not drilled and connected the wells in the block KG -DWN-98/3 as 
per the approved plan i.e., “Addendum to Initial Development Plan” (AIDP). Out  
of the total 50 planned development wells, contractor has drilled only 22 wells 
and connected only 18 wells for production. Despite repeated DGH advice, the 
Contractor has not drilled and connected remaining wells as per the approved 
AIDP".  
1.87 On being  asked about details of the share of profit petroleum received by the 
government on KG-D6 discoveries by M/S Reliance Industries Limited and the total cost 
disallowed as decided by DGH, the Ministry submitted the details as under: 
"Profit petroleum of US$ 114.8 million has been received upto March 2014 by 
Govt. of India from the discoveries namely Dhirubhai1, Dhirubhai 3 and Dhirubhai 
26 in the block KG-DWN-98/3.   
MoP&NG vide letter no. O -19025/4/2011-ONG-D-V dated 10.07.2014, has 
disallowed an amount of US $ 2,376 million from the cumulative development 
cost incurred by the Contractor as on 31st March 2014. This disallowance was 
computed based on the cumulative shortfall in production of gas vis -a-vis 
production estimates under the approved Addendum to Initial Development Plan 
(AIDP) of D1 -D3 gas field in KG -DWN-98/3 block till 31.03.2014. On account of 
this disallowance, the Contractor has to remit the additional profit petroleum of 
around US $ 195 million to the Govt. of India". 
1.88 When specifically devised a comparative analysis of ONGC and RIL in the field 
of production of natural gas in KG basin, the Ministry furnished the following details: 
"ONGC has not started any gas production in KG basin . Status of Discoveries 
made by ONGC & RIL in KG Basin is given below: 
 

 
 
65 
 
 
Status of ONGC operated Blocks in KG Basin 
Operator/Block ONGC  
Total  
KG-
DWN-
2005/1 
KG-
DWN-
98/2 
KG-ONN-
2003/1 
KG-OSN-
2004/1 
KG-
DWN-
98/3 
KG-OSN-
2001/1 
KG-OSN-
2001/2 
Discoveries which have 
been put on Production 0         3     
Discoveries which are 
under Development or on 
way to production 
0         5     
Commerciality established 
(DoC Reviewed) 15   8 2 5       
Discoveries in Early 
Stage, DoC to be 
submitted 
3   1   2       
Discoveries not pursued 
by 
Operator/relinquished/pro
posed for relinquishment 
2 1 1     7 3 2 
Discoveries that may be 
monetised under policy for 
"Exploration in ML area" 
0         3     
Revised DoC to be 
submitted (As per "Policy 
for Testing Requirement" 
dt 13th May 2015) 
4   4     2     
Total 24 1 14 2 7 20 3 2 
 
Status of RIL operated Blocks in KG Basin: 
Operator/Block RIL 
Total 
KG-
DWN-
2001/1 
KG-
DWN-
2003/1 
KG-DWN-
98/1 
KG-DWN-
98/3 
KG-OSN-
2001/1 
KG-OSN-
2001/2 
Discoveries which have 
been put on Production 3       3     
Discoveries which are 
under Development or on 
way to production 
5       5     
Commerciality established 
(DoC Reviewed) 0             
Discoveries in Early Stage , 
DoC to be submitted 0             
Discoveries not pursued by 
Operator/relinquished/prop
osed for relinquishment 
18 1 4 1 7 3 2 
Discoveries that may be 
monetised under policy for 
"Exploration in ML area" 
3       3     

 
 
66 
 
Revised DoC to be 
submitted (As per "Policy 
for Testing Requirement" 
dt. 13th May 2015) 
2       2     
Total 31 1 4 1 20 3 2 
 
Gas production has commenced form KG-DWN-98/3 Block operated by RIL as 
detailed below: 
 Production of oil from D26 (MA-oil field) commenced on 17.09.08 
 Production of gas from D1D3 (Gas-field) commenced on 01.04.09 
Current Status of gas production from the Block is given below (October, 2015) 
Field 
No. of wells 
flowing 
Gas production  rate 
(MMSCMD) 
Oil production rate 
(BOPD) 
Condensate production 
rate (BOPD) 
D1 -D3 11 6.78 - - 
MA 4 4.53 4424 866 
 Total Discoveries in the block: 20". 
IOR/EOR schemes monitoring by DGH 
1.89 When asked as to whether DGH has any role in monitoring of IOR/EOR s cheme 
of national oil companies, the Ministry stated as under:  
"Monitoring the performance of IOR/EOR schemes under implementation in 
major fields of NOCs is done at DGH. Quarterly performance reports for 
IOR/EOR projects under implementation at National Oil Companies are reviewed 
at DGH on regular basis". 
1.90 In response to specific enquiry  about the targets set and achievements made 
during 2013-14 under IOR / EOR projects for ONGC and OIL and also about the details 
of investments made in such projects, the Ministry furnished following details: 
"IOR is commonly us ed to describe any process, or combination of processes, 
that may be applied to economically increase the cumulative volume of oil that is 
ultimately recovered from the reservoir at an accelerated rate. Enhance oil 
recovery (EOR) methods are used to recove r that percentage of residual oil that 
cannot be captured by water flooding alone, or by the use of physical, 
mechanical, or procedural processes like Thermal, Polymer etc.  
ii. Annual target setting for IOR/EUR projects is difficult. The targets and results o f 
IOR/EOR processes are cumulative. In India National Oil Companies, ONGC and 
OIL have used IOR/EOR methods to sustain and enhance the production rates 

 
 
67 
 
from their mature fields. At present, several IOR/EOR projects are being 
implemented or are at different  phases of implementation. 21 IOR/EOR projects 
of ONGC have been completed including 03 EOR projects at Balol, Santhal and 
Sanand. As per information received from ONGC cumulative incremental oil gain 
from these projects is 87.18 MMT as against plan of 112 .85 MMT. Additionally, 
05 IOR projects are ongoing in Heera & S. Heera Redevelopment Ph -II, IOR B -
173A Field, Development of Western Periphery of MH South, Addl. Development 
of Vasai East and MH Redevelopment Ph-III. 
iii. OIL has completed IOR/EOR projects in 1 5 reservoirs including two pilot 
IOR/EOR projects, Microbial Enhanced oil recovery and Polymer flooding in 
Zaloni field. Additionally, 14 IOR/EOR projects are underway and 07 more 
IOR/EOR projects planned for near future. 
iv. During year 2013 -14, IOR/EOR perfo rmance of ONGC/OIL in their nomination 
fields are as below:  
 
 
1.91 The Committee enquired as to where does DGH sees itself in the coming years 
in augmenting domestic oil and gas production and asked about shortcomings and 
lacunae in the production sharing contracts of the  Exploration & Production 
programmes, DGH furnished following details: 
"The shortcoming and lacunae of our E&P programmes primarily arise from 
the shortcoming encountered during implementation of the Production Sharing 
Contracts. The same is reproduced as under: 
1. Cost of unfinished work program: 
a) Valuing the committed work program not done by the contractor is subject to 
challenge on the basis of computation. 
 
b) The methodology of computation of cost of unfinished work programme is 
complex and result in higher amounts than the rates stipulated in PSC‟s of later 
rounds (NELP-VIII onwards) and is being disputed by the Contractors. 
 
c) From NELP -VIII onwards, the amount  is payable by the Contractor at specific 
rated stipulated in PSC. 
 
Production through IOR/EOR 
IOR/EOR Gain ONGC OIL 
Actual, MMT 7.52 1.13 

 
 
68 
 
d) The Bank Guar5antee amount is inadequate to recover the cost of unfinished 
work program. 
2. Cap on cost recovery of exploration costs: 
From NELP-V onwards, a new Article 15.13 has been ins erted fixing upper limit 
for exploration costs (both activity wise cost and total cost -wise) limited to the 
cost estimates quoted by the Contractor during bidding. 
Any cost recovery above the aforesaid cost estimate limit requires the approval 
of the Gover nment based on the recommendation of the Management 
Committee.  
3. Dispute over Expenditure figures: 
Under Article 15 of NELP PSC, the Contractor is entitled to cost petroleum in 
respect of Exploration Costs, Development Costs and Production Costs incurred  
by the Contractor. Thus the cost petroleum is entirely based on the actual 
expenditure incurred duly audited by independent auditors. Although the basis of 
expenditure allowance under the PSC and under the Income Tax Act is similar, 
doubts in some cases have been raised by agencies like CAG on the authenticity 
of the expenditure claimed as cost petroleum. 
4. Procurement: 
There have been CAG audit exceptions on Contractors procurement of 
goods/services even from non -affiliated parties but still doubting und er benefit to 
the contractor although under the PSC the procurement is funded by the 
contractors and procurement procedures are laid down. 
5. 7-year tax exemption: 
The applicability of tax holiday under section 80IB(IX) of the L.T Act in respect of 
gas pro duced under Contractor awarded up to NELP -VII has come under 
ambiguity due to lack of clarity in the definition of mineral oil. 
6. Investment Multiple (IM): 
Different methodologies adopted by different contractors for computation of IM 
may adversely affect GOI take. On this issue there has been arbitration/litigations 
on components of IM and related issues of profit sharing. CAG & Ashok Chawla 
Committee have adversely commented on IM. 
7. Pricing of Crude Oil: 
a) There is a possibility of reduction in GOI take when the transaction is with 
affiliates. 

 
 
69 
 
b) Pricing of crude oil is a matter between buyer and seller and there is no adequate 
mechanism to protect GOI interest. 
8. Arbitration: 
a) Foreign arbitral tribunals attempt to re -write the provisions of contract itself and 
take jurisdiction on fiscal issues 
b) Contractors unilaterally take disputed amount without enforcement in Indian court  
9. Role of MC: 
Too many activities require interventions (review or approval) by Management 
Committee (MC), which may delay the progress of activities or put on hold the 
activities in case of disagreement in MC. 
10. Delay in FDP implementation: 
There is no remedy in PSC if a contractor delays/fails to implement the approval 
Field Development Plan (FDP). There is no specified timeline for commencement 
of production after approval of FDP. 
11. Stringent Timelines: 
There are too many stringent timelines for various activities form exploration to 
development, which if violated by the contractor, cannot be easily resolved as 
there is no remedy for such violations in PSC. 
Role of DGH in augmenting domestic oil gas production-  
DGH has been making constant efforts in brainstorming over the above 
mentioned shortcoming and ambiguities and facilitating to arrive at best 
possible way forward in close collaboration with MOPNG. The major efforts in 
this regard are as under:  
i) In view of the same, Dr. C.R. Rangrajan Committee has recommended that "A 
uniform licensing policy to enable E&P operators to explore and extract all 
hydrocarbon resources cove red under the Oilfields Regulation and 
Development (ORD) Act, 1948, and Petroleum and Natural Gas (PNG) Rules, 
1959 under one PEL/PML, and one contractual regime will replace the NELP 
and CBM regime for the Contracts to be awarded in future. The uniform 
licence will enable the contractor to explore conventional and unconventional 
oil and gas resources including CBM, shale gas/oil, tight gas, gas hydrates 
and any other resource to be identified in future which fall within the definition 
of "Petroleum" and "Natural Gas" under PNG rules, 1959."  A uniform licensing 
policy has been prepared at DGH and is under consideration by Government 
of India 

 
 
70 
 
ii)  Present fiscal system of production sharing ba sed on PTIM and Cost 
recovery/production linked payment will be replac ed by a revenue sharing 
model based on an incremental production -based sliding scale combined with 
a fixed, price -sensitive scale subjected to approval by Government of India. 
The contractor shall pay biddable Government share of revenue (net of 
royalty), as per Revenue Sharing Contract (RSC). A model contract has been 
prepared at DGH in this regard which has been uploaded on its website and is 
under consideration. 
With a view that more and more fields/blocks are put up on production, 
Operators are encourag ed to venture into more efficient and effective 
technologies and all proposals of FDP and Doc are being monitored and 
reviewed expeditiously. 
Also sincere efforts are being made by DGH in order to resolve the PSC 
related issues amongst Contractors if any s o that the stalemate condition is 
resolved and the halted/delayed production is resumed. 
Currently out of 26 sedimentary basins and deep offshore areas upto 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covering an area of 3.14 million square 
kilometres, about 48% of the basinal area only has been appraised and a large 
number of sedimentary basins have either no/or scanty data and require 
additional geo-scientific data coverage and analysis for proper understanding. 
To address the same, following projects have been initiat ed by Government 
through DGH: 
i. A project to reassess hydrocarbon resources in all sedimentary basins of India 
has been initiated. DGH is a member of the Multi Organisational Team (MOT) 
constituted for this purpose where the process of tendering for award of  job in 
under progress through International Competitive bidding coordinated by 
ONGC, KDMIP.  
ii. A project for appraisal of unapprised areas of all sedimentary basins of India 
has been initiated. Unapprised area in North East has been assigned to OIL 
India Li mited whereas rest of the unapprised areas have been assigned to 
ONGC. The process of invitation of Expression of Interest and tendering 
procedures have been initiated in the respective areas which are coordinated 
by concerned National Oil Company (NOC). DGH is monitoring the progress of 
the project as an inter -phase between the NOCs and the MOPNG and is also 
holding technical interaction with ONGC & OIL on the subject matter. 
iii. A policy on non -exclusive multi -client speculative survey for assessment of 
unexplored sedimentary basins through Service Providers is being 
implemented-DGH has been receiving and reviewing the proposals and 
forwarding it further for necessary clearances. It is also coordinating for its 
approval. Till date seven proposals have been forwarded to MOPNG for 

 
 
71 
 
further clearances from Ministry of Home affairs (MHA) and Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) out of which, provisional consent letter for five proposals has 
been i ssues on the basis of requisite permissions obtained from MHA and 
MoD. 
Due to the fact that some discoveries are coming up on production, the Oil and 
Gas production is expected to increase especially Gas. However the decline in 
the mature fields will restrict the increase in future". 
 
Practical Difficulties in the Implementation of Production Sharing Contracts 
1.92 When asked about salient features of the proposed uniform licensing policy and 
the role of DGH in the policy, the Ministry submitted the following information: 
 During the course of implementation of CBM Policy and NELP, it has been 
observed that unconventional hydrocarbon resources such as shale oil and gas 
are left unexplored, which could not be explored due  to  lack of policy /guidelines  
on  exploration of  shale oil and gas 
 In order to make next bidding round more attractive, the Government is in 
the process of finalizing Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) for award of hydrocarbon 
acreages with new contractual system and fiscal model.  
 ULP will enable the contractor to explore conventional and unconventional 
oil and gas resources including CBM, shale gas / oil, tight gas, gas hydrates and 
any other resource to be identified in future whic h fall  within the definition of 
“Petroleum” and “Natur al Gas” under PNG rules, 1959 under a single policy 
regime.  
The salient features of ULP are  
I. Covering exploration for both conventional and unconventional 
 Hydrocarbon resources  
II. Proposed revenue sharing contract model 
III. No investment by the Government  
IV. Revenue Generation from first day of production.  
V. 100% participation by foreign companies and participation through 
 unincorporated Joint Ventures  
VI. biddable Government share of revenue (net of royalty)  

 
 
72 
 
VII. no signature or production bonuses, State participation,  
VIII. No submission of annual WP&B will be  required 
 
Role of DGH  
 Uploading of required geo -scientific data in the NDR for  all  acreages  
 under ULP  to be  offered through open Acreages Licensing System or 
 otherwise 
 prepare basin wise dockets 
 prepare maps showing open acreages areas,   
 prepare NIO and  MRSC as per term and condition of ULP/ OALP". 
 
1.93 When the Committee specifically sought  a status report on programmes like 
Uniform Licensing Policy and Open Acreage Licensing Policy of the Ministry and the 
role of DGH in promoting the same, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Uniform Licensing Policy 
In past, there had been a gradual shift in the E& P policy, from nomination 
acreage to New Exploration licensing Policy through International competitive 
bidding in 1997. Now a Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) is being proposed to 
enable E&P operators to explore and extract all hydrocarbon resources covered  
under the Oilfields Regulation and Development (ORD) Act, 1948, and Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (PNG) Rules, 1959 under one PEL/PML. The proposed ULP will 
replace the NELP and CBM regime for the Contracts to be awarded in future. 
The uniform licence will en able the contractor to explore conventional and 
unconventional oil and gas resources including CBM, shale gas/oil, tight gas, gas 
hydrates and any other resource to be identified in future which fall within the 
definition of “Petroleum” and “Natural Gas” under PNG rules, 1959. 
 
DGH role:  
Based on the experience of Production Sharing Contract under NELP/Pre NELP 
regime and CBM contracts, DGH has given its inputs to MOPNG after reviewing 
the existing PSC towards covering the exploration and exploitation of a ll types of 
hydrocarbons under ULP.  
 

 
 
73 
 
Like NELP, DGH shall be coordinating for the generation of awareness and 
publicity of the ULP by way of conducting national and international roadshows 
and reaching out to competent national and international E&P companies.  
With the past experience of handling the PSCs, DGH is advising on the bidding 
parameters such as, Mandatory Work Programme, Minimum Work Programme 
(MWP), Technical capability and the fiscal package of the blocks. DGH will 
prepare Bid evaluati on criteria for work programme fiscal package as per the 
model. 
 
Further, MOPNG has formed two committees Dr. Rangarajan Committee and Dr. 
Kelkar Committee to review different aspects of exploration and exploitation of 
Hydrocarbons in Indian Sedimentary ba sins. These reports are under 
consideration by Government. 
 
 Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) 
To accelerate the exploration programme in the remaining areas of Petroliferous 
sedimentary basins in the country which have not been awarded so far, a 
different policy framework - Open acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) has been 
conceptualised to open up the entire Petroliferous sedimentary area in a short 
span of time for E & P companies round the year.   
 
The utilization of Open Acreage System in India would be a strategic shift from 
the successful National Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) mechanism. The 
Open Acreage System would enable domestic and international upstream oil and 
gas companies to select areas of their interest from the available acreage in gri d 
pattern. The available open acreages grids will be opened round the year and 
prospective bidders can select the areas which would be put on offer through 
international Competitive bidding as per Government approved Policy. 
 
 
DGH role:  
 
National Data repository (NDR) is a pre -requisite for OALP as this would enable 
prospective bidders to view the data online and select the areas which can be put 
on offer under ICB. Work for establishment of NDR is going on fast pace and 
initial work has already been co mpleted. Work for populating NDR with geo -
scientific data has also been started and opening of data rooms at NDR is being 
scheduled shortly". 
 
 
 
 

 
 
74 
 
Dispute Settlement by DGH 
1.94 In response to specific query by the Committee  as to how DGH handles its legal 
matters with legal professionals in the organisation, the Ministry submitted the following 
details: 
"The officers in the legal department are legal professionals.  All the legal matters 
pertaining to the Ministry of Petrole um & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) and Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) are being handled by this department.  The 
legal functions performed by these legal professionals as under;  
 Legal Scrutiny of Production Sharing Contracts and Amendments thereto, Join t 
Operating Agreements, Crude Oil Sale Agreements etc. and Commercial 
Agreements entered into by Directorate General of Hydrocarbons. 
 Assisting in preparation of various policies framed by MoP&NG.   
 Legal opinions on the issues referred to legal section by  various departments in 
connection with activities being undertaken by DGH.  
 Vetting of Contracts (viz. Tender documents floated by DGH and contracts 
executed thereafter), Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with various 
countries. 
 Vetting of Bank Guaranties, Financial and Performance Guaranties, proposals for 
Assignment/transfer of Participating Interest, Extension of Exploration Phases 
and Amendments to PSC‟s during the contract period and thereafter.     
 Legal comments on behalf o f DGH to MOP&NG in connection with interpretation 
of Petroleum Laws & relevant rules framed there under and on other issues 
which are being referred to DGH by MoP&NG from time to time. 
 Preparation of legal notices, vetting of correspondence with contractor s in 
connection with various issues being raised under PSC‟s from time to time.  
 Vetting of cases relating to Force Majeure, Excusable Delays etc.   
 Framing of strategies for handling various legal disputes based on the current 
scenario.  
In addition to ab ove, the legal team also handles various Arbitration and Court 
matters, National as well as International with the guidance of MOPNG and while 
handling such legal matters, the legal team performs the following activities:   
 Scrutiny of the various claims o f the contractors and advice GOI/DGH for further 
course of action to protect the interest of the GOI, which includes appointment of 

 
 
75 
 
Arbitrators, Attorney General (AG), Solicitor General (SG), Additional Solicitor 
General, Senior Counsels, Advocates or Law Firms etc. on behalf of GOI as per 
requirement.  
 Scrutiny of legal disputes.   
 Briefing the counsels on various legal disputes, assist them for preparation of the  
Statement of claims, Statement of Defence, Counter Claims, Evidences, Written 
Submissions and all other allied pleadings.  
 While performing the aforesaid activities, legal team of DGH also attends the 
hearings before Arbitral Tribunals or Courts along with counsels. 
 Liaison with MoP&NG to appraise the development in the matters and to obtain 
necessary approvals from MoP&NG. 
 Legal scrutiny of Arbitration Awards or Court judgments for advising further 
action.  
 Scrutiny of the Professional Bills of the Arbitrators/Counsels and processing the 
same for the payments".   
 
1.95 When asked as to who repres ents DGH in the arbitration proceedings, the 
Ministry has submitted as under: 
"DGH is represented in the arbitration proceedings through Attorney General 
(AG), Solicitor General (SG), Additional Solicitor General Govt. Standing 
Counsels, reputed Sr. Advocates, Advocates and Law Firms".   
1.96 When asked to f urnish the details of disputes and arbitration proceedings where 
DGH is involved, the Ministry provided the following information: 
SL. 
NO. 
PARTICULARS ARBITRATION/ COURT 
1.  Reliance Industries Limited, British Gas Exploration Pvt. Ltd vs. UOI  -
Panna Mukta Tapti Field 
Arbitration 
 
2.  Reliance Industries Ltd. vs. UOI  -Four Relinquished Blocks - KG-
OSN-97/3, KG-OSN-97/4, MB-OSN-97/1, GK-OSN-97/1 
Arbitration 
 
3.  Reliance Industries Limited  vs. UOI -KG-DWN-98/3 (D-6) Arbitration 
4.  Reliance Industries Limited  vs. UOI - Gas Pricing uidelines Arbitration  
5.  Videocon Industries Limited vs. UOI  - ONGC Carry under Ravva 
PSC 
Arbitration 
6.  Assam Company India Limited vs. UOI -Amguri Field Arbitration 

 
 
76 
 
SL. 
NO. 
PARTICULARS ARBITRATION/ COURT 
7.  Hindustan Oil & Exploration Company VS. GOI -CY-OSN-97/1 Arbitration 
8.  NIKO Resources VS. UOI -Hazira Field  Arbitration 
9.  CAIRN ENERGY VS. GOI -ONGC Carry under Ravva PSC Arbitration  
10.  Videocon Industries Limited Vs. UOI -ONGC Carry under Ravva PSC Federal Court of Malaysia 
11.  GOI vs Cairn Energy & Ors. - BDC issue under Ravva PSC Federal Court of Malaysia 
12.  Stephenson Harwood vs. UOI -Issue relating to fees of the Law Firm Queen‟s Bench division 
13.  Joshi Technologies Industries  vs. UOI -Dholka & Wavel Fields. Supreme Court of India 
14.  UOI vs. Ishar Gas Oil -Evaluation of Bid under NELP IX. Supreme Court of India 
15.  Shri. Gurudas Dasgupta vs. UOI & Ors. -PIL in D-6 Block Supreme Court of India 
16.  Common Cause & Ors. vs. UOI -PIL in D-6 Block Supreme Court of India  
PIL 
17.  SELAN Vs. UOI -Lohar Field Delhi High Court 
18.  NIKO Resources Vs. UOI -Hazira Field. Delhi High Court 
19.  UOI vs. HARDY -CY-OS-1 Delhi High Court 
20.  MOP&NG vs. Great Easter  n  Energy Corporation Limited -CBM Block 
- Raniganj 
Delhi High Court 
21.  WELSPUN Natural Resources Vs. UOI & Ors.  - Invocation of BG CB-
ONN-2004/5 
City Civil Court at 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
22.  WELSPUN  Plastics Vs. UOI & Ors.  - Invocation of BG  AA-ONN-
2004/4 
City Civil Court at 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
23.  Krishna Godavri Delta Parikshana Samiti & 2 others  vs. UOI -PIL for 
Land subsidence. 
High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh 
24.  UOI vs. ACIL -Amguri Field 
 
Sibsagar District Court, 
Assam 
25.  ONGC vs. UOI & Others. -KG-DWN-98/2 (D-6) Delhi High Court 
26.  M/S Manali Petrochemicals Ltd. Vs. UOI & Ors.  -Issue relating to 
Excise Exemption Certificate 
Madras High Court 
27.  Union of India  Vs. Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.  KG-DWN-98/3 
(D-6) 
Delhi High Court 
28.  GEECL vs. UOI -CBM – MG-CBM-2008/IV Delhi High Court 
29.  Cairn India Ltd. Vs. UOI  (Enforcement of Award dt 18.1.2011 in BDC 
issue 
Delhi High Court 
30.  SHIV-VANI Vs. DGH -Terminating Geological Survey Contract Arbitration 
31.  DGH Vs. ODL -Issue related to demobilization cost for the ship hiring 
for Gas Hydrate.  
Delhi High Court 
32.  DGH vs. New Shine Star Manpower  - Issue relating to siphoning of 
Provident Fund by the contractor. 
Noida City Civil Court 
33.  DGH Vs. Aambience Aambience vs. DGH  -Issue relating to hiring of 
office building for DGH. 
Delhi High Court 
 

 
 
77 
 
1.97 When specifically asked about the number of disputes pertaining to execution of 
Production Sharing Contracts, the Ministry stated as under:   
"Out of 33 matters listed above, 29 matters (from serial no. 1 to serial no 29) are  
pertaining to execution of PSCs" 
1.98 Referring to some of the  media reports, DGH has submitted suggestions to the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for streamlining of dispute resolution mechanism. 
The Committee wanted details of strategy note for a point -wise follow-up action taken 
on various suggestions included in the note. The Ministry submitted the following 
details: 
"A strategy/approach note for dealing and minimising the arbitration cases/ 
disputes against Government has been submitted to MoP&NG for consideration. 
Proposed strategy note by DGH is attached at Annexure - 10." 
1.99 When asked r egarding the options available at present with operators who are 
aggrieved by the decision of DGH, the Ministry submitted as under:   
"Operators who are aggrieved by the decision of DGH have option to invoke 
Arbitration/legal course".  
1.100 When asked about by the cases that have been referred to courts due to failure 
of arbitration, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"There are 8 cases wherein party to the arbitration being not satisfied with award 
passed by arbitral tribunal approached to court against award.  
 
There is one more arbitration case which pertains to DGH , however, Union of 
India (UOI) was not a party to arbitration and award passed by tribunal has been 
challenged in court by DGH"  
 
As for the steps that are being taken to empower DGH with quasi judicial powers 
accompanied by an appellate tribunal for fast and effective dispute resolution, the 
Ministry has submitted as under: 
 
"Resolution for creation of DGH notification dated 8 th April 1993 does not 
envisage empowering DGH with quasi -judicial powers accompanied by an 
appellate tribunal.  Presently, there is no proposal under consideration of 
Government to empower DGH with quasi -judicial powers accompanied by an 
appellate tribunal".   

 
 
78 
 
1.101 When asked about the steps taken by DGH to find a conciliatory way out to avoid 
resorting to foreign arbitral tribunals by operators, which are inclined towards rewriting 
the provision of contract affecting adversely the Government share, the Min istry 
provided the following information: 
"A strategy/ approach note for dealing and minimizing the arbitration cases/ 
disputes against Government have been prepared by DGH which is under 
consideration at MoP&NG. Suggestions made by DGH regarding reducing the 
arbitration cases against government are given below: 
1. In order to reduce arbitration arising out of disputes, it is important to have a 
clear, sound, fair and transparent decision making process which will clarify who 
decides what, as well as the extent of their authority and discretion.  
2. In most of the cases  arbitrators have considered contractor‟s views more on 
technical merits vis -à-vis contractual merits. There is a need to relook in the 
process for dealing a dispute at the initial stage itself. 
3. DGH proposed for adopting two prong strategies. The cases, wh ich may result in 
dispute, can be referred to a multi disciplinary team (MDT) in DGH at the first 
stage to study all the aspects of dispute with open mind. The officers dealt the 
dispute earlier will have observatory role in explaining the case to the MDT.  In 
case the MDT has differing views then the issue to be raised to 2nd level. At 
second stage, the report of MDT can be examined by Executive Committee of 
DGH consisting of DG,  Executive Directors and FA&CAO  (recently formed). The 
decision of EC will be final on any dispute arising in the block/ field.  
4. DGH may take the opinion of Advisory Council, where larger stakes are involved. 
If Advisory Council suggests taking the help of external expert in dealing the 
dispute, DGH will do so in prompt manner. Timel ines for all the activities for 
dealing the dispute will be fixed so that it will not take more than 60 days in taking 
final decision on the case in DGH.   
5. If the case is not resolved, then DGH will suggest the Government to go for the 
sole expert at the f irst instance as provided in the PSC for the matter to be 
referred to be Sole Expert. DGH will prepare beforehand a list of sole experts in 
various fields for approval of the Government. 
6. Disputes, which are not resolved following the above steps will only,  be sent to 
Government for acceptance of arbitration".  
 
 

 
 
79 
 
Site Restoration Activities under PSC 
1.102 On being a sked about whether site restoration guidelines are applicable to all 
exploration blocks/fields or have exclusive applicability on petroleum oper ations under 
PSC only, the Ministry submitted the details as under:  
"As per Rule 22 (2) of Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules 1959, at any time within 
six months after determination of the license or the lease under these rules or 
within such further time as the Central Government or the State Government , as 
the case may be, may allow, the former licensee or lessee may remove or 
dispose of and petroleum recovered, during the currency of such license or 
lease, and all stores, equipment, tools and machinery an d so much of the 
improvements on the land covered by the license or the lease as the State 
Government may permit. 
In view of above, the site restoration guidelines are applicable to all exploration 
blocks/fields irrespective of the regime under which the p etroleum operations 
have been undertaken". 
1.103 When asked about  exploration blocks/fields under nomination and p re-NELP 
regimes which are restored to their earlier state, and also whether contractors are issued 
certain directions in that regard, the Ministry submitted the following details: 
"The exploration blocks/Fields under nomination and Pre -NELP regimes are 
restored to their earlier state as per existing rules and regulations/guidelines. As 
far as PSC regime is concerned, only one fi eld namely Matar has been 
relinquished and site is restored to its original condition before handing over the 
same to the field owner. The site was inspected by DGH and OISD before final 
handing over.  
However, DGH has appointed an international consultant  namely TSB Offshore, 
USA for framing the comprehensive guidelines for site restoration for offshore 
and onshore fields . The report has been submitted  and is under evaluation for 
necessary notification. Once notified, these guidelines will be applicable fo r all 
the fields irrespective of NOCs or private companies".  
1.104 On being asked about site restoration fund created for producing fields under 
PSC provisions and its purpose, specific responsibilities and source of funding for the 
same, the Ministry has submitted following details:  

 
 
80 
 
"The details of the Site Restoration Fund have been formulated by GOI as “ Site 
Restoration Fund Scheme 1999”. The GOI order is self explanatory and is 
reproduced below: 
Quote: 
The Contractor shall prepare a proposal for the restoration of site including 
abandonment plan and requirement of funds for this and the annual contribution. 
This will be submitted along with the annual Budget for the consideration and 
approval of the Mana gement Committee. The annual contribution shall be 
deposited by the Contractor in the Site Restoration fund which will be 
established, in accordance with the scheme notified by the Government.  
 
For this purpose, the annual contribution to Scheme shall be calculated based on 
unit of production method i.e. Reserve to Production Ratio. 
Unquote: 
The referred order is attached at Annexure-11". 
 
1.105 When enquired about salient features of guidelines regarding the utilisation of site 
restoration fund by operators of the block after cessation of petroleum operations along 
with details of the exploration sites that have been restored till date, the Ministry 
submitted the information as under: 
"The details in this regard as per Model Production Sharing Contract of NELP IX 
are as under: 
Quote: 
Site Restoration" shall mean all activities required to return a site to  Its state as 
of the Effective Date pursuant to the Contractor ’ s environmental impact study 
and approved by the Government or to render a site compatible with its intended 
after –use (to the extent reasonable) after cessation of Petroleum Operations in 
relation thereto and shall include, where appropr iate, proper abandonment of 
Wells or other facilities, removal of equipment, structures and debris, 
establishment of compatible contours and drainage, replacement of top soil, re -
vegetation, slope stabilization, in -filling of excavations or any other appro priate 
actions in the circumstances.  
 
Unquote: 
Further, as per the Model Production Sharing Contract of NELP IX under the 
Article „Protection of Environment‟: 
 
Quote: 
On expiry or termination of this Contract or relinquishment of part of the Contract 
Area, the Contractor shall: 
(a)  subject to Article 27, remove all equipment and installations from  the 
relinquished area or former contract Area in a manner agreed with the 
Government pursuant to an abandonment plan; and  

 
 
81 
 
(b) perform all necessary Site Restoration in accordance with modern oilfield and 
petroleum industry practices and take all other action necessary to prevent 
hazards to human life or to the property of others or the environment 
 
Unquote: 
In this regard Government of India has constituted a committee vide MoPNG OM 
no. O -23011/75/2013-ONG-I dated 20.01.2014 under the Chairmanship of DG, 
DGH for formulation of Site Restoration guidelines for petroleum operations. 
Currently an internationally reputed firm is working as a consultant.  
As on date there is no production site where petroleum operations have ceased 
under PSC regime hence no Site Restoration activities have been carried out so 
far. However in the exploratory blocks which have been relinquished, Site 
Restoration activity w ith regards to wells drilled, as mandated, has been carried 
out by Operator. The plug and abandonment of wells are a regular practice which 
is carried out by Operators as per the extant rule".  
 
1.106 The Committee was given the following information by DGH on Norms for Field 
abandonment and Site Restoration 
A fourteen member committee was constituted in 2014 to prepare site restoration 
guidelines with the following objectives: 
 To identify global best practices for Site Restoration after cessation of petr oleum   
operations. 
 To develop guidelines for Site Restoration for onland and offshore oil & gas 
fields. 
 To develop the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for abandonment and site 
restoration for onland and offshore oil & gas fields. 
An international cons ultant M/s TSB Offshore was awarded the contract to help 
prepare the committee the guidelines for site restoration. The Consultant has 
submitted its final report on 31.07.2015. The site restoration guidelines are 
currently being prepared based on the repor t and considering stakeholder‟s 
comments. OISD and DGMS are the nodal agencies to implement Site 
restoration guidelines in association with DGH.  The cost of the project is US$ 
1,20,000 and is funded by DGH budget.  
Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) 
1.107 The Committee observe that DGH had constituted Standing Committee on GIPIP 
to identify the areas requiring codification of good international practices and to prepare 
national codes for petroleum operations and t he work was assigned to  M/s Petro Tel, 

 
 
82 
 
USA  and it was to submit its first report by mid 2015. In that regard, when asked about 
the submission of this report alongwith  details of key areas identified for codification  
and the commencement of codification, the Ministry  submitted the following details:  
"The Consultant appointed by DGH, i.e. PetroTel, USA has submitted the final 
report on Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) on 14.07.2015, 
which has been sent to all the members of the inter -ministerial and industry 
“Standing Committee” constituted by MoP&NG. 
The key areas identified for codification are as under: 
 1. Exploration  
 
a) Geophysical Surveys-Best Practices  
i. 2D API, 3D API, HR -3D, HD -3D, Gravity and Magnetic data, Geochemical 
Sampling, Aeromagnetic data  
 
b) G&G-Best Practices  
Geological model (reservoir wise) comprising of  
i. Petro-physical parameters-log derived and laboratory data derived  
ii. Well log correlations  
iii. Geological maps (porosity, thickness, saturation, fluid contacts, 
boundary/faults)  
iv. Resource/reserve estimation  
v. 3D volumes/computer modeling  
vi. Heterogeneous 4D surveys to be invariably carried out to locate by -passed oil, 
if any.  
 
c) Global Oilfield practices for the alternate/ substitute data types against the 
contract committed data types of the Minimum Work Program (MWP) bidded by 
the contractor  
 
d) Procedure for calculating cost of Unfinished Work Program 
 
e) Standard gu idelines, if any, on the type of tapes/ media for the Operators to 
submit their acquired/ processed/ interpreted data.  
 
f) Choice of Accounting System (Successful Efforts, Full Cost)  
 
g) If there is any standard practice worldwide for sending the geophys ical data 
abroad online for processing/ interpretation  
 
h) Drilling- Best Practices  
i. Defining attainment of exploration objective during exploratory drilling  
ii. Applicability of IADC, API, IWCF guidelines  
iii. Type of drilling –Vertical, Inclined, Horizontal, Multilateral, Casing  
Policy, Cementing Policy, Mud Policy, LWD/MWD  
iv. International definition of “Basement”  
 

 
 
83 
 
i) How popular is the phenomenon of “Stopping the clock internationally”?  
 
j) Data acq uisition of adjoining areas to get a better understanding of regional 
geology.  
 
k) Continued Exploration throughout the life of PSC.  
l) Work Program approval process and best practices with respect to bid, 
budgeted and actual cost in PSC regime.  
 
2. Discovery  
a) Norms for area demarcation for Development, Discovery and Mining Lease  
 
b) Norms for declaration of “Discovery”, “Commercial Discovery” and “Potential 
Commercial Interest (PCI)” and its acceptance by regulators.  
 
c) International norms for wel l flow tests such as DST and any other test 
procedures in open hole, cased hole, gravel pack, frac pack required for 
evaluating or approving the “discovery”.  
 
d) Standard activities usually conducted between hydrocarbon discovery and 
Declaration of Commerciality (DoC).  
 
e) How to reduce timelines between discovery(ies) to delivery period (commercial 
production)?  
 
f) Best practices on maximum time allowed to the contractor to retain the 
discovery area for discoveries not monetized.  
 
3. Appraisal  
 
 
a) Codification of International best practices regarding various methods of 
appraisal considering the extent of reservoir, hydrodynamic systems and 
connectivity, different fault blocks.  
i. Is an Appraisal program always required?  
 
b) Whether during appr aisal of a discovery, the Contractor can explore other 
reserves/pools? 
 
c) Can the contractor take up drilling of appraisal/exploration wells during Pre -
development period for further improved understanding of resources, which helps 
in better development plan?  
 
d) Are pre -development activities like sea bed surveys (geophysical, geo -
mechanics and geo -hazards studies) / FEED required / permissible / possible 
during appraisal period / post Declaration of Commerciality (DOC)?  
 
4. Declaration of Commerciality (DoC)  
 
 
a) Data requirement at the time of submission of DoC, Field Development Plan 
(FDP) ,viz. Drilling, exploration and Pre -development proposals which is 
comprehensive and transparently known to operator and approving body in 
advance so that the entire dataset is submitted in single instance  

 
 
84 
 
 
b) Strategy for allowing DoCs on „point forward basis‟ or „sunk cost consideration‟ 
in case of small reserves for exploiting marginal fields, which are otherwise not 
economically viable.  
 
c) Internationally available guidelines for classification and evaluation of resource 
and reserve estimates and auditing  
 
d) What are the ranges of technologies that constitute „Reliable Technology‟ to 
establish reserves with „Reasonable Certainty‟ under SEC criteria? How do t hese 
criteria relate to IFRS reporting, SPE/WPC –PRMS and Russian, Canadian or 
Norwegian reserve classification?  
 
 
5. Field Development  
 
a) Practices regarding exploitation/development of reservoir and mid -course 
correction for onland, shallow water, deep water and ultra-deep water fields.  
i. International norms for monetization of reserves in probable & possible 
categories.  
ii. Is implem entation of Improved Oil Recovery/ Enhanced Oil Recovery 
techniques mandatory?  
iii. To encourage EOR activities on mature fields, should government‟s enacted 
special incentives be given to encourage investment?  
iv. Is a minimum ultimate recovery specifie d by any regulations/ authorities – 
international norms?  
 
b) Practices for prompt and orderly field development  
 
c) Preparation of plans for joint/integrated development and operation for several 
discoveries  
 
d) Best practices on Unitization of discoveries in adjacent blocks  
 
6. Production  
 
a) International practices for submitting long term production profile and medium 
term production forecast and mid-course changes 
 
b) Issues related to underproduction and overproduction from FDP approved 
production profile and suggested remedial measures based on international best 
practices  
 
c) Standards on Well Completion requirements including deep water and ultra -
deep water well completion strategies.  
i. Completion Strategy: Self flow wells, Artificial Lift we lls (SRP, ESP, PCP, GLV, 
Plunger Lift)  
ii. Best practices on sand control measures – gravel pack, frac-pack etc.  
iii. Best practices for well completions and equipments and material selections for 
sour services (H2S) and higher CO2 contents for oil/gas fields.  
 

 
 
85 
 
d) Best practices on Work over: well interventions and stimulations, especially 
deepwater well intervention, hydraulic and acid fracturing.  
 
e) Best practices on facility: Onshore/Offshore/deep water/ultra -deep water 
facilities-collection, separa tion, processing, storage, compression, evacuation, 
effluent disposal  
 
f) Quantity and quality measurement - oil, gas, water – applicable standards and 
best practices for measurement of petroleum  
i. Hydrocarbon Delivery Point for sales- International norms  
ii. International practice for reconciliation between petroleum produced & saved 
and petroleum sold.  
 
g) Best practices for production, measurement and allocation in case of 
simultaneous produc tion of different hydrocarbons (oil/gas, CBM, shale oil/gas) 
from the same wells or different wells in the same field.  
 
h) Transportation of oil/gas/water- by tanker, pipeline – best practices  
 
i) Well Production and Reservoir Pressure Performance report ing and evaluation 
practices  
i. Influx studies, PVT studies  
ii. Fluid properties and composition- oil, gas, water  
iii. Guidelines for reservoir management for optimum exploitation rate and 
maximum recovery of reserves.  
 
j) Best practices for testing individual production wells , especially sub-sea wells 
 
i. Norms for Extended Well Testing (EWT)and disposal of oil/gas during testing 
periods.  
 
k) International norms of gas flaring  
 
l) Best practices on sourcing and storage of water for fracturing, dispo sal of 
produced and flow back waters.  
 
m) Best practices to reduce environmental footprints by adopting drilling 
strategies in limited land areas 
 
7. Testing, Analysis- Reservoir, Production-Best Practices  
 
a) Core studies and special core analysis  
 
b) Conventional- decline curve analysis  
 
c) Simulation model generated  
 
8. Health, Environment & Safety (HSE) / Abandonment  
 
a) Best HSE practices in petroleum operations. Do‟s and Don‟ts in conducting 
each and every petroleum activity / operation to mi nimize the risk of 
Environmental Damage.  
 

 
 
86 
 
b) International timelines for various permissions related to environment 
clearances.  
 
c) Preparation of Contingency Plans, Emergency Response Plan (ERP) and 
Disaster Management Plan (DMP) for Oil spills, Fires, Blow-outs, Accidents and 
Emergencies in accordance with International practices.  
 
9. Procurement procedure  
 
a) Contracts provide some guidelines for procurement. How much flexibility 
should be there for allowing the operator for purchasing something or s ome 
service on nomination basis? Is it possible to have a global data bank to have fair 
idea about the approximate market price of various items before allowing a 
purchase on nomination basis?  
 
b) Standardization and ways of compliance of procurement proc edures 
(Appendix-F of PSC) to the mutual benefit of the parties.  
 
 
10. Others Areas  
 
a) International requirements for reporting of details of E&P activities to ensure 
ethical operations / share market compliance.  
 
b) Sharing of Infrastructure:  
 
i. Wha t are the typical contractual mechanisms and fee/tolling arrangements to 
share third party infrastructure?  
 
ii. How third party infrastructure was introduced and promoted in key hydrocarbon 
provinces?  
 
c) Are there certain unidentified gaps and ambiguities in the Indian PSCs / 
Contracts?  
 
d) International norms for insurance for petroleum operations taken by contractor 
to provide for his liabilities and indemnify the Government  
 
e) Global best practices for accounting procedures; inventories and records of 
assets.  
 
f) Global norms for information security for E&P industry  
 
g) Standards for IT and Data Management infrastructure.  
 
h) Dispute resolution process 
 
i) Practices regarding obligations of Govt. / Regulator in contract management.  
 
j) Enabling regulations for unconventional hydrocarbons  
 
k) General Guidelines on Tight Oil/Gas, CBM, Shale oil/gas exploration and 
exploitation strategies  
 
l) Practices for extension of PSC s to extract maximum oil/gas for importing 
countries.  
 

 
 
87 
 
m) Best practices of the governing bodies of different fiscal regimes (like 
management committee in Indian PSC).  
 
n) If subsequent to the award of contract, access to the area is restricted due to 
any reason, what are the best practices relating to rights and responsibility of 
contractor?  
 
The consultant‟s report is under due diligence and examination by various 
agencies led by DGH. Upon finalization and due deliberations, it will be put up to 
the inter-ministerial and industry “Standing Committee” constituted by MoP&NG. 
Since it is a maiden effort to compile the best practices around the world and 
come out with national codes for petroleum operations, it is essential that the 
report is drafted taki ng into account all the aspects and observations of all the 
stakeholders, which is a time consuming process. 
It is expected that the “Standing Committee” will approve the report on GIPIP by 
March 2016 to make its guideline applicable". 
1.108 On being asked to update on GIPIP, DGH furnished the following information: 
“Codification of Good International Petroleum Industry Practices. 
The term “Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP)” is used 
repeatedly in PSCs to specify that the contractors sh ould adopt best industry 
practices in areas of Exploration, Development and Production activities. The 
“Standing Committee on Petroleum Industry Practices”  was constituted by 
GOI vide MoPNG OM no. O -23012/8/2013-ONG-I dated 27.12.2013 with 
following terms of reference: 
i. To identify the areas requiring codification of GIPIP 
ii. Preparation of national codes for petroleum operations 
iii. Review of codes every two years to update in line with evolution of international 
standards 
The work has been carried out by PetroTel  Inc., USA on 30.10.14 for 
identification of the following key areas for codification: 
1. Exploration  
2. Discovery  
3. Appraisal  
4. Declaration of Commerciality (DoC)  
5. Field Development  

 
 
88 
 
6. Production  
7. Testing, Analysis- Reservoir, Production-Best Practices  
8. Health, Environment & Safety (HSE) / Abandonment  
9. Procurement procedure  
10. Others Areas  
The consultant submitted its final report on 14.07.2015 which is under review by 
standing committee. The project cost is US$ 1.2 Million and is funded through 
DGH budget.”  
National Data Repository and DGH 
1.109 On the issue of the role of DGH in  National Data Repository (NDR), the Ministry 
furnished following details: 
"DGH on behalf of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG), Government 
of India has established National Data Repository (NDR) in DGH, OIDB Bhawan, 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh.  
The role of DGH in NDR is as under: 
1.  DGH is the focal point of collection, uploadi ng, preservation and dissemination of 
the vast geo -scientific information available in the country. Also, all the new data 
generated shall be uploaded in NDR through the coordination of DGH.  
2. DGH is entrusted with the responsibility of data population, its  quality check and 
speedy creation of the data base consisting of geo -scientific information from 
various domains viz. 2D, 3D reprocessed data, well logs etc. 
3. Subsequent to the completion of set -up of NDR, DGH shall be coordinating for 
offer of prospective  areas to national and international companies by facilitating 
as data viewing centre against the requisite payment".  
1.110 When Committee wanted to know the status of data c ompilation under NDR, the 
representative of the Ministry of P&NG submitted the following information: 
 "In the first phase, the data compilation is going on right now. It will be completed 
 by March, 2016. As far as NDR is concerned, appraisal of unappraised areas will 
 take four years.  Every year some data will come.  By the time of next round, 25 
 per cent data will come and it will take three more years.  As far as reassessment 
 of hydrocarbon potential that will also be completed by2016".  

 
 
89 
 
1.111 When the Committee specifically asked about the role of DGH in acquisition of oil 
assets abroad by Indian PSUs, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"DGH plays limited role in the matter of acquisitions of oil assets abroad as 
acquisitions are made by ONGC Videsh Limited or other companies directly. 
DGH examines proposals as and when specific reference is made to it by the 
Ministry".  
New initiatives by DGH 
1.112 The Committee observe d that more than two decades have been passed since 
the last Hydrocarbon appraisal was carried out in the country. In that regard, when 
enquired as to whether there are any plans of the Government for reappraisal of 
hydrocarbon resources with improved technologies, the Ministry stated as under: 
"Government has planned to carry out the Re -assessment of Hydrocarbon 
Resources of all Sedimentary Basins including deepwater areas of India. In 
light of geo -scientific data acquired since the last assessment the Study of 
Hydrocarbon Resource Assessment will be carried out through KDMIPE, 
Dehradun. The study is planned to be  carried out within a span of 30 months. 
Hiring of expert agencies through tendering process is in progress by 
KDMIPE, ONGC. Others details of the project are as under: 
i. Multiple work execution teams have been setup for the purpose for re -
assessment of Indi an Hydrocarbon Resources through an International 
competitive bidding.   
ii. Since the Hydrocarbon Resource re -assessment of all the basins cannot be 
done simultaneously, the work execution teams will prioritize and draw 
timelines for completion schedule for e ach basin to complete the total 
exercise". 
Survey of Unappraised Areas of Indian Sedimentary Basins 
1.113 When the Committee asked about the status note on the time lines along with the 
funds required and the sources of funds on the  “Survey of Unappraised Areas of Indian 
Sedimentary Basins”, the Ministry has furnished following information: 
"Survey of Unappraised Areas of Indian Sedimentary Basins: 
ONGC and OIL have been entrusted with the task of surveying the  48%  
unappraised areas of country.  OIL has been assigned to carry out 2D seismic 
API of 7408 LKM falling in North eastern part of India covering states of Assam, 

 
 
90 
 
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram and ONGC has 
been assigned to carry out 2D seismic API of approx. 40835 LKM seismic data in 
onland part of 22 sedimentary basins of India viz. Cambay, Kutch, Saurashtra, 
Rajasthan, Pranhita -Godavari, Krishna -Godavari, Cuddapah, Bastar, Cauvery, 
Vindhyan, Narmada, South Rewa, Satpura -Damodar and Chattisgarh, Bengal, 
Mahanadi-NEC, Ganga, Deccan Synclin e, Bhima-Kaladgi, Himalayan Foreland, 
Spiti-Zanskar, Karewa and Andman-Nicobar basins. 
The proposed 2D Seismic survey work is expected to start in March 2016 and 
will take five years period to cover the entire area. Total fund req uirement for 
these projects would be to the tune of about 4375 Crores. Initially the expenditure 
will be made by NOCs. Ministry has sent the proposal to Ministry of Finance for 
reimbursement of the same through OID cess.  
Multi-client Speculative Survey through Service Providers 
1.114 Giving information to the Committee on the Survey of offshore areas through 
policy for Geo -Scientific data generat ion through Multi -client Survey, Ministry/DGH 
furnished to the following: 
New policy allowing Multi -client Speculative Survey through Service Providers is 
being implemented by Government of India. Under this policy, Service providers 
have been invited for carrying out Non -exclusive Multi -Client Geo -Scientific 
Surveys/ Activities  relating to Hydrocarbons in offshore and/or on land part of 
India.  
Under this policy of non- exclusive Multi -client Speculative Survey through 
Service Providers, seven  proposals have been received from various service 
providers which may generate new 108621 LKM of Geo -scientific data in Off -
Shore Basins of India. Provisional letter of consent has been issued for seven 
proposals after seeking clearances from Ministry of Defense and Ministry of 
Home Affairs for the offered areas and the interested companies/ entities   
Out of the seven proposals for which Provisional Letter of Consent has been 
issued, M/s Electromagnetic Geo -services ASA, Norway has signed the 
Agreement of the Data Policy along with Project Data Delivery Bank Guarantee 
for 10079.96 LKM Marine CSEM & MMT Data Acquisition, Processing, Inversion 
and Interpretation studies. 
No fund is required to be  spent by Government of India in implementation of   
non exclusive multi-client speculative survey on sedimentary basins in India as 
all expenditure is borne by the contracting companies/ entities. One set of data 
will be given to DGH free of cost.     
 

 
 
91 
 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
1.115 When a sked by the Committee to provide information on the time line and the 
cost estimates for the project „ Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources ‟, the DGH 
furnished the following in its written reply:  
“The last assessment of hydrocarbon resources in India was done for 15 
sedimentary basins & deep water areas about twenty years ago.  The present 
project will make use of the large amount of geo -scientific data collected through 
exploration & development activities in the last twenty years and re -estimate the 
hydrocarbon resources including yet -to-find hydrocarbon potential. Multi 
Organization Team (MOT) has been formed to carry out re -assessment of 
Hydrocarbon Resources of India in all its 26 sedimentary basins in January, 
2014. The expenditure for the entire exercise will be borne by KDMIPE, 
Dehradun and reimbursed by DGH. Budget estimate for the project is Rs. 59 
crore. Project will be completed by November 2017. 
The Keshav Dev Malviya Institute of Petroleum Engineering (KDMIPE)  of ONGC 
will act as leader with Director (Exploration) of ONGC as Chairman and Director 
(Exploration & Development) of Oil India Ltd (OIL) as Co -chairman.  A National 
Level Committee headed Petroleum Secretary will monitor & review the progress 
of work periodically.” 
Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 document for Northeast India  
1.116 The Committee were furnished the following information by Ministry regarding 
Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 document for Northeast India with CRISIL.  
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  (MoPNG) has constituted a steering 
committee to prepare Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for northeast India. The 
committee was formed under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPNG, 
and comprises representatives from Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC),  
Oil India Ltd (OIL), Directorate General of Hydrocarbon (DGH), Gas Authority of 
India Ltd (GAIL), Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (IOCL), Numaligarh Refinery Ltd 
(NRL), Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell (PPAC), Oil Industry Development 
Board (OIDB) and Engine ers India Ltd (EIL). The committee was constituted in 
March 2015. 
CRISIL Risk and Infrastructure Solutions ( CRIS) was appointed as a knowledge 
partner to assist the committee in preparing the vision document. CRIS has held 
in-depth discussions with various stakeholders including private and public sector 
exploration and production companies, industry bodies, service providers and 
domain experts, representing different segments of the hydrocarbon value chain, 
as a part of the consultation process. Also, CRIS  team visited the north -eastern 

 
 
92 
 
region, held interactions with stakeholders in the region and players across the 
value chain and based on the review and analysis of respective segments, 
deliberated on the possible solutions and roadmap for the region. The committee 
held several meetings to review and discuss the Vision document. Draft Report 
has been submitted by CRIS  after detailed deliberations with respective 
committee members, covering key action areas and action plan.  Ministry is 
finalizing the report.   
Efforts of DGH to explore and develop alternate source of Energy 
 
1.117 In response to specific query about the efforts undertaken by DGH to promote 
and develop alternate/unconventional sources of energy like shale gas, gas hydrates 
and CBM etc  and its role in developing the same, the Ministry furnished details as 
under: 
"Coal Bed Methane (CBM):  
Coal Bed Methane is a form of natural gas (methane) that is extracted from coal 
beds. Methane is adsorbed in the coal matrix and is present in a near liquid state. 
CBM is extracted from coal seams by drilling wells into the coal seams, hydro -
fracturing the coal seams followed by continuous dewatering of coal seams.  
India having the fourth largest proven coal reserves in the world holds significant 
prospects for exploration and exploitation of CBM. The prognosticated CBM 
resources in the country are about 92 TCF (2608 BCM). In order to harness CBM 
potential in the country, the Government of India formulated a policy in 1997 
wherein CBM being natural gas is explore d and exploited under the provisions of 
Oil fields (Regulation & Development) Act 1948 and Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Rules, 1959 and administered by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
Current Status: 
In order to harness CBM potential in the country, the Government of India has so 
far awarded 33 CBM blocks under 4 round of CBM bidding & nomination basis. 
These CBM blocks were carved out by DGH in consultation with MoC and 
CMPDI. Till date, 33 CBM blocks have been awarded in four rounds of CBM 
bidding, which covers 17,200 sq. km. (66%) of the total available coal bearing 
area (26,000 sq. km.) in 11 states of India viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Assam, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. Tota l prognosticated CBM resource for 33 
awarded CBM blocks is about 63.3 TCF (1792.43 BCM), of which so far, 9.9 TCF 
(280.8 BCM) has been established as Gas-In-Place (GIP). 
As on date, 8 CBM blocks have entered development phase (Phase -III), 5 CBM 
blocks are in exploration phase (Phase -I&II), 4 CBM blocks are awaiting PEL 
from state government, 4 CBM blocks have been relinquished due to poor CBM 

 
 
93 
 
prospectivity and 12 CBM blocks are under the process of relinquishment. Out of 
8 CBM blocks in development phase, c ommercial CBM production has started in 
1 block since 14th July 2007 which contributes about 0.38 MMSCMD of total CBM 
production which is 0.76 MMSCMD. Four more CBM blocks are expected to start 
commercial production in near future. The details are tabulated as under: 
1 Blocks awarded till date  
Nomination basis  3 
Under round-I  5 
Under round-II  8 
Under Round-lll 10 
Under Round-IV 7 
Total  33 
2 
 
 
 
 
Status of Blocks as on date 
under  
 
 
 
i)  Exploration Phase-I  3 
ii) Exploration Phase-II  2 
iii) Development Phase-III 8 
iv) Under Relinquishment 12 
v) Awaiting grant of PEL  4 
vi) Relinquished  4 
3 CBM area awarded (sq. km.)  17,200 
4 Total CBM Resources, BCM  2,608 
5 CBM wells drilled so far (Core Hole/Test wells or Pilot wells)  244/567 
6 CBM reserve established (Gas Initial In Place), TCF for 8 blocks  9.9 
7 CBM Resource from 33 blocks (TCF) 92 
8 Commercial Production commenced, w.e.f. 14.07.2007  
9 Present Gas Production from 5 blocks Jharia, RG(E),SP(E), & SP(W), 
Raniganj (South),MMSCMD  0.736 
10 State wise Blocks awarded  
i) Jharkhand 7 
ii) Rajasthan 4 
iii) Gujarat 1 
iv) Orissa 2 
v) Chhattisgarh 3 
vi) Madhya Pradesh 7 
vii) West Bengal 4 
viii) Tamil Nadu 1 
ix) Andhra Pradesh 2 
x) Maharashtra 1 
xi) North East 1 
Efforts by DGH and role of DGH in developing CBM:  
a) DGH is the implementing and monitoring agency for all CBM activities carried out 
in India by CBM operators 
b) DGH coordinates with MoC /CMPDI for shortlisting of new CBM blocks for 
auction in upcoming CBM round 
c) Continuous monitoring of the Work program submitted by CBM block contractors 
and ensuring that the committed work program is completed in timely manner 

 
 
94 
 
d) Addressing the grievances of CBM block operators and ensuring that approvals 
and recommendations from MoP&NG to operators are provided in an easy and 
time bound manner 
Issues faced by CBM block operators: 
a) Overlap Issues with existing awarded coal blocks and Oil/Gas/NELP blocks 
b) Land Acquisition problems as large number of CBM wells have to be drilled to 
drain the CBM from coal seams 
c) Low CBM productivity: Per well CBM productivity is low, which necessitates the 
need to drill a large number of wells to drain the CBM from coal seams 
d) Delay in grant of PML/PEL from state govt. 
e) Delay in getting Clearances like Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate 
(CTO) from state govt. and Environment Clearances 
f) Cost of Unfinished Work Program issues in CBM blocks under relinquishment 
Shale Gas: 
Shale gas is a natural gas entrapped & retained in the shale pore space, 
fractures and adsorbed on the surface of organic materials present in the shale. 
Shale gas is found in Source rocks (Shales) whereas conventional gas is found 
in reservoir rock which is generally sandstone & limestone. Shale gas is different 
from conventional natural gas because of following reasons: 
 Shale gas exploration & exploitation  is more cost and technology intensive than 
conventional gas 
 Shale gas deposi ts are continuous whereas conventional gas deposits are 
discrete   
 Shale gas is found in source rocks whereas conventional gas is found in 
reservoir rocks  
 Shale gas is easier to find but difficult to develop whereas conventional gas is 
difficult to find but easy to develop 
Current Status: 
a) The Shale gas policy was announced vide MoPNG Order dated 14 -Oct-2013. 50 
blocks identified by ONGC and 5 blocks identified by OIL have been issued 
permission letters to carry out shale gas assessment studies. 
b) Activities by ONGC: 
i. CAMBAY BASIN: ONGC has identified 28 blocks in the Cambay Basin for shale 
gas and oil activities under the shale gas policy.  As per policy ONGC has to drill 
29 pilot wells in the 28 blocks. So far ONGC has completed drilling of 4 wells.  
Three wells are under drilling. 19 Cores have so far been collected. Identification 
of 22 wells is in progress. ONGC is also carrying out G&G assessment studies 
for shale gas activities. 

 
 
95 
 
ii. KG-BASIN: In this basin ONGC has 10 blocks for Shale Gas/oil assessment 
studies.One well is under drilling for shale gas assessment studies. Two cores 
have been collected. Identification of remaining 12 wells is under progress. In 
addition G&G assessment studies are also in progress. 
 
iii. CAUVERY BASIN: In Cauvery Basin ONGC has identified 9 blocks for shale gas 
and oil Assessment studies. One well has been drilled and two cores have been 
collected. Remaining 11 wells are under identification. G&G studies are in 
progress. 
iv. ASSAM BASIN: In Assam -Arakan Basin three blocks have been i dentified by 
ONGC for shale gas activities. One well is currently under drilling and two cores 
have been collected. G&G studies are in progress. Further identification of 
remaining two wells is in progress. 
c) Activities by OIL: 
i. UPPER ASSAM BASIN: OIL has ide ntified 4 blocks in the Assam Basin. Five 
wells are to be drilled. G&G studies are in progress for the identification of the 
wells. 
ii. JAISALMER BASIN: OIL has one block in this basin. Data collection and G&G 
studies are in progress for the identification of well in this basin. 
iii. The above status has been prepared based on the monthly reports submitted by 
ONGC and OIL. Technical review meetings have been scheduled for the 22nd & 
23rd Jan 2015 to discuss the progress of shale gas activities 
Efforts by DGH and role of DGH in developing Shale gas:  
Government of India has initiated following concrete steps for commercial 
production of Shale Gas India. The Government of India announced a “Policy 
Guidelines for Exploration and Exploitation of Shale Gas and oil by Nati onal Oil 
Companies under Nomination regime” vide order dated 14th Oct 2013. 
Assessment studies have been initiated by ONGC and OIL in 55 blocks under 
the shale gas policy for carrying out studies related to the exploration of shale 
gas and oil. Depending o n the results of the first assessment phase of three 
years, these blocks may become producing blocks for shale gas. Subsequent, to 
the first Assessment phase ONGC and OIL will further take up 75 and 5 blocks 
respectively from the existing PML/ML blocks und er nomination regime for the 
assessment studies for Shale gas/oil. Finally in the third Assessment phase of 
three years, ONGC and OIL will take up 50 and 5 blocks respectively. Depending 
on the results of assessment phase of three years, some of these bloc ks may 
come up to producing shale gas/oil on a commercial basis. 
Gas Hydrates: 
Gas hydrate is a crystalline solid; its building blocks consist of a gas molecule 
surrounded by a cage of water molecules. Each molecule of Gas hydrate 
contains up to 164 m 3 of Methane (CH4).  Initial work in India on Gas Hydrates 

 
 
96 
 
as energy resource, was done by GAIL and NIO. In 1995 an expert committee 
realized the potential of gas hydrates in India.   
 
 
Gas hydrate exploratory activities/ research in India is being steered by the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas under National Gas Hydrate Program 
(NGHP) which was initiated in 1997 with participation from Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH), National E&P companies (Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
Ltd, GAIL India Ltd,  Indian Oil Corporation & Oil India Ltd ) and National 
Research Institutions (National Institute of Oceanography, National Geophysical 
Research Institute and National Institute of Ocean Technology). Steering 
Committee is headed by Secretary, P&NG with Join t Secretary (E) as convener. 
The Technical Committee is chaired by DG, DGH and has participation from all 
NOCs like OIL, ONGC, GAIL, IOC & EIL, and National Institutes like the NGRI, 
NIO & NIOT. The NGHP was restructured in the year 2000. 
Current Status of Gas Hydrates: 
a) NGHP carried out the Expedition -01 in 2006. The presence of significant 
quantities of Gas Hydrate has been established in the KG, Mahanadi and 
Andaman basins.                                             
b) NGHP Expedition 02  aims at identifying sites which would ideally have: 
 
i. Sand dominated gas hydrate occurrence 
ii. Reasonably compacted sediments 
iii. Occurrence of free gas below the gas hydrate stability zone 
 
c) Geoscientific studies of over 8000 km² have been carried out in Krishna Godavari 
and Mahanadi offshore deepwater areas. More than 80+ sites considered to 
have sand have been studied. These sites have been deliberated at the technical 
meetings of NGHP as we ll as by several international experts on gas hydrates. 
Based on the recommendations of international experts (Scientists of USGS, 
USDOE) and Indian scientists, 20 sites have been prioritized for NGHP 
Expedition-02.   
d) NGHP Expedition 02 will consist of LWD  (Logging while drilling), Coring and wire 
line logging programme at 20 sites (40 wells) in the deep water KG & Mahanadi 
basins. M/s Japan Drilling Company has been entrusted to carry out the work for 
the execution of NGHP Expediton -02 at a cost of Rs 616. 95 crores. The 
Expedition has started on 04th March 2015 and will likely be completed by 31st 
July 2015. 
Efforts by DGH and role in developing Gas hydrates:  
As on date Gas Hydrate is still at the research stage globally. No commercial 
production has been established anywhere in the world. In March 2013, Japan 
carried out the first ever offshore marine production test. Commercial production 
is yet to be established based on the test carried out by Japan".  
***** 

 
 
97 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Need for an Independent and Statutory DGH  
The Committee note that with major discoveries in Mumbai High and 
Western offshore, the hydrocarbon sector received a big boost and after the 
adoption of liberalized economic policy  in July 1991, the Government of India felt 
the need to deregulate and de-license this sector along with other measures. As a 
result, the hydrocarbon sector was opened to private and joint sectors . In this 
changed scenario, the expert committees appointed by the Government 
recommended the creation of an independent regulatory body. Accordingly, the 
Government of India set up Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) on 8 
April, 1993 through a cabinet resolution. It was modelled as a technical arm of the 
Ministry on the lines of Norwegian model after studying and suitably modifying 
the structure, functions and responsibilities of various regulatory authorities with 
an objective to promote sound manage ment of Indian petroleum and natural gas 
resources and also having a balanced regard for environment, safety, 
technological and economic aspects of petroleum activities. The functions 
assigned to DGH have been revised from time to time by the Government an d it 
also includes safety related issues and monitoring of Production Sharing 
Contracts (PSCs). 
The Committee observe that the private sector participation has 
significantly increased ever since the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) 
was launched in 1998. Through nine NELP rounds 254 blocks have been awarded 
till date. The Committee, however, are anguished to note that the entire 
hydrocarbon sector is in limbo with the last round of NELP having begun almost 

 
 
98 
 
four years ago. There have been several litig ations and arbitration proceedings 
involving DGH and operators. As a result, it has not only dampened investment 
scenario in the country but also withheld investments in production and 
exploration activities. This situation perhaps has been created because  the 
functions of DGH do not refer to 'regulation' in the name of DGH and decisions of 
the DGH do not lie in any appellate body or court which is the hallmark of an 
independent regulator.   
In Committee's view, when there is a participation of public secto r as well 
as private sector in hydrocarbon sector, it is necessary to have an independent 
regulator with certain statutory powers to adjudicate matters in line with the 
policy of the Government. The presence of independent regulators in sectors like 
telecom, power, financial services, etc. vested with statutory powers further 
supports the views of the Committee.  Need of such regulator is also justified 
because the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) is a regulator 
in the Ministry of Petroleu m and Natural Gas only for a small part of the 
downstream sector and the upstream sector does not have any regulator at all. 
Basically, the DGH carry out contract management and some of regulatory 
functions on behalf of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Ga s. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that MoPNG should vest the regulatory functions being 
performed by DGH with PNGRB so that it can be regulator for both upstream 
sector as well as for downstream. 
  

 
 
99 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Filling up of the post of Director General of Hydrocarbons 
The Committee note that the Directorate General of Hydrocarbon came into 
being in 1993 and there have been eight officials who have held the post of 
Director General of Hydrocarbons during the last 23 years. The previous DGH 
was from the Ministry who held the post as additional charge.  The Committee 
have also noted that the post of DGH has been filled up by technical people in 
most of the cases.  However, in June 2012, the government appointed an official 
from Indian Administrative Service to the post of DGH and the said official served 
for 21 months. The post of Director General of Hydrocarbons was lying vacant 
since July 2015 and the Committee are surprised to learn that one of the main 
reasons for inordinate delay in appointment  is that there have been no 
recruitment rules for the post of Director General. Now, the Committee have been 
informed that the rules have been approved in consultation with DoPT and UPSC 
which provide for technical people with experience in the upstream se ctor only 
be eligible for the post of DGH.  The process for the recruitment after framing new 
recruitment rules has been completed and the post has been filled recently. 
The Committee have a strong view that the post of Director General of 
Hydrocarbons is a technical one and it should be filled up only by people who 
have considerable exposure and experience in upstream sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the post of Director 
General Hydrocarbons is not kept vacan t or held  as additional charge by senior 
officials of the Ministry rather through advance action it should be filled up 
timely.   
 
 
  

 
 
100 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
Human Resources issues of DGH 
The  Committee note that DGH has been entrusted with varying functions  
like carving of blocks for NELP,  monitoring of PSC s, providing  technical advice 
to Ministry on issues relevant to exploration and optimal exploitation of 
hydrocarbons, issuance of essential ity certificates, implementation of  NELP and 
CBM Policies,  etc. The Committee, further, note that  as against the sanctioned 
staff strength of 255 , the actual strength of DGH is 187 only.  The Committee 
observe that the officers are appointed on deputation  at DGH on tenure basis in 
consultation with CEOs from various oil PSU s and 80% of them are from ONGC 
and 20% from remaining oil PSUs such as OIL, IOCL, GAIL, HPCL, etc. 
 The Committee observe that the officers of DGH on deputation may have 
conflict of int erest in assessing the work of their own PSUs.  There seems no 
effort or plan in the Ministry or DGH to create permanent cadre for DGH.  The 
Committee observe that DGH has been advised to appoint an expert consultant 
on restructuring of DGH and it is in the process of hiring a consultant for this job.  
The Committee believe that DGH should have its own cadre of employees 
for discharging its functions independently.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the hiring of consultant should be completed on priority basis 
within a reasonable time frame and DGH should be restructured suitably to 
develop it with permanent cadre of employees after the receipt of report thereon. 
 
 
  

 
 
101 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Budgetary Allocation for DGH 
The Committee note that DGH is one of the most important technical wings 
of the Ministry assisted by an Advisory council and an A dministrative council. As 
per DGH resolution, the expenditure of the DGH is fully funded by grants from Oil 
Industry Development Board  (OIDB). The expenditure  is incurred on Secretarial 
expenditure, E&P activities, promotion of hydrocarbon activities etc.  
The Committee note that DGH is fully dependent on another arm of the 
Ministry namely OIDB for its funds .  E ven th ough it has been stated that the 
present funding arrangement is considered appropriate and adequate to carry out 
its various activities,  the Committee do not treat this as a happy situation. The 
Committee observe that DGH has taken several initiatives like  Survey of 
unapprised reg ions, r eappraisal o f hydrocarbon resources,  multi-client 
speculative survey  through service providers, National Data Repository etc . All 
these initiatives are very important for understanding and harnessing 
hydrocarbon potential of the country. The Committee, while concurrin g with the 
DGH resolution that its expenditure will be fully met from the grants of OIDB, hold 
the view that it would have been appropriate  at the time of DGH formation but 
considering the new projects entrusted to it, it would be in fitness of things to 
review the funding mode and have its own budgetary allocation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that DGH gets suitable budgetary allocation  prepared for it 
either through budgetary allocation or from the Ministry‟s budget. The Committee 
also expect that having vested with such an important role and functions , DGH 
should no longer depend upon OIDB for its funds. 
 
 
 

 
 
102 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 5 
DGH and Production Sharing Contracts 
 The Committee note that the Government had assigned the work relating to 
implementation of production sharing contracts (PSCs) under NELP to DGH and 
it has discharged the powers of Central Government where a contract or an 
agreement for exploration and production of hydro carbons has been signed by 
the Central Government.  Under the PSC re gime, all companies are required to 
submit their cost of production for the year in the beginning and this has to be 
approved by the Managing Committee. These are evaluated by the officers of 
DGH in line with the approved development plans and past perform ance. The 
Committee have noted that DGH has officers with different backgrounds like 
exploration, finance and legal etc., who vet, interpret and analyse all documents 
and other production signing contracts. DGH suggest mid course corrections 
wherever the p roduction is lesser than the targets.  The Committee note that 
there have been many instances of disputes arising out of execution of 
production sharing contracts between DGH and companies. Certain disputes 
have also led to court/arbitration proceedings in  Indian and foreign courts.  The 
Committee believe that companies have no choice but to approach courts for 
appeal against decisions of DGH as there is no appellate authority or other 
mechanisms where companies can appeal or challenge orders of DGH.  As a 
result, companies have lost their precious time, costs and efforts and there has 
been delay in carrying out exploration activities. The Committee, therefore, 
observe that this may not be a good sign for development of hydro carbon 
industry and therefore, d esire that Ministry should strive for setting up a 
regulatory authority as mentioned in recommendation No.1. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should consult all 
stakeholders and other departments towards setting up of an authority to 
adjudicate or to hear review orders passed by DGH.  The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should review the existing production sharing contract system 

 
 
103 
 
and bring out a more simplified forms of contracts with clear definitions and with 
less scope for misin terpretation in line with the stated objective of the 
Government i.e. „Ease of Doing Business' initiative. 
  

 
 
104 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
National Data Repository 
The Committee note that National Data Repository has been established in 
DGH at Noida.  The role of DGH in NDR is collection, uploading, preservation and 
dissemination of vast geo-scientific information available in the country. NDR has 
been entrusted with data population, quality checks and creation of database and 
once NDR is completed then DGH will coordinate with national and international 
companies by facilitating data viewing against requisite payment. 
The Committee note that the data compilation for NDR is supposed to be 
completed by March 2016. The Committee  also expect that in future all the geo 
scientific data collected by DGH from its various projects like reassessment of 
hydrocarbon resources and survey of un -apprised areas of Indian sedimentary  
basins will also be uploaded on NDR. The successful establishment and 
operationalization of NDR will help paving the way towards Open Acreage 
Licensing policy (OALP), which is the future objective of the Ministry. 
The Committee, acknowledge the significan ce of a reliable E&P data base 
for an accurate analysis and assessment of hydrocarbon potential in the country 
and expect the Ministry to set up and maintain National Data Repository for better 
management of petroleum and natural gas reserves in the countr y. The 
Committee also expect that NDR will allow more transparency and effective 
dissemination of information regarding hydrocarbon resources and will also lead 
to better exploration and subsequently fulfilling energy requirements of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry and DGH should 
ensure that work of data compilation in NDR is completed in time and the data is 
disseminated so that DGH can emerge as a key institution for data viewing for 
national and international companies. 
 

 
 
105 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Survey of Unappraised areas of Indian sedimentary basins 
The Committee note that ONGC and OIL have been entrusted with the task 
of surveying 48% of unapprised areas of the country. OIL has been assigned to 
carryout 2D seismic survey API of 7408 LKM falling in north eastern apart of India 
and ONGC has been assigned to carryout 2D seismic API of approx. 40835 LKM 
in inland part of 22 sedimentary basins in India. The proposed 2D seismic survey 
work is expected to start in March 2016 and will take five years to cover the entire 
area. The fund requirement for these projects would be to the tune of about Rs. 
4375 crore and initially the expenditure will be made by these national oil 
companies. The Committee note that the Ministry has sent a proposal to Ministry 
of Finance for reimbursement of the same through oil industry development cess.  
The  Committee, however, have an apprehension as to whether ONGC and 
OIL would accord priority to these works and spend such huge funds for this 
work from  their budget.  The Committee also wonder as to why more agencies 
which may have better specialization in such works were not engaged through 
global tendering so as to complete the project more speedily and in a better 
manner.  The Committee, therefore, op ine that the survey of unapprised areas of 
Indian sedimentary basins is an important project and accordingly, would expect 
the DGH/Ministry to attach high importance and priority to this work and also 
desire that the national level committee headed by Petr oleum Secretary which 
monitors and reviews the reassessment of hydrocarbon resources should also 
include this project for direct monitoring. The Committee also recommend that 
the Ministry should try to expedite completion of the project at the earliest and  
also seek funds from Ministry of Finance so that the project does not get delayed 
for want of funds. 
 

 
 
106 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Certification of Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) 
The Committee note that the Government had constituted a Standing 
Committee on Petroleum Industry P ractices on 27.12.2013 for identification and 
codification of Good I nternational Practices in a reas of exploration, discovery 
appraisal, field development etc,. The work was carried out by the consultant M/s 
Petro Tel Inc USA and the final report was submitted to the standing Committee 
on 14.07.2015. The project cost of US $ 1.2 Million was funded through DGH 
budget. T he C ommittee, further, note that this report is u nder review of afore 
mentioned standing Committee . The Committee consider the need for 
codification of Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) as a right 
step to move towards improving processes at par with global standards. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the report may be reviewed and actionable 
points to the concerned agencies may be issued so that this practice is put into 
use at the earliest. 

 
 
107 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 26 sedimentary basins and 
deep offshore areas upto Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), only 48 per cent of the 
basin area has been appraised. Therefore, currently, a large number of 
sedimentary basins have either no or scanty data and require additional geo -
scientific data coverage and an alysis for proper understanding. The Committee 
also note that the last assessment of hydrocarbon resources base in India was 
done for fifteen sedimentary basins and deep water areas more than twenty years 
ago. This shows all the policy makers in poor light  especially DGH which has 
been providing technical advice to the Ministry for more than twenty years.  The 
Committee, further, note that to address the same, some projects have been 
initiated by the Government through DGH recently.   
 To reassess the hydro carbon resources in all sedimentary basins of India, 
a multi -organisational team has been formed for that purpose where DGH is a 
Member.  The process of tendering for award of job is under progress through 
international competitive bidding. Similarly, anot her project for appraisal of 
unapprised areas of all sedimentary basins has also been initiated which is to be 
completed in 5 years.  DGH is monitoring the project as an interface between Oil 
India Limited and ONGC and MoPNG are also holding technical inte raction with 
them.  
 Moreover, a new policy on non-exclusive multi-client speculative survey for 
unexplored sedimentary basins through service providers is also being 
implemented with an objective to acquire geophysical data in poorly explored and 
unexplored areas.  DGH has been receiving and reviewing proposals and 
forwarding them for further necessary clearances. However, seven proposals 
have been forwarded to MoPNG till date. 

 
 
108 
 
 The Committee welcome all these initiatives being taken by the 
Government/DGH and hope that these efforts will certainly help the country to 
know its hydrocarbon resources potential and henceforth devise policies and 
strategies to manage its exploitation. The Committee, however, desire that all the 
initiatives to reassess the hydrocarbon resources and appraisal of unapprised 
areas in all sedimentary basins of the country must be completed under a fixed 
time frame and by strictly adhering to the given timeli nes by using all the latest 
tools, techniques and technologies in the field.   
 Considering the stagnant domestic production, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should constitute a multi -organisational team to review 
thoroughly all the exploration a ctivities in details being carried out by upstream 
PSU companies for each block, investment made, technology deployed, 
prospects, production, if any in respect of the exploration and production 
activities in the country. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
109 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 10 
DGH and Alternate Sources of Energy 
 The Committee note that in addition to crude oil and natural gas, there are 
other sources of hydrocarbons which can supplement and enhance energy 
security of the country.  Some of these sources are Coal Bed Methane, Shale gas, 
Gas Hydrates etc.  The Committee note that the projected CBM resources in the 
country are about 92 TCF and there is a policy for its exploration and exploitation.  
The Government has so far awarded 33 CBM blocks to harness CBM potential.  
However, several p roblems like overlapping issues, land acquisition, low 
productivity of CBM per annum, delay in grant of PML/TEML from State 
Governments have been plaguing CBM block operators and as a result, it has 
hindered optimum exploitation of these non -conventional energy resources. The 
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry/DGH to promptly address and resolve 
these issues in consultation with the agencies concerned and facilitate for 
exploitation of CBM as an alternate source of energy.   
 Similarly, Shale gas has emerged as the latest source of hydrocarbons with 
encouraging prospects. Shale gas exploitation is costlier and requires intensive 
technology than the oil.  The Committee note that as per the policy guidelines 
announced in October 2013 that Shale gas development in the country will be 
carried out by national oil companies under nomination regime.  Accordingly, 
ONGC and Oil India Limited (OIL) have been allotted 50 and 05 blocks 
respectively.  Research in blocks allotted to ONGC and OIL has not yet begun.  
The Committee are concerned that there has been no progress since two years 
and ONGC/OIL should be held accountable for their work programme in the 
development of shale oil and gas.   The Committee, therefore, would like to 
impress u pon DGH to closely monitor Shale gas exploration projects so that 
these would be completed well in time. 

 
 
110 
 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is 
steering National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP) in the country.  Many nationa l 
research institutions and national E&P companies are participating in this 
programme and the NGHP Expedition -02 has been completed recently.  The 
Committee note that results have been encouraging and further expeditions for 
testing/exploiting these resources need to be carried out.  
  The Committee find that the progress in exploitation of alternate energy 
resources has been very tardy in the country.  The Committee, therefore, 
emphasise that DGH should give due attention to all these programmes relating 
to alternative sources of energy  i.e. CBM, Shale Gas and Gas Hydrates. Further, 
for better exploration  and exploitation of these resources, all contentious issues 
that may arise in the process may be sorted out amicably so that hydrocarbon 
production of the country could be increased and energy security would be 
enhanced. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 04 May,  2016 
 14 Vaisakha,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                   
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
111 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
(19.01.2015) 
 
The Committee held its meeting on Monday 19 January, 2015 from 1130 hrs 
to 1445 hrs in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri  Pralhad Joshi          -             Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
11 Shri Arvind Sawant 
12 Shri Raju Shetty 
13 Shri Rajesh Verma 
14 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
15 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                       RAJYA SABHA 
 
16 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
17 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.C. Choudhary - Director 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 

 
 
112 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
1 Shri Saurabh Chandra -  Secretary 
2. Dr. S.C.Khuntia - SS & FA 
3. Shri U.P.Singh - Joint Secretary 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings 
1. Shri D.K.Sarraf - C&MD, ONGC 
2. Shri S.K.Srivastava - C&MD, OIL 
3 Shri B.N.Talukdar - DG, DGH 
 
2.   At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas , Directorate General of Hydrocarbons and 
PSUs to the sitting  of the Committee held to have a briefing by the representatives of 
the MoP&NG on the subject 'Functioning and Purview of Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons'.  Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on 
the subject.  A power point presentation was also made by the representatives of DGH 
highlighting the various activities and responsibilities of DGH. 
 
3. The Committee then deliberated upon various aspects related to the subject such 
as activity domain of DGH as an upstream reg ulator, manpower requirements, available 
fund resources, ongoing projects of DGH and monitoring thereof, status of development 
of unconventional hydrocarbons and progress achieved therein, status of fields awarded 
under various nomination regimes, monitori ng of E&P processes, status of various 
discoveries under PSC regime, appraisal of sedimentary basins etc. 
 
4. The clarifications sought by the Members on various points were provided by the 
representatives of the Ministry.  However, on some of the points where the information 
was not readily available, the Hon‟ble Chairperson instructed the Ministry to furnish the 
written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest.   
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept for record. 
 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
113 
 
Annexure II 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
FIFTH SITTING 
(18.11.2015) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 November, 2015 from 1100 hrs. 
to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi     - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Smt. Rama Devi 
5 Shri Elumalai V. 
6 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
8 Smt. Anupriya Patel  
9 Shri Arvind Sawant 
10 Shri Ravneet Singh 
11 Shri Rajesh Verma 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
                       
                       RAJYA SABHA 
 
13 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
14 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
15 Shri Praful Patel 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 
 

 
 
114 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
1 Shri Kapil Dev Tripathi - Secretary 
2 Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney - Additional Secretary and DG, DGH 
3 Shri U.P.Singh - Additional Secretary & CMD, OIL and 
Secretary, OIDB   
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other Organisations 
 
1 Shri D.K.Sarraf - C&MD, ONGC 
2 Shri R.K.Sinha - CTO, DGH 
 
2.    At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Directorate General of Hydrocarbons and 
PSUs to the sitting of the Committee held to take oral evidence  by the representatives 
of th e MoP&NG on the subject 'Functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons'.  
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the subject.  A 
power point presentation was also made by the representatives of DGH highlighting 
various activities undertaken by DGH. 
 
 
3. The Committee then deliberated upon various aspects related to the subject such 
as evolution of  DGH as an upstream regulator,  its functions and responsibilities, 
shortage of staff, deputation of personnel from PSUs, fun ding pattern, ongoing projects 
of DGH and their monitoring, steps taken to apprise the unapprised areas for 
hydrocarbons, redressal mechanism for disputes and National Data Repository etc.  
Further, issues like long pending vacancy of the post of DG of DGH , delay in framing of 
rules for the appointment of DG, composition of advisory council and its appointment 
procedure were also discussed.  In addition, the issue of road map for ensuring nation's 
energy security and the role of oil companies like ONGC in reducing import dependency 
of crude oil also came up for discussion. 
 
4. The clarifications sought by the Members on various points were provided by the 
representatives of the Ministry.  However, on some of the points where the information 

 
 
115 
 
was not readily a vailable, the Hon‟ble Chairperson instructed the Ministry to furnish 
written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
5. During the process of discussion, the Committee decided to bifuricate the already 
selected subject "National Gas Grid with specific reference to utilization of product 
pipelines of Oil PSUs" into two separate subjects namely (i) "National Gas Grid" and (ii) 
"Capacity utilization of product pipelines of oil PSUs" for better deliberation and 
examination. The Committee also decided to select a new subject namely "Pricing of 
Gas" for detail examination and Report during the current term.   
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept for record. 
  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
116 
 
Annexure III 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
FIFTEENTH SITTING 
(04.05.2016) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4 May, 2016 from 1000 hrs. to 1040 
hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
3 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
4 Shri Raju Shetti 
5 Dr. Bhola Singh 
6 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
7 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
8 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
9 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
                RAJYA SABHA 
10 Shri Prabhat Jha 
11 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 

 
 
117 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on the 
subject 'Functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH)'.  The Members of 
the Committee thereafter, adopted the report without any modifications/changes.  
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the Report in both 
the Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 