1 
 
 
 
21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing  Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016-17) on Demands for Grants (2017-18)] 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018/ Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  on  
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016-17) on Demands for Grants (2017-18)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.01.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.01.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018/ Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
 CONTENTS 
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)                                         (iii) 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                             (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
Report                     1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government    
                   
17 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies     
                    
56 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of th e Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee         
                    
60 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited   
                     
64 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sev enth sitting of  the Standing 
Committee on  Petroleum and Nat ural Gas (2017 -18) 
held on 27.12.2017. 
 
68 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Report Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016 -17) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)' of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
70 

4 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
Sl. No. Names of Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
4 Dr. P. K. Biju 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Shri Arvind Sawant 
15 Shri Raju Shetti 
16 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
17 Shri Ravneet Singh 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri Santosh Kumar 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
23 Shri Om Prakash Mathur   
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti  
26 Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
29 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
30 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
31 Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav                     
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri A.K.Singh Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai Director 
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash Additional Director 
4 Shri Sujay Kumar Under Secretary 
   

5 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this 
Twenty First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommend ations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the 
subject 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)' of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha on 17.03.2017 . The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report were 
received on 26.07.2017 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27.12.2017. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
28 December, 2017 
7 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                           Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (201 6-17) on 'Demands for Grants (2017 -18) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas' ', which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17.03.2017. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 25.07.2017 in 
respect of all the 25 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. 
These have been categorized as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
21, 22, 23 and 24 (Total 18) 
(Chapter- II)   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. No. 7 and 25 (Total 
2) 
(Chapter- III)      
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 
5, 18 and 19 (Total 3)  
(Chapter- IV) 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No. 10 and 20 (Total 2)   
 
(Chapter- V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  

7 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy  
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that an Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) 
is to be established in Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh in accordance with  
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. The objective of the 
University is to meet the quantitative and qualitative gap in the supply of 
skilled manpower in the petroleum sector and promote research activities. 
Total capital expenditure for the proje ct is estimated at Rs. 655.46 crore. A 
provision of Rs. 14.20 crore has been made for IIPE in BE 2017 -18. Andhra 
Pradesh Government has made available 200 acres of land free of cost for 
the IIPE and foundation stone for the project has been laid on 20th Oc tober 
2016. The Committee further note that the IIPE is currently operating from a 
temporary campus at the space provided by the College of Engineering in 
Andhra University at Visakhapatnam from the year 2016 -17. IIT-Kharagpur 
is acting as a Mentor Institu tion for starting the academic session 2016 -17. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress made so far in setting up 
the Institute. The Committee note that since the institute is of national 
importance, it involves Legislation seeking Parliament app roval so that the 
institute can give degrees. The Committee recommend that work relating to 
enactment of Legislation should be expedited and desire that the Institute 
should start functioning from its own campus at the earliest and adequate 
funds should be allocated for the purpose of building of own campus of IIPE. 
The Committee desire that the revised cost outlay and time line for 
completion of the project should be shared with the Committee". 
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
"The Note for the Cabinet along with the the draft Bill for establishment of 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) at Visakhapatnam was sent 
to the Cabinet Secretariat for consideration before the Cabinet.  The Union 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 12.4.2017 has given its approval for setting up 
of IIPE at Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh.  An amount of Rs.32.00 crore 
had been allocated to IIPE during the year 2016 -17 which was released to 
them.  Further, an amount of Rs.145.20 crore has been allocated for the year 
2017-18 which will be released.  Ministry of Finance will be requested for 
allocation of funds from time to time as per schedule.  IIPE Bill has been  
introduced in the Parliament in the Monsoon Session". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
7. While observing the slow progress in establishment of Indian Institute 
of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) at Vishakhapatnam, the Committee had 
desired that the work on the allotted land by the Andhra Pradesh Government 

8 
 
should be expedited so that the Institute could start functioning from its own 
campus at the earliest . The Committee had further recommended that 
adequate funds should be allocated for that purpose and the revised cost 
outlay and timeline for completion of the IIPE project should be shared with 
the Committee. The Committee had also recommended that the work relating 
to enactment of Legislation declaring the IIPE as  an Institution of National 
Importance should also be expedited.  
 The Committee are happy to note that the Indian Institute of Petroleum 
and Energy(IIPE) Bill, 2017 providing for establishment of such an Institute at 
Vishakhapatnam was introduced by the Ministry on priority and has also 
been passed by the Parliament .   In their action taken reply, the Ministry has 
stated that an amount of Rs. 32.00 crore was allocated to IIPE in 2016 -17 and 
Rs. 145.20 crore has been allocated in 2017 -18 and also that Ministry of 
Finance will be requested for further allocation of funds from time to time as 
per schedule.   However, the Committee are constrained to note that the reply 
of the Ministry does not ment ion about the revised cost outlay and time line  
fixed for completion of the IIPE project. Also, there is no mention as to from 
which date, the IIPE will start functioning from its own campus. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a time-bound schedule for setting up of the 
Institute within the revised cost outlay should be prepared and the Ministry 
should adhere to the same so that IIPE can start functioning from its own 
campus at the earliest.    
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) and Centres of 
Excellence  
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the construction of permanent campus of RGIPT 
at Jais, district Amethi, Uttar Pradesh is almost complete and has already 
been inaugurated in October, 2016. The Institute has started functioning 
from the new premises. The Committee a lso, however, note that progress of 
the RGIPT campus in Sibsagar, Assam is highly unsatisfactory. Ever since 
the foundation stone was laid in February, 2011, the project has got delayed 
due to a number of reasons including change of contractors, land 
preparation for construction, etc. The Assam centre of RGIPT is expected to 

9 
 
operate from its temporary campus from the academic session 2017 -18. A 
four member committee has now been constituted by MoPNG to submit the 
report on funding pattern for the institutio n, whether to be given from Oil 
PSU‟s/OIDB or GBS and also to examine if the grant of autonomous status 
is required for the Institute.  
 
The Committee also note that in 2017 -18, the Government has announced 
the establishment of two Centres of excellence in Petroleum Sector in 
Karnataka and Assam. The mandate of Karnataka Centre is to create an 
Energy Institute on the lines of World‟s leadin g energy institutes for 
undertaking contemporary research duly involving other Ministries and key 
stakeholders. The estimated expenditure under capital head for Bengaluru 
centre is Rs 358 cr. The mandate of RGIPT Centre at Assam is to set up a 
Centre to ca ter to requirements of blue -collar technicians especially in 
upstream area to meet the current gap in skill set and the anticipated 
demand in view of future exploration plans. The Assam Centre will be 
established at an estimated expenditure of Rs. 235 cror e. RGIPT has been 
asked to prepare a fresh DPR in light of the mandate for Assam centre.  
 
The Committee recommend that the remaining work in Jais, Uttar Pradesh 
be completed as soon as possible and the all the issues connected to 
RGIPT in Assam be resolve d in a time bound manner including the funding 
pattern andgrant of autonomous status to the Institute. The Committee 
further recommend that the DPRs for Centres of Excellence in Assam and 
Karnataka should be prepared and submitted within three months so that the 
centres may be established at the earliest". 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
          "In so far as Jais campus is concerned, an amount of Rs.100.00 crore 
(including Rs.47.00 crore at the BE stage 2016 -17) has been released to 
RGIPT during the financial year 2016 -17.  The remaining funds of Rs.135.10 
crore has been allocated under BE 2017 -18. The remaining construction as 
well pending payment to contractor will be done once the funds are made 
available. 
         As far as Assam Centre of RGIPT at Sivasagar is concerned, fresh DPR is 
being prepared to expand the scope of functioning of the Cen tre which is to 
offer skill -oriented courses in addition to diploma / degree courses to the 
students as mandated in earlier DPR.  A four -member committee has been 
constituted to look into funding pattern for setting up of Assam Centre 
whether to be set up with funding from GBS or with funds from Oil 
Companies / OIDB.  The report of the committee is awaited.  It is proposed to 
start the academic session 2017 -18 from the temporary campus available at 
Sivasagar College of Commerce. 
As far as Bangalore Centre is concerned, there was a proposal for setting up 
of Fire Safety Engineering and Research Centre of RGIPT at Bangalore.  For 
this institute,  Government of Karnataka has provided 150 acres of land free 
of cost at  Kambalipura Industrial Area, Hoskote Taluk,  Bangalore Rural 
District, Karnataka.  The land is yet to be handed over to RGIPT.  The 

10 
 
foundation stone for Bangalore Centre of RGIPT was laid by the Former 
Petroleum Minister on 5.3.2014.   In a meeting held on 27.10.2016,  it  has 
been decided that this  institute will be established as Energy Institute – 
Centre of Excellence on the line of World Energy Institutes for undertaking 
contemporary research duly involving other Ministries and private sector 
companies.  A four member committee has been constitut ed for preparation 
of a Roadmap covering the vision, objectives, processes, space requirement 
etc. with the structure for the institute, funding pattern and budget 
requirement for setting up of the Institute".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
10. The Committee had recommended that all remaining work in the Rajiv 
Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) Campus in Jais, Rae Bareli 
(U.P.) be completed at the earliest and the Campus should be fully functional.  
The  Com mittee, however, observe  that the funds for construction of Jais 
Campus of RGIPT has been allocated but the construction work is still 
awaiting completion and  payment of contractor is also pending. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the funds may be released timely and the 
remaining construction work be completed at the earliest.  
 Similarly, t he Committee do not find any progress in the direction of 
setting up of  Assam Campus of RGIPT.  The Committee, therefore, would like 
to reiterate their recommendation that for resolving the issues like scope of 
functioning of the Centre and the funding pattern at the earliest.  The Ministry 
should take a decision about the funding pattern for the Centre on the priority 
basis and ensure the allotment of fund accordingly. Moreover, the 
preparation of DPR may be completed within the prescribed time limit and 
work on the ground should start at the earliest.  The revised cost outlay and 
time line for the Assam Campus of RGIPT may be shared with the Committee.  
  As regards the proposed setting up of Centre of Excellence, 
Bengaluru, the Ministry has stated that the Centre shall be set up as an 
Energy Institute -Centre of Excellence on the line of world energy institutes 
for undertaking contemporary research duly involving other ministries and 
private sector companies. The land for the Centre has been identified by the 
Karnataka Government but yet to be handed over to the RGIPT. The Ministry 

11 
 
have further stated that a four -member Committee has been constituted for 
preparation of Roadmap for the Centre of Excellence.  
 The Committee are not satisfied with such lack of clarity on the part of 
the Ministry about the exact contours of the proposed Centre of Excellence in 
Bengaluru. The Committee, therefore, desire that the roadmap covering 
structure for the Institute, funding pattern and budget requirement for setting 
up of the Institute should be finalized within a fixed time -frame to fulfil an 
important announcement made in the Budget 2017-18. 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Merger of Oil PSUs & formation of an ‘Oil Major’  
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the Government has announced in the budget that 
it is considering to strengthen the Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) 
through consolidations, mergers and acquisitions which will give them 
capacity to bear higher risks, avail economies of scale, take higher 
investment decisions and create more value for stakeholders. The objective 
of the Government is to create an „Oil Major‟  in petroleum sector which will 
be able to match the performance of international and domestic private 
sector oil and gas companies. The integration is expected to result in several 
benefits to the companies to withstand the volatility in the international prices 
of crude oil and natural gas, strengthen balance sheets, synergies across 
value chains, sharing of skills, research and development, infrastructure, 
increase in overall capacity and an edge during bidding for E&P assets. The 
entire process of integration may result in reshaping of the existing 
petroleum architecture in the country which is currently designed on the 
basis of upstream and downstream operations.  
 
 Though the exa ct contours of the „ integration‟ process is yet to become 
clear, the Committee opine  that creation of an „ Oil Major ‟ could have an 
beneficial impact on the domestic petroleum sec tor scenario and immensely 
improve the  competitiveness of the Oil PSU ‟s on global stage. The 
Committee, however, feel that the Government needs to proceed with 
caution as there are several challenges such as integration of human 
resources, creating synergi es in companies having diverse operations, etc., 
which needs to be overcome for successful implementation of such an 
endeavour. The Committee, therefore, would suggest that Government 
should come out with a clear roadmap and framework with objective 
parameters at an early date for  creation of such an „ Oil Major ‟ in order to 
remove ambiguity and app rehensions and the Ministry/PSU ‟s should also 
consult employees of the companies to allay their fears about mergers and 
consolidation exercise. The Committee further recommend that abundant 

12 
 
caution should be exercised in order to ensure that the integration exercise 
is not done in undue haste but handled without any disadvantage for the 
existing human resources of the PSUs and make it a win-win situation". 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
 
 "Finance Minister in the Union Budget Speech of 2017 -18 on February 1, 
2017, inter alia,  stated that “We see opportunities to strengthen our CPSEs 
through consolidation, mergers and acquisitions.  By these methods, the 
CPSEs can be integrated across the va lue chain of an industry.  It will give 
them capacity to bear higher  risks,  avail economies of  scale, take  higher  
investment  decisions and create more value for the stakeholders.  
Possibilities of such restructuring are visible in the Oil and Gas sec tor.  We 
propose to create an integrated public sector „Oil Major‟ which will be able to 
match the performance of international and domestic private sector oil and 
gas companies”. 
 
      The Ministry is examining the feasibilities and modalities of “Synerg y in the 
Functioning of Oil and Gas PSUs”.  ONGC ha d forwarded a proposal to 
acquire HPCL. In-principle approval for this proposal has been  given by 
CCEA". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
13. Referring to the announcement of Finance Minister in the Budget 
Speech about creation of an Integrated Public Sector Oil Major, t he 
Committee, in their recommendation had suggested that  in order to remove 
ambiguity and apprehensions , in this regard,  the Government should come 
out with a clear roadmap and framework with objective parameters at the 
earliest for creation of  an 'Oil Major' . They had further desired that  the 
Government/PSUs should also consult employees of the companies to allay 
their fears about mergers  and consolidation exercise. The Committee had 
further recommended that abundant caution should be exercised in order to 
ensure that the integrated exercise is not done in undue haste but handled 
without any disadvantage to the existing human resources of the PSUs.  The 
Ministry, in its reply, has  stated that it is examining the feasibilities and 
modalities of "Synergy in the Functioning of Oil and Gas PSUs".  As the exact 
feasibilities and modalities of the acquisition proce ss is yet to be submitted 
by the Ministry, the Committee desire that the same may be expeditiously 
furnished once those are finalised. The Ministry, in the same context, has 
informed that  the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has 

13 
 
approved the pr oposal of acquisition of HPCL by the ONGC. The Committee 
reiterate their recommendation that the interests of the workers of both the 
ONGC and HPCL should be protected in this acquisition process. 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Exploration and Production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas  
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that in last three years the total crude oil production in 
India was 36.95 MMT in 2015 -16, 37.46 MMT in 2014 -15 and 37.78 MMT in 
2013-14 respectively. In 2016-17 (upto December 2016), the production was 
27.04 MMT. Similarly, the production of natural gas in last three years has 
been 97 MMSCMD in 2013 -14, 92.2 MMSCMD in 2014 -15 and 88.1 
MMSCMD in 2015 -16 while in 2016 -17 (upto Decemb er 2016), the 
production of natural gas was 86.9 MMSCMD. It can be seen that crude oil 
production show either stagnant and slightly declining trend and the scenario 
is same for natural gas also. Crude oil production is declining because major 
production fi elds of the country, namely, Mumbai High, Gujarat and NE 
region have aged and production in those fields are declining after having 
peaked. The sharp fall in natural gas production is being attributed to decline 
in production coming from KG deep -water bloc k operated by RIL, natural 
decline in old gas fields, accidents in Andhra Pradesh gas fields (Tatipaka) 
and bandhs/blockades in NE region. Even the projected production figures 
of crude oil show that the production in near future is going to decline. The 
Committee understand that the DGH foresees increase in hydrocarbon 
production mostly from the natural gas as development plans of regular and 
small fields have been finalised. Some production may also come from CBM 
gas. The Committee are of the view that a large part of the Country is still 
unexplored and adequate efforts should be made for exploration of all parts 
of the country and the way to increase the domestic production of crude oil 
and natural gas is to allocate sufficient funds for the purpose and e nsuring 
that the funds are fruitfully spent. Similarly, the IOR/EOR technologies in 
order to get more production from the existing and ageing fields should also 
be a priority. In the year 2015 -16, about 1.32 MMT of oil production was 
achieved through IOR/EOR technologies alone. The Committee recommend 
that the field development plans in respect of eastern -offshore fields should 
be closely monitored for production. The Committee recommend that state -
of-the-art IOR/EOR technologies should be implemented in the oil fields from 
where production is stagnating or declining by making adequate allocation in 
the IEBR of the respective PSUs". 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
 
 "Close Monitoring of Field development plans of Eastern-offshore 
fields 
 

14 
 
 The management Committee and Directorate General of Hydrocarbon are 
closely monitoring the progress of Field development plans.  In addition, 
performance of Oil PSUs is being monitored on monthly basis by the 
Secretary(P&NG).   
 
 Financing of oil & gas Projects 
The funding of oil & gas projects by Oil PSUs is being done though their own 
resources or borrowings.  Government is not funding to Oil PSUs for the 
exploration and development projects".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
16. While observing the stagnant or declining trend of Crude Oil and 
Natural Gas production in the major production fields, t he Committee had 
recommended that the field development plans in respect of eastern -offshore 
fields which is a key region for oil and gas, should be closely monitored for 
production. The Committee had also recommended that state -of-the-art 
IOR/EOR technolo gies should be implemented in the oil fields from where 
production is stagnating or declining by making adequate financial 
allocations in the IEBR of the respective PSUs.  In its reply, the Ministry has 
simply stated that the M anagement Committee and Direct orate General of 
Hydrocarbon are closely monitoring the progress of Field development plans  
and the performance of Oil PSUs  is being monitored on monthly basis by the 
Secretary, MoP&NG . They have also stated that the funding of oil & gas 
exploration and d evelopments projects by Oil PSUs is being done through 
their own resources. 
  The Committee are aware  that the progress of field development plans 
are being monitored both in the DGH and also in the Ministry and the funding 
of Oil and Gas Exploration and development projects are being done by PSUs 
through their own resources. But, Committee had found that no positive 
results had been coming out of all these efforts. Therefore, MoP&NG was 
asked to do more close and focused monitoring t o ensure that explorat ion 
and production of crude oil is sustained and increased through sufficient 
IEBR allocation and spending by Oil PSUs in exploration and production 
sector so that the Oil and Gas production from aged oil fields is improved as 

15 
 
well as the development of ea stern offshore fields is expedited.  The 
Committee would like to underline that the increase in domestic crude oil and 
gas production is a sine qua non  for meeting the Government’s objective of 
reducing crude oil imports by 10% by the year 2022.  Similarl y,  better 
IOR/EOR techniques are important in the aged oil fields to improve oil and 
gas production. The Committee, therefore, would urge upon the Ministry to 
maintain a close vigil on the E&P Programmes of Oil PSUs in order to ensure 
that crude oil produ ction is sustained and increased and the Government's 
objective of reducing crude oil imports is achieved.  
Recommendation No. 18 
 
Ethanol Blended Petrol  
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under 
 
 "The Committee note that Ethanol Blended Programme was launched in the 
year 2003 with an objective of blending ethanol with petrol. Currently the 
programme is being implemented in 21 States and 4 UTs with a target of 
achieving 5% blending and progressively increasing to 10% blending. As per 
projections, the requirement for ethanol to achieve 10% blending is 280 
crore litres. The Committee note that in the year 2015 -16 (from 1 December 
2015 to 30th November 2016), a total of 111 crore litre ethanol was procured 
by the OMCs which is about 40% of the requisite quantity and will be 
sufficient for blending of only 3.5%. The blending percentage needs to be 
increased to fulfill the Government‟s target and also as a component of 
import reduction. The low procurement has been attributed to lower cane 
production due to drought in Maharashtra and Karnataka and also due to 
demands from potable and chemicals sector. As the domestic sourcing of 
ethanol is continuously failing to achieve the target, there is a need to look a t 
other alternatives. The Committee note that since 10.12.2014, Government 
has allowed procurement of ethanol produced from other non -food 
feedstocks besides molasses like cellulosic and lingo -cellulosic materials 
including from petrochemicals route. The C ommittee further note that twelve 
2G ethanol bio-refineries in 11 States are being established. The Committee 
appreciate that such steps are required in view of consistent under -supply of 
domestic ethanol from traditional sources. To achieve the target of 5% 
blending during the year 2017 -18 itself and 10% blending by 2020, 
permission for imports of ethanol, if possible, may also be given. The 
Committee recommend that the proposed 2G ethanol bio -refineries should 
be completed by the OMCs on priority basis wi thout any time and cost 
overrun". 
 

16 
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
 
 "As regards import of ethanol for EBP Programme, the Government on 
3.7.2013 inter -alia decided that ethanol be procured only from domestic 
sources. 
  
As regards 2G ethanol bio -refineries, on 07.12.2016 Oil PSUs have entered 
into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with State Governments and 
Technology Providers for 2G ethanol bio -refineries.  Foundation Stone of 
one bio-refinery has been laid by Hindustan P etroleum Corporation Limited 
on 25.12.2016 at Bathinda, Punjab". 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
 
19. The Committee, in their  recommendation, had said  that the proposed 
2G ethanol bio-refineries should be completed by the OMC's on priority basis 
without any time and cost overrun  with a view to achieve the target of 5% 
blending in the year 2017 -18 itself and 10% blending by the year 2020 . The 
Ministry, in its reply, has stated that Oil PSUs have entered into MoUs with 
State Governments and Technology Providers for 2G ethanol bio -refineries 
and foundation stone for one bio -refinery in Bathinda, Punjab has already 
been laid. 
 The Committee feel that ethanol  blending in petrol is an effective way 
of increasing domestic pe trol availability and for that  all round efforts need 
to be made to increase the production of ethanol. The Committee are 
disappointed to note that out of twelve 2G ethanol bio-refineries in 11 States 
which the oil PSUs were establishing, the foundation stone of only one 2G 
refinery has been laid and there is no information about the status of other 
eleven 2G ethanol bio-refineries and also about their funding. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that all the proposed 2G ethanol bio -refineries should be 
established without any delay. The Committee further desire that the cost 
outlay and timeline for completion of the 12 2G ethanol bio -refineries should 
be shared with them. 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Development of Bio-fuels 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 "The Committee note that with a view to encourage production of other bio -
fuels such as bio-diesel in the Country, Bio-diesel Purchase Policy has been 
announced which provides guidelines for OMCs to procure bio -diesel for 
blending with High Speed Diesel (HSD) to the extent of 5%. Subsequently, 
sale of Bio -Diesel (B100) by private manufacturers to bulk buyers has also 
been allowed. Similarly, Public sector OMCs have been permitte d to retail 
bio-diesel. The Committee appreciate the measures being taken by the 
Government to promote the use of alternative or Bio -fuels. The Committee 
recommend that the production of bio -diesel in the Country should be 
promoted by the Government OMCs through appropriate interventions". 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
 
 "In the past, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have made efforts for 
indigenous production of biodiesel by carrying out plantation &  maintenance 
activities of Jatropha through Joint Ventures with State Governments. 
However, the desired result i.e. yield from Jatropha was not obtained which 
incurred losses to the company. Trial results with High Yielding Varieties 
(HYVs) of Jatropha for  production of Biodiesel were also not satisfactory. 
Therefore, the OMCs put an end to all its operations for undertaking 
biodiesel production from Jatropha cultivation.  
 
In order to promote Biodiesel in the country, appropriate steps are being 
taken for allowing sale of Biodiesel for blending purposes to retail consumers 
by private manufacturers. Besides, specifications for blends of Biodiesel (B6-
B20) have been issued by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)".  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
22. The Committee had recomme nded that the production of biodiesel in 
the Country should be promoted by the OMCs through  appropriate 
interventions. The Ministry, in its written reply, has submitted that the OMCs 
have put an end to all its operations for undertaking biodiesel production 
from Jatropha cultivation in view of unsatisfactory results. The Ministry has 
also stated that for promoting biodies el in the Country, appropriate steps are 
being taken for allowing sale of biodiesel for blending purposes to retail 
customers by private manufacturers and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
has issued specifications for blends of biodiesel. 

18 
 
 The Committee ar e unhappy to note that the OMCs have effectively 
stopped their research activities for production of biodiesel from Jatropha in 
view of unsatisfactory results. The Committee feel that intervention by the 
OMCs for significant biodiesel production is a must and it may not be a 
sound policy to depend on private manufacturers only for biodiesel 
production and supply. Apart from having policies such as ' Biodiesel 
Purchase Policy ' to encourage production /purchase of bi o-diesel in the 
country, MoP&NG, through the OMCs also needs to become a player in 
biodiesel research and production by making suitable investments in 
alternative sources of biofuels. In view of the Committee, the OMCs have the 
wherewithal to encourage research in the area and come out with suitable 
products for blending. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the OMCs 
should promote the production of biodiesel in the Country through 
appropriate interventions and apprise the Committee. 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
National Seismic Programme- Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources and 
National Data Repository  
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under 
 
 "The Committee note that after almost two decades of last such exercise, 
the Directorate -General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is undertaking a 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources in all 26 sedimentary basins of 
the Country through a Multi -Organisation Team with the collaboration of 
ONGC and OIL. The project commenced in September 2015 and is 
scheduled to be completed in 27 months, i.e., by November 2017. The 
Committee further note that so far, re -assessment study for ten basins have 
been completed and their draft reports are under preparation. At present, the 
study for ten more basins is in progress. The Committee also note that the 
National Data Repository (ND R) has been set up as a part of National 
Knowledge Hub to populate all the geo -scientific data available in the 
Country. Its aim is to provide reliable exploration and production data for 
India for seamless access and on -line data management to the E&P 
Companies. It will validate, store, maintain and reproduce high quality and 
reliable geo-scientific data, facilitate efficient data reporting, data exchange, 
and data trading amon g existing players, improve DGH‟ s ability to monitor 
and control the E&P activit ies and reporting, encourage new E&P activities 
by providing high quality and reliable data and strengthen overall geo -
scientific activities in India. 

19 
 
 NDR Project is currently being executed in the DGH premises in Noida. The 
Committee understand that initial works relating to NDR project has been 
completed and it has been populated with data. NDR is ready for providing 
data to various E&P operators throu gh launching of OALP/HELP 
programme. The Committee feel that having an NDR for India will enhance 
prospects of petroleum exploration and facilitate the Bidding Rounds by 
improving the availability of quality data. It will also help the Country 
compete effectively in the hydrocarbon exploration and production sector.  
 
 The Committee note that two proposals have been received for Geo -
Scientific Data generation for hydrocarbons in Indian sedimentary basins 
and desire that these proposals may be evaluated so that funds and physical 
targets are achieved for successful completion.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the project relating to 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources be completed without any time 
overrun and proper guidelines for using the data contained in the NDR 
should be framed at the earliest so that exploration exercises can be 
undertaken more effectively". 
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted following reply:- 
 
  "National Seismic Programme of Un-appraised areas 
Almost half of the India‟s Sedimentary areas are yet to be appraised. 
Government of   India  has  taken up an ambitious programme for 
undertaking 2D seismic survey of entire un -appraisal areas with an 
estimated expenditure of Rs.3000 crore.  National seismic programme was  
launched on 12th October 2016 in Mahanadi Basin.  
 
 
Out of 48243 line kilometer (LKM) of 2D seismic, ONGC and OIL will carry 
out 40835 LKM and 7408 LKM respectively.  
 
   Currently 2D seismic data acquisition is in progress.  5618 line kilometer of 
2D sei smic data has been acquired in the area of Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Cambay, Saurashtra, Rajasthan, Kutch, Bengal, Mahanadi, NEC 
basin, Deccan Synclise North, Deccan Synclise -South, Bhima, Kaladgi, 
Vindhyan-A, Narmada, Satpura, Himalayan -Foreland, Karewa a nd Spiti – 
Zanskar as on 31st March 2017. 
 
The national seismic Programme is likely to be completed by 2019 -20.  
Annual milestones have been fixed". 
 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
Presently, the process of re -assessment of hydrocarbon resources of 26 
sedimentary basins of India including deep water areas integrating all the 
available geo -scientific data is in progress. The reassessment project is 
under execution by ONGC in association with OIL and DGH.  

20 
 
Currently, the studies of eleven basins (Satpura -South Rewa -Damodar, 
Bastar, Chattishgarh, Karewa, Vindhyan, Kerala -Konkan, Mahanadi, 
Rajasthan, Spiti -Zanskar, Mumbai Offshore and Pranhita -Godavari) have 
been completed and their draft reports are prepared.  The project has been 
reviewed by the International experts and the suggestions given by the 
international experts are also incorporated in the report.  
The reassessment work of eleven sedimentary basins (A&AA fold Belt, 
Assam Shelf, Himalayn Fold Belt, Bh ima-Kaladgi, KG, Cauvery, Bengal - 
Purnea, Andaman -Nicobar, Cambay Basin, Kutch -Saurashtra and Ganga –
Punjab Plain) is in progress at various work centers of ONGC. 
National Data Repository 
  
National Data Repository (NDR) has been set up to populate all the geo-
scientific data available in the country. NDR Project is currently being 
expedited in DGH premises at sector 73, Noida. Integration of Software at 
NDR site has been completed. Build up phase on pilot data and priority data 
has also been completed. Currently, NDR is in operation phase wherein data 
loading  and sharing is in progress. So far 16,65,145 line kilometre (LKM) of  
2D seismic, 5,83,985 Sq. Km of  3D seismic data,15,254 well reports and 
1,964 seismic reports have been uploaded. 
 
NDR is ready for  providing data to various Industry E&P operators through 
launching of OALP/HELP programme. The interested E&P companies would 
be able to view geo-scientific data from anywhere in the world and firm up an 
opinion regarding prospectivity of the blocks prior to bidding for the block". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
 
25. The Committee had recommended that the project relating to 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources should be completed within time. 
In its reply, the Ministry has stated that currently 2D seismic data acquisition 
is in progress and out of the total of 48243 line kilometre (LKM) of 2D seismic, 
5618 LKM of 2D seismic data has been acquired. As per the Ministry, the 
National Seismic Programme is likely to be completed by 2019 -20 and annual 
milestones have been fixed for the exercise. The Committee may be apprised 
of the complete details relating to financial and temporal aspects of the 
National Seismic Programme alongwith annual milestones fixed in the matter.  
 As regards the Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources, the Ministry 
has replied that out of 26 sedimentary basins, studies of 11 basins have been 
completed and studies are underway in 11 more sedimentary basins. There is 

21 
 
no mention of the status of work in the remaining basins and also whether 
the time frame fixed for completion of this work by November, 2017 will be 
adhered to or any new timeline has been fixed in this regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that reassessment work  in all the basins should be 
completed within fixed time frame.  The progress of work may be shared with 
the Committee in respect of all 26 sedimentary basins for which the exercise 
was undertaken. 
 The Committee appreciate that the NDR has become operatio nal with 
completion of build up phase on pilot data and priority data and the data 
loading and sharing in the programme is in progress. The Committee hope 
that this process will be completed in a time -bound manner.  The Committee, 
however, desire that the proper guidelines for using the data contained in the 
NDR should be framed at the earliest so that exploration exercises could be 
undertaken more effectively. 
 
----- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Allocation of Financial Resources to MoPNG  
 
The Committee note that the Budget Allocation of the MoPNG for the year 2017 -18 
has been pegged at Rs. 29157.57 crore. The funds allocated during 2016 -17 at BE 
stage was Rs 30160.62 crore which has been revised to Rs 30241.76 crore at RE 
stage. However, the actual expenditure has been Rs. 22,600.91crore till 
31.12.2016. The major expenditure are accounted for schemes like Direct Benefit 
Transfer for LPG (DBTL), other subsidia ry payable on SKO, Pradhan Mantri 
Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY), Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) and 
PDHPL pipeline. 
Budgetary allocation for DBTL for LPG which has been pegged at Rs. 13000 crore 
for RE 2016 -17 out of which Rs. 10224.25 crore h as been spent till December 31, 
2016. The other major component of budget allocation has been the „Other subsidy 
payable on SKO including NE Region‟ for which an amount of Rs. 8770.70 crore 
has been allocated at RE 2016 -17 while actual utilisation has been  7094.21 crore 
till December, 2016. The allocation for the scheme during BE 2017 -18 is Rs. 
8661.87 crore.   
 PMUY Scheme was allocated Rs. 2000 crore at BE stage in 2016 -17 which was 
revised to Rs 2500 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure is only Rs. 1436.03 
crore till December, 2016. The allocation for PMUY Scheme in BE 2017 -18 is Rs. 
2500 crore. The Committee also note that for ISPRL phase -I, the actual 
expenditure in 2015-16 was Rs. 1153 crore. Against RE of Rs. 2001 crore in 2016 -
17, the expenditure upto December, 2016 was Rs. 1000 crore. In BE 2017 -18, Rs. 
2499 crore has been allotted for ISPRL phase -I. For phase-II, a token allocation of 
Rs. 1 crore has been made. For Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga (PMUG) pipeline 
project, which aims to connect eastern  part of the Country with the western part for 
gas supply, the allocation in BE 2017 -18 is Rs. 1200 crore. In the year 2016 -17, 
allocation for PMUG project at RE stage was Rs. 450 crore. 
The Committee feel that the PMUY, ISPRL and PMUG are very important s chemes 
and recommend that the funds allocated therefore should be fully utilized by the 
end of the financial year. The Committee also recommend that funds should be 
adequately allocated for schemes like PMUY and the ISPRL - and in case of any 
shortages, the  Ministry of Finance should be promptly approached for additional 
funds at the RE stage. Similarly, the funds should not be a constraint also for 
nationally important pipeline projects such as Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga project 
for which partial GBS has been committed by the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted.  The position with 
regard the PMUY, ISPRL and PMUG is as under: 

23 
 
PMUY : The Government had initially allocated Rs.2000.00 crore in BE 2016 -17 to  
release  1.5 LPG  connections  under  PMUY. Subsequently,  keeping  in view the 
pace of the release of LPG connections under PMUY, the budget allocation was 
revised to Rs. 2500.00 c rore at RE stage. OMCs have released more than 1.98 
crore LPG connections in the Financial Year 2016 -17.  An amount of Rs. 
2499,99,99,700/- was reimbursed  to Oil Marketing Companies towards release of 
LPG connections under PMUY in the FY 2016 -17.  Thus, almost all funds allocated 
under PMUY in the FY 2016 -17, has been utilized.  Further, the Government has 
made provision of Rs. 2500.00 crore  to release 1.5 crore LPG connections under 
PMUY in the Financial Year 2017-18. 
ISPRL :  Rs. 2001 crore allocated fo r ISPRL (Crude filling)Phase -I in RE 2016 -17 
has been released in the year 2016-17 and thus fully utilized.  The Phase II projects 
of ISPRL are yet to be approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA). The allocation of Rs 1.00 crore as BE for FY 2017-18 against a total outlay 
of Rs 9116 crore for Phase II, is only a token provision and funds would be sought 
after the formal approval is obtained. 
 
PMUG :  Rs.450.00 crore allocated for PDHPL in RE 2016 -17 (against Ministry‟s 
proposal for Rs.900.00 crore as per CCEA‟s approval) has been released in the 
year 2016-17 and thus fully utilized. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL)  
 
The Committee note that the first phase of building of strategic oil caverns is almost 
complete and while the caverns located at Visakhapatnam and Mangalore have 
been commissioned, the Padur cavern is d elayed on account of land acquisition 
issues and pending court cases. The Committee further note that for ISPRL Phase -
I, the BE for 2016-17 was of Rs. 1001 crore, which has been enhanced to Rs. 2001 
crore at RE stage. Out of this amount, Rs. 1000 crore has  been utilised till 
December, 2016 which is only 50% of the amount allocated under RE. The 
Committee find that for Visakhapatnam Crude Oil storage facility, the total 
reimbursable amount is Rs. 2112 crore. Out of this, remaining amount of Rs. 1001 
crore has to be utilised for reimbursing PSUs. But, surprisingly, not a single rupee 
has been shown as spent till December, 2016 for meeting operation and 
maintenance cost (O&M costs) out of Rs. 45 crore allocated for the purpose at RE 
2016-17 stage. The Committee, therefore, desire that the remaining amount should 
be reimbursed to the Oil PSUs and Ministry should submit a justification for no 
allocation for meeting O&M costs during BE 2016 -17 and not spending a single 
rupee till December, 2016. The Committee note that the BE for crude filling in 2017-
18 has been kept at Rs. 2499 crore and O&M expenses has been kept at Rs. 79 
crore. The Committee hope that this allocation will be sufficient for filling of oil in 
phase-I caverns and to meet operation and maintenance costs.  
 

24 
 
While observing the funding pattern, the Committee find while that no Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) has been provided for the construction of caverns, the 
filling up of caverns in Visakhapatnam and one cavern in Mangalore has been 
funded through b udgetary support. The Committee also note that the Government 
is looking at various options, including allowing overseas companies for storing 
their crude oil in these caverns. For filling up of one cavern in Mangalore, an 
agreement with Abu Dhabi National  Oil Company (ADNOC) has also been signed. 
In order to fill up Padur storage facility, the Committee note that to formulate a 
viable commercial model, an EOI was floated and six responses have been 
received at the end of last date for submission of proposa l in end December 2016. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that the remaining part of the pipeline at 
Padur cavern should be expeditiously completed and desire that the ISPRL/Ministry 
should evaluate the proposals received for filling of Padur facility and  finalise the 
same within a reasonable time.  
The Committee also observe that the Government, in the budget, have announced 
construction of two more strategic caverns in Chandikhole (Odisha) and Bikaner 
(Rajasthan) under Phase -II of ISPRL. For the ISPRL Ph ase-II, Rs. 1 crore has 
been allocated in BE of 2017 -18 against a total financial outlay of Rs. 9116 crore. 
While the cavern at Chandikhole will be completed in 64 months, the Bikaner 
cavern is expected to be completed in 96 months. The Committee desire to  be 
informed about the international standards as far as time taken in construction of 
such caverns are concerned. The Committee feel that though the completion time 
for phase-II project has been kept very long, it, however, want that sufficient funds 
should be provided for completion of these strategically important projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 
MoPNG has noted the recommendation of the Standing Committee. MoPNG 
has reimbursed Rs 2001 crore to ISPRL in F.Y. 2016-17.   
 
In 2016-17, for O& M of the facility, Rs. 29.49 crores were spent against the 
sanctioned amount of Rs 45 crores. The short utilization of funds is on the account 
of that the Visakhapatnam storage was commissioned in year 2015. Also, there 
was no expenditure towards Operation s & Maintenance (O&M) for the Mangalore 
facility which was commissioned in October 2016 and for three months the facility 
was to be maintained by the EPCC contractor.  
 
After reimbursing the outstanding amount to oil PSUs for filling the storages 
at Visakhapatnam and Mangalore, some amount will be available for procurement 
of approximately 0.5 MMT of crude oil for Padur. This crude oil can be used for 
commissioning of the Padur facility.  In case the alternate business models being 
explored do not fru ctify, additional funds will be sought in RE of 2017 -18. The 
reimbursement of Rs. 1121 crore to ISPRL out of allocated 2499 crore is already 
approved. 
 
The total requirement of funds for the O&M of all the three locations is Rs 
179 crores, against this an amount of Rs 79 Crores has been allocated in the 
budget. Depending on the progress of works and the placement of orders for O&M 
of the facilities additional funds would be sought in the RE of 2017-18. 
 

25 
 
The pipeline for Padur project is being laid and short  stretch of 300 meters is 
pending for completion due to court cases and Right of Use (RoU) issues. The 
anticipated commissioning for Padur facility is July 2017. 
 
In response to the Preliminary EOI floated by ISPRL, 6 companies namely 
BP, Shell, Goldman Sa chs, Trafigura, MRPL and HPCL had shown interest in 
Padur. While three companies have expressed their in principle interest in 
participating in filling the caverns, clarity on issues such as strategic and 
commercial break up, applicable tax structure etc. need to be finalized. 
 
According to M/s. Geostock, a leading consultant for underground rock 
cavern projects in the world and a backup consultant to EIL for the ISPRL 
Mangalore Project, as far as international standards are concerned, the average 
gestation period for cavern projects is approximately 7 years (84 months). The 
anticipated timeline of 5 years 4 months (64 months) for completion of Chandikhol 
project is within the timeline of 84 month as per the global standards. With respect 
to the Bikaner proj ect the anticipated timeline for the completion of entire project is 
8 years (96 months). However, anticipated timeline for the completion of the first 
cluster of 4 caverns having a capacity of 1.875 MMT is 5 year 6 months (66 
months) which is well within the international benchmark of 84 months.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY)  
 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) was launched in 
the year 2016-17 in order to increase LPG coverage among rural poor households. 
The scheme aims at providing 5 crore deposit free new LPG connections to women 
of Below Poverty Lin e (BPL) households over three years starting from 2016 -17. 
The first two years will target 1.5 crore connections every year while 2 crore 
connections are to be given in the third year. The scheme will provide an initial cost 
of Rs 1600/ - for providing LPG connection to poor households in the name of 
women of the household. Under the scheme, initially OMCs bear the cost of 
release of new connections out of their own available fund and subsequently, make 
their claim for reimbursement with the Ministry. Minist ry reimburses the claimed 
amount after due verification.  
 
The Committee also note that the target of 1.5 crore connections for the year 2016 -
17 has been achieved by the end of December 2016. During Financial Year 2016 -
17, Rs. 2000 crore was allotted for release of 1.5 crore connections under PMUY of 
which Rs. 1768 crore (claim made upto 30.11.2016) has been reimbursed to 
OMCs. At RE stage the allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 2500 crore. Further, 
Rs. 2500 crore has been allocated for Financial Year 2017-18.  
 
While appreciating the Ministry and OMCs on the successful implementation of the 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY), the Committee expect the Ministry to issue 

26 
 
suitable guidelines to OMCs that the local elected public representatives 
particularly t he Members of Parliament should be involved in the launch/ 
implementation of the scheme as this is a Central Government scheme. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry and OMCs should not become 
complacent and slacken but continue their efforts to a chieve the targets in the next 
two years also and desire setting up a monitoring mechanism to ensure that the 
beneficiaries under the PMUY scheme are actually using the gas cylinders and 
refilling them. Any additional requirement of funds for covering more  than the 
targeted households may be sought from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry/OMCs should evolve a mechanism 
involving elected public representative to identify deserving persons who may have 
been left out in the Socio -Economic Caste Census (SECC) data so that they may 
also become beneficiaries of PMUY. 
                                          Reply of the Government  
        OMCs organise „Melas‟ at various locations for release of LPG connections 
under PMUY in the presence of public representatives and distinguished 
personalities of the area. The presence of public representative enhances the 
awareness of the scheme. Further, District Nodal Officers (DNOs) have been 
appointed to co-ordinate with elected representatives for smooth implementation of 
the scheme.   
 The Government had set a target to release 1.5, 1.5 and 2 crore LPG 
connections during Financial Years 2016 -17, 2071 -18 and 2018 -19 respectively. 
OMCs have already released more than 1.98 crore LPG connections under PMUY 
during the Financial Year 2016 -17. Keeping in view the pace of release of 
connections, it is expected that the Govt. will achieve the target of  release of 5 
crore LPG connections by 2018 -19. The average refill consumption by PMUY 
beneficiaries is 4 cylinders per annum.  
 
The Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) data data has been prepared by 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Housing and  Urban Poverty 
Alleviation in consultation with State Governments. Instances of non -inclusion of 
names in the SECC List have been brought to the notice of Ministry of Rural 
Development for taking necessary remedial action.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy  
 
The Committee note that an Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) is to be 
established in Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh in accordance with the Andhra 
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. The objective of the University is to meet the 
quantitative and qualitative gap in the supply of skilled manpower in the petroleum 
sector and promote research activities. Total capital expenditure for the project is 
estimated at Rs. 655.46 crore. A provision of Rs. 14.20 crore has been made for 

27 
 
IIPE in BE 2017-18. Andhra Pradesh Government has made available 200 acres of 
land free of cost for the IIPE and foundation stone for the project has been laid on 
20th October 2016. The Committee further note that the IIPE is currently operating 
from a temporary campus at the sp ace provided by the College of Engineering in 
Andhra University at Visakhapatnam from the year 2016-17. IIT-Kharagpur is acting 
as a Mentor Institution for starting the academic session 2016 -17. The Committee 
are not satisfied with the progress made so far  in setting up the Institute. The 
Committee note that since the institute is of national importance, it involves 
Legislation seeking Parliament approval so that the institute can give degrees. The 
Committee recommend that work relating to enactment of Legi slation should be 
expedited and desire that the Institute should start functioning from its own campus 
at the earliest and adequate funds should be allocated for the purpose of building of 
own campus of IIPE. The Committee desire that the revised cost outl ay and time 
line for completion of the project should be shared with the Committee. 
Reply 
       The Note for the Cabinet along with the the draft Bill for establishment of Indian 
Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) at Visakhapatnam was sent to the Ca binet 
Secretariat for consideration before the Cabinet.  The Union Cabinet in its meeting 
held on 12.4.2017 has given its approval for setting up of IIPE at Visakhapatnam in 
Andhra Pradesh.  An amount of Rs.32.00 crore had been allocated to IIPE during 
the year 2016-17 which was released to them.  Further, an amount of Rs.145.20 
crore has been allocated for the year 2017 -18 which will be released.  Ministry of 
Finance will be requested for allocation of funds from time to time as per schedule.  
IIPE Bill has been introduced in the Parliament in the Monsoon Session. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 7 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Direct Transfer of Cash Subsidy for Kerosene (DTCK)  
 
The Committee note that Rs. 50 crore was allocated for DBTL in Kerosene in BE 
2016-17. However at RE stage it was reduced to Rs. 0.01 crore as the DBTL 
scheme in 2016 -17 was implemented in only four dis tricts of Jharkhand and no 
amount could be spent in that year. The Committee further note that during 2016 -
17, a provision of Rs. 7094.21 crore was made in BE for making payments towards 
under recovery under the Head „Other Subsidy payable including NE reg ion (SKO)‟ 
which were fully utilized and at RE stage in 2016-17, the allocation were increase to 
Rs. 8770.70 crore as the subsidy outgo was more. In BE 2017 -18, an allocation of 
Rs. 8661.87 crore has been made. The Committee also note that cash incentive t o 
the tune of 75% of the subsidy saved is paid to the states/UTs which voluntarily 
undertake cut in PDS SKO allocation. In the year 2016-17, Karnataka, Haryana and 
Telangana undertook voluntary cut for which about Rs. 112.4 crore was paid to 
them. Allocation in 2017 -18 has been increased to Rs. 150 crore as more states 

28 
 
are expected to join the scheme. The Committee feel that expanding the coverage 
of LPG beneficiaries is necessary to reduce dependence on Kerosene. Only then it 
will be possible to reduce expenditure on the subsidy on Kerosene. The Committee 
feel that the Government should work towards eventual withdrawal of kerosene 
subsidy as it will not only result in more usage of cleaner fuel, promote the health of 
users but also address problems such as adulteration. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the efforts towards universal coverage of LPG should be 
intensified. More and more states should be encouraged to move towards DTCK in 
Kerosene to eliminate inefficiencies in Kerosene subsidies. The Co mmittee also 
desire that the Ministry/OMCs should ensure that non -subsidized kerosene is 
available in retail outlet of OMCs so that consumers can easily purchase them. 
Reply of the Government 
The national LPG coverage as on 01.01.2016 was 61.3 %, which has  increased to 
72.8 % as on 01.04.2017.  Further, the Government has targeted to release 3 crore 
more LPG connection including 1.5 crore under PMUY in the Financial Year 2017 -
18. It will increase the LPG coverage significantly. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natur la Gas has launched Direct Benefit Transfer in PDS 
Kerosene (DBTK) Scheme with effect from 01 -04-2016.  The initative of the 
Government is aimed to cut subsidy leakages.  Under the Scheme, the Kerosene  
is being sold at non -subsidised price and subsidy, as  admissible, is being 
transferred to consumers  directly into his/her bank account.  The States 
participating  the scheme would be given cash  incentive of 75% of subsidy savings 
during the first two years, 50% in the third year and  25% in the fourth year . In case 
the States voluntarily agree to undertake cut in kerosene allocation, beyond the 
savings due to DBT, a similar incentive would be given to those States/UTs. 
Jharkhand has become first State in the country to implement DBTK in all the 
Districts of the State.  The States of Karnataka, Haryana, Telengana, Nagaland and 
UT of Chandigarh have responded favourably by undertaking voluntary cut in their 
PDS SKO allocation of 2,19,161.40 KL. 
The Ministry is regularly following up with the States/UTs and als o urged them to 
join DBTK Scheme. Regular meetings have been organised in this respect by 
MoPNG with State/UT Governments.  
With a view to ease the availability of Kerosene, the Central Government has 
amended the Kerosene (Restriction on Use and Fixation of Ceiling Price) Order, 
1993 allowing sale of Kerosene at commercial rate in the open market.  It is 
expected that this will reduce demand for diverted PDS Kerosene by improving 
availability of non-PDS Kerosene in the open market and wil thus met the dema nd 
of Kerosene for various legitimate end uses for the industry and for individual 
consumption by those who can afford it at market price. 
Accordingly, OMCs have allowed existing Kerosene dealers (wholesalers) of 
OMC‟s to market white Kerosene (non -PDS Ker osene) to small consumers.  
Revised procedure for making white Kerosene available to the interested Kerosene 
wholesalers has been prepared by OMCs and made available to all Kerosene 
dealers.  Moreover the State Level Coordinator of OMCs have sent communica tion 

29 
 
to the respective State Governments to nominate and authorize one or more 
existing Kerosene wholesalers to market Non PDS Kerosene wherever demand 
exists.  Further Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has also advised the State 
Governments to conside r suitable steps for allowing marketing of Non PDS 
Kerosene in their area of operation.  Some State Governments have already 
permitted existing Kerosene wholesalers / private entities / Government bodies to 
market Non DS Kerosene”. 
PDS Kerosene allocation of States/Uts have been rationalized since 2010 -11, by 
taking into account the factors such as increase in domestic LPG / PNG 
connections and non -lifting of PDS Kerosene quota by the concerned States/Uts 
etc.  However, for the year 2016-17, allocation of PDS SKO was made on the basis 
of recommendation of Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC), Ministry of Finance. IMC 
had observed that in the case of few States, the subsidized Kerosene allocation for 
2015-16 was more than the households consumption as estimated  in the 2011-12 
NSS Data.  IMC recommended that the allocations of all the States with PDS 
Kerosene allocation more than their total household consumption as estimated in 
2011-12 NSS data, should be brought down to the level of their consumption.  In 
line with the recommendation of IMC, PDS Kerosene allocation of various 
States/UTs for the year 2016 -17 was determined at 68,76,024 KL against an 
allocation of 86,85,384 KL made in 2015-16 with overall reduction of 20.18% 
Further, in the first half of 2017 -18, an allocation of 26,22,056 KL of PDS SKO has 
been made to States/Uts, with reduction of 34.03% as compared to corresponding 
period of 2016-17. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Reduction in Import Dependency  
 
The Committee note that the Prime Minister has given a call to reduce import 
dependency on petroleum imports by 10% by the year 2022 and to implement the 
vision, a Committee had been constituted under the Chairmanship of Ad ditional 
Secretary (P&NG) which submitted its final report in April 2016 and has 
recommended a five pronged strategy and actionable points for various divisions 
have been prepared and circulated. The Committee also note that action in this 
regard pertain t o several Ministries/Departments such as Finance, Agriculture, 
Power, Highways and transport, etc. The estimated total savings will be 68.7 
(O+OEG) Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (MTOE) as against the required 
reduction of 61.8 MTOE in consumption of Petroleum Products.  
 
An integrated monitoring and advisory council is being constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (P&NG) with representatives of all ministries  / 
departments having actions on their part. Given the fact that demand for petroleum 
products in the Country is increasing by about 10% per annum and the domestic 
production of crude oil and gas is almost stagnant or declining, the task of reduction 
in import dependency will be challenging. The Committee are of the view that the 

30 
 
pace of addressing the goal by the Ministry has been very slow and does not augur 
well for the task to be achieved. It is two years since the goal has been spelt out 
but, no firm action by any of the ministries towards the goal has been started yet. 
Moreover, the Minis try has not fixed any annual target for reduction of imports of 
crude oil during the period leading upto 2022. On the contrary, the Committee note 
that in the last two years the imports of crude oil has increased and therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should fixed annual targets for reduction of imports of crude 
oil. 
The Committee feel that the five pronged strategy devised by the Ministry is grossly 
inadequate and lacks inclusion of all round focus for the strategy does not indicate 
R&D activities to be undertaken, financial incentives needed etc. The Committee 
also feel that this task needs better coordination among the various ministries and 
therefore, recommend that the entire exercise should be monitored at Inter -
Ministerial level and wherever necessary, global cooperation may also be obtained. 
The Committee also opine that experiences in other parts of the world on some of 
these issues could also be studied and suitably incorporated in the strategy 
particularly in areas like use of Hydrogen as fuel, E lectric Vehicles, solar 
equipments/appliances, hybrid vehicles etc,. 
Reply of the Government 
An Integrated Monitoring and Advisory Council(IMAC) has been constituted 
under the Chairmanship of MoS (I/C), P&NG for effective implementation of the 
roadmap for 10% reduction in dependency on import in energy by 2021-22.   
The main purpose of IMAC is to facilitate better coordination and 
comprehensive strategy of all energy sources while addressing common concern 
and creating synergy in implementation of roadmap i ncluding R&D and innovation 
in oil & gas sector.  
The members of IMAC are JS level officers from the Ministry of Rural 
Development, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Ministry of Finance, Ministry 
of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare, Ministry of Road Transp ort & Highways, Ministry 
of Power, Ministry of Urban Development, Energy Economist and Secretary, 
PNGRB.  The council will meet periodically to oversee the roadmap to achieve the 
target of 10% reduction in import dependency in energy by 2021-22. 
In the fiv e pronged strategy, R&D activities and financial incentives are 
briefly indicated.  In the first strategy, vide recommendation 13 (page 49, 50 and 
51) of the report, the need for sponsoring/ infusing more capital for promoting R&D 
activities has been recog nized  alongwith the involvement of international research 
institutions for in -house development of new technologies in the area of upstream 
activities.  
The need for adequate funding for aggressive R& D activities and Viability 
Gap Funding (VGF) proposals during initial years for 2G technology developments 

31 
 
has also been recognized (Page 103).  It is also indicated to allocate a fund for 
biofuels R&D to perform field trials and related activities. 
Providing necessary guidance and assistance for asset acquisition for oil 
and gas, technological collaboration related to R&D activities, energy efficiency, 
conservation, supply management and demand management, framing a 
comprehensive R&D policy for energy in g eneral and oil and gas in particular for 
promoting dialogue among stakeholders, fostering strategic partnerships, 
developing technological missions, identifying critical thrust areas and setting long 
term objectives, integrating efforts for fund allocation  and its transparent utilization 
etc. has been identified as one of the important functions of IMAC.   
In addition to these, the R&D activities being adopted by the countries 
chosen as case studies in chapter 9 of the report for reducing import dependency 
have also been captured for reference and learning.   
Some policy interventions which would entail financial incentives included in the 
report are given below: 
Page # Policy interventions 
44 Development of suitable incentivizing mechanism for promoting 
IOR/EOR methods 
42-43 Operationalize the process for marginal and small fields  
developments for both under bidding round and nominated to ONGC   
48-49 Natural gas sector reform- Infrastructure and pricing reforms 
46 Oil and gas price premium for difficult/challenging areas 
46 Formulating a framework for fast -tracking requirement for CBM/ 
Shale projects 
85-86 Financial incentives/ supports for demand substitution  
97-98 Incentives for active participation in producing fuel grade ethanol 
103 Adequate funding for aggressive R&D activities and Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) proposals need to be put in place for 2G technology 
developments  
117-119 Financial incentives related to biodiesel and bioethanol expansion 
128 Incentives relating to substit ution of oil with electricity and 
renewables  
148 Government supports relating to refinery process improvement  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Impact of GST on Petroleum Sector  
 
The Committee note that as per the GST Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2016, all 
petroleum products and services are covered under the ambit of GST except 
supplies of crude oil, MS, HSD, ATF and Natural Gas which will b e brought under 

32 
 
GST at a later date. The Committee feel that under the GST regime, the tax liability 
of the upstream oil PSUs will increase as the GST rate on inputs is expected to be 
higher than the prevailing rate of taxation. In addition, if crude oil a nd natural gas 
are kept out of GST, the upstream oil companies like ONGC and OIL cannot claim 
credit for their money spent towards VAT on services hired and goods used for 
production of petroleum products. Moreover, the inputs in the form of equipments 
and services will also attract GST but the main output, i.e., crude oil will be out of 
the purview of GST. The Committee also note that in downstream sector, in the 
course of refining crude oil, several products are manufactured some of which will 
be under GS T and some will be out of the purview of GST. This will result in 
distortions in pricing of the product as well as increase in input cost of the oil 
companies. Also, they have to maintain separate accounting for GST and non -GST 
accounts. 
  
The Committee feel that the GST will lead to increase in operational cost of the 
petroleum products and can have cascading effect across the supply chain. The 
Committee are of the view that the oil PSUs companies should be able to get 
adjustment of full VAT credit for t he total amount against VAT that have been paid 
by them on inputs and services. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
MoPNG should take up the matter of providing full credit of VAT to the oil 
companies against VAT paid by them with the Ministry of Finance and a mutually 
acceptable solution to the problem be found. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has been pursuing with Ministry of 
Finance for considering an appropriate rate of GST on specified petroleum 
products, viz, crude oil, natural gas, HSD, MS and ATF. 
 
As recommended by the Standing Committee, Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas will take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Share of Gas in Energy Mix  
 
The Committee note that the share of natural gas in the primary energy mix of the 
country was 7.1% in 2014. Though the share of gas consumption in the energy mix 
of the country has registered  some increase during the last ten years, it has 
declined in the last five years. Similarly the domestic production of natural gas has 
also declined over last few years. From 35.407 BCM in 2013 -14 it has declined to 
32.248 BCM in 2015-16 and is projected to decline further in the coming years. The 
reasons of decline has been cited as sharp decline in production in KG deep -water 
block operated by the RIL, natural decline in the major gas producing fields and 
delay in commencement of production from Eastern O ffshore Fields. As a result of 
decline in domestic production and domestic consumption because of various 
factors, infrastructures created for natural gas are being operated at sub -optimal 

33 
 
level. The Committee also note that due to a number of factors, suc h as, carbon 
content per unit of heat and lower cost of calorific value, gas is a preferable source 
of fuel compared to oil. Taking all this factors in account and also that the 
Government‟s vision of having the share of natural gas in the primary energy mix of 
the Country at 15% by 2030, the Committee are concerned that adequate efforts 
are not being taken to increase domestic production of gas even though potential 
for the same exists in the Country. It is also required to fulfil the Government‟s 
vision o f reducing import dependency by 10% by the year 2022. The Committee 
feels that the Government should take effective steps to increase the domestic 
consumption of gas by expanding the CGD and PNG/CNG networks to various 
parts of the Country not only because gas being a cleaner and greener fuel but also 
because sufficient capabilities to increase domestic production of gas exist in the 
Country. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that all bottlenecks preventing 
production from the Eastern Offshore Gas field s are removed at an early date to 
boost domestic production of gas. The Committee also recommend that domestic 
consumption of gas in building, industry and transport sectors should be 
incentivized by the Government through policy interventions. 
Reply of the Government 
Enhancing Production from the Eastern Offshore Gas fields 
 
ONGC is giving major thrust to develop discoveries made in the Krishna Godavari 
basin in Eastern offshore. Integrated Development of G -1 & GS -15 project has 
been completed &  put on production. Vashishta, S1 and Cluster -II fields of NELP 
Block KG -DWN-98/2 field development projects are under implementation in 
Eastern offshore. The projected gas production from cluster -II is from 2018 -19 to 
2033-34 with peak gas production of 1 2.75 MMSCMD.  The projected crude oil 
production is from 2019-20 to 2030-31 with peak oil production of 80,157 BOPD.   
 
Production has commenced from well S2AB in S1 field by utilizing existing facilities 
of G -1. Development of other discoveries in KG offs hore such as KG -DWN-98/2 
(Cluster-I & III fields), GS -49 and GS -29 & G -4-6 fields etc. are under various 
stages of appraisal/ development.   
Field Development Plan for D34 discovery made by RIL was approved by the 
Management Committee and new gas  is expec ted in first quarter of  2020.  GSPC 
is also taking actions for development of gas discoveries in block, KG -OSN-2001/2 
located in Krishna Godavari basin. .    
 
Incentive for Gas production from difficult areas 
 
To incentivize gas production from difficult areas such as High Pressure High 
Temperature (HPHT) reservoirs and deepwater and ultra deepwater areas, 
government has given marketing and pricing freedom. The marketing freedom so 
granted would be capped by a ceiling price arrived at on the basis of lande d price 
of alternative fuels. 
 
As per IEA (International Energy Agency) estimate (ref. NITIAayog‟s discussion 
paper on National Energy Policy), the respective share of global oil and gas is 
expected to. However, in order to increase the share of gas from 6 .5%to 12% by 

34 
 
financial converge to 25% each. Accordingly, with no change in prevailing policy 
conditions, the share of gas in the primary energy mix can be targeted to 25% from 
the prevailing 6.5% by financial year 2035year 2022 in primary energy mix, the 
following precursors are required-  
• Changeover of old coal based power generation to natural gas based 
generation, which is environment friendly. 
• Replacing other solid and liquid fuels like Furnace oil/Naphthain industrial 
sector with the Natural Gas which would reduce the carbon footprint.  
• Inclusion of natural gas in GST in order to remove distortion in consumer 
pricing as well as to do away with the distortions due to differential VAT regime (0% 
to 26%) in different states etc. 
On the aspects of expansion of City Gas Distribution (CGD) network to increase the 
usage of natural gas in PNG/CNG segments, the Government, in year 2007, has 
established Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) under the 
PNGRB Act 2006. Under the Act, PNGRB grants the authorization to the entities for 
developing a City Gas Distribution (CGD) network in a specified Geographical Area 
(GA) of the country. CGD network supplies gas to four distinct segments – Piped 
Natural Gas (PNG) used in domestic, commercial and Indus trial segments as well 
as Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) predominantly used as auto-fuel.  
PNGRB has concluded total 7 rounds of CGD bidding to grant authorization to 
entities for developing CGD projects in different parts of the country. At present, 78 
cities covering 20 States/UTs have been approved for CGD projects by PNGRB. 
Further, PNGRB is also in process to award another 14 cities under ongoing 8th 
round of bidding.  
In order to facilitate the faster roll -out of PNG/CNG network in the country, 
Government has prioritized the domestic gas allocation for CGD entities to meet 
their entire requirement of PNG (Domestic) and CNG (transport) segments. 
About36 Lakh households are availing the benefit of domestic gas in the form of 
PNG for cooking purpose. Furthe r, existing CGD companies are also supplying 
domestic gas in the form of CNG for Transport Sector though their 1178 CNG 
stations. At present, CGD sector is consuming approx. 11.50 MMSCMD of 
indigenous domestic Gas for CNG (Transport) and PNG (Domestic) sector.  
In order to expand the coverage of CGD network in the country, possibility of 
completion of Natural Gas Grid is being explored. PNGRB has identified 226 such 
cities which will be awarded in future CGD bidding rounds in phased manner in 
synchronization with the commissioning of Natural gas grid. With these steps, 
coverage of CGD networks is expected to 318 cities by 2022. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga (PMUG) Project  
 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga (PMUG) Project is being 
implemented in order to develop gas pipeline network in the Eastern Part of the 
Country. The pipeline will connect Jagdishpur -Haldia and Bo karo-Dhamra. The 
Committee also note that for the first time, Government is providing capital grant of 
40% (Rs. 5176 crore) of the total estimated cost of Rs. 12490 crore for developing 
this gas pipeline. The Committee observe that in RE 2016 -17, Rs. 450 c rore was 
provided for the project and during this year (2017 -18) BE of Rs. 1200 crore has 
been provided. The project is likely to be completed by the year 2020. The 
Committee further note that the objective of the project is to connect Eastern part of 
the country with Natural Gas Grid and ensure the availability of clean and eco -
friendly fuel, i.e., Natural Gas to the industrial, commercial, domestic and transport 
sectors in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal. 
GAIL has bee n entrusted with the responsibility of implementing the project. The 
Committee understand that the Capital Grant will encourage the supply of eco -
friendly fuel at affordable tariffs to industries and will encourage industrial 
development, particularly the fertilizer plants in Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri. The 
project will also help expand CGD project to cities in Eastern India, namely, 
Varanasi, Patna, Jamshedpur, Cuttack, Ranchi and Kolkata. The Committee 
appreciate that Government is taking initiative to  connect the eastern region of the 
Country with gas pipelines which will result in greater use of clean fuel and reduce 
the use of Kerosene and firewood. The Committee recommend that the project 
should be implemented within the timeline prescribed and with out any cost 
escalation. To ensure this, Ministry needs to have a robust monitoring mechanism 
and the project progress should be assessed periodically. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is making concentrated efforts to implement the 
Jagdishpur-Haldia/Bokaro-Dhamra Pipeline (JHBDPL) which is popularly known as 
Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga (PMUG) project for eastern part of the country within 
the timelines prescribed and without any cost escalation. At present, Project is 
proceeding as per  schedule and no Time & Cost overruns are envisaged. In order 
to expedite the completion of this project, the progress of project is monitored 
through regular review meetings and fortnightly project progress reports.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Expansion of City Gas Distribution/PNG Network  
 
The Committee note that out of 75 Geographical Areas (GAs) authorized by 
PNGRB for development of CGD networks in the country, 57 GAs have been 
covered by CNG by 2015 -16 and remaining GAs are likely to be covered during 
2016-17. The Committee also note tha t 8th bidding round has been launched 

36 
 
recently for seven new GAs (8 districts) across the country i.e. Karnal, Ambala 
Kurukshetra, South Goa, Baghpat, Yanam, Kolhapur and Bulandshahar. The 
Committee understand that PNGRB has envisaged a phased roll out pla n for 
development of CGD networks in various parts of the country depending on the 
natural gas pipeline connectivity/natural gas availability and feasibility for grant of 
authorization to develop CGD networks in the country. As regards CNG, the 
Committee n ote that a total of 1167 CNG stations were operating in the Country 
catering to the fuel requirements of 28,44,616 CNG vehicles through 32 CGD 
entities as on September 2016. As regards domestic PNG connections, there were 
34.21 lakh connections as on 1 Jan uary 2017. A total of about 78 lakh PNG 
domestic connections are targeted to be provided by the end of 2017 and about 97 
lakh connections are targeted to be provided till the year 2021. The Committee feel 
that the implementation of CGD projects is very slo w and are unable to understand 
as to how the target of providing the 43.79 lakh new connections by December 
2017 is going to be achieved. The Committee expect the Ministry to share its plan 
in this regard. 
  
The Committee understand that the total quantity  of natural gas required for CNG 
and PNG under City Gas Distribution is to be provided from the domestically 
produced natural gas. The availability of Gas to be supplied in case the targeted 
PNG connections are made functional is also an issue. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommend that availability of adequate natural gas should also be ensured 
alongwith necessary infrastructure for expansion of CGD and PNG projects in order 
to enable people living in all parts of the Country have access to efficient and 
cleaner fuels. Also Ministry should monitor the progress of such projects so that the 
prescribed targets are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
On the aspects of expansion of City Gas Distribution (CGD) network, the 
Government, in year 2007, has established Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) under the PNGRB Act 2006. Under the Act, PNGRB grants the 
authorization to the entities for developing a City Gas Distribution (CGD) network in 
a specified Geographical Area (GA) of the country. CGD network supplies gas to 
four distinct segments – Piped Natural Gas (PNG) used in domestic, commercial 
and Industrial segments as well as Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) predominantly 
used as auto-fuel.  
At present, 78 cities covering 20 States/UTs have been approved for CGD 
projects by PNGRB. Further, PNGRB is also in process to award another 14 cities 
under ongoing 8th round of bidding. In order to expa nd the coverage of CGD 
network in the country, PNGRB has identified 226 such cities which will be awarded 
in future CGD bidding rounds in phased manner in synchronization with the 
commissioning of Natural gas grid. With these steps, coverage of CGD network s is 
expected to 318 cities by 2022. 
PNGRB is regularly monitoring the progress in each of the GA authorized 
and to monitor the targets, review meetings are held by the Board to evaluate the 
performance of the entities. Corrective measures are also taken i n line with the 
provisions of extant Regulations as notiﬁed under the PNGRB Act, 2006. 

37 
 
As on 31st March 2017, the existing CGDs are supplying Natural Gas to 
about 36 Lakh households in the form of PNG. In order to achieve the targets, 
GAIL, along with its JVs/Subsidiaries CGD companies, shall endeavour to connect 
9 Lakh new Households with PNG in FY 2017-18. 
 
In order to facilitate the faster roll -out of PNG/CNG network in the country, 
Government has prioritized the domestic gas allocation for CGD entities to meet 
their entire requirement of PNG (Domestic) and CNG (transport) segments. 
Further, the Government of India has also issued advisory to the State 
Governments for treating CGD network as a Public utility service as well as 
extending necessary supports  to CGDs by providing timely permissions at 
reasonable road restoration charges. It is also being pursued for suitable 
modifications in extant rules/guidelines/by -laws by earmarking of land area for new 
CNG at the planning stage of City/town as well as cre ating the provisions of gas 
pipeline in residential and commercial buildings at the architectural design stage, at 
least in Government buildings/ High-rise apartments.     
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Reduction of Customs Duty on LNG  
 
The Committee note that the Government has proposed reduction of Customs duty 
on LNG from 5% to 2.5% during the financial year 2017-18. The reduction in duty is 
expected to result in sa vings of about Rs. 900 crore to consumers based on LNG 
consumption during the year 2015 -16. As the reduction will make LNG price 
competitive to alternate fuels, the move is expected to give boost to gas as fuel in 
industries such as steel, fertilizer, powe r, etc. which are major users of LNG. It will 
provide incentive to industries to switch over to LNG from other competing fuels. 
The Committee feel that the reduction can help revive idle gas -based power plants. 
The Committee appreciate that the move will r esult in greater use of LNG which is 
more environment-friendly compared to other conventional fuels and will also help 
the nation to honour its commitment of limiting carbon emissions. Further, in view of 
the Committee, increase in use of gas is necessary to improve the share of gas in 
energy mix of the Country and the increase in demand for LNG may spur the 
production of gas which is domestically available. It may also lead to creation of 
mid-stream infrastructure from LNG terminals to gas pipelines and ci ty gas 
distribution networks. While steps such as reduction of duties may make gas 
utilization attractive and viable, the Committee recommend that the Government 
needs to take more policy measures and make gas an attractive choice of 
industries. 
Reply of the Government 
Till FY 2016 -17, import of LNG for Power sector was only exempted from 
custom duty subject to certain conditions. However, other industrial sectors like 
fertilizer, LPG etcwas bearing the burden of Custom duty @ 5% plus education 

38 
 
cess.  In order to make affordable LNG, Government of India has reduced the 
custom duty on LNG import from 5% to 2.5% during FY 2017-18.   
 
As per the recommendations of Hon‟ble Committee, efforts will be made for 
considering a case to exemptfrom payment of custom duty to gas based industries 
and domestic consumers. 
Further, in connection with Finance Minister Budget Speech 2017 -18, 
input/material on the issue of “Exemption of custom duty n import of LNG”  as per 
the following was sent to the Ministry of Finance for consideration;  
 
“Crude oil is exempt from Custom Duty.  However, 5% Custom Duty is 
imposed on LNG.  This additional cost is ultimately passed on to consumers.  
Exemption of Custom Duty on LNG will improve the afforability of imported 
RLNG for consumption and promote its use as an alternative source and will 
help in filling the wide gap in supply of Natural Gas in the contry.  This 
dispensatinmay be given to all enduser – industries, like LPG, Steel, 
Petrochemical and Refinery etc”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Exploration and Production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas  
 
The Committee note that in last three years the total crude oil production in India 
was 36.95 MMT in 2015 -16, 37.46 MMT in 2014 -15 and 37.78 MMT in 2013 -14 
respectively. In 2016 -17 (upto December 2016), the production was 27.04 MMT. 
Similarly, the production of natural gas in last three years has been 97 MMSCMD in 
2013-14, 92.2 MMSCMD in 2014 -15 and 88.1 MMSCMD in 2015 -16 while in 2016-
17 (upto December 2016), the production of natural gas was 86.9 MMSCMD. It can 
be seen that crude oil production show eithe r stagnant and slightly declining trend 
and the scenario is same for natural gas also. Crude oil production is declining 
because major production fields of the country, namely, Mumbai High, Gujarat and 
NE region have aged and production in those fields are  declining after having 
peaked. The sharp fall in natural gas production is being attributed to decline in 
production coming from KG deep -water block operated by RIL, natural decline in 
old gas fields, accidents in Andhra Pradesh gas fields (Tatipaka) and 
bandhs/blockades in NE region. Even the projected production figures of crude oil 
show that the production in near future is going to decline. The Committee 
understand that the DGH foresees increase in hydrocarbon production mostly from 
the natural gas as development plans of regular and small fields have been 
finalised. Some production may also come from CBM gas. The Committee are of 
the view that a large part of the Country is still unexplored and adequate efforts 
should be made for exploration of all par ts of the country and the way to increase 
the domestic production of crude oil and natural gas is to allocate sufficient funds 
for the purpose and ensuring that the funds are fruitfully spent. Similarly, the 
IOR/EOR technologies in order to get more production from the existing and ageing 
fields should also be a priority. In the year 2015 -16, about 1.32 MMT of oil 

39 
 
production was achieved through IOR/EOR technologies alone. The Committee 
recommend that the field development plans in respect of eastern -offshore fields 
should be closely monitored for production. The Committee recommend that state -
of-the-art IOR/EOR technologies should be implemented in the oil fields from where 
production is stagnating or declining by making adequate allocation in the IEBR of 
the respective PSUs. 
Reply of the Government 
Close Monitoring of Field development plans of Eastern-offshore fields 
 
The management Committee and Directorate General of Hydrocarbon are 
closely monitoring the progress of Field development plans.  In addition, 
performance of Oil PSUs is being monitored on monthly basis by the 
Secretary(P&NG).   
 
Financing of oil & gas Projects 
The funding of oil & gas projects by Oil PSUs is being done though their own 
resources or borrowings.  Government is not funding to Oil PSUs for the 
exploration and development projects.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 16 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
Allocation of Blocks under HELP  
 
The Committee note that the Government has come out with a number of policy 
initiatives for exploration and production of crude oil and gas. Hydrocarbon 
Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP) is the latest policy brought in by the 
Government. This policy provides for single license for conventional and non -
conventional hydrocarbons, marketing and pricing freedom and allows 100% FDI 
among other things. The award of blocks under this policy will commence once the 
Draft Model Revenue Sharing contract and Noti ce Inviting Offer are finalized and 
approved and Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) is operationalised. The 
Committee are unhappy that allocation of blocks under licensing regimes take a 
very long time and start of production from those blocks take even more time. For 
instance, HELP was announced more than one year ago and till now bidding under 
the policy is yet to take place as the required paperwork is not ready.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should finalise the Revenue 
Sharing contract under HELP and also OALP without any further delay and 
announce launch for bidding and all the measures that are required to be taken for 
awarding of blocks should be kept ready. 
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has finalized the Model Revenue Sh aring Contracts, Notice Inviting 
Offer and other documents under Hydrocarbon Exploration & Licensing Policy 
(HELP) and the HELP has been launched w.e.f. 1 -7-2017.  The Open Acreage 
Licensing Policy (OALP) has also been notified on 30 -6-2017. Exploration bl ocks 
under HELP will be offered as per approved policy. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
Discovered Small Field Policy  
 
The Committee note that Discovered Small Field Policy aims at monetizing 67 
discovered small fields by ONGC and OIL in a time bound manner to boost 
domestic production of Oil and Gas. This policy offers improved fiscal terms viz., no 
oil cess applicable on  crude oil production, moderate royalty rates, no upfront 
signature bonus, pricing and marketing freedom for oil and gas and no carried 
interest by NOCs. Under the policy, attractive incentives are provided to the start -
ups also. The Committee also note th at the Government has launched the 
Discovered Small Field (DSF) Bid Round - 2016 in May 2016 which was the first 
bidding round in six years. Under the DSF Bid round, 67 fields clubbed under 46 
contract areas were put on offer which included areas located On land, Shallow 
water offshore and in Deepwater Offshore. After examining the bids as per 
prescribed guidelines, the award of contracts in 31 contract areas has been 
approved by the Union Cabinet. The Committee understand that the awarded fields 
would result in adding 15000 Barrel of Oil Per Day (BOPD) and 2 MMSCMD of gas 
to the domestic production of oil and gas.  
 
The Committee feel that early start of production is necessary from these fields 
because the domestic production of oil and gas are declining and  production from 
all available sources is essential for meeting the Government‟s vision of reducing 
import by 10% by 2022. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the awarded 
blocks should be brought under production through pro -active measures. Further, 
the Committee also recommend that the remaining contract areas should also be 
put under bid again in order to ensure that there is no inordinate delay in 
monetizing those fields. 
Reply of the Government 
Contracts under Discovered Small Field Policy Bid Round -2016 were signed 
on 27th March, 2017. Directorate General of Hydrocarbons is going to monitor the 
progress of these contracts and will provide all possible support to the operators for 
fast track mone tization of the fields. As recommended, remaining fields of first 
round identified under Discovered Small Field Policy will be taken up for bidding in 
near future.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 

41 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
IEBR of the Oil PSUs  
 
The Committee note that the actual IEBR expenditure of the oil PSUs in the year 
2015-16 was Rs. 97223.32 crore. In the year 2016 -17, the BE figures are Rs. 
87214.56 crore and RE figure is Rs. 104673.56 crore. T he BE for 2017 -18 has 
been reduced to Rs. 86027.29 crore. The Committee are unhappy at such great 
variation in figures for BE, RE and Actual in the last two years as it shows poor 
planning on the part of PSUs. The Committee also note that the outlay for 
investment in public sector undertakings during 2017-18 has been reduced from BE 
2016-17 (Rs. 60131.45 crore) and RE 2016 -17 (Rs. 75731.59 crore) to Rs. 
52749.14 crore. If sectoral allocations are analysed, it may be seen that there is 
substantial variation in allocations for „Refinery and Marketing‟ sector and 
„Petrochemicals‟ sector. In 2014-15, in „Refinery and Marketing‟ sector the „Actual‟ 
expenditure was almost 30% higher than the BE while in case of „Petrochemicals‟ 
sector the „Actual‟‟ expenditure was  three times more than the BE amount. As 
regards allocation in 2016 -17 in Exploration sector, the RE is Rs. 75731.59 crore 
which is almost 25% more than the BE amount. IN BE 2017 -18, the allocation for 
Exploration is again reduced by more than 30% to Rs. 5 2749.14 crore. The 
reduction in allocation for exploration goes against the necessity of expanding 
exploration activities in newer areas in order to enhance domestic production. The 
Committee are concerned at such high mismatch of figures at BE and RE stage.   
In case of IEBR of oil PSUs, the comparison of figures of BE, RE and Actuals also 
show substantial variation. In case of HPCL, the actual expenditure in Refining &  
Marketing Sector 2015-16 was Rs. 5896.90 crore but in BE 2016 -17 it was reduced 
to Rs. 1907.24 crore. At the RE stage, however, the amount was increased again 
to Rs. 5642.52 crore. Rs. 7073.75 crore has been allocated for BE 2017 -18. For 
BPCL, the actual expenditure in Refining & Marketing Sector in 2015 -16 was Rs. 
6933 crore. In BE 2016 -17, it was increased to Rs. 9797 crore but at RE stage, it 
had to be reduced to Rs. 6832.80 crore. Rs. 5600.64 crore has been allocated in 
BE 2017 -18. For upstream PSUs li ke OIL, the situation is same. For OIL, the 
allocation in Exploration & Production sector in the BE 2016 -17 was Rs. 11381.89 
crore while at RE stage it was enhanced by almost 50% to Rs. 17012.73 crore. In 
BE 2017-18, the amount has again been reduced to Rs. 9252.34 crore.  
 
The Committee are concerned to find substantial variation in allocations and 
expenditure of the IEBR of the PSUs. The Committee feel that this reflects poor 
planning on the part of PSUs. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
financial estimates of the oil PSUs should be prepared with adequate caution to 
avoid such substantial variations. The Committee also recommend that the 
activities proposed for a particular year in respect of the PSUs for which funds have 
been allocated should normally be undertaken. 
Reply of the Government 
IEBR of the Oil PSUs 
(a) Reasons for variation in BE for 2017-18 as compared to actual expenditure 
in 2015-16, BE and RE for 2016-17. 

42 
 
During the financial year 2015 -16 against BE of Rs.76565.46 crore of I&EBR, 
Rs.97223.32 crore was utilised for implementation of ongoing and new projects. 
During 2016 -17, the actual funds utilised was Rs.104501.89 crore  (provisional) 
against BE & RE of Rs.87214.56 crore and Rs.104673.56 crore respectively.  BE 
for 2017-18 has been proposed at Rs.86027.29 crore. It may be mentioned that as 
per Budget Document 2017 -18, Rs.700.00 crore proposed by BPCL for 2017 -18 
under Petrochemicals sector has not been printed in the document inadvertently. 
Therefore, total I&EBR for BPCL is presen tly shown as Rs.7100.64 crore as 
against the proposed figure of  Rs.7800.64 and accordingly, total I&EBR shown 
(with missing entry) comes to Rs.86027.29 crore as against total proposed Rs. 
86727.29 crore. CPSE -wise Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (I &EBR)- 
Actuals for 2015 -16, BE, RE and Actuals for 2016 -17 and BE 2017 -18 is given 
below: 
                                                                                                                     (Rs. in 
crore) 
CPSE 
 
2015-16 
 
2016-17 
 
2017-18 
Actuals BE RE Actual * BE 
ONGC 30110.43 29307.20 28881.68 28009.90 29967.82 
OVL 6470.24 14843.00 19450.00 18360.31 7088.00 
OIL 12262.89 11381.89 17012.73 10514.74 9252.34 
GAIL 1880.00 1787.59 1843.00 1730.29 2053.00 
IOCL 14368.58 13772.87 19676.86 20736.93 20161.79 
HPCL 5917.74 1974.26 5650.00 5860.46 7110.00 
BPCL ** 8287.00 10597.00 8843.80 16807.48 7100.64 
MRPL 15214.76 2270.75 600.00 614.38 1137.75 
CPCL 1342.74 1073.00 1229.00 1293.21 845.00 
NRL 1323.57 157.00 1435.49 500.84 1260.95 
Balmer & 
Lawrie  
45.37 50.00 51.00 73.35 50.00 
Total 97223.32 87214.56 104673.56 104501.89 86027.29 
* : Provisional 
**: As per Budget Document 2017-18, Rs.700.00 crore proposed by BPCL for 2017-
18 under Petrochemicals has not been printed in the document. Therefore, total 
I&EBR for BPCL is Rs.7100.64 crore against Rs.7800.64 crore and accordingly, 
total I&EBR comes to Rs.86027.29 crore against Rs..86727.29 crore. 
CPSE-wise Reasons for variation are as follows: 
ONGC 
On overall basis, IEBR outlay (BE) for 2017 -18 of Rs.29967.82 crore is lower by 
Rs.142 crore vis -à-vis actual expenditure of Rs.30110.43 crore for 2015 -16. 
Expenditure towards core E&P activities viz. survey, exploratory and development 

43 
 
drilling is propose d to increase mainly due to higher level  of  physical  targets of 
these  E&P activities.  However,  there  is  reduction  under  integration  activities, 
wherein Rs.1874 crore was spent in 2015-16 as compared to a  target of only Rs.13 
crore in BE 2017 -18, as the planned target of equity infusion /subscription of 
warrants in OpAL was met in 2015 -16 itself and at present there are no major 
integration projects in the pipeline.  BE 2017 -18 is higher as compared to BE 2016 -
17 and RE 2016-17 by Rs.660.62 crore and Rs.1086.14 crore respectively.  
 
OVL 
OVL‟s BE 2017-18 for exploration and development of existing projects, excluding 
new acquisitions, is Rs.7088 crore. Expenditure for acquisition of assets is not 
considered in BE 2017-18 due to uncertainty of finalization of such acquisition. 
The approved BE 2016 -17 and RE 2016 -17 are Rs.14843 crore and Rs.19450 
crore respectively. BE 2016 -17 includes acquisition expenditure of Rs.7800 crore 
for 15% Vankorneft, Russia; and RE 2016 -17 includes acquisition expenditure  of 
Rs.12808 crore for 26% Vankorneft Russia. Therefore, BE 2016 -17 and RE 2016 -
17 excluding new acquisition are Rs.7043 crore and Rs.6642 crore respectively.  
OIL 
IEBR outlay (RE) in  2016 -17 of Rs.17012.73 crore includes projected investment 
of Rs.6606 c rore for acquisition of stake in two Russian assets viz., LLC Taas -
Yuryakh Neftegazodobycha (Tass Yuryakh) and JSCVankorneft (Vankorneft) from 
Rosneft Oil Company, which was not planned at BE 2016 -17. BE 2017 -18 of 
Rs.9252.34 crore is lower as compared to RE 2016 -17 at Rs.17012.73 crore 
because OIL does not have any plan of acquisition during 2017-18.  
 
GAIL 
The actual expenditure in 2015 -16 was Rs.1880 crore and total CAPEX planned in 
BE and RE 2016 -17 was Rs.1787.59 crore and Rs.1843.00 crore respectively . As 
compared to that total CAPEX planned under BE 2017 -18 has increased to 
Rs.2053 crore. This excludes the Rs.1200 crore which has been obtained as 
budgetary support (viable gap funding) for Jagdishpur -Haldia & Bokaro -Dhamra 
Pipeline (Phase-I) pipeline during 2017-18. 
The increase of planned CAPEX in RE 2016 -17 and in BE 2017 -18 is mainly 
because of CAPEX planned for natural gas pipeline. On account of thrust of 
execution of various activities under Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga Project, a Capex 
of Rs.1650 cr ore is expected to be spent in 2017 -18 for the Jagdishpur Haldia -
Bokaro-Dhamra pipeline project alone. An amount of Rs.1200 crore is budgeted 
from Government of India during 2017 -18 as viability gap funding (VGF) for this 
project 
 
IOCL  
 
The actual expenditure in 2015 -16 was Rs.14368.58 crore and total CAPEX 
planned in BE and RE in 2016 -17 was Rs.13772.87 crore and Rs.19676.86 crore 
respectively.  

44 
 
BE 2017-18 with an outlay of Rs.20161.79 crore  is higher than actual expenditure 
for 2015-16 due to reasons as under: 
 Higher provision kept for pipeline projects (Rs.1890 crore against actual 
expenditure of Rs.1078 crore in 2015-16) 
 Higher provision kept for marketing projects (Rs.5988 crore against actual 
expenditure of Rs.3512 crore in 2015-16) 
 BE 2017-18 is higher than RE for 2016 -17 due to provision for the projects of 
fuel upgradation, etc. 
 
BPCL 
BE 2017-18 of Rs.7100.64 crore is lower as  compared to BE/RE in 2016 -17 and 
actual expenditure in 2015 -16 due to higher CAPEX for major refinery  p rojects 
nearing completion / completed  upto March 2017 viz.  Conversion of CRU to ISOM 
at Mumbai Refinery (MR), IREP at Kochi Refinery & Installation of DHT at MR. 
Work on few marketing projects where all approvals have recently been obtained 
are having lower phasing during 2017 -18 and this would pick up in future years for 
these projects. Provision was made during 2016 -17 for Exploration & Production 
Activities through BPRL for investment to be made in Russian assets. 
 
HPCL 
Major projects, Vizag Refinery Modernization Project and Mumbai Refinery 
Expansion Project will contribute significantly in 2017 -18, therefore,  BE 2017 -18 is 
higher at Rs.7110 crore as compared to actual of 2015 -16  and BE & RE of  2016 -
17. 
 
CPCL 
 
The BE 2017 -18 at Rs.845 crore is lower than actual expenditure in 2015 -16, BE 
2016-17 and RE 2016 -17 primarily on account of major projects which are under 
execution during the year 2016-17 are nearing completion as detailed below: 
 Crude Oil Pipeline: Budget increased in 2017-18. Overall progress of around 
60% by 2016-17. 
 Resid Upgradation: Overall progress of around 95% achieved in 2016 -17 
and DCU has achieved mechanical completion by Mar‟17. Hence, less 
quantum of jobs left over for 2017-18. 
 Mounded Bullets: Project completed and commissioned in 2016-17. 
 BS-IV DHDS Revamp: Mechanical Completion by May‟17. All major 
equipment have been installed by 2016-17. 
 BS - VI Projects: Budget increased in 2017 -18 for procurement of long lead 
items. Project completion by Sept‟19. 
 RLNG: Project under development of Basic Design & Engineering Package. 
  
         

45 
 
MRPL 
The IEBR (BE) for financial year 2015 -16 was Rs.2,143.87 crore which was 
subsequently reduced to Rs.1,862.19 crore at RE stage due to reduction in 
payments to be made for Phase -III expansion  project and SPM project. Against 
this, the CAPEX expenditure in respect of Phase III Project, PPU and CCR Revamp 
totaling Rs.1502.03 crore was incurred as part of Refinery expansion project. In 
addition, a provisioning of Rs.13,712.73 crore was kept towar ds overdue payments 
of NIOC Iran, taking total actual IEBR to Rs.15,214.76 cror 
The IEBR (BE) for financial year 2016 -17 was Rs.2,270.75 crore which was 
subsequently reduced to Rs.600 crore as the projects envisaged at BE stage could 
not materialize and he nce were not included in revised estimates. The actual 
expenditure during 2016-17 was Rs.614.38 crore. 
NRL 
Out of an IEBR of Rs.1260.95 crore during 2017 -18, CAPEX is kept Rs.375.00 
crore considering anticipated expenditure of Rs.250 crore against DHDT pro ject, 
Rs.100 crore against additional facility schemes in refinery and marketing 
terminals. The BE 2017 -18 is lower since approval for NRL‟s refinery expansion 
and finalisation of JV agreement for the Bio-refinery projects are yet to be obtained. 
For the a bove two projects and proposed Indo -Bangla pipeline project, a token 
amount of Rs.25 crore has been kept as „line entry‟ to meet emerging requirements 
during the year.  During 2015 -16 actual IEBR was Rs.1323.57 crore and during 
2016-17 actual IEBR was Rs.5 00.84 crore.  The main reasons for variation in BE 
2017-18 vis-à-vis 2015-16 and 2016-17 due to absence of approved ongoing major 
projects other than the DHDT. 
 
Balmer Lawrie & Company 
 
There is not much variation in BE for 2017 -18 as compared to actual in  2015-16 
and BE &RE for 2016 -17 as actual in 2015 -16 was  Rs.45.37 crore while BE and 
RE for 2016 -17 was Rs.50.00 crore and Rs.51.00 crore respectively. BE for 2017 -
18 is Rs.50.00 crore  
(b)  Reasons for reduction of I&EBR for Exploration and Production activi ties 
in BE 2017-18 as compared to BE  and RE for 2016-17 
ONGC  
IEBR for Exploration activities by ONGC in BE and RE 2016 -17 was  lower at 
Rs.9150 crore and Rs.8191 crore respectively compared to BE 2017 -18 is Rs.9497 
crore.  
OVL 
OVL‟s BE 2017-18 for exploration and development of existing projects, excluding 
new acquisitions, is Rs.7088 crore. Expenditure for acquisition of assets is not 
considered in BE 2017-18 due to uncertainty of finalization of such acquisition. 

46 
 
The approved BE 2016 -17 and RE 201 6-17 are Rs.14843 crore and Rs.19450 
crore respectively. BE 2016 -17 includes acquisition expenditure of Rs.7800 crore 
for 15% Vankorneft, Russia; and RE 2016 -17 includes acquisition expenditure of 
Rs.12808 crore for 26% Vankorneft Russia. Therefore, BE 201 6-17 and RE 2016 -
17 excluding new acquisition are Rs.7043 crore and Rs.6642 crore respectively.  
OIL 
RE 2016-17 includes projected investment of Rs.6606 crore for acquisition of stake 
in two Russian assets viz., LLC Taas -Yuryakh Neftegazodobycha (Tass Yury akh) 
and JSCVankorneft (Vankorneft) from Rosneft Oil Company, which was not 
planned at BE 2016-17. BE 2017-18 is lower as compared to RE 2016 -17 because 
OIL does not have any plan of acquisition during 2017-18.  
 
GAIL 
 
The I&EBR of GAIL for the Exploration and Production sector includes all segments 
other than Petrochemicals in which GAIL operates, i.e Pipelines, Business 
Development projects, Exploration and Production, Equity investment in JVs/ 
Subsidiaries etc. are clubbed under Exploration and Productio n sector.  In case of 
GAIL (India) there has been no reduction of I&EBR in E&P sector in BE 2017 -18 
(Rs. 1952 crore)  as compared to I&EBR of E&P sector in BE 2016 -17 (Rs.1735 
crore) and in RE 2016 -17 (Rs.1508  crore). However, the Capex in the E&P 
activities has seen a gradual reduction at  Rs.66 crore in BE 2017 -18 from BE Rs. 
78 crore and RE Rs.81 crore. 
The Exploration budget for the exploration companies is based on the Minimum 
Work Programme committed in the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) and sprea d 
in the 3 -4 financial years as per the timelines in the PSC. Most of the exploration 
activities for the E&P blocks awarded in NELP -IX (awarded in the year 2012), are 
already completed or are likely to be completed during FY 2017 -18 except for one 
block in Assam.   
Further, exploration activities in GAIL Operated block (awarded in NELP -VII bidding 
round) could not be carried out as Petroleum Exploration License was not extended 
after initial period of 4 years. The block was relinquished in June 2016 without  
drilling three exploratory wells. 
IOCL 
 
IOCL has reported that for E&P activities BE & RE during 2016 -17 and BE for 
2017-18  is Rs.1997.75 crore, Rs. 6860.79 crore and Rs.2953.00 crore 
respectively.  The main reason for variations in BE 2017 -18 is lower than RE 2016-
17  primarily because a higher provision  was kept in RE 2016 -17 for payment 
towards acquisition of overseas E&P assets. 
 
BPCL  
BPCL has reported that for E&P activities BE & RE during 2016 -17 and BE for 
2017-18  is Rs.800 crore, Rs.2011 crore and Rs.1500 crore respectively.  The main 
reason for  a lower in BE 2017-18  as compared to RE 2016-17 is as follows:  

47 
 
 
RE 2016-17 was higher than BE 2017 -18 as the Foreign Blocks exploration phase 
was over and now the blocks are progressing  to appraisal / pre-development phase 
which require less CAPEX than the exploration phase. Also in 2016 -17, BPRL in 
consortium with IOC L and OIL India was in discussion to acquire stake in two 
Russian entities.    
HPCL 
HPCL has non-operating minority Participating Interest (PI) in consortium with other 
oil CPSEs and E&P companies in 20 Exploration Blocks. BE 2016 -17 was made 
based on the work programs received from the Operators and the expected 
expenditure proportionate to HPCL‟s PI. The RE 2016 -17 was revised to Rs.7.48 
crore from Rs.67.02 crore mainly because of lower expenditure in the following two 
exploration blocks: 
 For Block MB -OSN-2010/2, Rs.30 crore was taken as the estimated 
expenditure while preparing the BE. However, based on the 3 -D seismic 
interpretation, the Consortium decided not to go ahead with drilling of the well 
as the block was under high risk category and decided to relinquish this block.  
 Block CY-DWN-2004/3 – Consortium decided to relinquish this block without 
drilling a well due to poor prospectivity and submitted a proposal to DGH for 
waiver of cost of unfinished committed work program. Provision for expenses 
amounting to Rs.34.27 crore towards the cost of unfinished committed work 
program was made in BE 2016 -17, which as the issue is yet to be decided by 
DGH, has now been shifted to BE 2017-18. 
 
In view of the above, BE 2017-18 has been kept at Rs.36.25 crore. 
 
(c) Reasons for higher actual expenditure against BE during 2014 -15 for 
Refinery and Marketing Sector 
During the financial year 2014 -15 under Refinery and Marketing sector BE 
was Rs.20054.60 crore from I&EBR. Against this actual expenditure was 
Rs.26303.44 crore. CPSE-wise reasons for variation are as follows:  
IOCL 
The actual expenditure during 2014 -15 under the head „Refining and Marketing  
against BE 2014 -15  (Rs.9724.80 crore)  was Rs.11934.82 crore due to higher 
expenditure in Paradip Refinery Project and th e assets acquired on financial lease 
at Paradip. 
BPCL  
The actual expenditure during 2014 -15 under the head „Refining and Marketing  
against BE 2014 -15  (Rs.4520.00 crore)  was Rs.5480.20 crore due to higher 
expenditure on Integrated Refinery Expansion Pro gramme (IREP) in Kochi 
Refinery.  

48 
 
HPCL 
The actual expenditure during 2014 -15 under the head „Refining and Marketing  
against BE 2014-15  (Rs.3730.00 crore)  was Rs.2652.00 crore. The main reasons 
for lower expenditure are as follows: 
Actual expenditure dur ing 2014-15 is lower than BE/RE of 2014 -15 mainly due to 
lower investment in Subsidiaries/Joint Venture projects, namely;  (1) Rajasthan 
Refinery Project;  (2) M/s Prize Petroleum (subsidiary);  (3) Joint Venture project of 
LNG Terminal at Chhara, Gujarat;  and  (4) Joint Venture Project of Cross country 
Gas pipelines with GSPC/IOC/BPC and HPCL projects (A) Calico Land Tankages 
(B) HGU revamp (C)  Mumbai Refinery Master Plan Project. 
CPCL 
 
The actual expenditure during 2014 -15 under the head „Refining and Marketing  
against BE 2014-15  (Rs.1102.00 crore)  was Rs.465.90 crore. The main reason for 
lower actual expenditure is delay in obtaining Environmental Clearance for Resid 
project.  
MRPL 
 
The IEBR at BE for 2014 -15 for refining and marketing sector was Rs.800.15 crore 
which was enhanced to Rs.1,380 crore at RE stage keeping in view the accelerated 
process of finalising contract and making payments towards Phase III expansion 
projects. The actual expenditure was Rs.5,559.03 crore in 2014-15 including a carry 
forward of Rs 4389.07 crore.  
 
NRL 
 
In the year 2014 -15, the IEBR (BE) was Rs.177.65 crore out of which total CAPEX 
utilised was Rs.102.77 crore and balance Rs.108.72 crore was carry forw ard for 
next financial year. The shortfall in actual expenditure was primarily due to less than 
anticipated expenditure against the Wax Project, primarily due to deferred 
commissioning of the project from first quarter to last quarter of the year. 
(d) Reasons for three times actual expenditure against BE during 2014 -15 for 
Petrochemical Sector 
During the financial year 2014 -15 under Petrochemical sector BE was Rs.3008.99 
crore from I&EBR. Against this actual expenditure was Rs. 9129.71 crore. The 
reasons for variation are as follows:  
IOCL 
Against BE of Rs.886.20 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs.562.81 crore. There 
was shortfall in actual expenditure as Coke Gasification & Acetic Acid Project at 
Gujarat was dropped as the project was later found to be economically unviable.  
 

49 
 
MRPL 
 
The IEBR at BE for 2014-15 for petro-chemical sector was Rs.500 crore which was 
retained at RE stage. The actual expenditure was Rs.7,494.97 crore in 2014 -15 
including a carry forward of Rs. 5917.57 crore. 
 
(e) Clarification/justification on substantial variation in allocations and 
expenditure of the IEBR during 2014-15 and 2015-16 
During the financial year 2014 -15 against BE of Rs.80634.82 crore of Internal and 
Extra Budgetary  Resources (I&EBR), Rs.89180.00 cro re was utilised for 
implementation of ongoing and new projects. During 2015 -16, the actual funds 
utilised was Rs.97223.32 crore against BE Rs.76565.46 crore. CPSE -wise Internal 
and Extra Budgetary Resources (I&EBR) - BE, RE and Actuals  for 2014 -15 and 
2015-16 is given below: 
                                                                                                                   (Rs.crore) 
CPSE-wise reasons for variation are as follows: 
ONGC  
2014-15 
Exploratory Drilling: Against a BE target of 130 wells, 102 wells were completed 
during the year. Shortfall in drilling of 2 Deep -water, 1 Shallow water and 25 
onshore wells was mainly attributable to rough weather conditions, non -availability 
of timely environmental clearance s, unplanned repairs of rigs, naval exercise and 
Name of the 
CPSEs 
2014-15 2015-16 
BE RE  Actuals BE  RE Actuals  
ONGC 36059.07 34813.00 29997.46 36249.37 31467.45 30110.43 
OVL 14792.00 12387.00 7171.55 10402.00 8488.00 6470.24 
OIL 3632.00 3529.44 12481.07 3917.64 11304.68 12262.89 
GAIL 3104.62 2131.52 1860.70 2704.51 1888.84 1880.00 
IOCL 11375.00 9367.00 14313.68 10409.00 11502.91 14368.58 
HPCL 3773.33 1801.64 2669.61 1791.85 1539.78 5917.74 
BPCL  5250.00 5793.50 6874.75 6501.32 7250.00 8287.00 
MRPL 1300.15 1880.00 13054.00 2143.87 1862.19 15214.76 
CPCL 1102.00 617.00 465.90 2230.90 1250.00 1342.74 
NRL 177.65 111.00 211.49 115.00 220.90 1323.57 
Balmer & 
Lawrie  62.00 158.00 79.79 100.00 100.00 45.37 
Biecco 
Lawrie Ltd. 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total 80634.82 72589.10 89180.00 76565.46 76874.75 97223.32 

50 
 
prolonged testing of wells under drilling. Progress was also hampered due to non -
availability of hired rigs as per plan because of delay in tenders etc. and also due to 
Bandhs/Barricades etc. at some of the units.   
Development Drilling: Against BE target of 294 wells, 268 wells could be drilled 
during the year. This shortfall of drilling of 26 wells, particularly in offshore was 
mainly due to utilisation of available rig months towards work-over and side-tracking 
of wells, loss of available rig months on account of down hole complications, waiting 
on weather etc. Further, non -availability of chartered rigs has also impacted the rig 
month availability against the plan.  
Capital: Underutilisation is mainly attr ibutable to delay in execution of ongoing 
projects like Tapti Daman Block, C -Series Ph-III, Pipeline Replacement Project Ph -
III, Sagar Samrat Conversion, Integrated Development of B -127 Cluster Fields, 
Ahmedabad-Mehsana and Ankleshwar Redevelopment projects etc. 
R & D: No major variation in the expenditure under this head vis -à-vis approved BE 
targets. 
Domestic JV: Excess utilization is due to additional development activities carried 
out by JV group. 
Integration Project:  Infusion of equity to ONGC Petro additions Limited (OPaL) 
and ONGC Tripura Power Company (OTPC) under the rights issue to the tune of 
Rs.750 crore and Rs.464 Crore respectively. 
 2015-16 
Survey: Lower achievement of physical targets due to intense fishing  activities, 
bankruptcy of the contractor(implication of about Rs.250 crore and about 3000 
Standard Line Kilometer, (SLK) of 3D Survey), inability of contractor to provide 
Seismic Job Services (SJS) and Shot Hole Drilling (SHD) services, delay in award 
of work due to re-tender, insufficient competition etc. 
Exploratory Drilling: Mainly due to non -availability of required rig months against 
chartered rigs, more than anticipated time taken in testing activities, non -availability 
of environmental clearances(ECs) and ready sites and one of the on -land rig being 
out of cycle due to damages in mast. 
Development Drilling:  Mainly attributable to delay in RFD (ready for drilling) of 
platforms in offshore, delay in mobilization of rigs, non -availability of sites in 
onshore. 
Domestic JV: Variation due to delay in execution of projects by operators. 
Integration Project: Investment in OPAL by way of subscription of convertible 
warrants. 
OVL 
BE, RE and actual expenditure by OVL during the years 2014-15 and 2015-16 is as 
under: 
                                                        

51 
 
2014-15 
The main reasons in variation in BE and actual expenditure during 2015 -16 are; no 
new acquisitions materialized during the year, delay in FID in case of Mozambique 
asset resulting in deferment of development wells and facility CAPEX, general 
delay in activ ities in Carabobo, Venezuela asset due to cash flow and contractual 
challenges, etc. In case of Brazil assets there was savings of US$ 35 Million due to 
early completion of development wells and cancellation of water injection project for 
phase-3 development. GPOC, South Sudan, the project was under force majeure 
hence budget activities stood deferred. In case of Sakhaline -I Russia, there was 
deferment of one well and spillover of completion of some components of 
development of Arkutun-Dagi phase, etc.  
 
2015-16 
 
The main reasons in variation in BE and actual expenditure during 2015 -16 are; no 
new acquisitions materialized in the year and funds earmarked could not be 
utilized. In case of Sakhalin -I asset, curtailment of JV Budget by the 
operator/partner for 2016 by about $1 billion (OVL share about Rs.1300 crore) due 
to slump in crude prices and corresponding cash flows and all non -essential sub-
projects (in Odoptu Stage -2 etc.) was shelved and LNG project (in Chayvo -2) was 
deferred, there was change in work program in MECL,OAAL, Colombia -
Development wells reduced from 82 in BE to 70 in RE resulting in outlay reduction, 
in block RC9, Colombia, one planned exploration well was deferred, etc.  
 
OIL 
 
OIL India has reported that the main reason for variation is th at OIL has carried 
forward IEBR during 2014 -15 to the extent of Rs.8707crore and Rs.8640 crore  
during 2015-16 to next year.   
 
GAIL 
 
2014-15: 
 Hindrance due to ROU problems especially in Tamilnadu and Kerala mainly in 
Kochi-Koottanad-Bengaluru-Mangalore Ph ase-II.  Further progress in  
replacement of pipelines in KG Basin had also been affected due to ROU ;  
 
 Statutory permissions and contractual issues esp. in VKPL Spurlines ;   
 Consumer tie -up was awaited for some pipelines esp. BNPL Spur lines 
(Uttaranchal)  
 
 Non approval of Phenol Acetone Project by the Board thereby leading to Capex 
shortfall  
 Time lag in payment vis -à-vis actual progress in Petrochemical expansion 
project and  slow progress of some of the contractors due to financial 
constraints. 

52 
 
 Lack of M&A opportunities  to invest in 
 Less cash call received from operators for E&P resulting in lower Capex for 
E&P activities 
 
2015-16 
 Delay in RoU acquisition led to delay in lin e pipe procurement of Gujarat region 
pipelines and also resulted in deferment of laying   
 Hindrance due to ROU problems especially in Tamil Nadu and Kerala mainly in 
Kochi-Koottanad-Bengaluru-Mangalore Phase-II  
 Due to delay in obtaining confirmations from  DoF / FCIL, award of Laying 
Works Package was delayed for JHPL. Further, non -deployment of Competent 
Authority and Revenue Manpower by Bihar State Government, RoU acquisition 
also got delayed for this pipeline.   
 
 Difficult site working condition and meager construction time window delaying 
jobs in KG basin.  
 Delay in award of tender due to abnormal variation in quoted rates in 
replacement of pipelines for Cauvery Basin  
 Higher budgeted amount was kept for non -plan CAPEX at plant and site level 
but due to  revision of work plan, there was a shortfall of non -plan CAPEX 
about Rs.700.00 crore.  
 The PBR project for rubber in JV model was on hold in view of uncertainty in 
the availability of feed  stock from M/s OPaL  
 Delay in FSRU project at Kakinada  
 No M&A opportunity could materialize during the period  
 In E&P segment sufficient cash calls from operators were not received as 
envisaged during target formulation  
 
IOCL 
2014-15 
Actual Expenditure was higher than BE primar ily due to acquisition of 10% 
participating interest in Pacific Northwest LNG Project, Canada. 
2015-16 
Actual Expenditure was higher than BE primarily due to Payment towards overseas 
E&P assets 
BPCL  
2014-15 
During 2014 -15, total actual expenditure was Rs.6874.75 crore against BE of 
Rs.5250.00 crore. The higher expenditure was due to speed up in commissioning of 
IREP Project in Kochi Refinery. 

53 
 
2015-16 
During 2015 -16, total actual expenditure was Rs.8287.00 crore against BE of 
Rs.6501.32 crore,  due to hi gher allocation for new products pipeline & associated 
infrastructure.    
HPCL 
2014-15 
Actual expenditure during 2014 -15 was lower than BE/RE 2014 -15 mainly owing to 
lower investment in Subsidiaries/Joint Venture projects, namely (1) Rajasthan 
Refinery Project; (2) M/s Prize Petroleum (subsidiary); (3) Joint Venture project of 
LNG Terminal at Chhara, Gujarat; and  (4) Joint Venture Project of Cross country 
Gas pipelines with GSPC/IOC/BPC and HPCL projects (A) Calico Land Tankages 
(B) HGU revamp (C)  Mumbai Refinery Master Plan Project. 
2015-16 
 Expenditure on turnaround cost & procurement of catalysts at Mumbai and 
Visakh Refineries was capitalized as per requirements relating to 
componentisation covered in notes to Schedule II to the Companies Act, 2013 
was not envisaged in BE/RE. 
 An amount capitalized towards proportionate share of 0.30 MMT in a Cavern 
constructed by a special purpose vehicle company named Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL)  was not envisaged in BE/RE. 
 Higher Cylinder, Valve , Regulator (CVR) expenditure due to higher 
procurement on account of large number of new LPG connection releases. 
CPCL 
2014-15 
 Plan RE and actual expenditure for the year 2014 -15 are lower as compared 
to BE 2014-15 and the variation is attributed mainly d ue  to delay in obtaining 
Environmental Clearance  for Resid project.  
 Necessity for revalidating the Engineering details finalized during DFR period 
for OHCU Revamp & Resid Project due to delay in obtaining EC by more 
than two years, which resulted in lower expenditure during the year. 
 Many of the contractors did not utilise the mobilization advance (with interest) 
and the budgeted amount towards this component could therefore  not be 
spent. 
 
2015-16 
 Plan RE and actual expenditure for the year 2015 -16 are marginally lower as 
compared to BE 2015 -16 and the variation is attributed to the following 
reasons: 

54 
 
 Lower CAPEX due to unprecedented floods in Dec‟15 resulting in de -
mobilization of labour and slow project progress for about 4 months. 
 The actual expenditure for New Crude Oil Pipeline Project is lower as 
compared to target due to delay in obtaining clearance from NHAI & PWD and 
poor response to purchase & works tender.  
 Savings in project cost of “Mounded Bullets” project. 
 Capital Expenditure during 2015-16 has been highest ever of the Company. 
MRPL 
 
The substantial variations in IEBR allocation and expenditure during 2014 -15 and 
2015-16 is due to inclusion of the carry forward of cash and bank balances and 
overdue payments on account of crude oil imports by MRPL owed to the National 
Iranian Oil Company (NIOC)  as a part of expenditure at the time of furnishing 
actual figures. 
NRL 
 
2014-15 
Variation in actual expenditure vis -à-vis BE during 2014 -15 was mainly due to less 
than anticipated expenditure against the Wax project. For the Wax project, BE was 
provided at Rs.154.65 crore, against which actual expenditure was Rs.89.57 crore 
primarily due to deferred commissioning of the project from first quarter to last 
quarter of the year. 
2015-16 
Actual expenditure was lower mainly due to lower expenditure against „Line Entry‟ 
schemes. Against refinery expansion and crude pipeline projects, an amount of 
Rs.20 crore was kept in BE and RE as „line entry‟ to meet pre-project expenditure in 
anticipation of obtaining necessary investment approval and commencement of the 
project. However, expenditure during the year was only Rs.1.94 crore. Besides, 
expenditure against other „line entry‟ schemes, viz. Bio -refinery and MS revamp 
was only Rs.0.25 crore against BE of Rs.20 crore and RE of Rs.10 crore. 
(f) The Committee recommended that the financial estimates should be 
prepared with adequate caution to avoid such substantial variation. And 
also recommended that the activities proposed for a particular year for 
which funds have been allocated should normally be undertaken 
CPSEs have been reported that while estimating the budgeted expenditure for a 
given  financial  year,  the  status of  the project, upstream and downstream 
linkages, the macroeconomic dynamics in w hich the project operates and the 
resources available for the project are some of the major factors considered. Every 
possible action is taken to ensure that the expenditure targets are met; however, in 
several cases of investment opportunities, such as ex ploration and production 
related schemes, it is very difficult to envisage them, as they involve multiple parties 
and are significantly affected by the global developments related to oil & gas 
industry and economic activities across the world.   The recomm endation of the 
Committee has been noted for compliance and all efforts would be made by the 

55 
 
CPSEs  to ensure that the activities that are proposed in a particular year for which 
funds have been allocated are undertaken.  
(g)  In case of HPCL, the actual expenditure in Refining & Marketing Sector 
for 2015 -16 was Rs.5896.90 crore, but in BE 2016 -17 it was reduced to 
Rs.1907.24 crore. At RE stage, however, the amount was increased again to 
Rs.5642.52 crore. Rs.7073.75 crore has been allocated to BE 2017-18.  
 
HPCL: 
 
HPCL‟s actual expenditure for the year 2015-16, BE/RE for the year 2016-17  (Plan 
& Non-Plan) & BE 2017-18 for Plan & Non – Plan are as follows: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sector 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Actual BE RE BE 
Plan  
E&P  20.84      67.02  7.48         36.25  
Refinery & Marketing   1407.02   1907.24   1,204.75   7,073.75  
Subtotal (Plan)   1427.86   1974.26   1212.23   7110.00 *    
Non Plan         
E&P             -                -                -                -    
Refinery & Marketing   4,489.88   4,888.00   4,437.77              -    
Subtotal (Non Plan)   4,489.88   4,888.00   4,437.77              -    
Plan + Non Plan         
E&P        20.84         67.02           7.48         36.25  
Refinery & Marketing   5896.90   6795.24   5642.52    7073.75  
Total (Plan + Non Plan)   5917.74   6862.26   5650.00    7110.00 *  
 
 *  Total outlay, with the distinction between plan and non -plan having been 
dispensed with. 
  
With removal of distinction  of Plan & Non -Plan expenditure effective 2017 -18, 
HPCL had provided expenditure data for Plan & Non -Plan for the year 2015-16 and 
2016-17 as required so as to provide a comparison with BE 2017 -18. It appears 
that while reporting BE 2016-17 to the Committee, inadvertently only Plan BE 2016-
17 of Refinery & Marketing Sector has been reported (Rs.1907.24 crore) whereas 
comparable figure is Rs.6795.24 crore. 
(h) For BPCL, the actual expenditure in Refinery & Marketing sector in 
2015-16 was Rs.6933 crore. In BE 201 6-17, it was increased to Rs.9797 crore 
but at RE stage, it had to be reduced to Rs.6832.80 crore. Rs.5600.64 crore 
has been allocated in BE 2017-18.        
 
 
 

56 
 
BPCL: 
During 2016-17,  RE was lower under Refining sector as excess Rs.748 crore was 
incurred during 2015 -16 for IREP for speeding up commissioning of the Project. 
Due to revision in scope of refinery project viz. Diesel Hydro Treatment (DHT) at 
Mumbai refinery,  project cost was revised from Rs.2443 crore to Rs.1714 crore. 
Therefore, RE was lower than BE 2016 -17. During 2017-18, lower allocation under 
refinery sector as major projects viz. IREP, ISOM & DHT are completed / nearing 
completion. Work on few marketing projects where all approvals have recently been 
obtained are having lower phasing during 2017 -18 as phasing will pick up in future 
years for these projects.  
(i) For OIL, the allocation in Exploration & Production sector in the BE 2016 -
17 was Rs.11381.89 cror e while at RE stage it was enhanced by almost 
50% to Rs.17012.73 crore. In BE 2017 -18, the amount has been reduced to 
Rs.9252.34 crore. Clarification may be provided.    
 
Oil India Limited (OIL) has stated that RE 2016 -17 was increased to Rs.17012.73 
crore from BE 2016 -17 of Rs.11381.89 crore considering the proposed investment 
of about Rs.6600.00 crore in the acquisition of stake in two Russian Assets viz. LLs 
Yuryakh and Vankorneft from Rosneft Oil Company, the National Oil Company of 
Russia. Total invest ment made by OIL till date in the above mentioned Russian 
acquisition towards initial acquisition cost and subsequent investments is 
Rs.6672.40 crore. No such investments have been planned in BE 2017 -18 and 
accordingly, the same is much lower than RE 2016 -17. I&EBR for 2017 -18 stands 
at Rs.9252.34 crore out of which CAPEX is Rs.4289.56 crore.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
International Cooperation in Petroleum Sector  
 
The Committee note that India, being one of the fastest growing economies of the 
world, will require assured supply of hydrocarbons in future to sustain its growth. It 
has only 0.3% of world‟s proven oil reserves but accounts for 4.5% of global oil 
consumption. Similarly it has 0.8% of natural gas reserves but accounts for 1.5% of 
global gas consumption. The Committee further note that the high dependence on 
imported oil and gas affects energy security and overall financial health. To meet 
these challenges, the Government needs to have robust oil diplomacy and a global 
vision. The Committee also understand that the Government is actively engaged in 
bilateral and multilateral cooperation in hydrocarbon sector with foreign countries. 
The Committee understand t hat the Oil PSUs are being encouraged to 
aggressively pursue opportunities to acquire hydrocarbon assets overseas. The 
Committee are happy to note that Indian PSUs have acquired 29.9 per cent stake 
in Tass -yurakh and 49.9 per cent stake in Vankorneft oil f ields of Russia at an 
investment of US$5.46 billion which will translate in to equity oil of 15.18 MMTOE. 
The committee also feel that Government should also engage with countries for 
long term supply agreements for natural gas and crude oil. The hosting o f events 

57 
 
like PETROTECH, International Oil & Gas Conferences and Exhibition enables 
national and international experts in the oil & gas industry to exchange views and 
share knowledge, expertise and experiences. The Committee appreciate growing 
engagements with African, South -east Asian and Latin American countries in 
Hydrocarbon sector. The Committee recommend that the bilateral and multilateral 
engagements with hydrocarbon rich countries be intensified and Ministry should 
institute a robust mechanism to re gularly follow up on agreements and MoUs 
signed and further build the momentum. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to ensure the energy security of our country, Indian oil &  gas PSUs 
are importing oil and gas on long / medium / medium / spot basis from global 
markets.  
 
Majority of Crude oil is imported by OMCs through term contracts and 
balance through spot tenders. Further, major part of term contracts are finalized 
with NO Cs of countries having exportable crude oil. The balance requirement is 
sourced through spot procurement from parties registered with OMCs. 
    For importing natural gas, our oil & gas PSUs have executed Sales and 
Purchase Agreements (SPAs) to source LNG o n long / medium term basis from 
various countries. 
        Further, in order to supplement domestic availability of crude oil and natural 
gas, MoPNG has been encouraging PSUs to acquire oil & gas assets abroad. Our 
oil and gas companies are present in 25 c ountries with investments of US$ 32.89 
billion. During the year, the estimated share of equity oil and gas for Indian PSUs 
from these was approx. 25.18 MMTOE.  
        MoPNG has noted the recommendation of the Standing Committee. MoPNG 
has been focusing to  intensify our bilateral and multilateral engagements with 
hydocarbon rich countries. 
 Based on the specific business requirements, oil & gas PSUs enter into 
agreements (MoUs, other commercial / definitive agreement) with their foreign 
counterparts under i ntimation to MoPNG. Based on agreed interests MoPNG also 
enter into MoUs with partner countries for mutual benefit. The MoUs are renewed 
on a regular basis. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
Make in India Initiative in Petroleum Sector  
 
The Committee note that the “Make in India” initiative was launched by the Prime 
Minister in September 2014 for facilitating investment, fostering innovation, 
enhancing skill development, protecting intellectual property and building best -in-

58 
 
class manufacturing infrastructure in India. The Committee also note that the 
MoPNG has constituted a Steering Committee to roll out the „Make in India‟ 
campaign in the oil and gas industry . The steering Committee consists of the 
representatives of the Ministry and the Oil PSUs. It has the mandate to devise a 
strategy and develop a roadmap for successful implementation of the „Make in 
India‟ campaign in the oil and gas industry. Sub -Groups h ave been set up for 
Upstream, Midstream and Downstream sectors. The „Make in India‟ endeavor in Oil 
& Gas sector aims to leverage the Increase in demand from increase in investment 
for indigenization. The Committee understand that studies for setting up de dicated 
manufacturing zones/ clusters catering to Oil Field Services will be undertaken 
under the initiative. Further, upstream, midstream and downstream oil companies 
have formed Indigenous Development Group (INDEG) to promote indigenization 
and are worki ng towards import substitution. Oil and Gas PSUs have also signed 
MoUs with Global Players with the aim of enhancing production and progressive 
import substitution. The Committee feel that in midstream operations, India has a 
robust infrastructure in place  that can make it a regional refinery hub as import 
content in refinery equipment and technology has come down considerably. 
Similarly, the expertise of our companies has been proved in high -end technologies 
such as construction of strategic oil caverns. In this context, the Committee feel that 
the 'Make in India' initiative is a great opportunity to not only achieve 100% 
indigenous content in all sectors of hydrocarbon in the Country but also to export 
technology as well as products from India. The Committ ee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should provide special incentives to the mid -stream 
operations to help the Country develop as a refinery hub. The Committee also 
recommend that special measures should be taken to increase indigenous content 
in the upstream operations such as manufacturing of rigs and other drilling 
equipments. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to incentivise investment in refineries, a committee of Directors of 
Refineries of PSU‟s and Centre for High Technology (CHT) was constitu ted under 
the Chairmanship of Director (Refinery), IOCL. The Committee submitted its report 
to MoPNG and report is under examination in light of GST proposed to be 
implemented throughout the country w.e.f. 01.07.2017. 
Further, in order to enhance the refin ing capacity in the country the 
Government has accorded its approval on 20.9.2013 to Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd (HPCL) to set up 9 MMTPA Refinery -cum-Petrochemical Complex 
in Barmer District of Rajasthan in collaboration with Government of Rajasth an 
(GoR). However, HPCL and Government of Rajasthan have signed a revised 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) for HPCL‟s proposed 9 million metric tonnes 
per annum (MMTPA) grass root refinery on 18.04.2017. 
HPCL along with GAIL is currently exploring the possibility to set -up a 
Greenfield Standalone Petrochemical Complex in Andhra Pradesh. MoU has been 
signed between GoAP, GAIL & HPCL on Jan 27, 2017 at Vishakhapatnam to 
facilitate investments for the petrochemical complex at Kakinada. 
 

59 
 
Oil PSUs namely, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
have proposed to jointly set up in pha sed manner an integrated refinery -cum-
petrochemical complex with a refining capacity of 60 MMTPA in Maharashtra. 
The Union Cabinet has   recently approved the Policy to provide Purchase 
Preference (linked with Local Content (PP -LC)) in all Public Sector Un dertakings 
under Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. Under the Policy, the targets of Local 
Content (LC) in the oil and gas business activities have been set. The 
manufacturers/ service providers having the capability of meeting/ exceeding the 
local conte nt targets (i.e. LC manufacturers/ LC service providers respectively) 
shall be eligible for 10% purchase preference. This will help in incentivising 
increase in indigenous content in upstream operations also. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
Skill Development in Petroleum Sector  
 
The Committee note that the Skill India initiative was launched by the Government 
in July, 2015 with the aim of developing convergence across  sectors and states in 
terms of skill training activities. The Committee also note that the Hydrocarbon 
Sector Skill Council (HSSC) has been set up in April 2016 which prepares training 
for certification based skill development programmes. The Committee fu rther note 
that an MoU for collaboration in skill development was signed between the MoPNG 
and the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship in November 2016 which 
establishes a broad framework of collaboration for providing appropriate skill 
development framework for supply of skilled manpower through vocational and 
technical training, skill up-gradation, building of new skills, mapping of existing skills 
and their certification. The Committee appreciate that under the Skill Development 
Initiative, Oil PSUs are in the process of setting up 7 Skill Development Institutes 
(SDIs) in the country. The SDIs in Bhubaneshwar, Visakhapatnam, Nagaram (AP) 
and Kochi have become operational while those at Ahmedabad, Guwahati and Rae 
Bareli are being established. Though there is no separate allocation of funds for the 
skill development initiatives, they are being funded through HSSC corpus, which is 
funded by the Oil and Gas companies both Public and Private sector. The 
Committee are happy that Oil PSUs are contri buting in establishing linkages 
between community and industry through vocational training and skill upgradation. 
This will help them get supply of skilled manpower in the long run. The Committee 
recommend that SDIs should be established in all parts of th e Country including in 
remote and hill areas so that appropriate benefit of the industry may pass on to the 
local community in terms of skill development. 
Reply of the Government 
Hydrocarbon Sector Skill Council (HSSC) was set up in April 2016 for 
certification based skill development programmes in oil and gas sector.  HSSC has 
been mandated to carry out   specific  labour  market  and  related  skill -gap  study  

60 
 
to  ensure  proxim ity  to  both  the  supply  and  demand  elements  of manpower 
required by the sector, to develop  occupational  standards,  curriculum  and  
assessment framework  for each sub sector, and other related functions like 
Training  of  Trainers,  Training  Pro vider  Accreditation,  oversee  Learner 
Certification  in  addition  to  interaction  with  industry  and existing/potential 
workforce.the HSSC is tasked to analyse skill gap and ensure training at identified 
locations with the help of accredited training providers.  
Four SDIs at Nagaram, Vizag, Bhubaneswar and Kochi have been 
established till now by oil and gas PSUs. Three more SDIs are planned at 
Ahmedabad, Guwahati and Raebareli. Apart from these SDIs, Oil and Gas PSUs, 
under their CSR initiative have set up training centres at many parts of the country.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
 
 
 
  

61 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Levy of Cess on Crude Oil  
 
The Committee note that prior to 2016, the OID cess levied on domestically 
produced crude oil under Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 was being charged 
at the rate of Rs. 4500/MT. However, as the then prevailing low international crude 
prices (around US$30/barrel) had made the fixed cess rate of Rs. 4500/MT 
unsustainable for the oil producing companies, the OID cess was changed to 20% 
ad-valorem w.e.f. 1.3.2016. The Committee also note that the international crude oil 
prices have now started increasing and it has adversely affected the financial 
health of the domestic oil producing companies. At the prevailing international 
crude price of US$ 55/barrel and at the exchange rate of 1US $ = Rs. 66, the 
burden on account of cess comes to Rs. 5322 per ton which is Rs. 822/ton more 
than the earlier rate of Rs. 4500/ton. Therefore, the existing burden of cess is 
seriously hurting the margins of the domestic oil producing companies. The 
increasing trend of international crude oil prices may result in even more burden on 
upstream oil companies. It is in this context that the Ministry of Finance was 
approached by the Upstream Oil Companies including ONGC through the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natu ral Gas to review and reduce the rate of OID Cess to 8% to 
10% ad -valorem. The Committee understand that if the OID Cess is reduced to 
10% ad-valorem, the burden per metric ton will be about Rs. 2661 per ton which is 
sustainable for the oil producing companies. The Ministry of Finance are of the view 
that the rate of OID cess may not be changed at this stage as there is still room to 
bear the cess by upstream oil companies and any reduction in cess may also 
impact revenue collection of the Government. The C ommittee feel that in view of 
stable or even declining domestic production of crude oil as also to fulfill the vision 
of the Hon‟ble Prime Minister for reducing imports by 10% in the next five years, all 
possible incentives need to be given to the domestic  oil producing companies. 
Therefore, keeping in view the severity of the situation for the finances of the 
upstream oil companies and also in the interest of domestic crude oil production, 
the Committee recommend that the MoPNG may continue to pursue the m atter 
with the Ministry of Finance regarding ad -valorem rate of cess on crude oil through 
appropriate channels regularly considering fluctuation of the international crude oil 
prices and exchange value of rupee. The Committee desire that Ministry should 
share with it the details regarding the total amount collected as OIDB cess and the 
amount utilised for the development of petroleum sector in the last three years. The 
Committee would further desire that the Government should ensure that the total 
OIDB cess  collected should be utilized specifically for the purpose for which it is 
actually collected. 
Reply of the Government 
Cess on crude oil is levied and collected by Ministry of Finance, Government of 
India. IDB has not received any apportionment for the ces s collected by the 

62 
 
Government since 1992 -93.  However, based on the information received from 
ONGC, OIL and DGH, the amount of cess collected during the last three years is 
as under: 
Financial Year Collection of Cess on crude oil by the Govt. 
2014-15 14677.24 
2015-16 14468.94 
2016-17 12778.20 
Total 41924.38 
 
Ad-valorem Rate of Cess 
OID cess levied on domestically produced crude oil under Oil Industry 
(Development) Act, 1974 was changed from Rs. 4500/tonne to 20% ad -valorem 
w.e.f. 1.3.2016 through Finance Bill 2016.  When the price of crude oil crosses 
US$ 46.5/barrel, the proposed rate of 20% will negatively impact oil companies as 
compared to earlier rates.  
 
To incentivize production from ageing fields, this Ministry has proposed to 
make the cess 10 -12% vide D.O. letter G -38011/3/2012-Fin.II/ONG-III/218 dated 
5.8.2016 and has taken up with Ministry of Finance.   However, Budget 2017 -18 
was silent on this issue .  MOPNG has again requested to Ministry of Finance to 
review the matter and make cess 10 -12% vide D.O. letter O -38011/3/2012-
Fin.II/ONG-III dated 6.2.2017.  
  
 Further in its meeting held on 21 -9-2016, CCEA approved for providing 
40% Capital Grant i.e. Rs .5,176 crore of the estimated capital cost of Rs.12,940 
crore (including inflation and interest during construction) by GoI to GAIL (India) 
Limited for execution of Phulpur -Dharma-Haldia Pipeline Project(PDHPL).  For 
ensuring smooth flow of resources, year -wise budget provision for Capital Grant 
to GAIL for PDHPL project shall be as under; 
(in crore) 
Year  2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total 
Capital Grant by 
GoI (Amount in 
Rs. Crore) 
900 1200 1500 1576 5176 
 
As per the CCEA approval, the Capital Grant amount, in absolute terms, would be 
restricted to the original cost estimate recommended above, and will be met 
through the Cess collections under the Oil Industry Development Act, 1974. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
 
 

63 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
Trans-national Pipelines  
 
The Committee note that Currently India is the third largest energy consuming 
country in the world and total consumption of petroleum products is likely to 
increase by about 60% to 368 MMT by 2024 -25. The current consumption level of 
petroleum products is 226 MMT. India being an energy importing country, about 
80% of our requirements of crude oil and a little less than 50% in case of natural 
gas are being bought from other countries.  Notwithstanding the Government‟s 
vision of reducing imports by 10% by the year 2022, in the foreseeable future, India 
is likely to continue being heavily reliant on imports of crude oil and natural gas. 
Moreover, India has had strong bilateral relations w ith the Central Asian republics 
which have huge surplus natural gas reserves. They may be a reliable source for 
meeting our long term energy needs and strengthen our energy security. The 
Committee understand that currently two trans -national pipelines are under 
consideration. The Pipeline Consortium for Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India (TAPI) pipeline, TAPI Pipeline Company Limited (TPCL) was incorporated in 
Isle of Man, a British Crown dependency and the Share Holders Agreement of 
TPCL has been sign ed in December 2015. The shareholding percentage in the 
TPCL would be Turkmenistan 85%, India 5%, Pakistan 5% and Afghanistan 5%. 
The construction of pipeline has commenced in December 2015 and is likely to be 
completed in about 7 years. The second pipelin e known as IPI Pipeline (Iran -
Pakistan-India) was envisaged to transport natural gas from South Pars gas fields 
of Iran to Pakistan and India with a carrying capacity of 60 MMSCMD of natural 
gas, to be equally supplied to India and Pakistan. However, there  has been little or 
no progress in the project since 2008 for a number of reasons. The Committee feel 
that trans-national pipelines are important elements of national energy security and 
they need to be pursued vigorously. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
TAPI project needs to be monitored closely in collaboration with other participating 
countries in order to ensure that the project is completed in time. As for IPI pipeline 
project, the Government should examine the idea of reviving the project  as 
international conditions have become favourable following lifting of sanctions 
against Iran. 
Reply of the Government 
Turkmenistan – Afghanistan – Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Project 
          MoPNG has noted the recommendations of the Standing Committee 
regarding TAPI and IPI Trans-national Pipeline projects. The TAPI pipeline is being 
pursued by Government of India with other participating countries. For timely 
completion of the TAPI  project, the pipeline consortium TAPI Pipeline Company 
Limited (TPCL) has engaged M/s ILF Beratende Ingenieure GmbH (German name 
for ILF Consulting Engineers) for providing Project  Management and FEED  
Consultancy  Services for  the  Afghanistan – Pakistan  section  of the  Pipeline.   
The   inaugural  ceremony  for  the Afghanistan portion was held in Kabul on 21st 
February, 2017. The FEED Contract inauguration in Pakistan portion of the pipeline 
was held on 03rd March, 2017. ILF would assist TPCL in car rying out various pre -

64 
 
FID activities such as Mine Clearance in Afghanistan, Detailed Route Survey, Front 
End Engineering Design, Environmental and Social Impact Assessment etc. 
 
         Further, TPCL is also in the process of appointing ADB as the Financi al 
Advisor of the Project to carry out detailed Financial Due Diligence and achieve 
Financial Closure. 
 
Iran – Pakistan – India (IPI) Pipeline Project 
 
         The last IPI meeting was held in 2008. India has been involved in discussions 
on the India-Pakistan-Iran (IPI) pipeline project as a part of the Joint Working Group 
on Oil, Gas and Petrochemicals with Iran. However, no pact has been signed in this 
regard. In the light of the US / UN sanctions on Iran earlier, the IPI Project didn‟t 
make much of progress.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
  

65 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) and Centres of 
Excellence  
 
The Committee note that the construction of permanent campus of RGIPT at Jais, 
district Amethi, Uttar Pradesh is almost complete and has already been 
inaugurated in October, 2016. The Institute has started functioning from the new 
premises. The Committee a lso, however, note that progress of the RGIPT campus 
in Sibsagar, Assam is highly unsatisfactory. Ever since the foundation stone was 
laid in February, 2011, the project has got delayed due to a number of reasons 
including change of contractors, land prepa ration for construction, etc. The Assam 
centre of RGIPT is expected to operate from its temporary campus from the 
academic session 2017-18. A four member committee has now been constituted by 
MoPNG to submit the report on funding pattern for the institutio n, whether to be 
given from Oil PSU‟s/OIDB or GBS and also to examine if the grant of autonomous 
status is required for the Institute.  
 
The Committee also note that in 2017 -18, the Government has announced the 
establishment of two Centres of excellence in  Petroleum Sector in Karnataka and 
Assam. The mandate of Karnataka Centre is to create an Energy Institute on the 
lines of World‟s leading energy institutes for undertaking contemporary research 
duly involving other Ministries and key stakeholders. The est imated expenditure 
under capital head for Bengaluru centre is Rs 358 cr. The mandate of RGIPT 
Centre at Assam is to set up a Centre to cater to requirements of blue -collar 
technicians especially in upstream area to meet the current gap in skill set and the  
anticipated demand in view of future exploration plans. The Assam Centre will be 
established at an estimated expenditure of Rs. 235 crore. RGIPT has been asked 
to prepare a fresh DPR in light of the mandate for Assam centre.  
 
The Committee recommend that  the remaining work in Jais, Uttar Pradesh be 
completed as soon as possible and the all the issues connected to RGIPT in 
Assam be resolved in a time bound manner including the funding pattern andgrant 
of autonomous status to the Institute. The Committee fu rther recommend that the 
DPRs for Centres of Excellence in Assam and Karnataka should be prepared and 
submitted within three months so that the centres may be established at the 
earliest. 
In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
         In so far as Jais campus is concerned, an amount of Rs.100.00 crore 
(including Rs.47.00 crore at the BE stage 2016 -17) has been released to RGIPT 
during the financial year 2016 -17.  The remaining funds of Rs.135.10 crore has 

66 
 
been allocated under B E 2017 -18. The remaining construction as well pending 
payment to contractor will be done once the funds are made available. 
        As far as Assam Centre of RGIPT at Sivasagar is concerned, fresh DPR is 
being prepared to expand the scope of functioning of  the Centre which is to offer 
skill-oriented courses in addition to diploma / degree courses to the students as 
mandated in earlier DPR.  A four -member committee has been constituted to look 
into funding pattern for setting up of Assam Centre whether to be  set up with 
funding from GBS or with funds from Oil Companies / OIDB.  The report of the 
committee is awaited.  It is proposed to start the academic session 2017 -18 from 
the temporary campus available at Sivasagar College of Commerce. 
        As far as Bangalore Centre is concerned, there was a proposal for setting up of 
Fire Safety Engineering and Research Centre of RGIPT at Bangalore.  For this 
institute,  Government of Karnataka has provided 150 acres of land free of cost at  
Kambalipura Industrial Area , Hoskote Taluk, Bangalore Rural District, Karnataka.  
The land is yet to be handed over to RGIPT.  The foundation stone for Bangalore 
Centre of RGIPT was laid by the Former Petroleum Minister on 5.3.2014.   In a 
meeting held on 27.10.2016,  it  has been d ecided that this institute will be 
established as Energy Institute – Centre of Excellence on the line of World Energy 
Institutes for undertaking contemporary research duly involving other Ministries and 
private sector companies.  A four member committee ha s been constituted for 
preparation of a Roadmap covering the vision, objectives, processes, space 
requirement etc. with the structure for the institute, funding pattern and budget 
requirement for setting up of the Institute.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 10 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
Ethanol Blended Petrol  
 
The Committee note that Ethanol Blended Programme was launched in the year 
2003 with an objective of blending ethanol with petrol. Currently the programme is 
being implemented in 21 States and 4 UTs with a target of achieving 5% blending 
and progressively increasing to 10% blending. As per projections, the requirement 
for ethanol to achieve 10% blending is 280 crore litres. The Committee note that in 
the year 2015 -16 (from 1 December 2015 to 30th November 2016), a total of 111 
crore litre ethanol was procur ed by the OMCs which is about 40% of the requisite 
quantity and will be sufficient for blending of only 3.5%. The blending percentage 
needs to be increased to fulfill the Government‟s target and also as a component of 
import reduction. The low procurement has been attributed to lower cane 
production due to drought in Maharashtra and Karnataka and also due to demands 
from potable and chemicals sector. As the domestic sourcing of ethanol is 
continuously failing to achieve the target, there is a need to look a t other 
alternatives. The Committee note that since 10.12.2014, Government has allowed 

67 
 
procurement of ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks besides 
molasses like cellulosic and lingo-cellulosic materials including from petrochemicals 
route. The Committee further note that twelve 2G ethanol bio-refineries in 11 States 
are being established. The Committee appreciate that such steps are required in 
view of consistent under -supply of domestic ethanol from traditional sources. To 
achieve the target of 5% blending during the year 2017 -18 itself and 10% blending 
by 2020, permission for imports of ethanol, if possible, may also be given. The 
Committee recommend that the proposed 2G ethanol bio -refineries should be 
completed by the OMCs on priority basis without any time and cost overrun. 
Reply of the Government 
As regards import of ethanol for EBP Programme, the Government on 
3.7.2013 inter-alia decided that ethanol be procured only from domestic sources. 
  
As regards 2G ethanol bio -refineries, on 07.12.2016 Oil PSUs have entered 
into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with State Governments and 
Technology Providers for 2G ethanol bio -refineries.  Foundation Stone of one bio -
refinery has been laid by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited on 25.12. 2016 
at Bathinda, Punjab. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 19 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Development of Bio-fuels 
  
The Committee note that with a view to encourage production of other bio -fuels 
such as bio-diesel in the Country, Bio -diesel Purchase Policy has been announced 
which provides guidelines for OMCs to procure bio -diesel for blending with High 
Speed Diesel (HSD) to the extent of 5%. Subsequently, sale of Bio -Diesel (B100) 
by private manufacturers to bulk buyers has also been allowed. Similarly, Public 
sector OMCs have been permitted to retail bio -diesel. The Committee appreciate 
the measures being taken by the Government to promote th e use of alternative or 
Bio-fuels. The Committee recommend that the production of bio -diesel in the 
Country should be promoted by the Government OMCs through appropriate 
interventions. 
Reply of the Government 
In the past, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) hav e made efforts for 
indigenous production of biodiesel by carrying out plantation & maintenance 
activities of Jatropha through Joint Ventures with State Governments. However, the 
desired result i.e. yield from Jatropha was not obtained which incurred losses  to the 
company. Trial results with High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) of Jatropha for 
production of Biodiesel were also not satisfactory. Therefore, the OMCs put an end 
to all its operations for undertaking biodiesel production from Jatropha cultivation.  

68 
 
 
In order to promote Biodiesel in the country, appropriate steps are being 
taken for allowing sale of Biodiesel for blending purposes to retail consumers by 
private manufacturers. Besides, specifications for blends of Biodiesel (B6 -B20) 
have been issued by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 22 of Chapter -I) 
 
  

69 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Merger of Oil PSUs & formation of an ‘Oil Major’  
 
The Committee note that the Government has announced in the budget that it is 
considering to strengthen the Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) through 
consolidations, mergers and acquisitions which will give them capacity to bear 
higher risks, avail economies of scale, take higher investment decisions and create 
more value for stakeholders. The objective of the Government is to create an „Oil 
Major‟ in petroleum sector which will be able to match the performance of 
international and domestic private s ector oil and gas companies. The integration is 
expected to result in several benefits to the companies to withstand the volatility in 
the international prices of crude oil and natural gas, strengthen balance sheets, 
synergies across value chains, sharing of skills, research and development, 
infrastructure, increase in overall capacity and an edge during bidding for E&P 
assets. The entire process of integration may result in reshaping of the existing 
petroleum architecture in the country which is currently designed on the basis of 
upstream and downstream operations.  
 
Though the exact contours of the „integration‟ process is yet to become clear, the 
Committee opine that creation of an „Oil Major‟ could have an beneficial impact on 
the domestic petroleum sector scenario and immensely improve the 
competitiveness of the Oil PSU‟s on global stage. The Committee, however, feel 
that the Government needs to proceed with caution as there are several challenges 
such as integration of human resources, creating syne rgies in companies having 
diverse operations, etc., which needs to be overcome for successful 
implementation of such an endeavour. The Committee, therefore, would suggest 
that Government should come out with a clear roadmap and framework with 
objective parameters at an early date for creation of such an „Oil Major‟ in order to 
remove ambiguity and apprehensions and the Ministry/PSU‟s should also consult 
employees of the companies to allay their fears about mergers and consolidation 
exercise. The Committee f urther recommend that abundant caution should be 
exercised in order to ensure that the integration exercise is not done in undue haste 
but handled without any disadvantage for the existing human resources of the 
PSUs and make it a win-win situation. 
Reply of the Government 
        Finance Minister in the Union Budget Speech of 2017 -18 on February 1, 2017, 
inter alia,  stated that “We see opportunities to strengthen our CPSEs through 
consolidation, mergers and acquisitions.  By these methods, the CPSEs can b e 
integrated across the value chain of an industry.  It will give them capacity to bear 
higher  risks,  avail economies of  scale, take  higher  investment  decisions and 
create more value for the stakeholders.  Possibilities of such restructuring are visi ble 
in the Oil and Gas sector.  We propose to create an integrated public sector „Oil 
Major‟ which will be able to match the performance of international and domestic 
private sector oil and gas companies”. 

70 
 
      The Ministry is examining the feasibilities and modalities of “Synergy in the 
Functioning of Oil and Gas PSUs”. ONGC had forwarded a proposal to acquire 
HPCL. In-principle approval for this proposal has been given by CCEA. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 13 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
National Seismic Programme- Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources and 
National Data Repository  
 
The Committee note that after almost two decades of last such exercise, the 
Directorate-General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is undertaking a Reassessment of 
Hydrocarbon Resources in all 26 sedimentary basins of the Country through a 
Multi-Organisation Team with the collaboration of ONGC and OIL. The project 
commenced in September 2015 and is scheduled to be completed in 27 months, 
i.e., by November 2017. The Committee further note that so far, re -assessment 
study for ten basins have been completed and their draft reports are under 
preparation. At present, the study for  ten more basins is in progress. The 
Committee also note that the National Data Repository (NDR) has been set up as a 
part of National Knowledge Hub to populate all the geo -scientific data available in 
the Country. Its aim is to provide reliable exploratio n and production data for India 
for seamless access and on -line data management to the E&P Companies. It will 
validate, store, maintain and reproduce high quality and reliable geo -scientific data, 
facilitate efficient data reporting, data exchange, and dat a trading among existing 
players, improve DGH‟s ability to monitor and control the E&P activities and 
reporting, encourage new E&P activities by providing high quality and reliable data 
and strengthen overall geo-scientific activities in India. 
NDR Project  is currently being executed in the DGH premises in Noida. The 
Committee understand that initial works relating to NDR project has been 
completed and it has been populated with data. NDR is ready for providing data to 
various E&P operators through launchin g of OALP/HELP programme. The 
Committee feel that having an NDR for India will enhance prospects of petroleum 
exploration and facilitate the Bidding Rounds by improving the availability of quality 
data. It will also help the Country compete effectively in the hydrocarbon 
exploration and production sector.  
 
The Committee note that two proposals have been received for Geo -Scientific Data 
generation for hydrocarbons in Indian sedimentary basins and desire that these 
proposals may be evaluated so that funds and physical targets are achieved for 
successful completion.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the project relating to Reassessment of 
Hydrocarbon Resources be completed without any time overrun and proper 
guidelines for using the data contained in the NDR should be framed at the earliest 
so that exploration exercises can be undertaken more effectively. 
 

71 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Seismic Programme of Un-appraised areas 
     Almost half of the India‟s Sedimentary areas are yet to be appraised. 
Government of  India  has  taken up an ambitious programme for undertaking 2D 
seismic survey of entire un -appraisal areas with an estimated expenditure of 
Rs.3000 crore.  National seismic programme was launched on 12th October 2016 
in Mahanadi Basin.  
 
  Out of 48243 line kilometer (LKM) of 2D seismic, ONGC and OIL will carry 
out 40835 LKM and 7408 LKM respectively.  
 
    Currently 2D seismic data acquisition is in progress.  5618 line kilometer of 
2D seismic data has been acquired in the area of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Cambay, Saurashtra, Rajasthan, Kutch, Bengal, Mahanadi, NEC basin, Deccan 
Synclise North, Deccan Synclise -South, Bhima, Kaladgi, Vindhyan -A, Narmada, 
Satpura, Hima layan-Foreland, Karewa and Spiti – Zanskar as on 31st March 
2017. 
 
The national seismic Programme is likely to be completed by 2019 -20.  
Annual milestones have been fixed. 
 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
Presently, the process of re -assessment of hydrocarbon resources of 26 
sedimentary basins of India including deep water areas integrating all the available 
geo-scientific data is in progress. The reassessment project is under execution by 
ONGC in association with OIL and DGH.  
Currently, the studies of eleven basins (Satpura -South Rewa -Damodar, 
Bastar, Chattishgarh, Karewa, Vindhyan, Kerala -Konkan, Mahanadi, Rajasthan, 
Spiti-Zanskar, Mumbai Offshore and Pranhita -Godavari) have been completed and 
their draft reports are prepared. The project has been reviewed by the International 
experts and the suggestions given by the international experts are also 
incorporated in the report.  
The reassessment work of eleven sedimentary basins (A&AA fold Belt, 
Assam Shelf, Himalayn Fold Belt, Bhima -Kaladgi, KG, Cauvery, Bengal - Purnea, 
Andaman-Nicobar, Cambay Basin, Kutch -Saurashtra and Ganga –Punjab Plain) is 
in progress at various work centers of ONGC. 
National Data Repository   
National Data Repository (NDR) has been set u p to populate all the geo -
scientific data available in the country. NDR Project is currently being expedited in 
DGH premises at sector 73, Noida. Integration of Software at NDR site has been 
completed. Build up phase on pilot data and priority data has als o been 
completed. Currently, NDR is in operation phase wherein data loading  and 
sharing is in progress. So far 16,65,145 line kilometre (LKM) of  2D seismic, 
5,83,985 Sq. Km of  3D seismic data,15,254 well reports and 1,964 seismic 
reports have been uploaded. 
 

72 
 
NDR is ready for providing data to various Industry E&P operators through 
launching of OALP/HELP programme. The interested E&P companies would be 
able to view geo -scientific data from anywhere in the world and firm up an opinion 
regarding prospectivity of the blocks prior to bidding for the block. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/19/2017-Fin.I dated 25th July, 2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 25 of Chapter -I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
28 December,  2017 
 7 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                           
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

73 
 
Annexure I 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(27.12.2017) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 December, 2017 from 1600 
hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. '139', PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
3. Smt. Rama Devi 
4. Shri Elumalai V. 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
8. Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
10. Shri Arvind Sawant 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
12. Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 

74 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration d raft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on „Demands For Grants (2017 -18) of MoP&NG‟ and adopted the same 
without any modifications.  
 
3. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx
 xxx 
 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the Report in 
both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx: Matter not related to the subject.  

75 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM 
AND NATURAL GAS (2016 -17) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017 -18) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 25 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
 1,2,3,4,6,8,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,21,22,23 and 24) 
 
 18 
 Percentage to Total 72% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 7 and 25) 
 
 
02 
 Percentage of Total 8% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 5, 18 and 19) 
 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 12% 
 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 10 and 20)  
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 8% 
 
 
 
 
 