 
16 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twelfth  
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2015-16)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)……………………………..                      4 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                      5 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
31 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
62 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
64 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
73 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016 -17) held on 
07.12.2016.  
74 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16) on 
'Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas' 
76 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2016-17) 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
13 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
14 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
15 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16 Shri Raju Shetti 
17 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
23 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
26 Shri Ahmed Patel 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
28 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya                     
31 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Sujay Kumar   - Under Secretary 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the 
subject „Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟. 
2. The Twelfth Report of the Standing C ommittee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 03.05.2016.  The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report were 
received on 04.08.2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natur al Gas (2016 -17) considered 
and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.12.2016.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 8 December,  2016 
 17 Agrahayana ,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2015 -16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas '', which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 03.05.2016. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respe ct of all the 
25 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 25 (Total 19) 
(Chapter- II)   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: - Recommendation No. 23 
(Total 1) 
(Chapter- III)      
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - 
Recommendation Nos. 7, 12, 15, and 17 (Total 4)  
(Chapter- IV) 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Recommendation No. 3 (Total 1)   
(Chapter- V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Go vernment on 
some of their recommendations.  
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Exploration and Production Scenario of Crude oil and Natural Gas  
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that strengthening „Energy Security‟ is one of the 
mandates of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and 
exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas is one of the most 
important ways of providing this security. The fortuitous circumstance of the 
low international prices of crude oil  and gas has given some respite. But it 
cannot be a substitute for domestic sources of energy developed through 
exploration and bringing them online. As the nation moves forward on the high 
growth trajectory and prosperity levels of the citizens increase, the demand of 
crude oil and gas is going to increase rapidly. At current levels of 
consumption, about 80% of our crude oil requirements are being met through 
imports. The Committee note that the production of crude oil is stagnant in the 
last few years whi le the natural gas production has actually gone down. The 
Committee further note the recent initiatives of the Ministry to simplify the 
rules involving exploration of crude oil and natural gas in the country including 
formulation of the Hydrocarbon Explora tion Licensing Policy (HELP). The 
Committee, however, find that from discovery of oil fields to production is a 
long drawn process involving substantial time frame and capital expenditure. 
Moreover, clearances from various Ministries/Departments are also r equired. 
Therefore, the Committee feels that it is very important to lay down a 
consistent and predictable licensing environment in the country in order to 
attract interest from national as well as global players who can bring much 
needed capital and techn ology to invest in the sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make focused effort to 
increase exploration and production by stimulating investment in the sector 
and prescribing a stable and transparent licensing/regulatory reg ime geared 
to face challenges of the sector and ensure increase in crude oil production. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should make sincere efforts to 
obtain all necessary clearances from different agencies for the blocks that 
have been stalled due to various reasons for initiating E&P activities".  
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed in exploration & production 
sector. Government awards exploration licenses through international 
competitive bidding process wherein National oil Companies, Indian private 
and foreign companies have to bid on equal footing. No preferential treatment 
is given to any company either foreign or Indian. Government has taken 
recent Policy initiatives with the following guiding objectives: 
 Enhance Domestic oil and gas production  
 Bring substantial investment  
 Generate sizeable employment  
 Enhance Transparency  
 Reduce Administrative Discretion 
 

8 
 
 
 
The visible impact of these policy decisions  will be seen in couple of years. 
Some of the recent policy initiatives are as under: 
 Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) for award of Hydrocarbon 
acreages with new contractual system and fiscal model coupled with the open 
acreage policy that p rovides right to investors to explore and produce all type 
of hydrocarbons including non -conventional such as CBM, shale gas, gas 
hydrates, etc.   
 Discovered Small Fields Policy - 69 oil & gas fields which have been held by 
ONGC and OIL for many years, but  have not been exploited, is to be opened 
for competitive bidding. Government has already announced the Policy on 
25th May, 2016 for bidding of 67 oil and gas fields. Bid closing date under this 
policy is 31st October, 2016. 
 Marketing and Pricing freedom for new gas production from Deepwater, Ultra 
Deepwater and High Pressure -High Temperature Areas with ceiling Price.  
This policy decision is expected to monetize 28 number of discoveries having 
reserves of 6.75 trillion cubic feet (TCF). 
 Policy for grant o f extension to the Production Sharing Contracts – Provision 
for extension of time period for another 10 years or till the economic life of the 
field for 28 Small and medium sized discovered fields. 
 Monetization of the Ratna offshore field – ONGC has initia ted actions for 
development of this field. 
 Drill Stem Test (DST) Policy - Monetization of 10 hydrocarbon discoveries in 5 
NELP blocks by resolving the long pending dispute associated with testing 
requirements. 
 Permission of Extraction of CBM to Coal India Limited (CIL) & its subsidiaries 
in coal Mining area. This decision will help in enhancement of production of 
coal as well as coal bed methane (CBM). 
 New Domestic Natural Gas price Guidelines, 2014: Under these guidelines, 
prices of domestically produced natural gas has been linked to prices of 
natural gas at important markets/hubs. 
 Policy Framework for relaxation, extensions and clarifications at the 
development and production stage under PSC regime for early monetization 
of hydrocarbon discoveries: Gover nment approved this policy on 10.11.2014, 
and the same is being implemented. Under this policy, about 40 pending 
cases have been resolved. 
 
As regards to various statutory clearances such as EC -FC is concerned, on 
some occasions the statutes provides for o perator only to apply.  As such, it 
becomes difficult to obtain full clearance before the blocks are awarded.  
However, Government takes in-principal approvals / clearances from different 
agencies such as - Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Environment, For est & 
Climate Change, etc.  before offering new blocks to the investors. Moreover, 
DGH and Ministry are helping the investors in getting clearances from different 
agencies as and when required. 
7. The Committee had recommended for  focused efforts  for increasing 
exploration and production of crude oil by stimulating investment in the 
petroleum sector and prescribing a stable and transparent licensing/regulatory 
regime geared towards facing challenges of the sector, thus ensuring increase 

9 
 
 
 
in crude oil p roduction. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry ha s only 
repeated the  various policy decision s taken by the Ministry to enhance 
domestic crude oil and natural gas production such as, permitting  100% 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the ex ploration and production in oil sector. 
The Ministry has further mentioned that recent policy initiatives such as HELP, 
Discovered Small Fields Policy, Marketing and Pricing Freedom for new gas 
production from Deepwater fields, etc., have been undertaken t he impact of 
which will be seen in a couple of years.   However, there is no mention of any 
short term or long term targets set to  increase the crude oil and natural gas 
production and time-frame fixed for implementation of policy decisions taken 
in that re gard. The reply of the Government is also silent when it comes to 
actual measures being taken to promote India as a preferred destination for 
investment in the petroleum exploration sector  or any concrete steps being 
taken to obtain clearances for the blocks that have been stalled due to various 
reasons for exploration and production activities . The Committee feel that in 
the current economic scenario, it is not enough to just provide an even handed 
policy environment and wait for the investors  to come in . The potential 
investors have to be wooed through positive campaigns and highlighting the 
attraction of the country as an investment destination. While appreciating the 
measures being adopted by the Government for formulating transparent and 
even-handed licensing regimes for crude  oil exploration and production , the 
Committee reiterate their recommendations and desire that Ministry should set 
specific targets for exploration and production of oil and natural gas and 
focussed efforts should be ma de to project this sector as a rewarding 
destination. The Committee would like to be informed about the short term and 
long term targets set and time -frame fixed to enhance the domestic crude oil 
and natural gas production , the specific initiatives taken to stimulate 
investment in this sector and outcome thereof.  
Recommendation No.3 
 
Levy of cess on Crude Oil  
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that the Government has modified the levy of Oil 
Industries Development (OID) cess on domestically produced crude oil from 

10 
 
 
 
oil PSU's from 4500/MT to 20% ad-valorem. This measure will result in saving 
of about Rs. 1150/MT at the crude oil rate of US$ 35/bbl and at exchange rate 
of Rs.67 per US dollar. However, if the crude oil rates in the international 
markets rise, the burden of cess on the upstream oil companies like ONGC 
and OIL will increase. At the price point of US$ 50/bbl and at exchange rate of 
Rs. 67 per US$, the burden will be even more than the previously fixed cess 
of 4500/MT, which will defeat the purpose of rationalizing the cess and give 
relief to upstream oil PSUs. Keeping this fact in view, the Ministry have 
decided to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for reduction of the 
cess from the current 20% to reasonable levels. They have also requested for 
transfer of part of the funds collected as cess from the oil companies to the 
OIDB for taking up initiatives l ike appraisal of unappraised areas, for national 
data repository as well as for the development of gas pipeline infrastructure. 
The Committee fully support the lowering of ad valorem rate making it more 
practical and simpler to administer the cess. The Com mittee, therefore, 
strongly desire that the issue of present ad valorem cess of 20% proposed in 
the budget should be raised by the Ministry with the Ministry of Finance so 
that the oil cess is brought down preferably in the range of 10%. The 
Committee may be informed about the outcome in this regard".  
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Government has revised OID cess at the rate of 20% ad -valorem basis w.e.f. 
1st March 2016 from the earlier rate of Rs. 4500 per tonne in re spect of crude 
oil. The new cess rate is beneficial to the industry when crude oil price is 
below US$45/bbl.   However, the new rate of 20% cess will have negative 
impact on oil companies on increase of crude oil price beyond US$ 45/bbl.  
Ministry of Petro leum& Natural Gas has taken up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance to reconsider the OID cess  rate. The outcome in this regard will be 
apprised to the committee". 
 
10. The Committee had favoured the lowering of ad valorem rate of cess on 
crude oil, preferably in the range of 10% from the rate of 20% in order to make 
it more practical and simpler to administer the cess. The Ministry, in its action 
taken reply, has stated that oil prices are increasing in the international market 
and once the crude oil  prices cross the level of US$ 50/bbl at the exchange 
rate of Rs 67 per dollar, the burden on the oil companies will be even more 
than the previous regime of fixed cess of 4500/mt. The Committee note that the 
international crude oil prices are hovering in the range of US$ 50/bbl and the 
matter of reducing cess has become urgent. The Committee , therefore, urge 
the Ministry to impress upon the Ministry of Finance, the necessity of taking 
action in  the matter and reducing the ad valorem  rate of cess to 10% 
immediately as this step is essential to protect the  long-term viability of the oil 
PSUs.  

11 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
LPG connection for households below poverty line  
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Government has announced a  scheme as a part of 
„Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Scheme‟ which will be implemented in three years 
(2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018 -19) to give 5 crore new LPG connections in the 
name of women members of BPL households. An amount of Rs. 2000 crore 
has been allocated for the scheme to provide free LPG connection to 1.5 
crore BPL households during 2016 -17. The Committee note that the Socio - 
Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 will be used to identify the BPL 
households and the States which are below the national average i n the LPG 
coverage will be given preference. The Committee however, desire that the 
LPG connections surrendered under 'Give it Up' scheme should also be 
brought into the ambit of this scheme and targets be revised suitably. The 
Committee appreciate launching of this pro -poor measure of the Government 
and hope that if the new scheme is successfully implemented, it can go a long 
way in providing clean energy to the poor households and also contribute to 
empowerment and health care of women. The Committee, how ever, note that 
the implementation of the scheme may face difficulties due to lack of 
adequate infrastructure including LPG dealerships, bottling plants, pipelines 
across the country, availability of adequate quantity of LPG in the country, 
supply of reaso nably priced LPG stoves, etc. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that Ministry should fine tune the processes linked to implementation of 
the Scheme particularly the development of delivery infrastructure in the 
remote and border areas. The Committee suggest  that the services of public 
representatives may be utilised in implementation of the scheme".  
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The Government has recently launched “Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana”  for 
providing LPG connections to 5 crore women belonging to the Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) families  over a period of 3 years starting  from FY 2016 -17. 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister of India has formally launched the scheme on 
01.05.2016. 
Under the GiveItUp Scheme, a customer surrenders his LPG subsidy only 
and not the LPG connection. Earlier, LPG connections linked to „GiveItUp‟ 
campaign were released to BPL households from the available CSR funds of 
Oil PSUs.  
 
Government is planning to s et up 10,000 new distributorships. Presently, the 
process for setting up of more than 1800 new LPG distributorships is at 
different stages of select ion across the country. Majority of these 
distributorships will come in rural areas to cater to unserved con sumers. 
Further, advertisement for new locations will be issued to appoint new 
distributorships.  
 

12 
 
 
 
OMCs have projected 20722 TMT demand of LPG in the year 2016 -17 and it 
will go up to 28988 TMT in 2021 -22.  Capacity augmentation of existing 
Bottling Plants and setting up of new Bottling Plants is in progress to meet the 
projected demand till 2021 -22. OMCs are planning to set -up 54 grass root 
Bottling Plants upto 2020 -21. As on 01.04.2016 there are 188 Bottling Plants 
with bottling capacity of 15172 TMT.  
 
The availability of indigenous LPG in the country is insufficient to cater the 
demands of the LPG. To meet this demand, OMCs import the LPG and 
imports are tied with different countries well in advance. Hence, OMCs do not 
see any shortage of LPG in the country. 
 
OMCs are providing two burner star rating gas stoves to beneficiaries under 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Scheme @ Rs. 990/ - per unit, which is cheaper than 
the one sold in open market. 
 
OMCs will organise „Melas‟ at various locations for release of connect ions to 
BPL families. This will be done in the presence of public representatives and 
distinguished personalities of the area. The presence of public representative 
will enhance the awareness of the scheme. Further, District Nodal Officers 
(DNOs) have been  appointed to co -ordinate with elected representatives for 
smooth implementation of the scheme".   
 
13. The Committee had desired that the Ministry should fine -tune the 
processes linked to implementation of the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana 
particularly the development of delivery infrastructure in the remote and 
border areas and availability of LPG in the country . The Committee had also 
suggested that the services of public representatives should be utilised in 
implementation of the scheme.  The Ministry , in its Action Taken Reply , has 
stated that the Government is planning to set up 10,000 new distributorships 
to cater to the unserved consumers.  Moreover, the OMC's will be setting up 54 
grass root bottling plants by 2020 -21. Further, to meet demand of LPG, OMC's 
have tied up with different countries to  import LPG  in advance . It has also 
been communicated by the Ministry that p ublic representati ves and 
distinguished personalities of the area will be involved to enhance the 
awareness of th e scheme . But the Committee note that only 1800 new LPG 
distributorships are at different stages of selection and there is no time -frame 
fixed for establishing more new distributorships . As Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana is intended to provide relief to the lowest strata of the society, within a 
period of three years, the Committee desire that measures being taken by the 
Ministry to ensure success of the Scheme such as setting up new 
distributorships, augmentation of exis ting bottling plants and setting up of 

13 
 
 
 
new plants should be expeditiously completed  in consonance with the 
requirement of the scheme as well as regular LPG requirements. 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT)  
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT) is in the process of being set up on 47 acres of land at Jais in Rai 
Bareli district of Uttar Pradesh (UP) as an Institute Of Excellenc e in the 
petroleum sector to cater to national and global educational and training 
requirements. Although it is operating from makeshift campus in the same 
district since 2008, there has been inordinate delays in the project. The new 
completion date for th e project has been stated as June 2016. The total 
estimated cost for the Institute is Rs. 695.58 crore against the initial estimate 
of Rs. 435 crore in the year 2007. The Committee note that the progress in 
March 2015 was 86% while the progress in January 2016 is reported to be 
93%. Thus in 11 months, the progress has been a mere 7% in the project 
which has been already suffering from substantial time and cost overruns. 
 
The Committee also note that RGIPT Assam Project is under construction on 
100 acres of land in Sivasagar district of Assam and very little progress has 
been made in the project with the estimates already gone up from Rs. 143 
crore to Rs. 235 crore. The work of RGIPT Assam is at a standstill due to non-
release of capital funds for constructio n. The capital funds are to be released 
by the oil PSUs and OIDB after the approval of expenditure by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  
 
The Committee are concerned about the poor progress being achieved in the 
two RGIPT projects at Raibareli and S ivasagar and would like to know the 
reasons for such long delays causing significant cost overruns in both the 
projects. The Committee, however, recommend that the Ministry should 
closely monitor the progress of both the projects so that these are complete d 
without any further time or cost overruns. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry should ensure to provide adequate financial allocations and timely 
release of funds for these projects".  
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The main academic centre of RGIPT is being constructed on 47 acres of land 
at Jais, District Amethi (Uttar Pradesh).  Initially, the Capital Expenditure was 
made through Govt of India budgetary support of Rs. 285.00 Crore and 
partially from grant of Rs.150.00 Crore from Oil Industry Development Board. 
The Institute has commenced its academic activities from 2008 -09.  Currently, 
6 batches of MBA, 4 batches of B. Tech and M. Tech students have passed 
out. 
The construction of the campus suffered setba ck as the job awarded to M/s. 
Punj Lloyd Limited (PLL) on the recommendation of PMC, Engineers India 

14 
 
 
 
limited (EIL) stopped in the year 2013 due to the contractor‟s un -reasonable 
demands leading to Arbitration and cost escalation.   
It is pertinent to note that due to non -payment of contractor‟s bills from 
January 2015 to July 2015, the contractor, M/s. NCCL had stopped the work 
at Jais Site which has resulted in time overrun beyond the scheduled date of 
completion of March 2016. The construction work has re started and is 
targeted to be completed by September, 2016 . The money so far released 
from GBS for Jais project is Rs. 181.00 crore (Rs.86.00 crore + Rs.48.00 
crore + Rs.47.00 crore = Rs.181.00 crore) whereas Rs. 188.10 crore 
(Rs.369.10 crore – Rs.181.00 crore = Rs 188.10 crore) is yet to be released 
for completion of the project.  
The execution of the project at Sibsagar is delayed due to site related issues 
requiring large quantity of earth filling and piling work which has since been 
completed in April, 2014. Meanwhile the project cost has gone up from the 
original estimate of Rs. 143 crore to Rs. 235 crore".  
16. The Committee had recommended for a close monitoring of the RGIPT 
projects at Jais (Amethi District, UP) and Sibsagar in Assam to avoid any 
further time or cost overrun. The Committee had also recommended allocation 
of adequate funds  and its timely release for these projects . In its reply, the 
Ministry ha s stated that t he initial Capital Expenditure  for RGIPT, which  is 
being constructed on 47 acres of land at Jais, was made through Govt. of India 
budgetary support of Rs. 285.00 crore and partially from grant of Rs.150.00 
crore from Oil Industry Development Board. Explaining the time  overruns, the 
Ministry has replied that the construction of the campus suffered setback due 
to contractual issues. According to  Ministry, the construction work has 
restarted and the work is targeted to be completed by September, 2016 . 
Further, Rs 188.10 c rore is reportedly yet to be released for completion of the 
project. The Committee find that the EIL, which is the PMC for the project, 
should have performed its responsibilities effectively thereby avoiding 
repeated delays to the project as well as cost e scalation. The Committee 
deplore the cost and time overrun being faced by this important project due to 
administrative delays in release of fund and hope that the project is completed 
by the new extended time line positively without any further delay on account 
of such constraints.  
 Similarly, the progress of RGIPT, Sibsagar is very tardy on account of 
site related issues and this project has also faced huge cost and time overrun. 
About this project, Ministry has informed that the work has been delayed due 

15 
 
 
 
to site related issues but has not pronounced any completion schedule for this 
project even when these issues  were resolved long back in April 2014.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the RGIPT , Sibsagar 
project should start at the earliest with a defined time line and it should  be 
closely monitored with a view to ensure that there is no further time and cost 
overruns and the funds for the project are also released in a timely manner.  
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Petroleum University in Andhra Pradesh  
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that an Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) 
is to be established in a 150 acre land in Subhavam Mandal in 
Vishakhapatnam in accordance with the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 
2014. The objective of the University is to meet the quantitative and qualitative 
gap in the supply of skilled manpower in the petroleum sector and promote 
research activities. Total capital expenditure for the project is estimated at Rs. 
855.46 crore. A token provision of Rs. one crore each under pla n and non -
plan has been provided in BE 2016-17.  
 
The Committee also observe that the land identified for the project is being 
acquired and until the campus is ready, arrangements have been made with 
the Andhra University to use their resources for starting classes. The 
Committee also note that Rs. 23.50 crore has been provided by the OIDB to 
start the academic session from the temporary campus.  
 
The Committee, however, are not satisfied with the progress made so far in 
setting up the Institute only through a token amount and recommend that work 
on the co nstruction should be taken up expeditiously after completing land 
acquisition work of the site in consultation with the State Government and 
allocation of more funds. The Committee also desire that the Institute should 
start functioning from its own campus  at the earliest and availability of funds 
should not be a constraint for the project".  
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"As per  the 13th Schedule of Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014, 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) has been set up with the 
objective to meet the quantitative and qualitative gap in the supply of skilled 
manpower for the petroleum sector and to pro mote research activities needed 
for the growth of the sector.  The Government of Andhra Pradesh has made 
available an area measuring about 200 acres of land in Anthakapalli Village, 
Sabbavaram Mandal, Visakhapatnam District for the Institute which is free of 
cost.  IIPE Society has been registered on 18.04.2016. 
College of Engineering (Autonomous) situated in Andhra University at 
Visakhapatnam has provided the resources to start the IIPE sessions during 

16 
 
 
 
the academic year 2016 -17 in two B.Tech. Programmes vi z., Petroleum 
Engineering and Chimical Engineering.  Rank list from JEE -Advanced, 2016 
(IIT-Guwahati) has been received and Rank  holders have been invited to 
apply for admission to  IIPE.  IIT - Kharagpur has been roped in to act as a 
Mentor Institution for starting the academic session 2016-17. 
The capital expenditure for the project is estimated to be around Rs.655.46 
crore (Rs.432.37 crore for the 1st Phase and Rs.223.09 crore for the 2nd 
Phase).  Deficit funding against recurring Expenses for 2016/17 to 2 024/25 
period would be Rs.334.84 crore.  The source of funding for the proposal 
would be through Government Budgetary Support (GBS).  EFC Meeting was 
held on 21.06.2016 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary & Secretary 
(Expenditure) which has  recommended the GBS funding of Rs.655.46 crore 
as a Capital Expenditure  of Rs.400 crore of Endowment Fund (Rs. 200 Crore 
under GBS and Rs.200 crore to be contributed  by oil PSU‟s).  
19. The Committee appreciate that the 200 acres land has been made 
available for construction of the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) 
in Andhra Pradesh  and funding pattern for the university has been approved. 
But no commitment has been shown by the Ministry for an expeditious 
completion of the project within a fixed time -frame in accordance with the 
Andhra Pradesh Re -organisation Act, 2014 . The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the work on the project should  start at the earliest and  be closely 
monitored by the Ministry to ensure that it is completed without  any further  
time or cost overrun  and timely release of the fund  should also be ensured. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to share the detailed schedule for 
completion of construction of the campus of IIPE with it.  
Recommendation No. 11 
 
National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP)  
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the NGHP was initiated in 1997 with participation 
from institutions/agencies such as Directorate General of Hydrocarbons, 
Upstream oil PSUs such as ONGC, IOL, GAIL and IOC and National 
Research Institutions like National Institute o f Oceanography, National 
geophysical Research Institute and National Institute of Ocean Technology. 
The Committee observe that second phase of NGHP expedition was 
completed in July 2015 in Krishna -Godavari (KG) and Mahanadi offshore 
basin. The Committee ar e happy to note initial results of the NGHP -02 
expedition are very encouraging and gas hydrates have been discovered in 
KG deep offshore areas in sand reservoirs which are reported to be the 
thickest gas hydrate reservoir system in the world. The Committee  note that 
based on data obtained during the expedition, sites for pilot production testing 

17 
 
 
 
are to be identified and pilot production of gas hydrate deposits are planned to 
be carried out under the third phase of expedition. The Committee note that 
while the prospects of Gas Hydrates are encouraging, there has to be a cost 
benefit analysis before committing investments. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should conduct a thorough review through an 
independent agency before carrying out further works under NGHP".  
 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The results of NGHP -02 were very encouraging as two quality Gas Hydrate 
Reservoirs have been discovered.  The cost benefit ana lysis is also highly 
favourable.  About 134 TCF  gas in about 8400 sq km area in KG Deep  
Offshore is likely to be present.   Studies are in progress".   
 
22. The Committee observe that initial studies in the direction of discovery 
of gas hydrates have been very encouraging  and the cost benefit analysis is 
also found favourable. However, i t is not clear that what further studies are 
under progress and also whether for such studies any independent agency 
has been engaged or not for further studies under NGHP as recommended by 
the Committee . The Committee , therefore,  urge the Ministry to  ensure that 
further studies are done only after review of the programme by an independent 
agency and adequate investments  are made  in technologies relating to 
evacuation of natural gas from such deposits. 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Ethanol Blended Petrol  
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) programme is 
being implemented since 2003. Selling of Petrol blended with ethanol upto 
10% has been envisaged for the year 2016 -17. For achieving 10% blending, 
the requirement of Ethanol would be app roximately 266 crore litres against 
which only 136 crore litres is available for blending within the country. Despite 
repeated rounds of floating Expression of Interest (EoI), the required 
additional Ethanol supply is not available in the country so far. T he Committee 
are concerned that the Ministry has not been able to procure sufficient 
quantity of Ethanol even though India is one of the largest Sugarcane 
producing countries of the world. The Committee note that unless concerted 
efforts are made by the Ministry, it would be difficult to attain the target of 10% 
EBP, particularly in those states which are not major sugarcane producing 
areas. The Committee desire that the Ministry has to focus on the issue of 
availability of Ethanol in the country so that the targeted blending of Ethanol in 
petrol it has envisaged for could be achieved. The Committee would advise 
the Ministry to work sincerely on alternate sources for ethanol including the 

18 
 
 
 
production of ethanol directly from sugarcane juice so as to incentivi ze 
farmers. The Committee recommend that a comprehensive plan be made by 
the Ministry for increasing availability of Ethanol for blending with petrol".  
 
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The Government has taken a number  of initiatives to improve the availability 
of ethanol for blending with Petrol under Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) 
Programme.  Some of them are as under:  
(i) On 10.12.2014, the delivered price of ethanol has been fixed in the 
range of Rs.48.50 per litre t o 49.50 per litre, depending upon the distance of 
distillery from the depot/installation of the OMCs.  The Government has 
allowed procurement of ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks 
besides molasses, like cellulosic and ligno cellulosic material s including 
petrochemical route, subject to meeting the relevant BIS Standards. 
(ii) Oil Marketing companies (OMCs) have been asked on 21.10.2015 to 
establish a project each of reasonable scale for producing ethanol from multi -
feedstock lignocelluloses using indigenous technology. A demonstration plant 
of 10 Tonnes Per Day (TPD) capacity at Kashipur, Uttarakhand, has been 
operationalised on 22.4.2016 
(iii) Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) has been taking up 
the State specific issues with the c oncerned State Governments for hassle 
free inter-State and intra-State movement of ethanol.  For better coordination 
with the States, Sugar Mills and other stakeholders, MoP&NG has appointed 
nodal Officers from OMC‟s, for effective implementation of EBP programme. 
2. The impact of these decisions is evident from the fact that ethanol 
supplies increased to 67.4 crore litres for the sugar year 2014 -15 from 38 
crore litres during 2013 -14.  During the current sugar year 2015 -16 OMCs 
have finalized over 135 crore litres of ethanol supplies. 
 
25. In view of the failure of the Government in procurement of adequate 
ethanol for blending in petrol, t he Committee had recommended that  a 
comprehensive plan be made by the Ministry for increasing availability of 
Ethanol as the ta rgeted blending of Ethanol in petrol has not been achieved 
upto the envisaged level of 10% .  The Committee  had also suggested that 
production of ethanol directly from sugarcane juice may be considered so as 
to incentivize farmers . In its reply, the Ministry has stated that a number of 
steps have been taken to improve the availability of Ethanol for blending 
including increase in ethanol prices, establishing projects for producing 
ethanol from alternative sources in  coordination with  State Governments for 
streamlining the movement of ethanol across states, etc. But the Ministry has 
neither prepared any specific plan to achieve the target  nor has shown any 

19 
 
 
 
intention to consider to promote the production of ethanol directly from 
sugarcane. The Committee, therefore,  reiterate their recommendation  asking 
the Government to formulate a comprehensive plan to augment production of 
ethanol primarily from sugarcane and alternatively from non -food feedstocks 
and ensure its availability in the Country with an objective of reaching the goal 
of 10% blending under a defined time -frame and convey the outcome to the 
Committee at the earliest.  
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Reserve Replacement 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Reserve Replacement Ratio is an important  
parameter for Exploration & Production companies. This indicates that 
amount of oil added to the reserves vis -a-vis production. It is generally 
expected  that the ratio to be more than 1 w hich indicates that more reserves 
are being added than being taken out through production. The Committee 
note that in 2012 -13, RRR based on 1P (1P = proven reserves) reserve for 
ONGC was 1.08 while in the years 2013 -14 and 2014-15 the figure was 0.62 
and 0 .70 respectively. In case of OIL, the corresponding figures were 1.17, 
0.80 and 1.22 respectively. The Reserve Replacement Ratio (RRR) on 1P 
basis has been consistently below 1 in case of ONC and about 1 in case of 
Oil. 
 
The Committee are concerned that th e RRR of the Nation‟s Oil Companies 
(NOC‟s) are about 1 or less than 1. The indicates these companies are 
producing crude oil from their existing reserve without adding new reserves.  
The Committee apprehends that the exploration activities are not being 
undertaken as intensively as is required in a energy -deficient country like 
India. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the oil companies 
undertake exploration of promising areas more intensively so that the crude 
oil production remains sustainable and recommend allocation of sufficient 
funds by NOCs for undertaking such activities.  The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should explore all the overseas acquisition opportunities to 
augment the reserves and improve RRR". 
 
27. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Exploration activities in the country were shrinking during last 5 years owing 
to the fact that no new exploration blocks were awarded from 2010 onwards.  
Now, Government has approved Hydrocarbon Exploration and  Licensing 
Policy (HELP), through which new exploration blocks will be awarded in near 
future.  With opening of new area for exploration, reserve replacement ratio 
(RRR) is likely to improve further and may be more than one on discovery of 
new hydrocarbon reserves. 

20 
 
 
 
The reserve accretion in ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) is a mix of exploratory 
accretions and inorganic acquisitions. As acquisitions do not happen at 
regular intervals, instead of Year wise, Cumulative RRR may be considered 
as an indicator of the pe rformance. Production in OVL has commenced in 
2002-03 and the cumulative production from the start of production to 2015-16 
is 100.468 MMTOE while the accretion of reserves in terms of 1P and 2P 
during the same period is 180.576 MMTOE and 548.242 MMTOE respectively 
resulting in overall RRR of 1.80 for 1P case and 5.46 for 2P.   
Oil India Limited (OIL) has also, over the past decade, acquired participating 
interests in exploration acreages in countries, namely, Libya, Gabon, Yemen, 
Bangladesh, Myanmar and discovered/producing asset in Nigeria, Venezuela, 
USA, Mozambique and Russia. These initiatives are expected to help 
improving the overall RRR of OIL in the near to medium-term". 
28. Expressing their concern over the declining Reserve Replacement Ratio 
(RRR), t he Committee had  recommended that  the oil companies  should 
undertake exploration of promising areas more intensively so that the crude 
oil production remains sustainable  and also allocation of  adequate funds for 
the purpose. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry should explore 
all the overseas acquisition opportunities to augment the reserves and 
improve RRR. Ministry, in its reply, has stated that the decline in exploration 
activities is due to the fact that no new exploration blocks wer e awarded from 
2010 onwards. They have expressed hope that exploration activities will pick 
up in coming years following the finalisation of Hydrocarbon Exploration and 
Licensing Policy (HELP), through which new exploration blocks are to be 
awarded in futu re. This will help in increasing RRR in future following 
expected discoveries in new blocks.  The Committee would like to point out  
that launching of licensing regime such as HELP is not a solution to the 
problem of declining RRR in the near to medium term rather in long term only. 
The Committee are constrained to note that long gestation period for 
exploration activities and also the fact that no production has started from the 
blocks that were allotted under earlier NELP rounds are also factors in the 
declining of RRR of ONGC.  Improvement in RRR in near and medium term is 
possible only through increased exploration of new areas, using state of the 
art technology both for exploration as well as improving extraction from 
existing reserves, etc. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that intensive exploration a ctivities should be 

21 
 
 
 
enhanced in promising areas and adequate financial resources should be 
allocated for the same.  
Recommendation No. 16 
 
 City Gas Distribution (CGD)  
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the City Gas Distribution (CGD) network supplies 
gas to four separate segments - Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) for 
automobiles, Piped Natural Gas (PNG) in domestic, commercial and Industrial 
segments. The Committee also note that furt her rounds of bidding for 
expansion of CGD network to 34 GAs were conducted by PNGRB and have 
received 56 bids for 24 GAs which are under evaluation. The Committee note 
that 28 new GAs in the CGD network have been added in the last two years. 
At present ab out 30.93 lakh households in 11 states are availing the PNG 
supplies. The Committee observe that the Ministry had targeted that by the 
year 2015-16, the total number of PNG customers would be about 50 lakhs, 
whereas the actual number is about 31 lakhs whic h indicates substantial 
shortfall in the target and need to scale up its effort to increase the number of 
connections. The Committee desire that the PNGRB/Ministry should complete 
the evaluation of the bids received under sixth round at the earliest and al so 
ensure that the work already awarded under earlier rounds are monitored 
regularly and commissioned. The Committee note that , therefore, feel that 
the expansion efforts of the CGD network has to increase expeditiously and 
recommend that Government/PNGRB  should make more coordinated efforts 
to expand the CGD network to more States and GAs".  
 
30. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"PNGRB received 56 bids for 20 Geographical Areas (GAs) (and not 24 GAs 
as mentioned in recommendation no. 16) out of the 34 GAs put on bid in 6th 
round of bidding. Out of the received bids in 6th round, PNGRB has awarded 
total 13 new GAs/Districts namely S aharanpur (Uttar Pradesh), Amreli 
(Gujarat), Patan (Gujarat), Bhatinda(Punjab), Rupnagar (Punjab), Dahej 
Vagra Taluka (Gujarat), Fatehgarh Sahib District (Punajb), North Goa (Goa), 
Dahod(Gujarat), Banaskantha (Gujarat), Ahemdabad (Gujarat), Anand 
(Gujarat) and Panchmahal (Gujarat). Further, PNGRB has issued Letter of 
Intent for 2 more GAs namely Ratnagiri (Maharashtra) and Ahmednagar 
(Maharashtra) to the successful bidders. Grant of authorization for one more 
GA namely Rohtak (Haryana) is kept on hold due t o pending legal case in the 
court. Decision regarding remaining 4 GAs is expected to be taken shortly. 
PNGRB monitors the performance of the CGD entities on quarterly basis. In 
this regard, PNGRB has given the quantitative targets (e.g. inch -Kilometer 
and number of PNG connections etc.) for 3 to 5 calendar years from the date 
of authorization. The CGD entities furnish the Quarterly Progress Report 
(QPRs) to PNGRB in terms of PNGRB‟s regulations. The non -performing/ 
under-performing CGD operators are called for statutory hearing by PNGRB. 
In addition, MoP&NG is also periodically reviewing the progress of PNG 
network expansion with CGD entities. During the review meetings, CGD 

22 
 
 
 
entities have attributed the following factors for slow progress of PNG 
coverage such as (i) In -ordinate delays in granting permission by Civic/Local 
bodies and levy of exorbitant charges for laying of networks and restoration of 
road, (ii)  Differential   taxes (i.e. VAT on CNG)   in  adjoining  states  and  
multiple  taxation impacting price competitiveness of PNG and CNG and (iii) 
PNG connectivity to individual consumers depends on availability of pucca 
houses and minimum width of roads that permits laying of pipelines etc. 
MoP&NG has also taken up these issues with the concerned State 
Governments and local bodies for expediting the PNG network expansion.  
31. While appreciating the effort of the Ministry towards bringing new areas 
under CGD through 6 th round of bidding for expansion of CGD network, the 
Committee has expressed their unhappiness that out of 34 Geographical Areas 
(GAs) which were included for inviting bids by the PNGRB , bids for  only 20 
GAs were received. The Committee had viewed it as poor planning on the part 
of PN GRB/Ministry and  had recommended that the Ministry /PNGRB should 
make more coordinated efforts to expand the CGD network to more States and 
GAs in order to make the use of natural gas more evenly spread across the 
country. The Action Taken Reply states that PNGRB  has given the quantitative 
targets for 3 to 5 calendar years from the date of authorisation. The reply also 
states that CGD ent ities have attributed inordinate delays in granting 
permission by Civic/ local bodies and demanding excessive taxes, levies, etc. 
for slow progress. The Committee are unhappy at such lopsided expansion of 
CGD network in the Country. While the western and Southern regions of the 
Country have forged ahead in this area, the Northern and Eastern regions have 
lagged behind. The Committee , therefore,  urge up on the Ministry to make 
efforts for expanding CGD network in more States and G As to achieve the 
target of reaching the 50 lakh households . The Committee also reiterate that 
Ministry/PNGRB should hold meetings with State G overnments and their 
agencies to ensure that CG D Projects are completed w ell in time and factors 
impeding the progress of CGD Projects are resolved and inform the Committee 
about the outcome.  
Recommendation No. 17 
 
Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR)  
 
32. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The main activities relating to petroleum sector are carried out by the Oil 
PSUs out of funds generated from their own resources known as Internal and 

23 
 
 
 
Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The PSU‟s BE 2016 -17 has been pegged 
at Rs. 8721 4.56 crore showing about 15% increase from the BE 2015 -16. At 
the RE stage of 2015 -16, the total outlay of PSUs was Rs. 68536.52 crore 
showing under- utilisation to the tune of 10%. Even out of this amount, only 
Rs. 45028.24 crore were utilised in the first three quarters.  
 
The Committee note that budget for exploration activities of upstream oil 
companies like ONGC, OIL and GAIL has been going down substantially over 
the years. Moreover, the PSUs are not able to utilise even the reduced 
allocations. In ca se of ONGC, the BE 2015 -16 for exploration activities was 
Rs. 14269.27 crore out of which they could utilise only about Rs. 7000 crore. 
BE for 2016-17 has been kept at Rs. 9150.56 crore. Similarly for GAIL the BE 
2016-17 has been kept at Rs. 77.55 crore wh ich is about half of BE 2015 -16. 
GAIL could utilise less than 40% of the amount in the first three quarters of 
the previous year.  
 
As regards downstream oil PSUs, the Committee note that 09 refineries under 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) achieved the crude throughput of 53.59 
MMT during 2014 -15 while during first three quarters of 2015 -16 the crude 
throughput was 41.68 MMT. The estimates for 2016 -17 has been fixed at 
57.51 MMT while the target for 2016 -17 is 62.5 MMT. Therefore, the total 
increase from 2014-15 to 2016 -17 is about 20%. The plan outlay of IOCL in 
2014-15 (actual) was Rs.14314 crore while RE for 2015 -16 is Rs.11503 
crores. The Committee note that in the first three quarters of 2015 -16 the 
actual expenditure is Rs.6962 crores which is is on ly about 65% of the annual 
estimates. The BE for 2016-17 has been fixed at Rs.13773 crores an increase 
of almost 20% over the previous year figures.  
 
In case of HPCL, its total refinery throughput in 2014 -15 was 16.18 MMT. In 
first three quarters of 2015-16 it achieved refinery throughput of 12.53 MMT. 
the target for 2016 -17 is 16.27 MMT. The Committee note that HPCL 
refineries are working at more than 100% capacity. Plan outlay for 2014 -15 
(actual) in case of 97 HPCL was Rs.1767 crores against the BE  of Rs.1792 
crores. The RE for 2015 -16 is Rs.1540 crores while in the first three quarters 
Rs.1084 crores has been utilised. The BE for 2016 -17 is fixed at Rs.1974 
crores which indicates more than 25% increase from the previous year. 
 
The Committee note th at BPCL has two refineries with combined capacity of 
21.5MMTPA. During 2013 -14, the BPCL refineries processed 23.35 MMTs 
which is more than 100% of their capacity. During 2014 -15 in the first six 
months the total of 11.23 MMT crude oil was produced in two refineries. The 
target for refining throughput for 2015 -16 is to 22.50MMT. The Committee 
observe that refineries in case of BPCL are also operating at more than 
100%. In 2014 -15 RE at Rs.5794 crores was about 10% higher than BE of 
Rs.5250 crores. RE for 20 15-16 was fixed at Rs. 7250 crores and BE for 
2016-17 was Rs. 10597 crore which indicates substantial increase.  
 
The Committee are concerned that the upstream oil PSUs are going slow on 
the exploration and development works even when the need is to work o n 
exploration and development work intensively. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should direct PSUs to increase exploration activities in 
various parts of the Country and to allocate adequate funds for that purpose. 

24 
 
 
 
The Committee note that the dow nstream oil PSUs show significant variation 
in their estimates and actual utilisation of funds. The Committee would expect 
the oil PSUs to prepare their estimates with utmost care and stick to it. 
Ministry may monitor the actual utilisation of outlay by th e PSUs regularly and 
suggest periodic course corrections".  
 
33. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (I&EBR): 
 
Total BE of I&EBR of the CPSEs under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas during 2015-16 and 2016-17 was ₹76565.46 crore (revised to ₹76874.75 
crore) and ₹87214.56 crore respectively. However, Plan Outlay (BE) from 
I&EBR for 2015 -16 was ₹75185.72 crore and RE was ₹ 68252.35 crore, 
against which actual expenditure incurred was ₹66118.29 crore. Plan outlay 
(BE) from I&EBR for 2016-17 is ₹77600.42 crore.  
 
Plan Outlays for Exploration and Production: 
 
Plan outlay (BE) from I&EBR during 2015 -16 under the head „Exploratio n and 
Production‟ was ₹55079.53 crore, which was revised to ₹48434.63 crore at 
RE stage. Actual expenditure under this head during 2015 -16 was ₹44196.55 
crore. During 2016 -17, plan outlay under the head „Exploration and 
Production‟ has been kept at ₹52618.71 crore.  
 
Plan Outlays for exploration activities by upstream oil companies: 
 
ONGC: 
Plan outlay (BE) of ONGC for exploration activities was ₹14269.27 crore 
during 2015 -16 which was revised to ₹11523.53 crore at RE stage. Against 
this actual expenditure incurred under this head was ₹9162.91 crore.  Plan 
outlay (BE) for exploration activities during 2016-17 is ₹9150.56 crore.  
 
ONGC: 
Reasons for underutilisation of allocated budget by ONGC during 2015-16: 
Budget allocation for exploratory activities by ONGC is reducing year by year 
because of reduction in exploratory acreages as no acreage h as been 
offered/awarded since NELP IX round in 2012. 
 
Shortfall in expenditure in exploratory activities is due to environmental & 
contractual issues along with mandatory clearance issues in seismic surveys. 
In exploratory drilling, shortfall has occurred due to environmental, mandatory 
clearance issues as well as down -hole complications during drilling/testing of 
wells leading to time loss. More specifically, lower utilisation in exploratory 
drilling is on account of  
 
 Less number of wells drilled during t he period due to low availability of rig 
months. 
 
 3D seismic work awarded to the company could not be initiated/completed 
due to outstanding contractual issues. 
 
ONGC is making all out efforts to resolve such issues / problems so that the 
efficiency of exploratory activities can be improved. 
 
 

25 
 
 
 
Reasons for decline in BE 2016-17 vis-à-vis BE 2015-16: 
 Survey budget has declined marginally on account of reduction in  physical 
targets of 2D and 3D Survey by 320 Ground Line KMs. (GLK) and 1353 
Square Kilometer (SKM) respectively. 
 The decline is on account of NIL target for deep -water exploratory drilling in 
BE 2016-17, as against a target of 7 wells in BE 2015-16. 
 
 The BE for shallow water exploratory drilling in 2016 -17 was reduced  mainly 
due to anticipated re duction in oil field services cost (rigs, etc.), due to 
persistent  decline in global crude prices. 
 
 The outlay for onland exploratory drilling has also been reduced on account of 
reduction in input costs of resources for 93 wells. 
 
Measures taken to increase exploration activities: 
 
To intensify its exploratory activities, various concerted measures are being 
taken by ONGC including inter-alia, focusing on exploration of deeper plays in 
the existing fields, carrying out exploration in geologically complex and 
logistically challenging areas and exploiting alternate sources of energy like 
shale gas, gas hydrate, etc. Further, pursuant to the formal launch of 
Hydrocarbon Exploration & Licensing Policy (HELP), the exploratory acreages 
/ area portfolio are expec ted to improve. In addition, resource appraisal of the 
un-appraised areas of Indian Sedimentary Basins would help in identification 
and prioritization of the areas.   
 
 
OIL: 
 
 
Plan outlay (BE) of OIL for exploration activities during 2015-16 was ₹1594.00   
crore which was revised to ₹1395 crore at RE stage. Actual expenditure 
incurred in exploration activities during 2015 -16 was ₹1364 crore. OIL has 
increased its allocation for exploration activities on year on year basis. During 
2016-17, plan outlay (BE) for exploration activities is ₹1793.50 crore.  
 
Reasons for underutilisation of allocated budget during 2015-16: 
 
The major reasons for lower utilisation of allocated budget for  exploratory 
drilling by OIL during 2015-16 are as under: 
 
(i) During financial year 2015 -16, OIL completed drilling of 16 exploratory wells 
against targeted 32 wells. 
 
(ii) Higher rig resource was allocated for development drilling in OIL‟s Petroleum 
Mining Lease (PML) areas of Assam in order to arrest declining oil production. 
 
(iii) Drilling of two exploratory wells in OIL‟s PML area in Rajasthan was deferred 
to 2016 -17 as the same is linked to Heavy Oil Monetization in the area for 
which efforts are in progress 
 
(iv) Drilling of four wells in NELP blocks could not be undertaken due to delay in 
statutory / regulatory permissions/clearance. 
 
(v) Exploratory drilling campaign in the block KG -ONN-2004/1 suffered due to 
delay in deployment of rig as use of a bridge was resisted by l ocal people. 
The drilling operation could start only w.e.f. 12th January, 2016. 

26 
 
 
 
  
Measures taken to achieve targets by OIL: 
 
Planning and monitoring mechanisms for implementation of planned 
projects/programmes are in place in OIL for achieving the set targets and the 
same are reviewed on a regular monthly basis.  
 
GAIL: 
 
Plan outlay (BE) of GAIL during 2015 -16 under the head „Exploration and 
Production‟ was ₹147.94 crore which was revised to ₹82.29 crore at RE stage 
due to rescheduling of activities by different operators. Actual expenditure 
incurred under this head during 2015-16 was ₹72 crore. Plan outlay under this 
head dur ing 2016 -17 has been kept at ₹77.55 crore which is based on 
projected expense under Minimum Work Programme, as per production 
sharing contract of various blocks. Blocks were last awarded under last bid 
round (NELP-IX) during March 2012 and since then, no n ew bid rounds have 
been announced. Various blocks have moved ahead in E&P life cycle leading 
to production in 4 blocks and thus the capital expenditure commitments are 
reducing in these blocks. 
 
IOCL 
 
During 2015-16, IOCL incurred plan expenditure of ₹1148 4.74 crore against 
BE and RE of ₹10540.00 crore and ₹11502.91 crore respectively. IOCL has 
kept BE for 2016 -17 at ₹13772.87 crore. While finalising the BE, detailed 
analysis of each ongoing and new project and those proposed, is carried out. 
Although intensive monitoring of physical and financial progress of projects is 
carried out, in certain cases  like exploration and production related schemes, 
which are significantly affected by the global developments related to oil and 
gas industry, variation between estimated and actual utilisation of funds does 
come in.   
 
HPCL 
 
During 2015 -16, HPCL incurred actual plan expenditure of ₹ 1429.49 crore 
against BE and RE of ₹ 1,791.85 crore and ₹1539.78 crore respectively. The 
shortfall in the utilisation of budget allocation was due to the following 
reasons: 
 
(i) Late receipt of Environment Clearance for Visakh Refinery Modernisation 
Project 
 
(ii) RoU disruption at Mangalore and Hassan for Mangalore -Hassan-Mysore LPG 
pipeline project 
 
(iii) Delayed receipt of permission from Forest and National Wild Life Board and 
agitation by villagers against pipeline laying for Uran -Chakan LPG pipeline 
project 
 
Reasons for higher budget allocation during 2016-17 
 
HPCL has kept BE at ₹ 1,974.26 crore for 2016 -17 as compared to BE of 
₹1,791.85 crore (an increase of about 10%) and RE of ₹1539.78 crore during 
2015-16. Budget estimates for 2016 -17 have been increased due to some of 
the new activities to be taken up in Mumbai and Visakh refineries during 

27 
 
 
 
2016-17 and as per work plan received from the operator under exploration 
sector.  
 
As far as utilisation of budget allocation is concerned, HPCL is monitoring 
physical and financial progress of the projects with respect to critical 
milestones on a monthly basis. The key progress made every month, reasons 
for delay and areas of concerns are identified and analysed for resolution on 
priority basis. 
 
BPCL 
 
During 2015 -16, BPCL incurred actual plan expenditure of ₹ 8257.00 crore 
against BE and RE of ₹ 6,501.32 crore and ₹7250 crore. Higher budget 
utilisation by BPCL during 2015 -16 was mainly to speed up the 
commissioning of Integrated Refinery Expansion Proje ct in Kochi and for 
Catalytic Reformer Unit (CRU) Isomerization project in Mumbai Refinery, in 
line with modification required as per Auto Fuel Policy and early 
commissioning of the unit.   
 
Reasons for keeping higher BE during 2016-17 
 
BPCL has kept BE 20 16-17 at ₹10597 crore which indicates a substantial 
increase as compared to BE 2015 -16. This is mainly due to higher budget 
allocation to „Refining and Marketing‟ head (₹9797 crore includes pipelines, 
JV with BORL, etc.). During 2016 -17, major projects are  planned under 
„Refining‟ head to meet the Government directive and deadline for ensuring 
production of BS V/VI fuels and also  Petchem project in Kochi Refinery. For 
evacuation of additional 6 MMT petroleum products from Integrated Refinery 
Expansion Project in Kochi, CAPEX expenses under marketing sector (major 
pipelines and infrastructure) have been planned in the southern region.  
 
Although all CPSEs had put in their best efforts to ensure expenditure in 
accordance with the targets during 2015 -16, reason s reported by each of 
them for the shortfall, wherever relevant have been detailed. The Ministry is 
also putting all out efforts to ensure that realistic targets are fixed at the BE 
stage so that the gap, if any, between the budgeted and incurred expenditu re, 
after following due diligence is minimized.  
 
ONGC and OIL are carrying out exploration through their internal generated 
resources/revenue. No budgetary allocation is made to oil PSUs for carrying 
out exploration and production activities. However Ministry monitor their 
exploration activities periodically. 
 
In order to accelerate exploration activities in the country for appraisal of the 
Indian sedimentary basin, an area of 1.502 Million Sq. Km is identified by 
DGH. To appraise these areas, Government has formulated a plan to conduct 
2D seismic surveys of volume of 48,243 LKM in 22 sedimentary basins of 
India where no/scanty data is available.  
 
Total estimated cost of the project is about Rs. 2932.99 Crore for conducting 
2D Seismic survey API of 48, 243 line kilometer (LKM) upto 2019 -20 in Indian 
sedimentary basins".  
 

28 
 
 
 
34. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should direct PSUs 
to increase exploration activities in various parts of the Country and to 
allocate adequate funds for that purpose . The Committee had also noted 
significant variation in the estimates and actual utilisation of funds  by the 
downstream oil companies. The Committee had further recommended that the 
Ministry should monitor the actual utilisation of outlay by the PSUs regul arly 
and suggest periodic course corrections.  In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry has stated that in case of ONGC, the underutilisation was due to 
reduction in budget allocation for exploratory activities by ONGC year by year 
as no acreage has been offered/awarded since NELP IX round in 2012.  The 
shortfall in expenditure in exploratory activities is attributed to environmental 
& contractual issues along with mandatory clearance issues in seismic 
surveys. In case of underutilisation by GAIL, the Ministry have explained that it 
was due to rescheduling of activities by different operators  and also as blocks 
were awarded under last bid round (NELP -IX) during March 2012 and since 
then, no new bid rounds have been announced. Further, as v arious blocks 
have moved ahead in E&P life cycle leading to decline in production in the 
blocks and thus the capital expenditure commitments are reducing in these 
blocks. 
 
 The Committee are not convinced with  the justification offered  by the 
Ministry for the underutilisatio n of allocated budget for the ONGC and GAIL  
and deplore their lackadaisical approach in utilisation of allocated funds. The 
Committee understand that  these companies must have prepared their 
estimates keeping all these  factors into account . There is no new  reason for 
pathetic under -utilisation of B udget Estimates. The Committee, therefore,  
would reiterate that  these PSUs must prepare their estimates appropriately 
keeping all the factors in view and every effort must be undertaken to utilise 
the available funds by them and the Ministry must monitor the fund utilisation  
on regular basis .  The Committee may accordingly be informed about the 
change in policy in preparation of estimates. 
 
  

29 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
India-Africa Cooperation in Hydrocarbon 
35. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Fourth India -Africa Hydrocarbon Summit was 
organised in New Delhi where the issues relating to increase in Hydrocarbon 
trade and investments in African countries were discussed.  Africa has 
become an important source of crude oil for India and we are currently 
importing about 26 per cent of our crude oil requirements from African 
countries.  The Committee note that Africa is blessed with vast hydrocarbon 
resources, substantial areas of which remai n unexplored and the potential for 
future collaborations with Africa is very high. This opens substantial 
exploration and production opportunities for Indian companies.  While Africa 
can be reliable source of our hydrocarbon needs, India is in a good posit ion to 
offer its expertise in capacity building and other related fields in hydrocarbon 
sector. India can also develop other ancillary industries in African countries 
such as fertilizer factories which can then be exported to India leading to 
mutual prosperity.   
India's demand for hydrocarbons and Africa's supply of the same is expected 
to grow and it is possible to harness the complementarities in this sector to 
ensure economic development in both India and Africa. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  the Government should prioritize its bilateral 
cooperation with African countries in the hydrocarbon sector with emphasis on 
exploration and production activities in unexplored areas specially in sub -
Sahara Africa".  
36. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The 4th India -Africa Hydrocarbons Conference was organized in New Delhi 
from January 21 -22, 2016.  The delegations of 9 African countries viz. 
Mauritius, Morocco, Algeria, Sudan, South Sudan, Tunisia, Senegal, 
Equatorial Guinea and Liberia were led by res pective Ministers.  Senior 
officials led the delegations from Nigeria, Ghana, South Africa, Egypt, 
Tanzania, Kenya, Mozambique, Uganda, Libya, Cote d'Ivory, Gabon & Sierra 
Leone.  
 
India's engagement with African countries in the petroleum sector has been 
on an upswing in the past few years with nearly 16% of India's crude oil import 
coming from Africa, majority coming from Nigeria and Angola. 
 
During the bilateral meeting, Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer 
Protection of Mauritius requested India' s assistance in developing Mauritius 
as a regional hydrocarbon hub.  In this regard, a visit to Mauritius of Shri 
Dharmendra Pradhan, MoS (I/C), MoPNG was scheduled in April, 2016. 
However, the said visit was postponed.  Equatorial Guinea and ONGC Videsh 
Ltd. (OVL) signed  a Memorandum of Understanding on exploring potential 
investment opportunities within the hydrocarbons sector in Equatorial Guinea.  
India announced additional 250 fully funded scholarships for African nationals 

30 
 
 
 
for technical and profession al courses in the Hydrocarbons sector in India 
institutes.  
 
In the first half of 2014, two Indian national oil companies ONGC Videsh 
Limited (OVL) and Oil India Limited (OIL) completed the acquisition of 20% 
participating stake in Area 1 of the Rovuma gas  block, Mozambique at a cost 
of US$ 5.115 billion. This is in addition to 10% already held by another 
national oil company, Bharat Petro Resources".  
 
37. The Committee had recommended that the Government should prioritize 
its bilateral cooperation with African countries in the hydrocarbon sector with 
emphasis on exploration and production activities in unexplored areas 
specially in sub -Sahara Africa  as India's demand for hydrocarbons a nd 
Africa's supply of the same is expected to grow in the forthcoming years and 
there exist significant complementarities between the two partners in this 
sector. The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry has stated  the various steps 
being taken to increase c ooperation by the Government with African countries 
in the field of hydrocarbon.  The Committee appreciate the attempts of the 
Government to increase its footprints in Africa in the sector  and desire the 
same needs to be sustained in concrete terms so as to improve the availability 
of hydrocarbon to the country. 
 
 
----- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 Utilisation of Budget Allocations  
 
 The Committee note that the total budget of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas for the year 2016 -17 is R  s. 29160.62 crore out of which plan outlay is 
Rs. 2050 crore and non -plan outlay is Rs. 27110.62 crore. The non -plan outlay 
consists mainly of subsidies on LPG and Kerosene . Of the plan outlay of Rs. 2050 
crore, Rs. 2000 crore has been earmarked for scheme for LPG connection to 1.5 
crore poor households. The Committee note that in the year 2015 -16, RE under plan 
and non -plan were Rs. 1203 crore and Rs. 30146.35 crore, respec tively and the 
actual expenditure under plan and non-plan head was Rs. 1201 crore and Rs. 30085 
crore, respectively. The BE 2016 -17 figures show 10% decline in non -plan 
expenditure when compared to RE 2015 -16. The Committee further note that the 
Annual pla n for 2016 -17 of the Oil PSUs, which pre -dominantly comprises the 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) of Oil PSUs, is Rs. 87214.56 crore 
compared to Rs. 75565.46 crore in 2015 -16. The Committee appreciate that the 
Ministry could fully utilise the RE budget allocations during 2015-16.  
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry has allocated Rs. 2000 crore for a 
plan scheme to provide free LPG connection to 1.5 crore BPL households during 
2016-17. The Committee further note that within plan outlay of MoPNG for 2016 -17, 
Rs. 47 crore has been  allocated to the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum 
Technology (RGIPT). A token amount of Rs. one crore each has been allocated to 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL), setting up Petroleum 
University in Andhra Pradesh and for ISPRL Phase-II. The Committee are concerned 
that the RGIPT project relating to setting up the Petroleum University in Andhra 
Pradesh has failed to take off so far. The Committee are also concerned that the 
outlay budgeted by the PSUs from their internal resources are not being properly 
utilised. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should exercise 
suitable monitoring in order to ensure that the outlays are utilised properly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Annual plan outlay (BE) of the CPSEs under the Min istry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas during 2015 -16 was ₹75185.72 crore which was revised to ₹ 68252.35 
crore at the RE stage, against which actual expenditure incurred was ₹66118.29 
crore. In so far as I&EBR of CPSEs is concerned, BE for 2015 -16 was ₹.76565 .46 
crore (and not ₹75565.46 crore) and RE was ₹76874.75 crore. Plan outlay (BE) of 
CPSEs during 2016 -17 is ₹77600.42 crore and Internal & Extra Budgetary 
Resources (I&EBR) is ₹.87214.56 crore.  
 

32 
 
 
 
 In order to ensure that the outlays are utilised properly, the performance of 
each PSU (including CAPEX) is being extensively monitored in the Ministry and also 
reviewed in the monthly review meetings, in order to ensure that each CPSE is able 
to achieve the target by the year. Further, Hon‟ble Minister of State ( I/C), PNG also 
reviews CAPEX performance of major CPSEs and necessary 
instructions/suggestions are issued to all concerned to achieve targets as proposed 
for different activities/projects.  
 
The approved revised cost estimate for RGIPT, JAIS centre is Rs. 538 cr. 
against original cost of Rs. 435 cr.  Government had to provide Rs.369.10 cr. and 
Rs.134 cr. was released till 2015 -16. To complete the project, MoPNG  had 
requested MoF to provide Rs. 235.10 cr. each  in the first, the second and the third 
supplementary of 2015 -16.   No fund was provided by Ministry of Finance  in any 
supplementary.  
 MoPNG had requested MoF to provide Rs.199 cr., including Rs.48 cr. in BE 
2015-16, in RE 2015 -16 and Rs.84.1 cr. in BE 2016 -17.  MoF did not provide any 
fund in RE 2015-16, over and above Rs. 48 cr. provide in BE 2015-16.  Against  the 
request of Rs.84.1 cr. in BE 2016-17, Ministry of Finance provided only Rs. 47 cr.  In 
the first supplementary of 2016 -17 MoF has  been requested for Rs. 188.1 cr.  
Completion of the proje ct is contingent upon availability of funds for which MoPNG 
has been regularly requesting MoF. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Exploration and Production Scenario of Crude oil and Natural Gas  
 
 The Committee note that strengthening „Energy Security‟ is one of the 
mandates of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and exploration 
and production of crude oil and natural gas is one of the most important ways of 
providing this security. The fortuitous circumstance of the low international prices of 
crude oil and gas has given some respite. But it cannot be a substitute for domestic 
sources of energy developed through explor ation and bringing them online. As the 
nation moves forward on the high growth trajectory and prosperity levels of the 
citizens increase, the demand of crude oil and gas is going to increase rapidly. At 
current levels of consumption, about 80% of our crude  oil requirements are being 
met through imports. The Committee note that the production of crude oil is stagnant 
in the last few years while the natural gas production has actually gone down. The 
Committee further note the recent initiatives of the Ministr y to simplify the rules 
involving exploration of crude oil and natural gas in the country including formulation 
of the Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP). The Committee, however, 
find that from discovery of oil fields to production is a long d rawn process involving 
substantial time frame and capital expenditure. Moreover, clearances from various 
Ministries/Departments are also required. Therefore, the Committee feels that it is 
very important to lay down a consistent and predictable licensing e nvironment in the 
country in order to attract interest from national as well as global players who can 
bring much needed capital and technology to invest in the sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make focused effort to inc rease 

33 
 
 
 
exploration and production by stimulating investment in the sector and prescribing a 
stable and transparent licensing/regulatory regime geared to face challenges of the 
sector and ensure increase in crude oil production. The Committee also desire tha t 
the Ministry should make sincere efforts to obtain all necessary clearances from 
different agencies for the blocks that have been stalled due to various reasons for 
initiating E&P activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed in exploration & production 
sector. Government awards exploration licenses through international competitive 
bidding process wherein National oil Companies, Indian private and foreign 
companies have to bid on equal footing. No preferential  treatment is given to any 
company either foreign or Indian. Government has taken recent Policy  initiatives with 
the following guiding objectives: 
 Enhance Domestic oil and gas production  
 Bring substantial investment  
 Generate sizeable employment  
 Enhance Transparency  
 Reduce Administrative Discretion 
 
 
The visible impact of these policy decisions will be seen in couple of years. Some of 
the recent policy initiatives are as under: 
 Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) for award of Hydrocarbon 
acreages with new contractual system and fiscal model coupled with the open 
acreage policy that provides right to investors to explore and produce all type 
of hydrocarbons including non -conventional such as CBM, shale gas, gas 
hydrates, etc.   
 Discovered Small Fields Policy - 69 oil & gas fields which have been held by 
ONGC and OIL for many years, but have not been exploited, is to be opened 
for competitive bidding. Government has already announced the Policy on 
25th May, 2016 for bidding of 67 oil and gas fiel ds. Bid closing date under this 
policy is 31st October, 2016. 
 Marketing and Pricing freedom for new gas production from Deepwater, Ultra 
Deepwater and High Pressure -High Temperature Areas with ceiling Price.  
This policy decision is expected to monetize 28  number of discoveries having 
reserves of 6.75 trillion cubic feet (TCF). 
 Policy for grant of extension to the Production Sharing Contracts – Provision 
for extension of time period for another 10 years or till the economic life of the 
field for 28 Small and medium sized discovered fields. 
 Monetization of the Ratna offshore field – ONGC has initiated actions for 
development of this field. 
 Drill Stem Test (DST) Policy - Monetization of 10 hydrocarbon discoveries in 5 
NELP blocks by resolving the long pending dispute associated with testing 
requirements. 
 Permission of Extraction of CBM to Coal India Limited (CIL) & its subsidiaries 
in coal Mining area. This decision will help in enhancement of production of 
coal as well as coal bed methane (CBM). 

34 
 
 
 
 New Domestic N atural Gas price Guidelines, 2014: Under these guidelines, 
prices of domestically produced natural gas has been linked to prices of 
natural gas at important markets/hubs. 
 Policy Framework for relaxation, extensions and clarifications at the 
development and production stage under PSC regime for early monetization 
of hydrocarbon discoveries: Government approved this policy on 10.11.2014, 
and the same is being implemented. Under this policy, about 40 pending 
cases have been resolved. 
 
 As regards to various st atutory clearances such as EC -FC is concerned, on 
some occasions the statutes provides for operator only to apply.  As such, it 
becomes difficult to obtain full clearance before th e blocks are awarded.  However,  
Government takes in -principal approvals / cl earances from different agencies such 
as - Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, 
etc.before offering new blocks to the investors. Moreover, DGH and Ministry are 
helping the investors in  getting clearances from different age ncies as and when 
required. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
LPG connection for households below poverty line  
 
 The Committee note that Government has announced a scheme as a part of 
„Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Scheme‟ which will be implemented in three years (2016-17, 
2017-18 and 2018 -19) to give 5 crore new LPG connections in the name of women 
members of BPL household s. An amount of Rs. 2000 crore has been allocated for 
the scheme to provide free LPG connection to 1.5 crore BPL households during 
2016-17. The Committee note that the Socio- Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 
will be used to identify the BPL households and  the States which are below the 
national average in the LPG coverage will be given preference. The Committee 
however, desire that the LPG connections surrendered under 'Give it Up' scheme 
should also be brought into the ambit of this scheme and targets be revised suitably. 
The Committee appreciate launching of this pro -poor measure of the Government 
and hope that if the new scheme is successfully implemented, it can go a long way in 
providing clean energy to the poor households and also contribute to empowe rment 
and health care of women. The Committee, however, note that the implementation of 
the scheme may face difficulties due to lack of adequate infrastructure including LPG 
dealerships, bottling plants, pipelines across the country, availability of adequa te 
quantity of LPG in the country, supply of reasonably priced LPG stoves, etc. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry should fine tune the processes linked to 
implementation of the Scheme particularly the development of delivery infrastructure 
in the remote and border areas. The Committee suggest that the services of public 
representatives may be utilised in implementation of the scheme.  
 
 

35 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Government has recently launched “Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana”  for 
providing LPG connections to 5 crore women belonging to the Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) families  over a period of 3 years starting  from FY 2016 -17. Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister of India has formally launched the scheme on 01.05.2016. 
 Under the GiveItUp Scheme, a customer surrenders his LPG subsidy only 
and not the LPG connection. Earlier, LPG connections linked to „GiveItUp‟ campaign 
were released to BPL households from the available CSR funds of Oil PSUs.  
 
Government is planning to set up 10,000 new distributorships. Pre sently, the 
process for setting up of more than 1800 new LPG distributorships is at different 
stages of selection across the country.  Majority of these distributorships will come in 
rural areas to cater to unserved consumers. Further, advertisement for ne w locations 
will be issued to appoint new distributorships.  
OMCs have projected 20722 TMT demand of LPG in the year 2016 -17 and it 
will go up to 28988 TMT in 2021 -22.  Capacity augmentation of existing Bottling 
Plants and setting up of new Bottling Plants  is in progress to meet the projected 
demand till 2021-22. OMCs are planning to set -up 54 grass root Bottling Plants upto 
2020-21. As on 01.04.2016 there are 188 Bottling Plants with bottling capacity of 
15172 TMT.  
 The availability of indigenous LPG in t he country is insufficient to cater the 
demands of the LPG. To meet this demand, OMCs import the LPG and imports are 
tied with different countries well in advance. Hence, OMCs do not see any shortage 
of LPG in the country. 
OMCs are providing two burner sta r rating gas stoves to beneficiaries under 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Scheme @ Rs. 990/- per unit, which is cheaper than the one 
sold in open market. 
 OMCs will organise „Melas‟ at various locations for release of connections to 
BPL families. This will be done in the presence of public representatives and 
distinguished personalities of the area. The presence of public representative will 
enhance the awareness of the scheme. Further, District Nodal Officers (DNOs) have 
been appointed to co -ordinate with elected representatives for smooth 
implementation of the scheme.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP)  
 
 The Committee observe that the Government has formulated a Hydrocarbon 
Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) with simplified rules governing exploration and 
production of all hydrocarbons in the country. The new policy will govern all 

36 
 
 
 
hydrocarbon fields which will henceforth be brought under production under a single 
licensing framework. This special dispensation will be available to future discoveries 
as well as existing discoveries which have not commenced commercial production 
as on 1/1/2016. The Committee also note that to address the issue of lack of interest 
in investment in the previous years in difficult areas such as deep water and ultra -
deep water areas, a calibrated marketing and pricing freedom has been provided for 
incentivizing oil and gas produc tion in the deep water, ultra deep water, high 
temperature-high pressure areas to the entities subject to a ceiling based on prices 
of alternate fuels. The Committee desire that the Ministry should leave the least 
scope for misinterpretation of the policy so that situations leading to disputes may 
not arise.  
Reply of the Government 
 Under the policy on „Marketing including Pricing Freedom for gas to be 
produced from discoveries in Deepwater, Ultra Deepwater and High Temperature – 
High Pressure areas, enough safeguards have been provided to avoid 
misinterpretation of the policy. 
 The Policy specifically provides that for the purpose of availing special 
dispensation including marketing freedom, fields having at least 2/3rd of total 
number of appraisal an d development wells in that field in deepwater/ultra 
deepwater/high pressure- high temperature area shall be considered as eligible for 
special dispensation for entire output from such fields. The classification for 
deepwater areas, ultra deepwater areas a nd high pressure- high temperature areas 
have also been made in the policy.  Also, the formula for calculating the price ceiling 
has been clearly specified.   Efforts have made to ensure that there is no ambiguity 
on any aspect and thus chances of disputes are minimized. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 Indian Strategic Petroleum Resolve Limited (ISPRL)  
 
 The Committee note that ISPRL was formed as a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) in order to address the oil supply security concerns of the country. The 
strategic caverns were planned to be established initially in Vishakhapatnam, 
Mangalore and Padur under Pha se-I with a capital cost of Rs.3985 crores. The 
Committee are happy to note that while Vishakhapatnam cavern has been 
commissioned and the other two caverns in Mangalore and Padur are likely to be 
commissioned in May 2016. The Committee also note that in t he second phase, four 
more caverns are to be established in Chandikhol, Bikaner, Rajkot and Padur. 
Detailed feasibility report for the second phase has been prepared. A token amount 
of Rs. 1 crore has been allocated to ISPRL as BE 2016 -17. The Committee de sire 
that Phase -II of the project needs to be started without any delay along with 
adequate allocation of funds. The Committee further note that the Government is 
exploring alternative options of financing part of the cost of crude oil to fill the 
Mangalore and Padur caverns which include commercial utilisation by other 
interested parties. The Committee understand that negotiations with Abu Dhabi 
National Oil Company (ADNOC) are underway in this regard. The Committee, desire 

37 
 
 
 
that strategic interest of the c ountry behind construction of caverns should be 
protected and recommend that Ministry may ensure that oil stored in those caverns 
should always be available for the nation in emergency situations.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As  regards the Phase-II  of Strategic Storage of Crude Oil, a Detailed Project 
Report have been prepared for establishing additional crude reserves of 12.5 MMT 
at Chandikhol (3.75 MMT), Padur (2.5 MMT) and Bikaner (3.75 MMT).   For this 
purpose, meeting of  Expenditure Finance Committee was held on 29.7.2016.  EFC, 
in-principle, recommended construction of caverns at Chandikhol and Bikaner.  
Minutes are awaited. 
 
 The Government is maintaining the Strategic Crude Oil Reserves for greater 
energy security.  Although the MoP&NG, is looking at alternative models of filing the 
caverns of Mangalore and Padur , yet its availability for strategic need of the country 
would be ensured. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Petroleum University in Andhra Pradesh  
 
The Committee note that an Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) is 
to be established in a 150 acre land in Subhavam Mandal in Vishakhapatnam in 
accordance with the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 20 14. The objective of the 
University is to meet the quantitative and qualitative gap in the supply of skilled 
manpower in the petroleum sector and promote research activities. Total capital 
expenditure for the project is estimated at Rs. 855.46 crore. A tok en provision of Rs. 
one crore each under plan and non-plan has been provided in BE 2016-17.  
 
The Committee also observe that the land identified for the project is being 
acquired and until the campus is ready, arrangements have been made with the 
Andhra U niversity to use their resources for starting classes. The Committee also 
note that Rs. 23.50 crore has been provided by the OIDB to start the academic 
session from the temporary campus.  
 
The Committee, however, are not satisfied with the progress made so  far in 
setting up the Institute only through a token amount and recommend that work on 
the construction should be taken up expeditiously after completing land acquisition 
work of the site in consultation with the State Government and allocation of more 
funds. The Committee also desire that the Institute should start functioning from its 
own campus at the earliest and availability of funds should not be a constraint for the 
project.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per  the 13th Schedule of Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014, 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) has been set up with the objective to 
meet the quantitative and qualitative gap in the supply of skilled manpower for the 

38 
 
 
 
petroleum sector and to pro mote research activities needed for the growth of the 
sector.  The Government of Andhra Pradesh has made available an area measuring 
about 200 acres of land in Anthakapalli Village, Sabbavaram Mandal, 
Visakhapatnam District for the Institute which is free of cost.  IIPE Society has been 
registered on 18.04.2016. 
College of Engineering (Autonomous) situated in Andhra University at 
Visakhapatnam has provided the resources to start the IIPE sessions during the 
academic year 2016-17 in two B.Tech. Programmes viz., Petroleum Engineering and 
Chimical Engineering.  Rank list from JEE -Advanced, 2016 (IIT-Guwahati) has been 
received and  Rank  holders  have  been  invited  to apply for admission to  IIPE.  IIT- 
Kharagpur has been roped in to act as a Mentor Instituti on for starting the academic 
session 2016-17. 
The capital expenditure for the project is estimated to be around Rs.655.46 
crore (Rs.432.37 crore for the 1st Phase and Rs.223.09 crore for the 2nd Phase).  
Deficit funding against recurring Expenses for 2016/ 17 to 2024/25 period would be 
Rs.334.84 crore.  The source of funding for the proposal would be through 
Government Budgetary Support (GBS). EFC Meeting was held on 21.06.2016 under 
the Chairmanship of Finance Secr etary & Secretary (Expenditure) which has  
recommended the GBS funding of Rs.655.46 crore as a Capital Expenditure of 
Rs.400 crore of Endowment Fund (Rs.200 Crore under GBS and Rs.200 Crore to be 
contributed  by oil PSU‟s).  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Marginal Fields Policy  
 
 The Committee note that the Marginal Fields Policy has been formulated by 
the Ministry in order to monetize oil blocks lying unutilised with ONGC and OIL 
because of reasons such as remote locations, small size, financial unviability and 
technological constraints. The policy aims at involving private sector including global 
players in the field for increasing domestic production in short -term. The Committee 
observe that the operators will be provided single license to explore and extract 
hydrocarbon resources alongwith pricing and marketing freedom. The operators will 
also be exempted from oil cess and custom duty on machinery and equipments. The 
aim is to simplify procedures in order to attract investment in exploration and 
production. The Committee note tha t there are about 67 fields which are to be 
offered under this policy and the bids for these oil and gas fields are likely to be 
launched in the current year. The Committee recommend that the bids for the blocks 
should be launched so that the discoveries c an be brought into production at the 
earliest. The Committee appreciate the policy which aims to evacuate oil and other 
hydrocarbons from the discoveries made by ONGC and OIL which were not 
monetized for reasons including viability. However, the Committee feel that the policy 
needs to remove any subjective interpretation of rules and guidelines. The 

39 
 
 
 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should issue clarifications in order to 
remove any scope of disputes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government of India has announced the commencement of the „Discovered 
Small Fields Bid Round -2016on 25th May 2016.  Under this Policy, 46 Contract 
Areas consisting of 67 different small fields has been offered to investors through 
international bidding pro cess. Bid closing date is 31st October, 2016. The 
introduction of Revenue Sharing Contract will minimize the number of disputes as 
there is no cost recovery element which invariably has led to many disputes in NELP 
regime.  
 Road shows were organised at De lhi, Mumbai, Guwahati, Houston (USA) and 
Calgary (Canada) in which the  doubts of the  investors were clarified and they were 
encouraged to participate in the bid. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Construction of pipelines under National Gas Grid through PPP & Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF)  
 
 The Committee note that 15000 kms of pipelines were to be added to the 
existing pipelines as part of National Gas Grid. Out of these, three pipelines of the 
length of about 2500 kms were to be executed through PPP mode with Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) opti on. GAIL, which was the 'Sponsoring Authority' to implement the 
pilot PPP project completed route survey and Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR). The 
Committee observe that work on these three pipelines has been stalled as gas 
pipeline projects do not meet the criteria of the PPP projects under the VGF scheme. 
The Committee are concerned that such an important project has been handled in a 
lackadaisical manner by the Ministry resulting in substantial time and cost overrun of 
the projects and in completion of National Gas Grid. The Committee note that the 
Ministry is considering to approach Ministry of Finance for direct budgetary support 
for meeting the viability gap for the gas pipelines. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take urgen t measures to finalise the funding 
pattern and ensure that work on these pipelines under the National Gas Grid is 
completed at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP& NG) identified various 
pipelines and spur -line pipeline sections to develop additional 15000 Km of gas 
pipeline for completing the National Gas Grid. Out of this 15000 Km, three pipeline 
sections of total length of about 2500 Km were identified to be devel oped through 
PPP & Viability Gap Funding (VGF). To start with the development of gas pipeline 
projects in PPP mode, MoP&NG approved Ranchi -Talcher-Paradip pipeline section 
as a Pilot PPP project and GAIL was appointed Sponsoring Authority for this Pilot 
PPP project. The remaining two identified PPP gas pipeline project was to be taken 
up for implementation only after the successful execution of pilot PPP project. GAIL 
completed the detailed route survey and other pre -project work for Pilot PPP project. 

40 
 
 
 
Based on survey report, the route of the pilot PPP project has also been revised to 
Bokaro-Ranchi-Talcher-Angul/Dhamra pipeline section for optimizing pipeline 
infrastructure in the region. However, over the period of pre -project activities of Pilot 
PPP projec t, it emerged that PPP route will not be feasible for the “Gas pipeline 
infrastructure” and alternate viability gap funding mechanism need to be explored for 
developing gas pipelines projects in the country. In view of this, MoP&NG has 
clubbed the pilot PP P project (i.e. Bokaro -Ranchi-Talcher-Angul/Dhamra pipeline) 
with GAIL‟s authorized Phulpur -Haldia Gas Pipeline Project. Government is under 
active consideration to provide necessary financial assistance to GAIL for 
implementing Phulpur -Halida Gas Pipeline  including Bokaro -Ranchi-Talcher-
Angul/Dhamra pipeline (PDHPL). Public Investment Board (PIB) convened a 
meeting on 6th July 2016 and has recommended for 40% viability gas funding for 
entire PDHPL project.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP)  
 
 The Committee note that the NGHP was initiated in 1997 with participation 
from institutions/agencies such as Directorate General of Hydrocarbons, Upstream 
oil PSUs such as ONGC, IOL, GAIL and IOC and National Research Institutions like 
National Institute o f Oceanography, National geophysical Research Institute and 
National Institute of Ocean Technology. The Committee observe that second phase 
of NGHP expedition was completed in July 2015 in Krishna -Godavari (KG) and 
Mahanadi offshore basin. The Committee ar e happy to note initial results of the 
NGHP-02 expedition are very encouraging and gas hydrates have been discovered 
in KG deep offshore areas in sand reservoirs which are reported to be the thickest 
gas hydrate reservoir system in the world. The Committee  note that based on data 
obtained during the expedition, sites for pilot production testing are to be identified 
and pilot production of gas hydrate deposits are planned to be carried out under the 
third phase of expedition. The Committee note that while t he prospects of Gas 
Hydrates are encouraging, there has to be a cost benefit analysis before committing 
investments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should conduct 
a thorough review through an independent agency before carrying out fu rther works 
under NGHP.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The results of NGHP -02 were very encouraging as two quality Gas Hydrate 
Reservoirs have been discovered.  The cost benefit analysis is also highly 
favourable.  About 134 TCF gas in about 8400 sq km area in KG Deep Offshore is 
likely to be present.   Studies are in progress.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter -I) 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM)  
 
 The Committee note that India possesses world's fourth largest proven coal 
reserves and holds substantial prospects for exploration and exploitation of CBM. It 
also notes that the Ministry of Coal has given No -Objection Certificate for a total of 
26,000 sq . km area of coal basins for CBM explorations. The estimated CBM 
resources in the identified area is about 91.8 Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF). The 
Committee observe that, till date, four rounds of CBM bidding have been undertaken 
by the MoP&NG under its CBM po licy which resulted in awarding of 33 CBM blocks 
in the total identified area. Out of the 33 awarded blocks, only one is in production 
phase while seven and five are in development and exploration phase, respectively. 
16 blocks are in the process of being relinquished on the ground of having poor CBM 
potential. The Committee are concerned about poor progress achieved so far in the 
exploration and exploitation of the CBM. Even after nearly a decade of start of 
commercial production, only one block is under p roduction. The Committee note that 
Government has issued notification on 3.11.2015 granting rights to Coal India Ltd. 
and subsidiaries for exploration and exploitation of CBM in coal basins on 
nomination basis for which the CIL possess lease for mining coa l. The Committee 
note that DGH has estimated that CBM production in 2017 -18 may reach 5.77 
MMSCMD from present level of 1.1MMSCMD in the country. The Committee 
recommend that the exploration and exploitation activities of CBM should be 
expedited in order to maximize production of this source.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The reasons for low CBM production may be attributed to the following issues 
faced by CBM block contractors:  
1. Overlap Issues with existing awarded coal blocks, Oil & Gas blocks, 
Forest area and other projects 
2. Land Acquisition problems as large number of wells have to be drilled in 
order to effectively drain CBM from the reservoir  
3. CBM productivity per well is low er than the conventional gas well. Hence, 
large number of wells have t o be drilled and dewatered over a 
considerable period to commence CBM production at commercial level 
4. Delay in grant of statutory clearances viz. PEL/PML/CTE (Consent to 
Establish)/ CTO (Consent to Operate) from respective state government 
and Environment Clearance (EC) from MoEF 
5. Other issues such as -Law and Order problems, Gas pricing and 
allocation, etc. 
Government is actively engaged to enhance CBM production in India by removing all 
impediments in consultation with stakeholders/State Governments a nd also through 
various reforms and policy initiatives as given below:  
1. To bring more  area under CBM production Government has already 
announced right to CBM extraction by Coal India Ltd and its subsidiaries in 

42 
 
 
 
its lease hold areas for coal vide notification dated 3.11.2015. To 
operationalize the notification first meeting in this respect was already held. 
The issues raised by CIL in this respect being deliberated for resolution. 
2. To resolve the issue of co -development of CBM and coal in the same a rea, 
Ministry is actively engaged in resolution of co -development issue by forming 
Core-Group on Co -development under the chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (Exploration). Core-group has deliberated on the issue and effort is 
on to give final shape to  a Co-development agreement between coal miners 
and CBM operator working in the same area by incorporation of relevant 
safety modalities. 
3. Government is actively considering other initiatives e.g. removal of rigidity in 
CBM Contract terms and reform in CBM pricing and allocation.  
4. This Ministry is also actively pursuing the pending PEL (Petroleum 
Exploration License)/ML (mining Lease) grant from different state 
Governments. On such intervention last year, 3 ML s for North Karanpura, 
Bokaro and Jharia CBM Blocks were issued by the  State Government of 
Jharkhand.  
5. Minister of State (IC), P& NG has reviewed the progress of CBM operation 
by convening a meeting of CBM Operators on 17.05.2016 and assured all 
possible assistance to Operators for enhancing CBM production in India. 
 In last two years CBM production in the country has more than doubled from 
0.59 MMSCMD in May 2014 to 1.38 MMSCMD in May 2 016. Around 250 new 
development wells were drilled in last 2 years. With exploratory and development 
efforts taken by the  CBM operating Companies, CBM production is likely to increase 
further to 5.77 MMSCMD by the end of  2017-18. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
 Pricing of Oil and Diesel  
 
 The Committee note that the crude oil prices have come down in the 
international market. However the Committee also note that the reduction in petrol 
and diesel prices in India have not been commensurate with the fall in international 
oil prices. In July 2 014 when the Indian basket of crude oil used to cost US$ 106.3 
/bbl, the retail cost of petrol and diesel in Delhi was Rs. 73.54/litre and 57.84/litre, 
respectively. In February 2016 the cost of Indian crude oil was US$ 30.33 which 
means the international prices fell by about 76%. However, during the same time -
frame the retail prices of petrol and diesel were reduced only by 13.86% and 12.86% 
respectively (in Delhi). The Committee observe that the retail prices of petrol and 
diesel in the country have not b een reduced to the extent of the reduction in 
international prices as a result of increase in central and state taxes‟ component on 
petroleum products. The Committee note that in February 2014 the excise duty 
levied by the Central Government on per litre p etrol was Rs 9.48 which was 
increased to 21.48 in February 2016. In case of diesel, the increase during the same 
period was from Rs. 3.56 to Rs. 17.33. Some of the State Governments also 
increased sales tax/VAT etc. during the same period which caused less  than 
expected reduction in retail petrol and diesel prices. The Committee appreciate the 

43 
 
 
 
efforts of the Government to maintain stability in the retail prices of petrol and diesel 
and keep a cushion in anticipation of future price increases in the internat ional 
market.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In this regard, the Ministry has submitted that they have "noted" the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
 City Gas Distribution (CGD)  
 
 The Committee note that the City Gas Distribution (CGD) network supplies 
gas to four separate segments - Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) for automobiles, 
Piped Natural Gas (PNG) in domestic, commercial and Industrial segments. The 
Committee also note that furt her rounds of bidding for expansion of CGD network to 
34 GAs were conducted by PNGRB and have received 56 bids for 24 GAs which are 
under evaluation. The Committee note that 28 new GAs in the CGD network have 
been added in the last two years. At present ab out 30.93 lakh households in 11 
states are availing the PNG supplies. The Committee observe that the Ministry had 
targeted that by the year 2015 -16, the total number of PNG customers would be 
about 50 lakhs, whereas the actual number is about 31 lakhs whic h indicates 
substantial shortfall in the target and need to scale up its effort to increase the 
number of connections. The Committee desire that the PNGRB/Ministry should 
complete the evaluation of the bids received under sixth round at the earliest and 
also ensure that the work already awarded under earlier rounds are monitored 
regularly and commissioned. The Committee note that , therefore, feel that the 
expansion efforts of the CGD network has to increase expeditiously and recommend 
that Government/PNGRB should make more coordinated efforts to expand the CGD 
network to more States and GAs. 96  
 
Reply of the Government 
 PNGRB received 56 bids for 20 Geographical Areas (GAs) (and not 24 GAs 
as mentioned in recommendation no. 16) out of the 34 GAs put on bid in 6th round of 
bidding. Out of the received bids in 6th round, PNGRB has awarded total 13 new 
GAs/Districts namely Saharanpur (Uttar Pradesh), Amreli (Gujarat), Patan (Gujarat), 
Bhatinda(Punjab), Rupnagar (Punjab), Dahej Vagra Taluka (Gujarat), Fatehgarh  
Sahib District (Punajb), North Goa (Goa), Dahod(Gujarat), Banaskantha (Gujarat), 
Ahemdabad (Gujarat), Anand (Gujarat) and Panchmahal (Gujarat). Further, PNGRB 
has issued Letter of Intent for 2 more GAs namely Ratnagiri (Maharashtra) and 
Ahmednagar (Maharashtra) to the successful bidders. Grant of authorization for one 
more GA namely Rohtak (Haryana) is kept on hold due to pending legal case in the 
court. Decision regarding remaining 4 GAs is expected to be taken shortly. PNGRB 
monitors the performance of t he CGD entities on quarterly basis. In this regard, 
PNGRB has given the quantitative targets (e.g. inch -Kilometer and number of PNG 
connections etc.) for 3 to 5 calendar years from the date of authorization. The CGD 

44 
 
 
 
entities furnish the Quarterly Progress Report (QPRs) to PNGRB in terms of 
PNGRB‟s regulations. The non -performing/ under -performing CGD operators are 
called for statutory hearing by PNGRB. In addition, MoP&NG is also periodically 
reviewing the progress of PNG network expansion with CGD entities . During the 
review meetings, CGD entities have attributed the following factors for slow progress 
of PNG coverage such as (i) In -ordinate delays in granting permission by Civic/Local 
bodies and levy of exorbitant charges for laying of networks and restora tion of road, 
(ii)  Differential   taxes (i.e. VAT on CNG)  in  adjoining  states  and  multiple  taxation 
impacting price competitiveness of PNG and CNG and (iii) PNG connectivity to 
individual consumers depends on availability of pucca houses and minimum width of 
roads that permits laying of pipelines etc. MoP&NG has also taken up these issues 
with t he concerned State Governments and local bodies for expediting the PNG 
network expansion.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter -I) 
  
Recommendation No.18 
 
3-D Seismic Survey and Drilling  
 
 The Committee note that the upstream PSUs such as ONGC and OIL have 
not performed as per expectations in exploratory activities in petroleum sector. In 
2012-13 the 3 -D seismic survey was undertaken i n 11402 sq. km area against the 
target of 5840 sq. km. In 2013 -14 and 2014-15, 3-D Seismic survey was undertaken 
by ONGC in 8371 & 9176 sq. km, respectively, while the targets set were higher. In 
2016-17, the target area is fixed much lower at 7060 sq. km.  Similarly the number of 
exploratory wells drilled were 106 against the target 153 in 2013 -14 and 108 against 
the target of 155 in 2014-15. 
 
 In case of OIL, the 3-D Seismic survey was undertaken in 1796 sq. km area in 
2012-13 which was more than 30% in ex cess of target fixed. However, in 2014 -15, 
the 3-D Seismic survey could be undertaken only in 1234 sq. km against the target 
of 2050 sq. km which is about 60% of the target fixed. In 2016 -17, 3 -D Seismic 
survey is to be undertaken only in 300 sq. km.  
 
 The Committee observe that exploration activity by oil PSUs needs to be 
stepped up significantly in order to achieve increase in production. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that ONGC and OIL should increase oil exploration activities 
including 3 -D Seismic s urvey and digging of exploratory wells with deployment of 
latest technologies and recommend that adequate budget for the same may also be 
allocated and the performance of PSUs in oil exploration should be closely 
monitored by the Ministry.  
 
 
 
 

45 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Oil PSUs are making  all out efforts to step up its exploratory activities utilizing 
its resources judiciously in exploration & development activities. ONGC/OIL are also 
implementing various state-of-the-art technologies available in in dustry in the field of 
seismic data acquisition (like Controlled Source Electromagnetic , Ocean bottom 
cable, Long Offset, Broad band etc), Passive Seismic Tomography (PST), seismic 
data processing (Common Reflection Angle Migration processing, Beam Process ing, 
etc.) and software for interpretation of Geological & Geophysical data. ONGC is also 
using latest technologies (like Top drive system, Air Hammer drilling, Steerable mud 
motors, Synthetic oil based mud system etc)  available in drilling of exploratory  wells 
for smooth & fast drilling operation, drill hole stabilization while drilling, well logging 
tools etc.  
 
 Due to shrinkage of exploratory areas with Oil PSUs as operator year by year, 
3D seismic acquisition is being acquired as per need base. In absence of grant of 
new exploration acreages / areas, 3D seismic acquisition is constrained.  
Accordingly, exploratory drilling is targeting deeper plays and unconventional plays 
like basement, shale gas, etc. in same available areas.   
 
 Recently Government of India has announced new Hydrocarbon Exploration & 
Licensing Policy (HELP). ONGC/OIL expect that its explorator y acreages / area 
portfolio and will have scope of step up exploratory activities in terms of seismic 
surveys and exploratory drilling.   ONGC and OIL do not have any financial 
constraints about budget allocations for carrying out exploration activities inc luding 
3D seismic survey and drilling of exploratory wells.  The performance of Oil PSUs are 
being monitored by the Ministry on monthly basis apart from performance monitoring 
at field level and corporate level by respective management. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 19 
Oil and Natural Gas Commission (ONGC)  
 
 The Committee note that the ONGC was incorporated in 1993 under 
Companies Act and is the largest company in the country engaged in exploration 
and exploitation of hydrocarbons. The Committee note with concern that the 
production of crude oil by ONGC is sta gnant for the past several years and at a 
standstill. The production of natural gas has also registered a decline. The BE target 
of crude oil production in 2016-17 has been fixed at 22.76 MMT which is about same 
as in 2015-16, i.e., 22.68 MMT. The BE targe t of natural gas production for 2016 -17 
is 24617 MMSCM which shows about 15% increase over RE 2015 -16 (21840 
MMSCM). The Committee also note that the plan outlay for 2016 -17 has been kept 
at Rs. 29307 crore. During 2015-16 the plan outlay at BE stage was Rs. 36249 while 
at RE stage it was reduced to Rs. 31467 crore.  
 
 The Committee feel that the target for crude oil production in the year 2016-17 
shows that the ONGC is not expecting any increase in the production. However, the 
target for natural gas production shows that about 15% increase is expected. It is not 

46 
 
 
 
clear from where this increase is being expected as the plan outlay (BE) for the next 
year is kept at a lower level than the corresponding figures for the previous year by 
about 20%. The Committee f eel that the target for natural gas production has been 
kept unreasonably high. Similarly, the budgeting of plan outlays show that ONGC is 
not expecting any expansion of its operations in the next year. Rather the plan outlay 
has been reduced from the previous year.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that ONGC should evolve a better 
system of setting targets so that realistic figures are projected. The Committee are 
concerned at the lack of increase in production of crude oil planned for the next year 
and desire that for energy security of the country, exploration and production 
activities are intensified by making more allocations for it. The Committee also 
recommend that the ONGC should improve its budgeting so that the allocation and 
utilization of fi nancial resources are more accurate. The Committee further 
recommend that ONGC should develop a monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
funds are adequately allocated to the priority areas and properly utilized. 100  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) 
 
 Annual Plan outlay BE, RE and actual expenditure of ONGC during 2015 -16 
was ₹36249.37 crore, ₹ 31,467.45 crore and ₹30110.43 crore respectively. Annual 
plan outlay (BE) during 2016-17 has been kept at ₹ 29307.20 crore.  
 
 It is further submitted that ONGC is making consistent endeavors of improving 
its budgeting and planning exercise by keeping the cost of activities into focus, rather 
than the summation of resource requirement for procurements etc.  In this 
mechanism, budget is all ocated to various defined activities viz. Survey, Exploratory 
Drilling,  Development   Drilling, Side-tracking of  Wells, JV Investments  and  Capital 
expenditure towards creation of OIL & Gas facilities & various other capital 
purchases, which are to be d eployed for exploration and production of Oil and Gas. 
This methodology ensures that the Capex estimation is backed up with realistic and 
achievable physical targets. A case in point is the utilization against the RE 2015 -16 
budget wherein against the approved Capex of Rs. 31,467 Crore, actual utilization is 
Rs. 30110 Crore (96% achievement). 
 
 In order to monitor the utilization status, monthly progress reports are sought 
from all budget units. They are required to explain reason for any underutilization 
and corrective measures taken. 
 
 So far as exploratory activities are concerned, ONGC is making all out efforts, 
through exploratory activities, to maximize its reserves base through discoveries as 
well as field growth. Contribution of exploratory efforts h elps in arresting production 
decline also. Exploratory activities are envisaged to be intensified in coming years 
after operationalization of new Hydrocarbon Exploration& Licensing Policy (HELP).  
 

47 
 
 
 
   ONGC‟s actual standalone crude oil (including condensate) and natural gas 
production during the F.Y. 2013-14 to 2015-16 and projection for FY 2016 -17 (as per 
approved BE / Draft  MOU) along with percentage variation w.r.t. previous year are 
as under: 
Year 
Crude oil Natural Gas 
Production 
(MMT) 
% Variation w.r.t previous year 
Production 
(BCM) 
% Variation w.r.t 
previous year 
2013-14 22.247 -- 23.284 -- 
2014-15 22.264 0.08 22.023 -5.42 
2015-16  22.368 0.47 21.177 -3.83 
2016-17 (BE) 22.761 1.76 24.657 16.42 
2016-17 
(Draft MOU) 22.420 0.23 22.746 7.39 
 
 During FY 2016 -17, ONGC gas production as per BE estimates is 24.657 
BCM which includes ~1.94 BCM (5.3 MMSCMD) of gas from ongoing offshore 
projects including Development of WO -16 cluster fields, Development of C -26 
Cluster fields, Additional development of B55 field, Enhanced recovery from Bassein 
field through Integrated Development of Mukta, Bassein and Panna Formations, 
Additional development of Vasai East and Daman Development in Western Offshore 
and Early monetization of Deep water well S2AB in Easter n Offshore. Further 0.04 
BCM (0.109 MMSCMD) gas is also expected from Coal Bed Methane in Bokaro.  
 
 However, considering the prevailing trend of production and status of projects, 
ONGC has estimated 22.42 MMT of oil (inclusive of condensate) and 22.746 BCM 
gas production. Therefore, the projected increase in ONGC‟s oil (inclusive of 
condensate) and gas production in 2016-17 (Draft MOU) vis-a-vis FY 2015-16 would 
be 0.23% and 7.39% respectively.  
 ONGC has also constituted a sub -committee to the board to monitor the 
progress of important projects. 
 
Major efforts to enhance Crude Oil and Natural Gas production 
ONGC has taken various actions for augmenting/maintaining the crude oil and 
natural gas production. In addition to focus on repair of existing wells, artificial lift 
and stimulation of wells, following various efforts are done / being made for 
enhancing crude oil and natural gas production in the fields being operated by 
ONGC in the Offshore and Onshore areas of the country.  
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
OFFSHORE: 
Completed Projects 
1. Mumbai High South Redevelopment Project Phase -II: The project envisages an 
incremental oil and gas production of 18.31 MMT and 2.70 BCM respectively by 
2029-2030.The project was completed in June 2014. 
2. Mumbai High North Redevelopment Project Phase -II: The project envisages an 
incremental oil and gas production of 17.354 MMT and 2.987 BCM respec tively 
by 2029- 2030. The project was completed in June 2014. 
3. Redevelopment of Heera and South Heera Fields Phase -II: The project 
envisages incremental oil gain of 13.361 MMT and 1.665 BCM of gas by 2034 -
35. The project was completed in August 2015. 
Projects under Implementation 
1. Development of Western Periphery of Mumbai High South field: ONGC Board 
has approved investment proposal on 25.04.2012. This scheme envisages an 
incremental production of 1.031 MMT of oil and 0.214 BCM of gas in 15 years. 
The overall project, including drilling, is expected to be completed by June 2017. 
2. Mumbai High North Redevelopment Project Phase -III: ONGC Board has 
approved the investment proposal on 27.06.2014. The scheme envisages an 
incremental oil & gas production of 6.997 MMT  and 5.253 BCM respectively by 
the year 2029 -2030. The overall project, including drilling, is expected to be 
completed by May 2017. 
3. Mumbai High South Redevelopment Project Phase -III: ONGC Board has 
approved the investment proposal on 14.11.2014. The schem e envisages an 
incremental oil & gas production of 7.547 MMT and 3.864 BCM respectively by 
the year 2029 -2030. The overall project, including drilling, is expected to be 
completed by March 2019. 
4. Neelam Redevelopment Plan for Exploitation of Bassein&Mukta p ay-Neelam 
field: ONGC Board has approved the investment proposal on 13.08.2015. The 
scheme envisages an incremental oil & gas production of 2.76 MMT and 4.786 
BCM respectively by the year   2034 -35. The overall project, including drilling, is 
expected to be completed by May 2019. 
 
Marginal Fields 
Completed Projects 
1. North Tapti gas field Development: The project envisages production of 4.116 
BCM of Gas in 10 years. Production commenced from June 2012. Project was 
completed in May 2013. 
2. Development of BHE and  BH-35: The project envisages 0.422 MMT of oil & 
condensate and 0.529 BCM of gas over a period of 8 years. Production 
commenced from Feb 2014. The project was completed in February 2014. 
3. Development of B -46 Cluster fields (B -46, B-48, B-105 and B -188): The project 
envisages production of 5.273 BCM gas &1.68 MMm3 condensate in 12 years. 
Production commenced from Feb‟2013. The project was completed in May 2014. 
4. Development of SB -14: The project envisages 0.197 MMm3 of condensate & 
1.641 BCM in 12 years. The project was completed in March 2014. 

49 
 
 
 
5. Additional Development of NBP (D-1) field: The project envisages incremental oil 
production of 8.298 MMT oil by 2024 -25. Production commenced from Aug 
2012. The project was completed in July 2014. 
6. Development of C -24 clu ster (C -22, C -24, C -39-I, C -39-A): The project 
envisages gas production of 10.771 BCM and 2.166 MM Cubic meter of 
condensate by 2024 -25. Production commenced from Sept 2009. The project 
was completed in July 2014. 
7. Development of B -22 Cluster fields (B -22, BS-12, BS -13, B -149): The project 
envisages production of 2.46 MMT of oil, 1.13 MMT of condensate and 6.56 
BCM gas in by 2021 -22. Production commenced from Aug 2011. The project 
was completed in July 2014. 
8. Development of B-193 Cluster fields (B-193, B-172, B-178, B-179, B-180, B-28A,     
B-23A, B-28): The project envisages production of 5.57 MMT oil, 0.75 MMT of 
condensate & 5.12 BCM gas by 2025 -2026. Production commenced from 
October 2013. The project was completed in May 2015. 
9. Development of Cluster -7 (B -192, B -45 & WO -24 structures): The project 
envisages production of oil & condensate is 9.73 MMT and gas 4.52 BCM over a 
period of 16 years. Production commenced from Sept 2013 through alternate 
arrangements. The project was completed in May 2015. 
10. Development Plan for lower pays in NBP-14 block of NBP field (D-1): The project 
envisages 2.52 MMT of crude oil by 2029 -30. The project was completed in 
Nov‟2015. 
11. Development of WO -16 Cluster fields (WO -5, WO -15, and WO -16 along with         
B-119/121): The project envisages production of 2.83 MMT of crude oil & 
condensate and 8.58 BCM of gas by 2025 -26. The project facilities have been 
completed in January 2016 (ex cept MOPU), however, production from the 
project commenced from June 2015 through alternate arrangements. MOPU 
SagarSamrat is likely to be commissioned by December 2016.  
 
Projects under implementation  
1. Development of C -26 Cluster fields (C -23, C -26 & B -12-1): The project 
envisaged gas production of 5.94 BCM and 0.644 MMm3 of condensate by 
2024-25. The project is likely to be completed by May 2016 except MOPU. 
2. Development of B -127 Cluster fields (B -127, B -157 & B -59) and additional 
development of B-55: Project envisages production of 1.836 MMT of crude oil & 
condensate and 2.093 BCM of gas in 10 years from B -127 cluster. Also 
production of 0.155 MMT of condensate & 2.583 BCM of gas in 13 years from B -
55 field. The project is likely to be completed by June 2017. 
3. Development of B -173A field: The project envisages 0.567 MMT of crude oil & 
0.071 BCM of gas by 2025 -26. The project is likely to be completed by May 
2016. 
 
4. Enhanced recovery from Bassein field through Integrated Development of 
Mukta, Bassein and Panna  Formations: ONGC Board has approved the 
investment proposal on 14.11.2014. The scheme envisages an incremental 
production of 18.830 BCM of gas, 1.90 MMm3 of condensate and 0.183 MMT of 
oil by the year 2027 -2028 (as per revised approval in Jan‟15). The ove rall 
project, including drilling, is expected to be completed by December 2017. 

50 
 
 
 
5. Additional Development of Vasai East: The project envisages an incremental oil 
& gas production of 1.827 MMT and 1.971 BCM respectively by the year 2029 -
2030. The project is likely to be completed by December 2018. 
6. Daman Development Project (C -24 Additional & B -12 fields): The project 
envisages cumulative gas & condensate production of 27.67 BCM and 5.01 
MMm3 respectively by 2034 -35. The project is likely to be completed by May 
2019. 
 
Development of Eastern Offshore Oilfields 
Completed Projects 
1. Integrated Development of G -1 & GS -15: Integrated development of these fields 
envisages production of 0.693 MMT of oil and 4.307 BCM of gas by 2026 -27. 
Production commenced from Aug 2011. The project was completed in June 
2015. 
Projects under implementation  
1. Development of Vashista& S -l Fields: The project is expected to result in gas 
production of 15.96 BCM in 11 years. The project is likely to be completed by 
December 2017.  
2. Development of shallow water wells in Eastern Offshore through mud line 
completions:  The project is expected to result in gas production of 1.702 BCM in 
9 years. The project is likely to be completed by May 2017. 
3. Field Development Plan (FDP) for Development of Cluste r 2 fields of NELP Block 
KG-DWN-98/2: The project envisages production of 23.526 MMT of oil and 
50.706 BCM of gas in 16 years. The project is likely to be completed by June 
2020. 
 
ONSHORE: 
Completed Projects 
1. Lakwa-Lakhmani IOR Scheme was completed in September 2013.The scheme 
envisages an incremental oil production of 3.061 MMT and gas production of 
0.36 BCM by 2023-24. 
2. Geleki IOR Scheme was completed in August 2013.The scheme envisages an 
incremental Oil & gas production of 4.761 MMT and 1.589 BCM (re vised) 
respectively upto 2023-24. 
3. Rudrasagar IOR Scheme was completed in March 2014. The scheme envisages 
an incremental Oil & gas production of 2.507 MMT and 0.393 BCM (revised) 
respectively up-to 2023-24. 
 
Initiatives to enhance production: 
1. Comprehensive redevelopment of Gamij Field through „Stage Gate‟ process is 
under progress.  
2. NELP discoveries in onshore such as Karnnagar, West Patan&Vadatal in 
March‟2015 and Nadiad in April‟15 and Madanam in October‟15 are monetized. 
3. Development of Malleswaram field in KG Asset and Nagayalanka JV block of KG 
onshore is in progress. 
4. Development of HPHT reservoirs in Cauvery and Rajahmundry Assets through 
outsourcing of services from International companies / experts.  

51 
 
 
 
5. Various projects have been taken up in  Onshore Assets with the aim of removing 
surface bottlenecks to improve productivity, product quality, system integrity and 
meeting environmental norms. 
Other initiatives: 
1. Technology Induction/adoption/absorption and engaging international experts in 
the a rea of Drilling, Well completion, Artificial lift, Well stimulation, facility 
construction etc. is being done regularly according to the technical requirement of 
the wells / fields and feasibility. 
2. Considering the importance of sustenance / arresting decline of production from a 
field, company is always on the lookout for latest technology to minimize cost of 
new wells, better placement of wells, improve productivity of existing and new 
wells, revive old or closed wells etc. so that production possibilities from the fields 
is maximized. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
Oil India Limited (OIL)  
 
 The Committee note that OIL is a PSU engaged in exploration of 
hydrocarbons, extraction of LPG by fractionalization of natural gas and transportation 
of crude oil produced by itself and ONGC in north -east region to the refineries 
located in that region. It  also transports crude oil to Bongaigaon refinery. The 
Committee also note that the production of crude oil by OIL in the last two years was 
about at the same level of around 3.5 MMTs. The production has been reported to 
be affected because of local issues such as bandhs and blockades and ageing of old 
wells. The production of natural gas and LPG has also more or less stagnated. As 
regards financial outlays, the Committee note that plan outlay for 2016 -17 is kept at 
Rs. 4020 crore which is about 15% more th an the RE 2015-16. The Committee note 
that during the BE 2015 -16, the plan outlay was Rs. 3918 crore but the OIL could 
utilize only Rs. 3537 crore.  
 
 The Committee are concerned that there has been no increase in production 
of crude oil in the last two ye ars and the production target has been kept at roughly 
the same level for the current year. The total plan outlay for OIL during 12th plan was 
Rs. 19003 crore out of which Rs. 16015 crore (84%) have been utilized in the first 
three years suggesting overuti lization. The Committee note that Rs. 6413 crore has 
been used for acquiring overseas assets. The Committee also note that higher 
outlay by about 15% (BE 2016 -17 compared to RE 2015 -16) has been kept in the 
current year because of higher targets of exploratory drilling.  
 
 The Committee recommend that OIL should take all necessary measures for 
increasing production of crude oil. While appreciating higher outlay in BE 2016-17 for 
undertaking exploratory activities including developmental drilling, the Committee are 
unhappy to note that in previous years, the target for drilling has not been met. The 
Committee recommend suitable monitoring to ensure that the targets of exploratory 
and developmental drilling for the current year is fulfilled. 101  

52 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Annual plan outlay (BE) of the OIL during 2015 -16 was ₹3917.64 crore which 
was revised to ₹3537.27 crore at the RE stage, against which actual expenditure 
incurred was ₹3622.25 crore. Annual plan outlay for 2016 -17, is proposed at 
₹4019.71 crore which is a bout 14% and 3% higher than RE and BE respectively for 
2015-16. It may be mentioned that at the beginning of 12th Five Year Plan, OIL has 
proposed ₹18986.06 crore. However, as per Annual Plan proposals Plan Outlay is 
₹18528.62 crore. During the three years  of 12th Five Year Plan, OIL has utilised 
₹16014.76 crore. However, during the last four years, OIL has utilised ₹19637.01 
crore. The higher utilisation is primarily on account of overseas acquisition in 2013 -
14.  
 
Reasons for underutilisation of allocated budget during 2015-16: 
 
The major reasons for lower utilisation of allocated budget for exploratory drilling by 
OIL during 2015 -16 as already furnished in reply to Recommendation No.17, are 
reiterated as under: 
(i) During financial year 2015 -16, OIL completed  drilling of 16 exploratory 
wells against targeted 32 wells. 
(ii) Higher rig resource was allocated for development drilling in OIL‟s 
Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) areas of Assam in order to arrest declining 
oil production. 
(iii) Drilling of two exploratory wells in O IL‟s PML area in Rajasthan was 
deferred to 2016-17 as the same is linked to Heavy Oil Monetization in the 
area for which efforts are in progress 
(iv) Drilling of four wells in NELP blocks could not be undertaken due to delay 
in statutory / regulatory permissions/clearance. 
(v) Exploratory drilling campaign in the block KG -ONN-2004/1 suffered due to 
delay in deployment of rig as use of a bridge was resisted by local people. 
The drilling operation could start only w.e.f 12th  January, 2016. 
 
OIL‟s crude oil production is from old fields which are in depletion phase and the 
small new structures that exist in the vicinity of the producing major fields. Therefore, 
due to non -availability of new large finds, present discovery of small structures i s 
inadequate to compensate the decline of major fields on account of reservoir related 
issues like rising water cut, failures like sand ingression associated with water cut 
etc.  
OIL has kept a target of 3.30 MMT (3.28 MMT from OIL + 0.02 MMT from JV 
Contribution) for the year 2016 -17. Crude oil production plan for the year 2016 -17, 
has been prepared based on contributions from different sources, namely, wells that 
were on production as on 01.04.2016, production addition through sick well 
liquidation throug h work over operations and contribution from new wells added 
through drilling during the currency of the year.  
 
In order to improve upon the hitherto challenging situation in crude oil production, 
certain action plans were chalked out and current status of the same as given below.  
1. Installation of ESP  
With an aim to improve production from depleted reservoirs, installation of Electrical 
Submersible Pumps(ESP) as a means of Artificial Lift Pumps has been planned. A 

53 
 
 
 
total of 10 ESP will be installed in OIL‟ s oilfield which will be carried out in four 
phases. In the first phase two wells were completed. The completed wells are 
showing encouraging result. 
2. Matrix Acidization 
For enhancement of production from wells with formation damage, matrix acidization 
job has been taken up. For the first phase, only water disposal wells and water 
injection wells are taken up for acidization which will indirectly help in maintaining 
crude oil production and reservoir management. In the present phase, matrix 
acidization job completed in three nos. of wells and the wells are showing increased 
infectivity.   
3. Radial Drilling  
For enhancement of crude oil production from old fields like Nahorkatiya and 
Jorajan, Radial Drilling has been planned in phased manner so that the gain in crude 
oil could be achieved through testing of higher up sands. In the current phase, Radial 
drilling activity has already been completed in 4 wells.Based on success in the first 
phase, a new contract will be formulated to complete more wells by radial drilling. 
4. Gravel Pack 
Sand ingression has become a major issue in reducing crude oil production in OIL‟s 
major oilfields like Makum&Hapjan and gas fields like Lohali, Deohal etc. Gravel 
pack campaign for total 20 nos. of wells has already been initiated. Out of 20 wells, 
the gravel pack jobs at 4 wells have already been completed.  
5. Chemical Water Shut-off 
In the recent times, water cut has been increasing significantly from OIL‟s matured 
fields like Naharkatiya, Makum, Bhogpara etc. To arrest the increasing trend of water 
cut and thus increasing the longevity of the producing wells, implementation of 
chemical water shut off technology is being envisaged in Bhogpara and a couple of 
Eocene wells.  
6. Hydraulic Fracturing  
In the initial phase of the hydro fracturing  campaign of OIL, 5 nos. of wells across its 
oilfields were taken up. The total gain of crude oil and gas production after hydraulic 
fracturing was 61 KLPD and 49500 SCMD respectively. In view of the encouraging 
results in the campaign the contract has bee n extended for another 5 more wells. In 
the present phase, hydro fracturing  has already been completed in three wells.  
7. Setting up of security camps at various strategic locations to prevent 
environmental losses. 
Environmental issue like Bandh, Blockades and miscreant activity have adversely 
affected crude oil production of OIL. To minimize the loss due to environmental 
reasons, security in oilfields has been intensified by setting up additional security 
camps in strategic localities. 
Drilling activities by OIL 
Although OIL could not achieve its drilling target for the year 2015 -16,  OIL was able 
to improve its drilling performance year over year basis  both in no. of wells and 
drilling meterage since 2013 -14. In 2015 -16, OIL achieved a drilling meterage of 

54 
 
 
 
1,54,874metres., which is highest in last decade and 8% higher than its 
achievements during the year 2014-15.  
Above improvement is despite having to face challenges in land acquisition, hostile 
terrains of frontier areas, more deviation wells with high angle & high displacement to 
mitigate the challenges in land acquisition leading to increasing down -hole 
complications,  environmental issues, small weather window in North East because 
of extended monsoon in the region and resulting flood in operational areas,  
However, with increase in no. of drilling rigs and more rig years, OIL has planned to 
drill 68 wells (Exploratory – 29 wells, Development – 39 wells) and shall make all 
endeavours to achieve the same.  
Monitoring of progress of exploratory and development drilling are being carried out 
both at field level and corporate level. Monthly  progress on these activities are  being 
monitored by the Ministry.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) 
 
 The Committee note that GAIL is the Country‟s principal natural gas 
transmission and marketing company. GAIL has expanded its presence in power, 
LNG re -gasification, City Gas Distribution and exploration and production through 
equity and Joint Venture (JV) participation.  
 
 The Committee are concerned that the figures relating to natural gas 
marketing, natural gas transmission, Liquid Hydrocarbon and LPG transmission has 
either remained static or gone down during the last three years. Only the polymer 
production has increased  in the last three years. The production which was 440 
MMT in 2013 -14 increased to 490 MMT at RE stage in 2015 -16 against BE of 580 
MMT. The BE 2016 -17 for production is 670 TMT. The Committee are also 
concerned that the turnover of the Company has gone do wn from Rs. 57245 crore in 
2013-14 to Rs. 56569 crore in 2014 -15. The turnover for the first three quarters of 
2015-16 is Rs. 39987 crore. This is accompanied with decrease in gross margin. 
Against the gross margin of Rs. 5620 crore in 2014 -15, it was Rs. 3681 crore in the 
first three quarters of 2015-16. These decreases have been attributed to low product 
prices. The Committee feel that the reasons cited for decline in the figures are not 
justified as India is still an under -penetrated market and any fall in product price 
should have been adequately made up by expansion in operations.  
 
 The Committee desire that the expansion of GAIL operations need to be 
undertaken on priority basis and the implementation of projects such as National 
Gas Grid need to be e xpedited. The Committee recommend that GAIL, in 
consultation with the Ministry, develop a consultative mechanism to engage with 
local people and agencies to redress the issue of local disruptions to its work. 102  
 
 

55 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 GAIL is committed to play a key role in nation -building by expanding 
infrastructure in the Natural Gas value chain and beyond as per the mandate 
entrusted upon it. GAIL took the pioneering step to promote and accelerate the 
growth of natural gas in the country thr ough its pipeline infrastructure including 
initiatives for cross -country pipelines, extraction & production of value added 
products i.e., Liquid Hydrocarbons & Petrochemicals from natural gas, long term tie -
up for LNG import from various international sour ces, LNG Terminal & Re -
gasification infrastructure for importing LNG, investments in Exploration & 
Production, Renewables etc. 
 GAIL, being a midstream oil & gas company, depends on upstream 
companies like ONGC, Reliance, JVs, etc. for supply of domestic g as for Marketing 
and Transportation. Domestic Gas production has gone down from peak of 140 
MMSCMD in 2010 -11 to 85 MMSCMD in 15 -16 and hence gas transmission and 
marketing volumes handled by GAIL have substantially come down.  
 Huge Investments have been made by GAIL for the development of pipeline 
infrastructure in anticipation of increase in domestic gas production after gas 
discovery from RIL KG D6 & other fields. However, due to steep fall in production 
from   KG-D6   and   fall  in  production  from   ageing ONGC / PMT   fields,  capacity 
utilization of pipelines has substantially gone down from around 70 % in FY: 2010 -11 
to merely 45 % in FY: 2015 -16. New pipelines of GAIL including Dadri -Bawana-
Nangal Pipeline which was taken up on priority by GAIL a s per government directive 
for Common wealth games are now operating at 10 -15% of installed capacity. 
Underutilization of most of the recently executed pipelines due to non -availability of 
domestic gas, affordability issues w.r.t imported LNG for anchor cu stomers and 
reduction in pipeline tariffs by PNGRB are severely affecting profitability of GAIL. 
 Primary anchor load consumers of Natural Gas i.e. Fertilizer and Power have 
not grown in the last few years. No new Fertilizer plants have been set up since 
1999. In the Power sector, out of 24200 MW of gas based power generation capacity 
connected to the pipeline grid, 9800 MW is receiving limited volume of domestic gas 
and operating at low PLF (~32%).  14,000 MW of gas based capacity is totally 
stranded and n ot able to operate sustainably on account of non -availability of 
domestic gas & pending power sector reforms. Ministry of Power has advised 
developers not to plan any new projects based on domestic gas, till further notice.  
 Further, in addition to decrease in domestic gas availability, quality of gas has 
also changed with higher fractions like C3/C4 (propane / butane) content required for 
LPG production decreasing over the years. As a result, GAIL‟s Gas Processing Units 
at Usar (Maharashtra) and Vaghodia (Gujarat) are idling while others are operating 
at sub -optimal capacities. GAIL‟s LPG recovery unit at Lakwa, Assam has been 
handed over to Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited for recovering feedstock for 
petrochemical complex. Hence, LHC production from  GAIL‟s plants has gone down 
from 1302 TMT in 2013-14 to 1088 TMT in 2015-16. 
 Availability of adequate quantity of rich gas is essential for running GAIL‟s 
landlocked gas based petrochemical complex at Pata, UP. Due to change in gas 
allocation policy effe ctive from April 2014, allocation of domestic gas for Pata unit 
has gone down substantially and consequently consumption of expensive RLNG 
which is the feedstock for the plant has increased (from 37% in 2013 -14 to 94% in 

56 
 
 
 
2016-17). With the plant running on  LNG, input cost has gone up substantially (feed 
gas cost increased by Rs. 25,781/MT in 2015 -16 compared to 2013 -14) thereby 
substantially increasing the cost of production and severely affecting the profitability 
of the segment. 
 Further, Gas industry is facing a complex and difficult environment today, with 
historically low commodity prices reflecting rampant supply and weak global demand 
amid concerns over slowing economic growth across the world resulting in steep fall 
in Liquid Hydrocarbon (~ 40 % fall in LPG price w.r.t FY:15) & Polymer prices (~15 % 
in petrochemicals w.r.t FY:15). This has severely affected Revenue and Profitability 
of GAIL. 
 GAIL has also taken up many projects including RGPPL, Brahmaputra 
Cracker & Polymer Limited in Assam, several Pipeline projects etc. as per directives 
of the Government for strategic interest of the nation. Investments made by GAIL in 
these avenues are not generating returns. 
 Crude prices starting falling from 2014 onwards resulting in cheap availability 
of alternate feedstock / fuels like Naphtha / Furnace Oil, etc. Due to this, Long -term 
RLNG price became unviable in the market. Discoms are not scheduling gas based 
power generation due to higher cost of power generated with RLNG and as a result 
Power sector cust omers defaulted on their RLNG off -take / purchase contractual 
commitments.  To overcome this low demand of RLNG, pro -active actions have 
been taken by GAIL during FY 2015-16 to increase the RLNG consumption: 
 For a viable RLNG supply, a scheme was notified by Ministry of Power for 
supply of E bid RLNG by GAIL to stranded Gas based power plants through a 
reverse auction mechanism from June‟15 onwards. This has been 
successfully implemented by GAIL, as the operator of scheme. Two rounds of 
the said scheme have  been already completed and currently third round is 
under progress. This has resulted in increase of approx. 5.8 MMSCMD of 
RLNG sale during FY 2015-16. 
 A scheme was notified by MoP&NG pursuant to which GAIL as the pool 
operator has been arranging RLNG req uirement of fertilizer plants. RLNG 
pooling scheme has been successfully implemented by GAIL from July‟15 
onwards. GAIL had achieved average RLNG sales volume of ~2.5 MMSCMD 
under fertilizer pooling scheme for FY 2015-16. 
 Long-term RLNG (LTRLNG) sales volu me for FY 2015 -16 had reduced 
primarily due to high contract price till Dec.‟15. Contract price was re -
negotiated with LNG supplier and subsequently, price has been linked with 
Brent crude from Jan.‟16 onwards. This has led to LTRLNG sales volume 
increase, up to a level of 16 -17 MMSCMD during Jan -March 2016 compared 
to average LTRLNG sale of ~ 8 -9 MMSCMD during preceding financial 
quarters. 
 In addition to the above, GAIL is continuously taking up for supply of RLNG to 
small/medium size customers and providi ng last mile connectivity to them for 
increase in Gas sales. GAIL is also discussing for supply of RLNG to the 
proposed brownfield/greenfield fertilizer plants both on the existing network 
and along GAIL‟s Jagdishpur - Haldia pipeline. 
 

57 
 
 
 
Other Initiatives: 
A) LPG transmission:  
 Expansion of LPG transmission business is being undertaken by way of 
augmenting the capacity of Jamnagar Loni LPG Pipeline (JLPL) from 
2.5MMTPA to 3.25MMTPA. Necessary authorization has been obtained from 
PNGRB and implementation of the project is underway. It is expected that the 
augmented capacity of JLPL would be commissioned by the end of 2017-18. 
B) Polymer and Liquid Hydrocarbon products:  
 The polymer production capacity of GAIL has gone up from 4,10,000 to 
8,10,000 MTPA by installing the new polymer plant of 4,00,000 MTPA 
capacity at Pata  which  has  been commissioned recently. In the FY 2016-17,  
 the expected production from Pata shall be  6,50,000 MTPA. Out of this 
6,50,000 MTPA, 4,10,000 MTPA shall be contributed by the existing Polymer 
plants whereas 2,40,000 MTPA shall be contributed from the new plant. 
 In addition to the above, GAIL shall also be marketing 100% products from 
petrochemical plant set up by GAIL‟s subsidiary M/s Brahmaputra Crackers & 
Polymers Ltd (BCPL), Assam. BCPL has recently commissioned the cracker 
as well as downstream plants. BCPL has capacity to produce 2, 20,000 MTPA 
of HDPE/LLDPE & 60,000 MTPA of Polypropylene b esides other liquid 
hydrocarbons. 
 Following Liquid Hydrocarbons as by- products of polymer plants shall also be 
available from Pata- Expansion and BCPL plants: 
 
 
With the above actions undertaken by GAIL, The Polymer & Liquid hydrocarbon 
scenario will undergo a sea change in the coming years. 
C) National Gas Grid: 
 The implementation of projects such as National Gas Grid is being taken up 
by GAIL in a time bound manner synchronizing with (i) progress of 
development of upstream sector for increased gas avail ability through 
domestic sources and RLNG from international markets (ii) downstream 
sector development along the pipeline route and (iii) commercial viability or 
capital grant by the Government. 
 With regard to development of consultative mechanism with lo cal people and 
agencies to redress through local disruptions, GAIL & MoP&NG has taken up 
the RoU acquisition issue with the State of Kerala with the State 
Administration of Kerala & favourable result are observed.  
 GAIL through MoP&NG intends to consult Ch ief Secretary of the respective 
states, for identification of community development Programmes in 
consultation with District Collectors and public representatives in the districts 
enroot the pipeline for creating positive environment in local populace for 
smooth implementation of the pipeline projects.  
Sl. No. Product Designed Capacity (TMTPA) Source
1 Benzene Rich Product (BRP) 32.8 Pata-II
2 Pyrolysis Fuel Oil (PFO) 12 Pata-II
3 Polymer Grade Propylene 49 Pata-II
4 Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline (HPG) 43 BCPL, Lepetkata
5 Carbon Black Feed Stock (CBFS) 9 BCPL, Lepetkata

58 
 
 
 
 Further, it is prudent that Natural Gas Pipeline Projects be treated as 
infrastructure projects at par with Highways, Railway Lines etc. by respective 
State Governments and the respective State Governments shall own the 
responsibility of ensuring  timely  availability  of  hindrance  free  Right of Use, 
encumbrance free permanent land and timely availability of various statutory 
permissions under the control of State Governments to ensure smooth 
execution and timely completion of Projects. Efforts are being made by GAIL, 
with the support of MoP&NG in influencing the State Governments to own 
these activities. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL)  
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) which was 
formed in 1964, is the largest downstream oil PSU of the country. It is a diversified, 
transnational, integrated energy company wit h activities in refining, pipelines, 
marketing and cryogenics and explosives. There is an full -fledged R&D Centre in 
Faridabad for improving the refining process to conserve oil and for 
development/improvement of lubricants/petroleum products. It owns 11 r efineries 
including those located in Guwahati, Barauni, Vadodara, Haldia, Mathura, Digboi, 
Panipat, Bongaigaon and Paradip. The Committee also note that the Paradip 
refinery was finally inaugurated in March 2016 after long delays resulting in huge 
cost overruns.  
 
 The Committee note that the total crude throughput of the refineries in 2014 -
15 was 53.59 MMT while the projected throughput for 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 are 
57.51 MMT and 62.25 MMT respectively. Total throughput during first 3 quarters of 
2015-16 was 41.68 MMT  which is about 72% of the projected throughput. The 
Committee observe that pipeline throughput in 2014 -15 was 75.68 MMT which is 
projected to marginally increase at 76.65 MMT in 2015 -16. The pipeline throughput 
stood at 77.5% of the total during the first  three quarters of 2015-16. BE 2016-17 for 
refinery throughput has been kept lower by 5% from the previous year at 73.33 
MMT. The sales figures of the Company stood at 76.51 MMT in 2014 -15. Projected 
figures for 2015-16 and 2016-17 are 75.43 MMT and 75.60 MMT respectively. In the 
first three quarters of 2015 -16 the sales figure stood at 59.15 MMT which is about 
79% of the projected figure for the year. The Committee note that the plan outlay for 
2014-15 was Rs. 14314 crore which decreased by about 20% in 20 15-16 to Rs. 
11503 crore. However, in the first 3 quarters the expenditure was Rs. 6962 crore 
which is only 60.5% of the outlay. The plan outlay figures for BE 2016-17 is projected 
at Rs. 13773 crore showing an increase of almost 20%. The Committee feel th at the 
figures for 2016 -17 appears highly ambitious because the IOCL has been able to 
utilize only about half of this amount in three quarters of previous year.  
 
 The Committee recommend that budgeting practices of IOCL needs 
improvement to ensure that re alistic figures are projected keeping in view the 
capacities of the Company. The IOCL also needs to monitor its financial utilization so 
that the funds available are actually used by the Company and not kept idle. The 

59 
 
 
 
Committee further recommend that the s tate-of-the-art refinery at Paradip may be 
operated to the maximum extent of its capacity at an early date.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Currently various processing units of Paradip Refinery are under stabilization 
stage after commissioning. Further following activities are under progress: 
 
1. Commissioning of Alkylation unit (Which produces MS blend component) is 
scheduled for Aug‟16 
 
2. Commissioning of following facilities for finished products evacuation are 
scheduled for Sep‟ 16 
 
a) Track electrification and double spur rake loading facility at Paradip Terminal 
for increased rail rake loading of products 
 
b) Commissioning of Paradip-Raipur-Ranchi product pipeline (PRRPL) till Raipur 
 
c) Commissioning of South Oil Jetty (SOJ) at Paradip port for products 
evacuation through coastal movement 
 
With completion of above mentioned activities/projects, crude processing at Paradip 
is planned to be scaled up gradually to the maximum extent of its capacity. 
 
IOCL 
 
Annual Plan outlay of IOCL for 2014 -15 was ₹11375 crore against which ₹14313.68 
crore was utilised. BE for 2015 -16 at ₹11540 crore was about 1% higher than BE for 
2014-15 and. expenditure was ₹11484.74 crore. IOCL has kept BE for 2016 -17 at 
₹13772.87 crore. The BE increase during 2016-17 is due to the following projects: 
 
(i) Polypropylene project at Paradip Refinery.  
(ii) Distillate Yield Improvement (Coker) at Haldia Refinery 
(iii) BS IV project at Gujarat  and Barauni Refinery 
(iv) Petcoke Evacuation Project at Paradip Refinery 
(v) LPG Import Facility at Kochi 
(vi) Paradip-Hyderabad Pipeline.  
 
While finalising the BE, detailed analysis of each ongoing and new project proposed, 
is carried out. Although intensive monitoring of physical and financial progress of 
projects is carried out, in certain cases like exploratio n and production related 
schemes, which are significantly affected by the global developments related to oil 
and gas industry, variation between estimated and actual utilisation of funds does 
come in.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
 

60 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
India-Africa Cooperation in Hydrocarbon 
 The Committee note that Fourth India -Africa Hydrocarbon Summit was 
organised in New Delhi where the issues relating to increase in Hydrocarbon trade 
and investments in African countries were discussed.  Africa has become an 
important source of crude oil fo r India and we are currently importing about 26 per 
cent of our crude oil requirements from African countries.  The Committee note that 
Africa is blessed with vast hydrocarbon resources, substantial areas of which remain 
unexplored and the potential for fu ture collaborations with Africa is very high. This 
opens substantial exploration and production opportunities for Indian companies.  
While Africa can be reliable source of our hydrocarbon needs, India is in a good 
position to offer its expertise in capacit y building and other related fields in 
hydrocarbon sector. India can also develop other ancillary industries in African 
countries such as fertilizer factories which can then be exported to India leading to 
mutual prosperity.   
 India's demand for hydrocarb ons and Africa's supply of the same is expected 
to grow and it is possible to harness the complementarities in this sector to ensure 
economic development in both India and Africa. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should prioritize it s bilateral cooperation with 
African countries in the hydrocarbon sector with emphasis on exploration and 
production activities in unexplored areas specially in sub-Sahara Africa.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The 4th India -Africa Hydrocarbons Conference was organized in New Delhi 
from January 21 -22, 2016.  The delegations of 9 African countries viz. Mauritius, 
Morocco, Algeria, Sudan, South Sudan, Tunisia, Senegal, Equatorial Guinea and 
Liberia were led by resp ective Ministers.  Senior officials led the delegations from 
Nigeria, Ghana, South Africa, Egypt, Tanzania, Kenya, Mozambique, Uganda, Libya, 
Cote d'Ivory, Gabon & Sierra Leone.  
 
 India's engagement with African countries in the petroleum sector has been 
on an upswing in the past few years with nearly 16% of India's crude oil import 
coming from Africa, majority coming from Nigeria and Angola. 
 
 During the bilateral meeting, Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer 
Protection of Mauritius requested India 's assistance in developing Mauritius as a 
regional hydrocarbon hub.  In this regard, a visit to Mauritius of Shri Dharmendra 
Pradhan, MoS (I/C), MoPNG was scheduled in April, 2016. However, the said visit 
was postponed.  Equatorial Guinea and ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL) signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding on exploring potential investment opportunities 
within the hydrocarbons sector in Equatorial Guinea.  India announced additional 
250 fully funded scholarships for African nationals for technical and professio nal 
courses in the Hydrocarbons sector in India institutes.  
 
 In the first half of 2014, two Indian national oil companies ONGC Videsh 
Limited (OVL) and Oil India Limited (OIL) completed the acquisition of 20% 
participating stake in Area 1 of the Rovuma g as block, Mozambique at a cost of US$ 

61 
 
 
 
5.115 billion. This is in addition to 10% already held by another national oil company, 
Bharat Petro Resources.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 11 August, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
Reduction of Oil Import dependence  
 
 The Committee note that the Government has embarked upon the target of 
reducing imports in energy sector particularly the crude oil and gas by at least 10% 
by 2022. The Committee note that the Committee constituted by the Ministry, after 
deliberating on th e subject, has submitted draft report for the consideration of the 
Ministry. The Committee has recommended five pronged strategy comprising of 
increasing production of oil and gas, energy consumption and energy efficiency, 
demand substitution, promoting al ternate fuels/renewable and improvement in 
refinery process.  
 
 The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Government for reducing our 
import of petroleum products. However, it is surprised to note that energy 
conservation has not been included in the strategy for attaining the objective. Energy 
conservation should be an important part of any such strategy in a country having 
the size of population like India. The Committee recommend that energy 
conservation should be included in the strategy for reduci ng import of petroleum 
products in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 In the five pronged strategy recommended by the Committee constituted for 
“Preparing a Roadmap to reduce dependency on import in energy by 10 % by 2021 -
22”, Committee has included „Energy Conservation and Energy Efficiency as one of 
the key strategies for attaining the objectives.  He above key area has been included 
at Chapter 5 of the Committee‟s Report. 
 Steps taken for conservation and energy efficiency efforts of petroleum 
products and natural gas across various sectors of the economy like transport, 
industry, domestic and agriculture etc are captured in the Report. 
 It has been estimated in the Report that by the year 2021 -22, targets of net 
incremental oil and gas savings of 2  Mtoe through PCRA‟s efforts and 3.8 Mtoe 
through the efforts of BEE can be achieved by embracing current and planned 
measures for energy conservation and energy efficiency. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016  
 
  

62 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No. 23 
International Gas Pipeline Projects 
 The Committee note that in order to address the growing energy needs of 
country's economy, Government has embarked upon projects aimed at bringing gas 
from gas -rich Central Asian countries to India. The Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India (TAPI) -1814 km long pipeline project -to be built at a cost of US$ 10 
billion is one such important project.  The Committee are happy to note that the 
project has finally taken off with the ground breaking ceremony held in Turkmenistan 
after resolution of all the major issues between the participating countries.  The 
Committee also note that consortium leader for the TAPI project has already been 
selected and work has started in Turkmenistan.  As per project report, the pipeline is 
likely to be completed by 2019.  The Committee recommend that the TAPI project 
which aims at bringing  much needed gas to the country should be pursued with a 
focused approach so that there is no time or cost overrun in the project. 
 The Iran -Pakistan-India (IPI) was planned for transportation of natural gas 
from Iran to India through Pakistan.  The Commit tee note that about 30 MMSCMD 
natural gas will be supplied to India through the project after completion.  The 
Committee also note that Iran has completed the pipeline (2700 km) up to its border 
with Pakistan and the onus is now on Pakistan to start work i n their territory. The 
Committee desire that the project should be pursued to resolve outstanding issues 
and recommend that the project needs to be monitored closely as international 
conditions have become favourable following lifting of sanctions against Iran.  
Reply of the Government 
TAPI 
The Ground Breaking ceremony to start the work on the Turkmen leg of the 
Turkmentistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline was held at Mary, 
Turkmenistanon 13th December, 2015.  Following the feasibility report and technical 
study conducted by relevant agencies, the overall project duration is estimated to be 
6 3/4 years from the start of the Front End Engineering Design (FEED) process till 
handling over of the pipeline for commercial operation. The pipeline will enter India at 
Fazika, Punjab.  
The 247th Steering Committee meeting of TAPI Gas Pipeline project was held on 7th 
April, 2016 in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan.  During the visit companies representing the 
four participating countries signed the Investment Agreement relating to initial equity 
infusion for the expenditure to be the pre -FID activities has been estimated Decision 
(FID) was signed.  The cost of the pre-FID activities has been estimated as USD 218 
million.  The estimated cost as per the ADB commissioned M/S Pans pen Report for 
the project is US $ 15 billion, including capital cost and funding cost.  
 

63 
 
 
 
IPI 
Various Trilateral and Bilateral Joint Working Group meeting s have been held in the 
past among Iran, Pakistan and India to finalize the issues like transportation cost, 
transit fee, p rice review, and governing law/seat of arbitration & delivery point. A 
JWG meeting between India -Pakistan was held in Islamabad in April 2008 which 
was followed by a Minister level meeting the same month at Islamabad and the issue 
related to GSPA, deliver y point, structure of the project in Pakistan, Transportation 
tariff and Transit Free were discussed.  No JWG meeting has been held since April 
2008.  
Due to the non -resolution of critical issues like the project structure, delivery period 
of gas, safety a nd security, pricing etc and the US sanctions on Iran, the IPI project 
did not move forward and no 'tripartite meeting could be held after 2008.  However, 
during the 1st India -Iran Joint Working Group on Oil and Gas issues held in 
December 2015, both sides discussed evacuation of gas Iran through various means 
including Iran -Pakistan - India (IPI) and sub-sea pipelines.  However, no discussions 
took place on the IPI Pipeline project.   During the visit of Hon'ble MoS(I/C) PNG to 
Iran in April 2016 and both  sides agreed to continue examining various mans of 
evacuation of gas from Iran to India, including through the proposed Iran -Pakistan-
India pipeline and sub-sea pipelines.  
MoPNG is in contact with Ministry of External Affairs on future course of action w ith 
regard to IPI Pipeline.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 11 August, 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
  

64 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT)  
 
The Committee note that the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT) is in the process of being set up on 47 acres of land at Jais in Rai Bareli 
district of Uttar Pradesh (UP) as an Institute Of Excellence in the petroleum sector to 
cater to national and global educational and training requirements. Although it is 
operating from makeshift campus in the same district since 2008, there has been 
inordinate delays in th e project. The new completion date for the project has been 
stated as June 2016. The total estimated cost for the Institute is Rs. 695.58 crore 
against the initial estimate of Rs. 435 crore in the year 2007. The Committee note 
that the progress in March 20 15 was 86% while the progress in January 2016 is 
reported to be 93%. Thus in 11 months, the progress has been a mere 7% in the 
project which has been already suffering from substantial time and cost overruns. 
 
  The Committee also note that RGIPT Assam Pro ject is under construction on 
100 acres of land in Sivasagar district of Assam and very little progress has been 
made in the project with the estimates already gone up from Rs. 143 crore to Rs. 
235 crore. The work of RGIPT Assam is at a standstill due to n on-release of capital 
funds for construction. The capital funds are to be released by the oil PSUs and 
OIDB after the approval of expenditure by the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC).  
 
The Committee are concerned about the poor progress being achieved i n the 
two RGIPT projects at Raibareli and Sivasagar and would like to know the reasons 
for such long delays causing significant cost overruns in both the projects. The 
Committee, however, recommend that the Ministry should closely monitor the 
progress of both the projects so that these are completed without any further time or 
cost overruns. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should ensure to provide 
adequate financial allocations and timely release of funds for these projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The main academic centre of RGIPT is being constructed on 47 acres of land 
at Jais, District Amethi (Uttar Pradesh).  Initially, the Capital Expenditure was made 
through Govt of India budgetary support of Rs. 285.00 Crore and partially from grant 
of Rs.150.00 Crore from Oil Industry Development Board. The Institute has 
commenced its academic activities from 2008 -09.  Currently, 6 batches of MBA, 4 
batches of B. Tech and M. Tech students have passed out. 
 The construction of the campus suffered setbac k as the job awarded to M/s. 
Punj Lloyd Limited (PLL) on the recommendation of PMC, Engineers India limited 
(EIL) stopped in the year 2013 due to the contractor‟s un -reasonable demands 
leading to Arbitration and cost escalation.   

65 
 
 
 
 It is pertinent to note that due to non -payment of contractor‟s bills from 
January 2015 to July 2015, the contractor, M/s. NCCL had stopped the work at Jais 
Site which has resulted in time overrun beyond the scheduled date of completion of 
March 2016. The construction work has restarted and is targeted to be completed by 
September, 2016 .  The money so far released from GBS for Jais project is Rs. 
181.00 crore (Rs.86.00 crore + Rs.48.00 crore + Rs.47.00 crore = Rs.181.00 crore) 
whereas Rs. 188.10  crore (Rs.369.10 crore – Rs.181.00 crore = Rs 188.10 crore) is 
yet to be released for completion of the project.  
The execution of the project at Sibsagar is delayed due to site related issues 
requiring large quantity of earth filling and piling work which has since been 
completed in April , 2014. Meanwhile the project cost has gone up from the original 
estimate of Rs. 143 crore to Rs. 235 crore.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Ethanol Blended Petrol  
 
 The Committee note that the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) programme is 
being implemented since 2003. Selling of Petrol blended with ethanol upto 10% has 
been envisaged for the year 2016 -17. For achieving 10% blending, the requirement 
of Ethanol would be approximately 266 crore litres against which only 136 crore litres 
is available for blending within the country. Despite repeated rounds of floating 
Expression of Interest (EoI), the required additional Ethanol supply is not available in 
the country so far. The Committee are concerned that the Ministry has not been able 
to procure sufficient quantity of Ethanol even though India is one of the largest 
Sugarcane producing countries of the world. The Committee note that unless 
concerted efforts are made by the Mi nistry, it would be difficult to attain the target of 
10% EBP, particularly in those states which are not major sugarcane producing 
areas. The Committee desire that the Ministry has to focus on the issue of availability 
of Ethanol in the country so that th e targeted blending of Ethanol in petrol it has 
envisaged for could be achieved. The Committee would advise the Ministry to work 
sincerely on alternate sources for ethanol including the production of ethanol directly 
from sugarcane juice so as to incentivize farmers. The Committee recommend that a 
comprehensive plan be made by the Ministry for increasing availability of Ethanol for 
blending with petrol.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government has taken a number of initiatives to improve the availability 
of ethanol for blending with Petrol under Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme.  
Some of them are as under:  
(i) On 10.12.2014, the delivered price of ethanol has been fixed in the range of 
Rs.48.50 per litre to 49.50 per litre, depending upon the distan ce of distillery 
from the depot/installation of the OMCs.  The Government has allowed 

66 
 
 
 
procurement of ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks besides 
molasses, like cellulosic and ligno cellulosic materials including petrochemical 
route, subject to meeting the relevant BIS Standards. 
(ii) Oil Marketing companies (OMCs) have been asked on 21.10.2015 to 
establish a project each of reasonable scale for producing ethanol from multi -
feedstock lignocelluloses using indigenous technology. A demonstration pl ant 
of 10 Tonnes Per Day (TPD) capacity at Kashipur, Uttarakhand, has been 
operationalised on 22.4.2016 
(iii) Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) has been taking up the 
State specific issues with the concerned State Governments for hassle free 
inter-State and intra-State movement of ethanol.  For better coordination with 
the States, Sugar Mills and other stakeholders, MoP&NG has appointed nodal 
Officers from OMC‟s, for effective implementation of EBP programme. 
2. The impact of these decisions is  evident from the fact that ethanol supplies 
increased to 67.4 crore litres for the sugar year 2014 -15 from 38 crore litres during 
2013-14.  During the current sugar year 2015 -16 OMCs have finalized over 135 
crore litres of ethanol supplies. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Reserve Replacement 
 
The Committee note that Reserve Replacement Ratio is an important 
parameter for Exploration & Production companies.  This indicates that amount of oil 
added to the reserves vis-a-vis production.   It is generally expected  that the ratio to 
be more than 1 which indicates that more reserves are being added than being taken 
out through production.  He Committee note that in 2012 -13, RRR based on 1P (1P 
= proven reserves) reserve for ONGC was 1.08 while in the years 2013 -14 and 
2014-15 the figure was 0.62 and 0.70 respectively. In case of OIL, the corresponding 
figures were 1.17, 0.80 and 1.22 respectively. The Reserve Replacement Ratio 
(RRR) on 1P basis has been consistently below 1 in case of ONC and about 1 in 
case of Oil. 
 
The Committee are concerned that the RRR of the Nation‟s Oil Companies 
(NOC‟s) are about 1 or less t han 1.  The indicates these companies are producing 
crude oil from their existing reserve without adding new reserves.  The Committee 
apprehends that the exploration activities are not being undertaken as intensively as 
is required in a energy -deficient co untry like India.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the oil companies undertake exploration of promising areas more 
intensively so that the crude oil production remains sustainable and recommend 
allocation of sufficient funds by NOCs for undertakin g such activities.  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should explore all the overseas acquisition 
opportunities to augment the reserves and improve RRR. 
 

67 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Exploration activities in the country were shrinking during last 5 years owing to 
the fact that no new exploration blocks were awarded from 2010 onwards.  Now, 
Government has approved Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 
through which new exploration blocks will be awarded in near future.  With opening 
of new area for exploration, reserve replacement ratio (RRR) is likely to improve 
further and may be more than one on discovery of new hydrocarbon reserves. 
 The reserve accretion in ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) is a mix of exploratory 
accretions and inorganic acquisitions. As acquisitions do not happen at regular 
intervals, instead of Year wise, Cumulative RRR may be considered as an indicator 
of the performance. Production in OVL has commenced in 2002 -03 and the 
cumulative production from the start of producti on to 2015 -16 is 100.468 MMTOE 
while the accretion of reserves in terms of 1P and 2P during the same period is 
180.576 MMTOE and 548.242 MMTOE respectively resulting in overall RRR of 1.80 
for 1P case and 5.46 for 2P.   
 Oil India Limited (OIL) has also, o ver the past decade, acquired participating 
interests in exploration acreages in countries, namely, Libya, Gabon, Yemen, 
Bangladesh, Myanmar and discovered/producing asset in Nigeria, Venezuela, USA, 
Mozambique and Russia. These initiatives are expected to help improving the overall 
RRR of OIL in the near to medium-term. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter -I) 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR)  
 
 The main activities relating to petroleum sector are carried out by the Oil 
PSUs out of funds generated from their own resources known as Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The PSU‟s BE 2016 -17 has b een pegged at Rs. 
87214.56 crore showing about 15% increase from the BE 2015 -16. At the RE stage 
of 2015 -16, the total outlay of PSUs was Rs. 68536.52 crore showing under - 
utilisation to the tune of 10%. Even out of this amount, only Rs. 45028.24 crore wer e 
utilised in the first three quarters.  
 
 The Committee note that budget for exploration activities of upstream oil 
companies like ONGC, OIL and GAIL has been going down substantially over the 
years. Moreover, the PSUs are not able to utilise even the red uced allocations. In 
case of ONGC, the BE 2015 -16 for exploration activities was Rs. 14269.27 crore out 
of which they could utilise only about Rs. 7000 crore. BE for 2016 -17 has been kept 
at Rs. 9150.56 crore. Similarly for GAIL the BE 2016 -17 has been kep t at Rs. 77.55 
crore which is about half of BE 2015 -16. GAIL could utilise less than 40% of the 
amount in the first three quarters of the previous year.  
 

68 
 
 
 
 As regards downstream oil PSUs, the Committee note that 09 refineries under 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) achieved the crude throughput of 53.59 MMT 
during 2014-15 while during first three quarters of 2015 -16 the crude throughput was 
41.68 MMT. The estimates for 2016-17 has been fixed at 57.51 MMT while the target 
for 2016-17 is 62.5 MMT. Therefore, the total increase from 2014 -15 to 2016 -17 is 
about 20%. The plan outlay of IOCL in 2014 -15 (actual) was Rs.14314 crore while 
RE for 2015 -16 is Rs.11503 cr ores. The Committee note that in the first three 
quarters of 2015 -16 the actual expenditure is Rs.6962 crores which is is only about 
65% of the annual estimates. The BE for 2016-17 has been fixed at Rs.13773 crores 
an increase of almost 20% over the previous year figures.  
 
 In case of HPCL, its total refinery throughput in 2014 -15 was 16.18 MMT. In 
first three quarters of 2015 -16 it achieved refinery throughput of 12.53 MMT. the 
target for 2016 -17 is 16.27 MMT. The Committee note that HPCL refineries are 
working at more than 100% capacity. Plan outlay for 2014 -15 (actual) in case of 97 
HPCL was Rs.1767 crores against the BE of Rs.1792 crores. The RE for 2015 -16 is 
Rs.1540 crores while in the first three quarters Rs.1084 crores has been utilised. The 
BE for 2016-17 is fixed at Rs.1974 crores which indicates more than 25% increase 
from the previous year. 
 
  The Committee note that BPCL has two refineries with combined capacity of 
21.5MMTPA. During 2013 -14, the BPCL refineries processed 23.35 MMTs which is 
more than 100% of their capacity. During 2014 -15 in the first six months the total of 
11.23 MMT crude oil was produced in two refineries. The target for refining 
throughput for 2015 -16 is to 22.50MMT. The Committee observe that refineries in 
case of BPCL are a lso operating at more than 100%. In 2014 -15 RE at Rs.5794 
crores was about 10% higher than BE of Rs.5250 crores. RE for 2015 -16 was fixed 
at Rs. 7250 crores and BE for 2016 -17 was Rs. 10597 crore which indicates 
substantial increase.  
 
 The Committee are c oncerned that the upstream oil PSUs are going slow on 
the exploration and development works even when the need is to work on 
exploration and development work intensively. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should direct PSUs to increase exploration activities in various parts of the 
Country and to allocate adequate funds for that purpose. The Committee note that 
the downstream oil PSUs show significant variation in their estimates and actual 
utilisation of funds. The Committee would expect the oil PS Us to prepare their 
estimates with utmost care and stick to it. Ministry may monitor the actual utilisation 
of outlay by the PSUs regularly and suggest periodic course corrections.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (I&EBR) 
 
 Total BE of I&EBR of the CPSEs under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas during 2015-16 and 2016-17 was ₹76565.46 crore (revised to ₹76874.75 crore) 
and ₹87214.56 crore respectively. However, Plan Outlay (BE) from I&EBR for 2015 -
16 was ₹75185.72 cro re and RE was ₹68252.35 crore, against which actual 
expenditure incurred was ₹66118.29 crore. Plan outlay (BE) from I&EBR for 2016 -17 
is ₹77600.42 crore.  
 

69 
 
 
 
 
Plan Outlays for Exploration and Production: 
 
 Plan outlay (BE) from I&EBR during 2015 -16 under the head „Exploration and 
Production‟ was ₹55079.53 crore, which was revised to ₹48434.63 crore at RE 
stage. Actual expenditure under this head during 2015 -16 was ₹44196.55 crore. 
During 2016-17, plan outlay under the head „Exploration and Production‟ has bee n 
kept at ₹52618.71 crore.  
 
Plan Outlays for exploration activities by upstream oil companies: 
 
ONGC: 
Plan outlay (BE) of ONGC for exploration activities was ₹14269.27 crore during 
2015-16 which was revised to ₹11523.53 crore at RE stage. Against this actual 
expenditure incurred under this head was ₹9162.91 crore.  Plan outlay (BE) for 
exploration activities during 2016-17 is ₹9150.56 crore.  
 
ONGC: 
Reasons for underutilisation of allocated budget by ONGC during 2015-16: 
Budget allocation for exploratory activities by ONGC is reducing year by year 
because of reduction in exploratory acreages as no acreage has been 
offered/awarded since NELP IX round in 2012. 
 
Shortfall in expenditure in exploratory activities is due to environmental & contractual 
issues along with mandatory clearance issues in seismic surveys. In exploratory 
drilling, shortfall has occurred  due to environmental, mandatory clearance issues as 
well as down -hole complications during drilling/testing of wells leading to time loss. 
More specifically, lower utilisation in exploratory drilling is on account of  
 Less number of wells drilled during t he period due to low availability of rig 
months. 
 3D seismic work awarded to the company could not be initiated/completed 
due to outstanding contractual issues. 
 
ONGC is making all out efforts to resolve such issues / problems so that the 
efficiency of exploratory activities can be improved. 
 
Reasons for decline in BE 2016-17 vis-à-vis BE 2015-16: 
 Survey budget has declined marginally on account of reduction in physical 
targets of 2D and 3D Survey by 320 Ground Line KMs. (GLK) and 1353 
Square Kilometer (SKM) respectively. 
 The decline is on account of NIL target for deep -water exploratory drilling in 
BE 2016-17, as against a target of 7 wells in BE 2015-16. 
 The BE for shallow water exploratory drilling in 2016 -17 was reduced  mainly 
due to anticipated reductio n in oil field services cost (rigs, etc.), due to 
persistent  decline in global crude prices. 
 The outlay for onland exploratory drilling has also been reduced on account of 
reduction in input costs of resources for 93 wells. 
 
Measures taken to increase exploration activities: 
 
To intensify its exploratory activities, various concerted measures are being taken by 
ONGC including inter -alia, focusing on exploration of deeper plays in the existing 

70 
 
 
 
fields, carrying out exploration in geologically complex and logistically challenging 
areas and exploiting alternate sources of energy like shale gas, gas hydrate, etc. 
Further, pursuant to the formal launch of Hydrocarbon Exploration & Licensing Policy 
(HELP), the exploratory acreages / area portfolio are expected to improve. In 
addition, resource appraisal of the un -appraised areas of Indian Sedimentary Basins 
would help in identification and prioritization of the areas.   
 
OIL: 
 
Plan outlay (BE) of OIL for exploration activities during 2015-16 was ₹1594.00   crore 
which was revised to ₹1395 crore at RE stage. Actual expenditure incurred in 
exploration activities during 2015 -16 was ₹1364 crore. OIL has increased its 
allocation for exploration activities on year on year basis. During 2016 -17, plan 
outlay (BE) for exploration activities is ₹1793.50 crore.  
 
Reasons for underutilisation of allocated budget during 2015-16: 
 
The major reasons for lower utilisation of allocated budget for exploratory drilling by 
OIL during 2015-16 are as under: 
(vi) During financial year 2015 -16, OIL completed drilling of 16 exploratory 
wells against targeted 32 wells. 
(vii) Higher rig resource was allocated for development drilling in OIL‟s 
Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) areas of Assam in order to arrest declining 
oil production. 
(viii) Drilling of two explor atory wells in OIL‟s PML area in Rajasthan was 
deferred to 2016-17 as the same is linked to Heavy Oil Monetization in the 
area for which efforts are in progress 
(ix) Drilling of four wells in NELP blocks could not be undertaken due to delay 
in statutory / regulatory permissions/clearance. 
(x) Exploratory drilling campaign in the block KG -ONN-2004/1 suffered due to 
delay in deployment of rig as use of a bridge was resisted by local people. 
The drilling operation could start only w.e.f. 12th January, 2016. 
  
Measures taken to achieve targets by OIL: 
 
Planning and monitoring mechanisms for implementation of planned 
projects/programmes are in place in OIL for achieving the set targets and the same 
are reviewed on a regular monthly basis.  
 
GAIL: 
 
Plan outlay (BE) of GAIL  during 2015 -16 under the head „Exploration and 
Production‟ was ₹147.94 crore which was revised to ₹82.29 crore at RE stage due to 
rescheduling of activities by different operators. Actual expenditure incurred under 
this head during 2015-16 was ₹72 crore. Plan outlay under this head during 2016 -17 
has been kept at ₹77.55 crore which is based on projected expense under Minimum 
Work Programme, as per production sharing contract of various blocks. Blocks were 
last awarded under last bid round (NELP -IX) during March 2012 and since then, no 
new bid rounds have been announced. Various blocks have moved ahead in E&P 
life cycle leading to production in 4 blocks and thus the capital expenditure 
commitments are reducing in these blocks. 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
 
IOCL 
 
During 2015-16, IOCL incurred plan expenditure of ₹11484.74 crore against BE and 
RE of ₹10540.00 crore and ₹11502.91 crore respectively. IOCL has kept BE for 
2016-17 at ₹13772.87 crore. While finalising the BE, detailed analysis of each 
ongoing and new project and those propos ed, is carried out. Although intensive 
monitoring of physical and financial progress of projects is carried out, in certain 
cases   like exploration   and production  related schemes, which  are significantly  
affected by the global developments related to oi l and gas industry, variation 
between estimated and actual utilisation of funds does come in.   
 
HPCL 
 
During 2015-16, HPCL incurred actual plan expenditure of ₹ 1429.49 crore against 
BE and RE of ₹ 1,791.85 crore and ₹1539.78 crore respectively. The short fall in the 
utilisation of budget allocation was due to the following reasons: 
(iv) Late receipt of Environment Clearance for Visakh Refinery Modernisation 
Project 
(v) RoU disruption at Mangalore and Hassan for Mangalore -Hassan-Mysore 
LPG pipeline project 
(vi) Delayed r eceipt of permission from Forest and National Wild Life Board 
and agitation by villagers against pipeline laying for Uran -Chakan LPG 
pipeline project 
 
Reasons for higher budget allocation during 2016-17 
 
HPCL has kept BE at ₹ 1,974.26 crore for 2016 -17 as compared to BE of ₹1,791.85 
crore (an increase of about 10%) and RE of ₹1539.78 crore during 2015 -16. Budget 
estimates for 2016 -17 have been increased due to some of the new activities to be 
taken up in M umbai and Visakh refineries during 2016 -17 and as per work plan 
received from the operator under exploration sector.  
 
As far as utilisation of budget allocation is concerned, HPCL is monitoring physical 
and financial progress of the projects with respect to critical milestones on a monthly 
basis. The key progress made every month, reasons for delay and areas of concerns 
are identified and analysed for resolution on priority basis. 
 
BPCL 
 
During 2015-16, BPCL incurred actual plan expenditure of ₹ 8257.00 cr ore against 
BE and RE of ₹ 6,501.32 crore and ₹7250 crore. Higher budget utilisation by BPCL 
during 2015 -16 was mainly to speed up the commissioning of Integrated Refinery 
Expansion Project in Kochi and for Catalytic Reformer Unit (CRU) Isomerization 
project in Mumbai Refinery, in line with modification required as per Auto Fuel Policy 
and early commissioning of the unit.   
 
Reasons for keeping higher BE during 2016-17 
 
BPCL has kept BE 2016 -17 at ₹10597 crore which indicates a substantial increase 
as compared to BE 2015 -16. This is mainly due to higher budget allocation to 
„Refining and Marketing‟ head (₹9797 crore includes pipelines, JV with BORL, etc.). 
During 2016 -17, major projects are planned under „Refining‟ head to meet the 
Government directive and deadline for ensuring production of BS V/VI fuels and also  
Petchem project in Kochi Refinery. For evacuation of additional 6 MMT petroleum 
products from Integrated Refi nery Expansion Project in Kochi, CAPEX expenses 

72 
 
 
 
under marketing sector (major pipelines and infrastructure) have been planned in the 
southern region.  
 
Although all CPSEs had put in their best efforts to ensure expenditure in accordance 
with the targets du ring 2015-16, reasons reported by each of them for the shortfall, 
wherever relevant have been detailed. The Ministry is also putting all out efforts to 
ensure that realistic targets are fixed at the BE stage so that the gap, if any, between 
the budgeted and incurred expenditure, after following due diligence is minimized.  
 
ONGC and OIL are carrying out exploration through their internal generated 
resources/revenue. No budgetary allocation is made to oil PSUs for carrying out 
exploration and production acti vities. However Ministry monitor their exploration 
activities periodically. 
 
In order to accelerate exploration activities in the country for appraisal of the Indian 
sedimentary basin, an area of 1.502 Million Sq. Km is identified by DGH. To appraise 
these areas, Government has formulated a plan to conduct 2D seismic surveys of 
volume of 48,243 LKM in 22 sedimentary basins of India where no/scanty data is 
available.  
 
Total estimated cost of the project is about Rs. 2932.99 Crore for conducting 2D 
Seismic s urvey API of 48,243 line kilometer (LKM) upto 2019 -20 in Indian 
sedimentary basins.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter -I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

73 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Levy of cess on Crude Oil  
 
The Committee observe that the Government has modified the levy of Oil Industries 
Development (OID) cess on  domestically produced crude oil from oil PSU's from 
4500/MT to 20% ad -valorem. This measure will result in saving of about Rs. 
1150/MT at the crude oil rate of US$ 35/bbl and at exchange rate of Rs.67 per US 
dollar. However, if the crude oil rates in the international markets rise, the burden of 
cess on the upstream oil companies like ONGC and OIL will increase. At the price 
point of US$ 50/bbl and at exchange rate of Rs. 67 per US$, the burden will be even 
more than the previously fixed cess of 4500/MT, w hich will defeat the purpose of 
rationalizing the cess and give relief to upstream oil PSUs. Keeping this fact in view, 
the Ministry have decided to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for 
reduction of the cess from the current 20% to reasonabl e levels. They have also 
requested for transfer of part of the funds collected as cess from the oil companies to 
the OIDB for taking up initiatives like appraisal of unappraised areas, for national 
data repository as well as for the development of gas pipe line infrastructure. The 
Committee fully support the lowering of ad valorem rate making it more practical and 
simpler to administer the cess. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the 
issue of present ad valorem cess of 20% proposed in the budget should be raised by 
the Ministry with the Ministry of Finance so that the oil cess is brought down 
preferably in the range of 10%. The Committee may be informed about the outcome 
in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has revised OID cess at the rate of 20% ad -valorem basis w.e.f. 
1st March 2016 from the earlier rate of Rs. 4500 per tonne in respect of crude oil. 
The new cess rate is beneficial to the industry when crude oil price is below 
US$45/bbl.   However, the new rate of 20% cess will  have negative impact on oil 
companies on increase of crude oil price beyond US$ 45/bbl.  Ministry of Petroleum& 
Natural Gas has taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to reconsider the OID 
cess rate. The outcome in this regard will be apprised to the committee. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/29/2016-Fin.I dated 3 August, 2016 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter -I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
8 December,  2016 
17 Agrahayana,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

74 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2016-17) 
FIFTH SITTING 
(07.12.2016) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7 December, 2016 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
10 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
11 Shri Rajesh Verma 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
15 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
16 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
17 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
18 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
19 Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
    SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
3. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
  

75 
 
 
 
2.  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the 12 th Report on 'Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of MoPNG' and 
adopted the same with some minor modifications.  
 
4. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
5. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
xxx:  Matter not related to the subject. 
  

76 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2015-16) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 25 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 25) 
 
19 
 Percentage to Total 76% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 23) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 4% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 7, 12, 15, and 17) 
 
4 
 Percentage of Total 
 
16% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 3)  
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 
 
4% 
 
 
 
 
 
 