 
15 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
FUNCTIONING OF PETROLEUM CONSERVATION RESEARCH 
ASSOCIATION 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 


2 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
FUNCTIONING OF PETROLEUM CONSERVATION RESEARCH 
ASSOCIATION 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)……………………………..                      4 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                      5 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
20 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
34 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
35 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
41 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016 -17) held on 
07.12.2016. 
42 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015 -16) on the subject 
'Functioning of Petroleum Conservation Research 
Association' 
44 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2016-17) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
13 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
14 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
15 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16 Shri Raju Shetti 
17 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
23 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
26 Shri Ahmed Patel 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
28 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya                     
31 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject „Functioning of 
Petroleum Conservation Research Association'. 
2. The Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report were received on 05.08.2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2016 -17) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.12.2016.  
4. An analysis of the action tak en by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 8 December,  2016 
17 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2015-16) on 'Functioning of Petroleum Conservation Research Association', which 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2016. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 9 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9 (Total 7) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. No. NIL 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 1 
and 8 (Total 2)                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of th e 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No. NIL               
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for w hich interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

7 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Functioning of PCRA 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"During the oil shock in the early seventies, a Petroleum Conservation Action 
Group (PCAG) was set up in 1976 towards oil conservation in the country.  It was 
later constituted as Petroleum Cons ervation Research Association (PCRA) in 
1978 as a registered society under MoPNG with a mandate to promote 
conservation of petroleum products in the major sectors of the economy. 
The Committee note that PCRA is engaged in promoting the conservation of 
petroleum products in various sectors of economy and assisting the Government 
in formulation of policies and strategies for petroleum conservation. PCRA 
conducts various field activit ies to reach the target groups by carrying out 
awareness campaigns, energy audits, studies on conservation of oil/gas, 
Institutional training programme, workshops, driver training programme, youth 
programme etc. The Committee have been informed that there is a potential to 
save 20 to 30 per cent in the Petroleum sector in the country by conservation 
efforts.  
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that during last five years, 
PCRA could not achieve the targets set in many areas of Energy Audits, Fu el Oil 
Diagnostic Studies, service to small scale industries, Model Depot Projects etc.  
The Committee feel that PCRA is the only body entrusted with the activities of 
conservation of petroleum/natural gas and that failure of PCRA in achieving the 
targets has seriously hindered the efforts. The Committee therefore, recommend 
that PCRA should seriously pursue the targets set for various field activities and 
work towards removing all the hindrances in order to achieve the conservation 
objectives. 
The Committe e are also not satisfied with the overall functioning of PCRA as 
efforts to expand its presence and reach of organization to masses is not visible 
and the awareness about the activities carried out by it is also very low. The 
Committee observe that in view  of climate change concerns caused due to the 
use of fossil fuels, it is imperative that the fuel conservation measures get the top 
most priority and the desired attention by the Ministry and PCRA. Moreover, in 
view of announcement and intention of the Gov ernment to reduce import 
dependence of crude oil, the role of organization like PCRA assumes more 
importance as it can play a significant role in achieving this objective.  The 
Committee therefore, recommend that MoPNG should seriously review the role 
and functioning of PCRA thoroughly and revamp it completely to make it more 
effective in implementing their strategies of fuel conservation". 
 
 

8 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
 "PCRA has been continuously working to achieve higher milestones in terms of 
performance in Field Activities.  As such, PCRA has been setting higher targets 
in each sector year after year and surpassing the same overall except during 
2012-13.  En ergy Audit, FODS, Follow Up and SSI fall under Industrial Sector 
while MDP is an activity of Transport Sector. Target of Energy Audits, FODS, etc. 
could not be met since the same is dependent upon the auditee organization‟s 
choice of agency to carry out th e audit through one of more than 100 other audit 
agencies authorized by BEE.  
 
 Sector-wise Performance data for last 5 years is given below:- 
Activity 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Target Achiev
-ement 
Target Achiev
-ement 
Target Achieve
-ment 
Target Achiev
-ement 
Target Achieve-
ment 
Industrial 
Sector 
1940 1966 2432 2317 2280 1976 2526 2199 2215 2281 
Transport 
Sector 
1520 1412 1984 1596 1720 1929 1897 2306 2593 3614 
Domestic 
Sector 
2105 2582 2100 2443 2300 2536 2443 3094 2980 3667 
Agriculture 
Sector 
680 796 680 649 660 732 693 782 890 1054 
Misc 135 124 172 174 128 145 135 119 120 226 
Total 6380 6880 7368 7179 7088 7318 7694 8500 8798 10842 
 
PCRA‟s performance in 2015 -16 has exceeded the targets. PCRA would 
continue to work towards achieving  the targets by mobilizing the desired 
resources to fulfill the objectives of conservation. 
 
MoP&NG fully realizes India‟s dependence on crude oil import and its overall 
impact on Indian economy. PCRA‟s role towards achieving energy security of the 
country by reducing energy intensity is very important. Ministry believes that most 
vital solution to address energy conservation and environment protection is to 
bring an attitudinal change by creating awareness amongst masses. PCRA has 
been mandated to create a nd sustain this awareness across all sectors on 
continual basis. Steadily, PCRA has been diversifying its area of operation 
leading to new avenue of conservation. Energy Management System (EnMS) 
ISO 50001 is one such initiative PCRA has embarked upon in last 2 years. PCRA 
has helped 93 units of various sectors for getting ISO 50001 certifications on 
their energy management during 2015-16.   
 
Similarly, under GOI plan of NMEEE (National Mission for Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency), PCRA has established itself as a major reliable player to advise 
energy intensive industries under PAT (Perform Achieve and Trade). So far, 

9 
 
PCRA has been able to successfully complete the audits of 14 no. energy 
intensive units notified under PAT cycle -1. Oil Refineries having been incl uded in 
PAT cycle -2 (effective 01.04.16) have opened up new avenues for PCRA to 
work with these refineries which are considered as energy guzzlers.  
 
In past, through PCRA, MoP&NG has run various people centric theme based 
campaigns focusing on specific s ubject.  During Oil & Gas Conservation 
Fortnight (OGCF) 2016, a nationwide campaign was run for a fortnight on 
Cleaner Fuels.  Realizing gravity of the situation due to burning of bio mass 
resulting in Lakh of deaths, particularly women in India, PCRA carried a pan India 
campaign to not only educate the masses on health hazards of bio mass burning 
but also on superior calorific value obtained from Cleaner Fuels.  
 
Similarly, last year campaign was run with an emphasis on overall reducing the 
consumption resulting in increased monetary savings. It is pertinent to note here 
that during this campaign alone more than 125 Lakh consumers physically 
remained present to understand necessity, methods and benefits of conservation 
as way of their lives.  
 
Ministry also understands the limitation of PCRA being a non -statutory body and 
without a regular cadre. Manpower of PCRA is drawn from different Oil and Gas 
PSUs for a short period on deputation. Within available frame work and 
resources, PCRA is able to establish its identity as an integrated energy solution 
provider.  
 
To underline its contribution towards cause of conservation, PCRA has drawn 
ambitious plans.  One such plan is to train existing all 24 Lakh heavy duty vehicle 
drivers in next 3 years. PCRA shall train 1000 Driver Training Instructors (DTI) of 
the Driver Training Institutes who in turn shall train 24 Lakh heavy duty vehicle 
drivers. The training of DTIs shall b e undertaken by PCRA after the amendment 
in CMVR (Central Motor Vehicle Rules) mandating PCRA‟s driving training 
module compulsory before issuance/renewal of commercial driving licenses.  
 
In transport sector, PCRA has been working with various stake holde rs in 
formulating the energy efficiency norms for Heavy Duty Vehicles (buses and 
trucks). Post deliberations with stake holders in a series of interactions, the final 
report has been submitted. Once the norms are approved and notified for 
implementation, it will have wide reaching positive impact on fuel consumption by 
heavy vehicles.  
 
With initiative of PCRA, energy efficiency standards for 3 products using 
petroleum fuel has already been notified by Ministry of Power.  
 
In addition to the regular activit ies carried throughout the year, PCRA also 
conducts focused programs to expand its reach and visibility towards 
conservation. Some of the activities carried out during 2015-16 are given below: 

10 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity No. of 
Programs 
No. of 
Participants 
1 Mass Awareness – Essay, Painting, Debate, Quiz 
competitions, Street Plays, Human Chain, TV/Radio panel 
discussions, etc during OGCF 2016 
46703 64.10 Lakh 
2 All India Painting/Essay (in 23 languages) competition for 
school students 
4632 schools 4.80 Lakh 
3 Cyclothon / Walkathon 237 32792 
4 LPG/PNG/SKO clinics for houserwives/cooks/maids 42582 91.35 Lakh 
5 Workshops for heavy duty, light duty and 2/3 vehicle drivers, 
mechanics, managers 
56799 51.84 Lakh 
6 Workshops for farmers, scientists, students on savi ng diesel 
& lubricants in tractors and farming equipments 
314 25126 
7 Technical Seminars & Workshops in cluster/CDM for 
engineers, industrialists, workers, supervisors 
338 15267 
8 Social Media – Fuel saving tips, contests, suggestions and 
feedback through Facebook, Google, Twitter, Youtube & 
PCRA web 
Daily  5.11 Lakh 
9 Other Activities – Kisan Mela, Exhibition, Van Publicity 309 4.12 Lakh 
10 Showcasing PCRA activities of conservation through IITF 15 days 1.50 Lakh 
11 All India campaign through Post Office Passbooks - 30 Lakh 
12 Campaign through Post Cards - 2 Lakh 
 
With above people centric activities, PCRA has reached more than 2.55 crore 
people during 2015-16. 
 
PCRA is regularly adapting and incorporating changes in its activities in order to 
cope with current scenario and the need of the nation and the society towards 
achieving the fuel conservation goal.  PCRA tries to build up synergy by 
coordinating with external agencies like BEE, CII, TERI, ASSOCHAM, NPC, 
FICCI, IIP, etc., and uses Oil  PSU network of 54000 Retail Outlets and 16000 
LPG distributorships to pass on its message".  
 
 
 
7. The Committee had in their Report  recommended that MoPNG should 
review the role and the functioning of PCRA thoroughly and revamp it to make it 
more effective in implementing fuel conservation programmes.  But, the Ministry 
in its action taken reply, has stated  that PCRA carries out various activities to 
create awareness amongst masses regarding energy conservation and 
environment protection and has been adopting changes to keep with the current 
scenario towards achieving the goal of fuel conservation  and also tries to build 
up synergy by coordinating with external agencies like CII, BEE, TERI, 
ASSOCHAM, FIICI, IIP etc. To pass on its me ssage, PCRA uses Oil P SU network 
of 54,000 Retail O utlets and 16,000 LPG distributors hips. The Ministry has also 
pointed towards  the limitations of PCRA activities as it is a non -Statutory body 

11 
 
and has no regular cadre of officials and the man-power for PCRA is drawn from 
different oil and gas PSUs on deputation.  
 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry repeating the  
same facts about which the Committee are aware.  In view of announc ement of 
new priorities of the G overnment to reduce the import dependence of crude oil 
and climate change concerns , the Committee had considered that the PCRA 
would have to play a major and most imp ortant role in achieving the targets. 
Therefore, they had desired a review of its functioning. In Committee's view, 
without reviewing the functioning and strengthening of PCRA by the Ministry, the 
PCRA may not be able to achieve energy security by reducing energy intensity.  
 The Committee, therefore, desire that the MoPNG should seriously view the 
fuel conservation programme and improvement in  energy efficiency in the 
country in hydrocarbon s ector as key objectives and review on its own or 
through  other agencies the role and functioning of PCRA  and revamp it 
completely to prepare the same for implementing the strategies of fuel 
conservation. 
Recommendation No.2  
Organizational structure of PCRA   
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that PCRA which was set up in the year 1978 works with 
the support of public sector oil companies, government and non -government 
organisations, research institutes and laboratories and other organisations.  
There is a Governi ng Body (GB) which determines the policies, priorities, major 
activities and special areas of interests.  The Secretary, MoPNG is the Chairman 
of GB and CMD's of Oil Sector PSUs and other senior officials of Government of 
India are its members.  There is a lso an Executive Committee (EC) which is 
primarily responsible for promoting the aims and objectives of PCRA and 
implementing its plans and programs.  The Additional Secretary of MoPNG is the 
Chairman of EC and Directors of Oil Sector PSUs are the members of EC. 
Representatives from National Productivity Council (NPC), Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency (BEE), Association of State Road Transport Undertakings (ASTRU), 
Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Centre for High Technology (CHT), Associated 
Chambers of Comm erce and Industry of India  (ASSOCHAM) and Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) are also members. 

12 
 
The Committee further note that Petroleum Conservation Research Association 
(PCRA) has its head office located in New Delhi and it has four sub offices and 
twenty regional offices at various locations with the total functional staff strength 
of 80 across the country out of which 32 persons work in head office, 30 in 
regional offices and 18 in field offices.  It is observed that the field offices are 
essentially one man show and there is lack of state level mechanism for 
implementation of activities of PCRA. The Committee are unhappy at such poor 
deployment of manpower in PCRA and are to conclude that MoPNG is non -
serious about conservation  activities. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
PCRA should set up State Level mechanisms for carrying out conservation 
activities across the States and it should be strengthened with more manpower in 
line with expanded activities.   
Moreover, the Commi ttee observe that PCRA had established Conservation 
Technology Centre in Delhi in the year 2008 for dissemination of technology and 
is the only conservation centre of the country. Since the conservation of 
Petroleum resources has a strategic importance for  the country, the Committee 
recommend that MoPNG/PCRA should explore the possibility of setting up more 
Conservation Technology Centres at regional/state level for better coordination 
and proper dissemination of conservation technology". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"Approved strength of PCRA is 86 which is deployed in Head Office, Regional 
Offices and Field Offices ie Sub Regional Offices (SROS) .  Currently, field 
activities are executed by a team of officers at Regional Offices / Sub Regional 
Offices, empanelled fac ulties and support from headquarters.   Presently, Field 
officers are posted in 17 states besides officers posted in 4 Regional Offices to 
co-ordinate and look after PCRA activities and the specific requirements of 
States falling under their Regional juris diction. PCRA‟s field activities are also 
carried out by large number of Faculties/Experts from different domain.   
The details of PCRA network on pan India are as under: 
1. Regional office – North Region, Delhi 
a. UP – SRO Lucknow 
b. Rajasthan – SRO Jaipur 
c. Haryana / Punjab / Himachal/ Chandigarh – SRO Chandigarh  
d. Uttarakhand – SRO Dehradun 
2. Regional office –  Western Region - Mumbai 

13 
 
a. Maharashtra – SRO Pune / SRO Nagpur 
b. MP – SRO Bhopal 
c. Chhattisgarh – SRO Raipur 
d. Gujarat, Goa & Dadra Nagar Haveli – SRO Ahmedabad / SRO Rajkot 
3. Regional office – Eastern  Region - Kolkata 
a. North East States - SRO Guwahati 
b. Bihar – SRO Patna 
c. Jharkhand – SRO Ranchi 
d. Orissa – SRO Bhuvneshwar 
4. Regional office – Southern  Region – Chennai  
a. Karnataka – SRO Bengaluru / SRO Belgaum 
b. Kerala – SRO Kochi 
c. Andhra – SRO Vizag 
d. Telangana - SRO Hyderabad 
e. Tamilnadu – SRO Coimbatore 
Officers posted in regional offices also supplement and support SROs for any 
specific requirement arising in SRO area under their region. For carrying out 
various conservation related a ctivities, PCRA in collaboration with PSU - oil 
marketing companies very effectively utilizes their retail outlets and LPG 
distributorship network of 54000 retail outlets and 16000 LPG distributorships 
respectively during OGCF and specific campaigns. 
Apart from above resources, PCRA collaborates with various agencies like KVKs 
in Agriculture Sector, OMC LPG distributors in Domestic Sector, Driver Training 
Institutes and OMC Retail Outlets in Transport Sector and MSME in Industrial 
Sector.  
PCRA is also asso ciated with many other organization and agricultural 
universities to carry out the activities of conservation.  Further, PCRA is 
strengthening its resources by using expertise of specific domain experts on 
need basis.   
PCRA operates its Conservation Techn ology Centre (CTC) from its premises in 
Delhi.  However, MoP&NG / PCRA is examining to explore the possibility of 
establishing more CTCs in the country in the premises owned by OMCs".   
 

14 
 
10.  The Committee had  observed that there was a very poor  state level 
mechanism of PCRA  to carry out conservation activities across states and  
desired that  it should be strengthened with more ma n-power in line with the 
activities.  
 The Ministry in their reply have stated that the  PCRA through regional 
offices and field offices are carrying out the conservation related field activities in 
different states with an approved staff strength of 86 only and some empanelled 
faculties/experts from different domain s. PCRA  also collaborates with PSU-Oil 
marketing Comp anies and utilizes their R etail Outlets and LPG distributorship 
network during oil  and gas conservation f ortnight (OGCF) and specific 
campaigns.  But they have not shown their commitment towards st rengthening 
the field offices. 
 The Committee reiterate their ob servation that the man-power for PCRA is 
inadequate to carry out  conservation activities for the continuously growing 
consumption of petroleum products and desire that state level mechanisms 
should be strengthened with more man -power to achieve the objective of 
reducing the country's import dependency of crude oil.  Similarly, it can also help 
in less wastage and better efficiency in the use  of petro leum products.  The 
Committee also reiterate their recommendation that for better dissimilation of 
conservation technologies , PCRA sho uld set up more c onservation technology 
centres across the country.  
Recommendation No.3 
Budgetary allocations of PCRA 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that PCRA gets its budget requirements through the grants 
received from Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB), Oil & Gas Conservation 
Fortnight (OGCF) Grants from Oil Companies etc.. The Committee observe that 
during the year 2013 -14, PC RA received funds to the tune of Rs. 9031 lacs 
against which PCRA could utilize only Rs. 7244.75 lacs and Rs. 5953 lacs was 
utilized against budget of Rs. 6483 lacs in the financial year 2014 -15. The 
Committee also observe that the funds spent on advertise ment activities show a 

15 
 
declining trend over the last two years and during the current year (2015 -16) till 
January, 2016, only Rs. 1644 lacs has been spent on advertisement activities 
which is less when seen in comparison to the Rs. 2990 lacs spent during t he 
year, 2014 -15.  The Committee express their unhappiness over such under -
utilization of budgetary/other grants by PCRA and desire that MoPNG should 
monitor the activities of PCRA and revamp the same in order to ensure the 
complete utilization of the funds allocated to them in an efficient manner.   
The Committee further note that the impact assessment studies conducted by 
PCRA show that in most of its activities in various areas, the impact has been 
more than 80 per cent and the savings made by PCRA Campaigns appears to be 
encouraging. The Committee however, note that the budget provided to PCRA 
does not commensurate with the responsibilities and activities being handled by 
PCRA. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure 
that PCRA gets more funds for its activities in order to ensure its expansion and 
effective functioning.  
The Committee observe that the prices of crude oil have gone down drastically in 
the international market. At the same time, the Committee also note that the 
demand of petroleum products has increased substantially during the past few 
years. The declining prices of crude oil in the international market may give rise 
to the tendency of liberal use of petroleum products and the Committee feel that 
this is the right  time to strike a balance between this increasing demand and 
conservation efforts in use of petroleum products.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry/PCRA should launch a focused mass awareness 
campaign to achieve success in conservation efforts in the present situation". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"It is submitted that expenditure on account of advertisement for FY 2013 -14 was 
Rs. 2990 Lacs and for  FY 2014 -15 the same was Rs. 2307 Lacs.  PCRA 
receives Grant-in-aid from OIDB based on actual execution and hence does not 
keep any idle fund unutilized.  Accordingly, the fund received from OIDB, Oil 
Companies etc. during FY 2013-14 was Rs. 7244.75 Lacs only.   
During 2013 -14, the expenditure for Mega Campaign was planned to be 
stretched to Rs. 39.30 crore as against the actual expenditure of Rs. 22.42 crore 
during 2012-13. However, the actual expenditure during 2013 -14 was Rs. 28.37 
crore which was higher by about Rs. 6 crore compared to 2012 -13. During 2014-
15, the expenditure on account of Education Campaign were lower due to 
stoppage of campaign midway.   
The Governing Body approves the budgetary requirement of PCRA for each 
Financial Year and the funds are made available by OIDB in the form of grant -in-

16 
 
aid based on the demands against actual expenditure by PCRA.  The required 
fund for execution of activities approved by Governing Body of PCRA are made 
available by OIDB immediately on demand by PCRA.  
Though there is a fall in retail selling prices, it is only marginal. Further, new 
generation vehicles are much more fuel efficient than in the past and it has been 
seen that the buyers have tendency to look for fuel efficient vehicles. 
In order to capture the present consumer behavior in transport sector, PCRA has 
planned to increase the awareness on fuel conservation and importance of 
cleaner fuel amongst the consumers by introducing Campaigns through TV, 
Print, Radio, Digital Cinema, Outdoor & Website in addition to conventional Mega 
Campaign run for a limited period. 
PCRA has put a concentrated efforts in social media and found encouraging 
results at low costs. In one year website, Facebook, Google searches have gone 
up substantially. Participation in essa y and painting competition has also 
remained encouraging. So, budgetary expenditure may not be seen as directly 
linked to the impact of campaign.  
PCRA has also embarked upon various new initiatives like spreading the 
message of conservation through: 
i) Cycle Clubs 
ii) Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
iii) Creation of “Friends of PCRA” at district level 
Budget of Rs. 40 Crore has been allocated in Budget Estimate for the FY 2016 -
17 towards round the year campaign and mega campaign in addition to Rs. 5.00 
crore for regular education campaign of PCRA.   
PCRA has budgeted an estimated total expenditure of Rs 99 Crore in FY 2016 -
17". 
13. While going through the expenditure trend of PCRA on advertisement  
activities, the Committee had observed that it was dec reasing over the last  two 
years and during 2015 -16 till January 2016 , it was very less. In their reply the 
Ministry has not responded clearly about such decreasing trend and particularly 
about the expenditure for this purpose during 2015 -16. The Committee, therefore, 
observe that PCRA has not paid the desired attention towards increasing 
awareness on fuel conservation t hrough advertisements. No doubt , they have 
adopted several new means to spread their message including  use of  social 
media but campaigns thr ough traditional means and expenditure thereon, it 

17 
 
certainly does not  show its willingness to reach  the maximum number of 
consumers. The Committee had recommended in their report that PCRA should 
launch focused mass campaign to achieve success in conservation efforts.  
 The Committee feel that lower petroleum prices shows an increasing trend 
in the demand for petroleum products with the increasing sale of automobiles 
and other vehicles, house -hold appliances  and other equipment  which use  
petroleum products . In the changed situation, t here is a n urgent need  of a 
focused approach to capture the present consumer behaviour and  create public 
awareness regarding fuel conservation and efficie nt utilization of this resource .  
The country is one of the biggest import ers of crude oil in the world for meeting 
its demand any effort towards conservation of h ydrocarbon resources should be 
viewed in the holistic way and there can be no complacency in the activities of 
petroleum conservation and other related activities due to the lower crude oil 
prices prevailing at present in the global market.  The Committee , therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that PCRA should launch an extensive and 
effective campaign to achieve conservation targets. 
Recommendation No.8 
Research and development in the field of Energy Conservation 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the efforts for conservation of petroleum products in 
India were started around 1978. The Committee have further been informed that 
PCRA has been conducting research programmes from research organizations 
such as CSIR, IITs, IOC -R&D etc. as it does not have its own research centre.  
The Committee are of the view that PCRA is the nodal agency entrusted with the 
task of petroleum conservation  in the country and must have its own Research 
and Development Centre alongside the research being carried out in other 
organizations. The Committee therefore, recommend that the PCRA should 
strive towards establishment of a world class Research and Develo pment Centre 
to carry out R&D activities in the field of petroleum conservation in the country. 
The Committee further observe that in countries such as Japan, the conservation 
efforts were started years after India adopted the strategy for petroleum 
conservation.  However, at present, these countries are far ahead in the progress 
achieved in comparison to that in India. The Committee therefore, recommend 
that PCRA should make efforts to access the conservation technologies through 

18 
 
international cooperation and adopt suitable technologies for obtaining better 
results in India. The Committee further desire that Ministry/PCRA should pursue 
and finalize the renewal of MoU in the field of Energy conservation with Energy 
Conservation Centre, Japan (ECCJ), Japan at the earliest".   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"PCRA has collaboration with various technical bodies, Research institute, 
Universities, laboratories, etc. covering various fields, viz:    
Sector Collaboration with 
Oil & Gas Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
Indian Institute of Petroleum 
Transport Automobile Research Association of India 
International Centre for Automotive Technology 
Central Road & Research Institute (CRRI) 
The Energy Resource Institute (TERI) 
Agriculture Tie up / MoU with various Agricultural Universities: 
University of Agriculture Science, Dharwar, Karnataka 
Bidhanchandra Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Nadia 
Tamilnadu Agriculture University, Coimbatore 
Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture & Technology, Udaipur 
Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Raipur 
Uttar Banga Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Cooch Behar, etc. 
Industrial Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, Ludhiana, Durgapur 
Indian Institute of Technologies 
Steel Authority of India Ltd., Ranchi 
Central Glass &Ceramic Research Institute, Khurja 
Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Ludhiana 
 
Above mentioned bodies cater to specialized fields of research covering various 
sectors and meets the present research requirements of PCRA sponsored 
projects. Different IITs and other reputed institutes also approach PCRA  for 
sanction of research projects and PCRA also invites reputed institutes for specific 
project activities. Further, for new areas of research on fuel conservation in future 
wherever required, PCRA shall also use the option of collaboration with other 
institutions working in the field based on the type of the project.  
PCRA has long association with ECCJ and has been regularly exchanging the 
latest developments of techniques, technologies and research results in the area 
of fuel conservation. As such, many  conservation programs like Driver Training 
Program, Eco Driving Concept, Development of literatures on Fuel Conservation 

19 
 
in Industry, Development of Energy Audit Manual, etc., have been undertaken 
and implemented in the country.  PCRA continuously keeps t rack of the 
developments of new technologies, techniques, research happening around the 
world and analyzes the scope of implementation in India specific scenario.    
PCRA has been vigorously following up with ECCJ, METI directly as well as 
through MoP&NG t o renew the MoU between PCRA and ECCJ enabling PCRA 
to work on superior technologies, capacity building and exchange of information 
on Energy Efficiency techniques and conservation methods".   
 
16.  The Committee have been informed  that the PCRA has collaboration with 
various technological bodies, research institutes, universities, laboratories etc. to 
cater to the specified fields of research covering various sectors . This meets the 
present research requirements of PCRA sponsored p rojects. They however, are 
open for collaboration with other institutions working  in the field based on  the 
type of the project. 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry/PCRA.  As 
the name PCRA includes 'research' also and it is in line with the objectives of the 
organization, the Committee had recommended that PCRA should strive towards 
the establishment of world class research and development center to carry out R 
& D activities in the field of petroleum conservation in th e country. Other 
institutes or research bodies can supplement the activities of PCRA.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that PCRA and the Ministry should view this fact 
from a long term perspective and strive towards the establishment of R& D centre 
for petroleum conservation in the country.  The Committee would also like to be 
informed about the  status of renewal of MoU between PCRA and ECCJ to obtain 
superior technologies and exchange of information on energy efficiency 
techniques and conservation methods at the earliest.  
 
----- 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Organizational structure of PCRA 
 The Committee note that PCRA which was set up in the year 1978 works with 
the support of public sector oil companies, government and non -government 
organisations, research institutes and laboratories and other organisations.  There is a 
Governing Body (GB)  which determines the policies, priorities, major activities and 
special areas of interests.  The Secretary, MoPNG is the Chairman of GB and CMD's of 
Oil Sector PSUs and other senior officials of Government of India are its members.  
There is also an Executive Committee (EC) which is primarily responsible for promoting 
the aims and objectives of PCRA and implementing its plans and programs.  The 
Additional Secretary of MoPNG is the Chairman of EC and Directors of Oil Sector PSUs 
are the members of EC. Repre sentatives from National Productivity Council (NPC), 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), Association of State Road Transport Undertakings 
(ASTRU), Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Centre for High Technology (CHT), 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Ind ustry of India  (ASSOCHAM) and 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) are also members. 
 The Committee further note that Petroleum Conservation Research Association 
(PCRA) has its head office located in New Delhi and it has four sub of fices and twenty 
regional offices at various locations with the total functional staff strength of 80 across 
the country out of which 32 persons work in head office, 30 in regional offices and 18 in 
field offices.  It is observed that the field offices are  essentially one man show and there 
is lack of state level mechanism for implementation of activities of PCRA. The 
Committee are unhappy at such poor deployment of manpower in PCRA and are to 
conclude that MoPNG is non -serious about conservation activities . The Committee, 
therefore, desire that PCRA should set up State Level mechanisms for carrying out 
conservation activities across the States and it should be strengthened with more 
manpower in line with expanded activities.   
 Moreover, the Committee observe that PCRA had established Conservation 
Technology Centre in Delhi in the year 2008 for dissemination of technology and is the 
only conservation centre of the country. Since the conservation of Petroleum resources 
has a strategic importance for the country, the Committee recommend that 
MoPNG/PCRA should explore the possibility of setting up more Conservation 
Technology Centres at regional/state level for better coordination and proper 
dissemination of conservation technology". 
 

21 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Approved strength of PCRA is 86 which is deployed in Head Office, Regional 
Offices and Field Offices ie Sub Regional Offices (SROS).  Currently, field activities are 
executed by a team of officers at Regional Offices / Sub Regional Offices, emp anelled 
faculties and support from headquarters.  Presently, Field officers are posted in 17 
states besides officers posted in 4 Regional Offices to co -ordinate and look after PCRA 
activities and the specific requirements of States falling under their Regi onal jurisdiction. 
PCRA‟s field activities are also carried out by large number of Faculties/Experts from 
different domain.   
The details of PCRA network on pan India are as under: 
5. Regional office – North Region, Delhi 
a. UP – SRO Lucknow 
b. Rajasthan – SRO Jaipur 
c. Haryana / Punjab / Himachal/ Chandigarh – SRO Chandigarh  
d. Uttarakhand – SRO Dehradun 
6. Regional office –  Western Region - Mumbai 
a. Maharashtra – SRO Pune / SRO Nagpur 
b. MP – SRO Bhopal 
c. Chhattisgarh – SRO Raipur 
d. Gujarat, Goa & Dadra Nagar Haveli – SRO Ahmedabad / SRO Rajkot 
7. Regional office – Eastern  Region - Kolkata 
a. North East States - SRO Guwahati 
b. Bihar – SRO Patna 
c. Jharkhand – SRO Ranchi 
d. Orissa – SRO Bhuvneshwar 
8. Regional office – Southern  Region – Chennai  
a. Karnataka – SRO Bengaluru / SRO Belgaum 
b. Kerala – SRO Kochi 
c. Andhra – SRO Vizag 
d. Telangana - SRO Hyderabad 
e. Tamilnadu – SRO Coimbatore 

22 
 
Officers posted in regional offices also supplement and support SROs for any specific 
requirement arising in SRO area under their region. For carrying out various 
conservation related activities, PCRA in collaboration with PSU - oil marketing 
companies very effectively utilizes their retail outlets and LPG distributorship network of 
54000 retail outlets and 16000 LPG distributorships respectively during OGCF and 
specific campaigns. 
Apart from above resources, PCRA collaborates with various agencies like KVKs in 
Agriculture Sector, OMC LPG distributors in Domestic Sector, Driver Training Institutes 
and OMC Retail Outlets in Transport Sector and MSME in Industrial Sector.  
PCRA is also associated with many other organization and agricultural universities to 
carry out the activities of conservation.  Further, PCRA is strengthening its resources by 
using expertise of specific domain experts on need basis.   
PCRA operates its Conservat ion Technology Centre (CTC) from its premises in Delhi.  
However, MoP&NG / PCRA is examining to explore the possibility of establishing more 
CTCs in the country in the premises owned by OMCs".   
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.3 
Budgetary allocations of PCRA 
 The Committee note that PCRA gets its budget requirements through the grants 
received from Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB), Oil & Gas Conservation 
Fortnight (OGCF) Grants from Oil Companies etc.. The Committee observe that during 
the year 2013 -14, PC RA received funds to the tune of Rs. 9031 lacs against which 
PCRA could utilize only Rs. 7244.75 lacs and Rs. 5953 lacs was utilized against budget 
of Rs. 6483 lacs in the financial year 2014 -15. The Committee also observe that the 
funds spent on advertise ment activities show a declining trend over the last two years 
and during the current year (2015 -16) till January, 2016, only Rs. 1644 lacs has been 
spent on advertisement activities which is less when seen in comparison to the Rs. 
2990 lacs spent during t he year, 2014 -15.  The Committee express their unhappiness 
over such under -utilization of budgetary/other grants by PCRA and desire that MoPNG 
should monitor the activities of PCRA and revamp the same in order to ensure the 
complete utilization of the funds allocated to them in an efficient manner.   
 The Committee further note that the impact assessment studies conducted by 
PCRA show that in most of its activities in various areas, the impact has been more 
than 80 per cent and the savings made by PCRA Camp aigns appears to be 
encouraging. The Committee however, note that the budget provided to PCRA does not 

23 
 
commensurate with the responsibilities and activities being handled by PCRA. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that PCRA  gets more 
funds for its activities in order to ensure its expansion and effective functioning.  
 The Committee observe that the prices of crude oil have gone down drastically in 
the international market. At the same time, the Committee also note that the demand of 
petroleum products has increased substantially during the past few years. The declining 
prices of crude oil in the international market may give rise to the tendency of liberal use 
of petroleum products and the Committee feel that this is the rig ht time to strike a 
balance between this increasing demand and conservation efforts in use of petroleum 
products.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry/PCRA should launch 
a focused mass awareness campaign to achieve success in conservation efforts in the 
present situation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 It is submitted that expenditure on account of advertisement for FY 2013 -14 was 
Rs. 2990 Lacs and for FY 2014 -15 the same was Rs. 2307 Lacs.  PCRA receives 
Grant-in-aid from OIDB based on actual e xecution and hence does not keep any idle 
fund unutilized.  Accordingly, the fund received from OIDB, Oil Companies etc. during 
FY 2013-14 was Rs. 7244.75 Lacs only.   
 During 2013 -14, the expenditure for Mega Campaign was planned to be 
stretched to Rs. 39.30 crore as against the actual expenditure of Rs. 22.42 crore during 
2012-13. However, the actual expenditure during 2013 -14 was Rs. 28.37 crore which 
was higher by about Rs. 6 crore compared to 2012 -13. During 2014-15, the expenditure 
on account of Education Campaign were lower due to stoppage of campaign midway.   
 The Governing Body approves the budgetary requirement of PCRA for each 
Financial Year and the funds are made available by OIDB in the form of grant -in-aid 
based on the demands against actual e xpenditure by PCRA.  The required fund for 
execution of activities approved by Governing Body of PCRA are made available by 
OIDB immediately on demand by PCRA.  
 Though there is a fall in retail selling prices, it is only marginal. Further, new 
generation vehicles are much more fuel efficient than in the past and it has been seen 
that the buyers have tendency to look for fuel efficient vehicles. 
 In order to capture the present consumer behavior in transport sector, PCRA has 
planned to increase the awarenes s on fuel conservation and importance of cleaner fuel 
amongst the consumers by introducing Campaigns through TV, Print, Radio, Digital 
Cinema, Outdoor & Website in addition to conventional Mega Campaign run for a 
limited period. 
 PCRA has put a concentrate d efforts in social media and found encouraging 
results at low costs. In one year website, Facebook, Google searches have gone up 
substantially. Participation in essay and painting competition has also remained 
encouraging. So, budgetary expenditure may no t be seen as directly linked to the 
impact of campaign.  

24 
 
 PCRA has also embarked upon various new initiatives like spreading the 
message of conservation through: 
iv) Cycle Clubs 
v) Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
vi) Creation of “Friends of PCRA” at district level 
 Budget of Rs. 40 Crore has been allocated in Budget Estimate for the FY 2016 -
17 towards round the year campaign and mega campaign in addition to Rs. 5.00 crore 
for regular education campaign of PCRA.   
        PCRA has budgeted an estimated total expenditure of Rs 99 Crore in FY 2016-17. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 4  
PCRA efforts in transport sector 
 The Committee note that the transport sector accounts for almost half of 
country‟s annual petroleum consumption and studies indicate a saving potential of 
around 20 per cent in the transport sector. As per an All -India study report submitted to 
Petroleum Planning Analysis Cell (PPAC), 70 per cent of diesel and 99.6 per cent petrol 
is consumed in the transport sector alone.   Of the total diesel sale, the highest 
consumption of 28.48 per cent is by cars, utility vehicles (UVs) and 3 -wheelers.  In case 
of Petrol, 99.6 per cent is consume d in the transport sector.   Of this, majority 
consumption of 61.42 per cent is accounted for by two -wheelers while cars use 34.33 
per cent followed by 3-wheelers at 2.34 per cent. 
 The Committee further note that to realize the conservation potential, PCRA  
conducts variety of Driver Training Programmes for State Transport Units (STUs), 
private fleet operators, organizations in private and public sector to promote efficient 
use of petrol and diesel in vehicles and through better maintenance practices, model 
depot studies, emission awareness programmes, exhibitions, workshops, etc. all over 
the country.  The Committee observe that the driver training programmes organized for 
STUs and other agencies have proved to be very effective and it has been found that 
more than 70 per cent of the drivers trained are able to achieve fuel saving in the range 
of 9 to 11 per cent on a consistent basis. 
 The Committee, however, note that all the STUs and a maximum number of 
individual car owners have not been covered in the am bit of the Driver‟s Training 
Programme. In Committee's view, the conservation of fuel is in individual as well as 
national interest.  Therefore, the Committee desire that a collaboration with local driving 
schools catering to common man should also be init iated alongwith maximum number 

25 
 
of STUs so that better driving skills enhancing the conservation of fuel can be inculcated 
in the individual car drivers in the public at large.  The Committee also suggest that for 
getting better results in this regard, PCRA  should collaborate with State transport 
license issuing authorities for associating maximum number of people with the efficient 
use of petrol and diesel. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Transport sector accounts for major share of petroleum fuel consumption (mainly 
diesel and petrol).  During 2014 -15, nearly 70 MMT of fuel being 42.4% of total 165 
MMT has been consumed by this sector. PCRA has increased its reach by signing 
MoUs and training drivers of different STUs.  Status till April 2016 is as under: 
STUs with whom PCRA has MoU: 
1. Kadamba, Goa 
2. Kerala State Road Transport Corporation 
3. Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation 
4. State Express Transport Corporation, Tamilnadu 
5. Metropolitan Transport Corporation, Tamilnadu 
6. North West Karnataka Road Transport Corporation 
7. Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited 
8. Odisha State Road Transport Corporation 
 There are 39 STUs in India having approximate driver strength of 2.55 Lakh.  Out 
of which 5 STUs with driver strengths of 80000 are self -sufficient for training of t heir 
drivers on fuel conservation.  Balance 1.75 Lakh drivers of remaining STUs are 
proposed to be trained by PCRA in next 3 years on fuel efficient driving practices.  
PCRA has already drawn an ambitious detailed plan to train these 1.75 Lakh drivers.   
 PCRA has submitted a proposal to MoP&NG to include PCRAs 3 days driver 
training program (DTP) in the CMVR.  Once included, it will cover all heavy duty drivers 
of the country in 3 years at the time of issuance / renewal of their licenses. Accordingly, 
all authorized driving schools training the heavy duty vehicles drivers will have to impart 
training on fuel efficient driving also while issuing a certificate of training, based on 
which new/renewal of license will be permitted.     
 PCRA runs a special drive  to educate drivers during OGCF at OMC Retail 
Outlets across the country.  In the year 2015, more than 6 Lakh car/taxi drivers were 
trained on fuel conservation.  Similarly, in the year 2016, 7.45 Lakh car/taxi drivers have 
been covered. Other drivers are covered through media campaigns and dissemination 
of PCRA fuel saving tips through various platforms including media apps and games.  

26 
 
 Additionally, PCRA shall also be taking up the matter with Ministry of Road 
transport & Highways (MoRTH) through its admi nistrative Ministry of P&NG to include 
component of fuel efficient driving in CMVR for car segment also. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Saving of fuels by improved roads 
The Committee note that there is substantial wastage of fuel at the traffic signals. 
The traffic signals are now being fitted with the timers which provide a clear indication 
for the vehicle drivers for switching OFF or ON their vehicles for saving fuel du ring the 
waiting time at the signal.  However, still a large number of traffic signals in the country 
are pending to be covered. The Committee feel that this is an effective method of saving 
significant amount of fuel annually and therefore, recommend that  the PCRA should 
take up with the concerned authorities for expediting the process of fixing timers at 
various traffic signals especially in metro cities and educate the people about switching 
their vehicles off and on such signals.   
The Committee note that international studies have shown that the quality and 
material used for construction of road contributes towards the varied fuel consumption.  
The Committee have been informed that concrete road surfaces can lead to about 1.14 
per c ent of fuel saving. Further, another study has shown that fuel consumption for 
asphalt pavements was much higher in comparison to concrete pavements. The 
Committee recommend that MoPNG/PCRA in collaboration with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) should conduct such studies in the country and after 
analysis of the data collected in these studies should take action in this direction since 
the type of road appears to be one of the important factors for fuel conservation.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
PCRA had conducted a study through CRRI on estimation of fuel loss during idling of 
vehicles at signalised intersections in Delhi. Based on the findings of the study, the 
concept of timer at traffic intersections in Delhi was introduced by the state autho rity. 
PCRA gives wide publicity through various means creating awareness like distribution 
of leaflets, driver training programs and workshops, social media, print and television 
ads etc. about the benefits of switching off and on the vehicle at traffic in tersections on 
regular basis.  
 
Encouraged by the saving potential of fuel due to idling of vehicles observed by 
installing timer on traffic junctions in Delhi, PCRA shall take up with State Governments 
through MoP&NG for replicating the same in major cities of the country.  

27 
 
The studies conducted abroad indicate that road surfaces and conditions play an 
important role in deciding fuel consumption pattern of vehicles.  Concretized roads, 
comparatively have a fuel saving advantage to asphalted roads.  However , the policy 
decisions of constructing / converting / developing existing roads to concretized one on 
highways fall under the purview of MoRTH.  PCRA/MoP&NG will suitably discuss this 
matter with MoRTH. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.  P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Conservation activities in Agricultural and Domestic Sector 
The Committee note that agricultural sector provides scope for conservation of 
petroleum products which can benefit the farmers. PCRA conducts activities  like kisan 
melas, van publicity and educational programmes for students in agricultural colleges.  
So far, 649 and 718 agricultural workshops have been conducted during 2013 -14 and 
2014-15 respectively in collaboration with empanelled faculties and expert s of PCRA. In 
this regard, the Committee observe that replacement of the fossil fuels with renewable 
sources of energy can make agriculture more environment friendly. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry/PCRA should collaborate with Ministry of 
Agriculture and its departments/agencies and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy to 
assess the possible ways for reducing/  replacing the use of fossil fuels by renewable 
energy resources in agricultural sector and educate the farmers, agricultural scientists 
etc., in this regard.  
The Committee also note that in its activities under domestic sector, PCRA 
educates women on bet ter cooking habits, use of fuel efficient stoves and lighting 
appliances, use of alternative sources of energy such as solar, bio -gas etc. in order to 
promote conservation of LPG, PNG and Kerosene.  It conducts awareness workshops 
for women, college girls,  cooks, housewives etc., where they are shown films and tips 
on energy conservation.  The Committee note that there is immense scope to create 
awareness in the domestic sector and recommend that PCRA should develop apps for 
conservation and saving measures in the domestic sector and use social media tools to 
disseminate such information to public. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
PCRA in association with ICAR under Ministry of Agriculture has taken initiatives to 
educate and propagate message of conservation through about 650 Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) situated across the country.   In this initiatives, a module consisting of 
literature containing efficient use of technology, benefits of using star labeled 
agricultural equipment‟s, video films, display materials, etc, has been provided to KVKs.  

28 
 
It also consist of literature/posters in local languages for fuel saving by efficient and 
economical use of tractor and pump sets.  
Similarly, PCRA has collaborated with some agricultural universities of the country for 
sensitizing agricultural scientists, farmers and student community of the University for 
Conservation of petroleum product through various tips and technological advancement 
like Star & Labelling.  PCRA partners with these universities in conducting various 
workshops to further expand the reach to farmers and agricultural educationist to bring 
the habitual changes among the f armer community in order to achieve the objectives of 
fuel conservation. 
As per market survey report, fuel efficiency of diesel engine driven pump sets in India is 
around 21%. PCRA, in association with BEE has developed fuel efficiency norms for 
Diesel Eng ine driven Monoset pumps (2 to 10 HP) for agricultural purposes under 
Standard Labeling scheme. Scheme is operational under Energy Conservation Act.   
Based on this benchmarking initiative is expected to improve the fuel efficiency upto 
28% for new Monoset  pumps to be manufactured in  next 5 years. PCRA has planned 
to disseminate information to farmers on benefits of use of Star Rated Monoset pumps. 
MNRE in coordination with Ministry of Agriculture through State Nodal Agencies, 
NABARD and Ministry of Drinki ng Water and Sanitation is running “Solar Pumping 
Program” for irrigation and drinking water under off grid and decentralized solar 
application scheme”. Under the scheme, 1 million solar powered pumps are planned to 
be deployed in the country for irrigation and drinking water by the year 2020-21. 
For domestic sector, PCRA runs specific programs of Domestic Workshops and Youth 
Programs. Target consumers for these programs are housewives, maids, cooks, school 
and college going students. Through these programs , conservation tips are shared with 
consumers for efficient combustion of fuel, better cooking habits, and general methods 
of saving fuel in day to day operations. During FY 2015 -16, PCRA has conducted 3667 
activities in Domestic Sector which were attended to by large no. of participants.  
Additionally, during OGCF 2016, a special drive was run for domestic sector targeting 
housewives, cooks and maids to impart training on fuel efficient cooking practices and 
eradication of bio mass including SKO. Response of the drive was a phenomenal 
success where 42582 activities were conducted with a participation of 91.35 Lacs.  
Benefits of the use of Star Rated LPG stoves have also been propagated during the 
campaign.  
 
PCRA is actively present in social media through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and 
Google+ apart from maintaining its own website where detailed information on fuel 
conservation is regularly updated for the public benefit. The continuous endeavor to 

29 
 
popularize conservation tips of PCRA has resulted in expansion of reach in social media 
with average monthly Google search of about 2.44 Lacs and Facebook likes reaching 
1.13 Lacs in a year time.  PCRA website has been visited by 6.52 Lacs people till April 
2016. PCRA is focused to expand its reach through social media.   
  
PCRA has also developed and launched an android based user friendly mobile app for 
fuel conservation tips on Domestic and other sectors. Mobile game, „Drive Smart Save 
Fuel‟ is   developed to facilitate deeper penetration of PCRA Conservation Tips & 
Messages and side by side enhancing the learning & driving skills. This game teaches 
how to play smartly in order to save fuel while driving & scoring best as much as one 
can. Driving and efficiency skills are judged and given score based on fuel sa ved. 
These apps are freely available for downloading from Google play store and PCRA 
website.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.  P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Standard labeling procedures 
The Committee note that, PCRA in association with Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) has been providing star rating for various appliances as a standard labeling 
procedure. The objective of this programme is to achieve fuel savings at the consumer 
end by us ing fuel efficient appliances having Star Ratings from 1 -Star to 5 -Star. The 
Committee have been informed that this scheme is operational and vendor registration 
is underway. The Committee appreciate the step taken by the Ministry/PCRA/BEE and 
in view of t he benefits of this star rating scheme, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry/PCRA/BEE should quickly increase the number of organizations covered under 
this star labeling programme. The Committee also desire that the details of the star 
rating for applia nces should be publicized widely to create awareness among 
consumers so that they may be able to select more energy efficient appliances.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
PCRA has taken initiative of formulating energy efficiency standards of 3 equipment‟s 
consuming petroleum fuel viz. Domestic LPG Stoves, Diesel Driven Monoset Pumps for 
agricultural purposes      (2 -10 HP) and DG Sets (Engine capacity up to 19 KW).  Till 
March 2016, 93 models of LPG stoves from 25 vendors have been awarded Star 
Ratings.  So far (till March 2016), 1.84 Lacs Star Rated LPG Stoves have been invoiced 
to OMCs distributorships for sale. Further, OMCs have also been advised to make 
available minimum 5 models of LPG stoves from 3 different vendors at distributorships 
for wider cover age of population.  For Diesel Driven Monoset pumps, 11 models of 2 
vendors have been awarded Star Ratings.  For DG Sets, 1 vendor is in process of 
obtaining Star Rating.  To create awareness amongst consumers PCRA has taken 
following steps: 

30 
 
(i) Release of newspaper advertisements on the scheme of Standard & Labeling 
for these 3 products. 
(ii) Inclusion of a capsule/documentary and content in field activities of PCRA 
(Domestic workshop, Youth Programme, Agricultural Workshop, Kisan Mela, 
Van publicity, Institutional  Training Programmes, etc.) on benefits of using 
energy efficient Star Labeled products. 
(iii) Distribution/display of posters/pamphlets/brochures on LPG distributorships 
promoting use of Star Rated LPG stoves. 
(iv) Dissemination of information on Diesel Driven Energ y Efficient Star Labeled 
Monoset Pumps through Krishi Vigyan Kendras across the country. 
(v) Use of social media like Facebook for popularizing Star Labeled products. 
(vi) Bulk SMSs are being sent on mobile phones. 
(vii) Popularization of S&L Scheme through PCRA website i.e. www.pcra.org. 
PCRA has plans to publicize the benefit of these Star Labeled products to 
encourage people in general towards use of these products by various means 
including above. 
PCRA with BEE is also exploring the f easibility to further increase the scope of this 
Standard and Labelling program by inducting more equipment containing petroleum 
fuels. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.  P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Publicity to the activities of PCRA 
The Committee note that though PCRA is engaged in promotion of petroleum 
conservation programmes for conservation of fuel, still large sections of public are not 
aware about its existence and its activities. The Committee therefore, desire that  
adequate publicity must be given to the activities of PCRA amongst the public at large 
so that they can contribute towards conservation of petroleum products. In this regard, 
the Committee desired that PCRA should focus its conservation related activities  in 
educational institutions and schools. If simple conservation strategies are included in 
the school curriculum, better results can be achieved in conservation efforts as they will 
emerge as major consumers in future. 
The Committee further observe that over the years, PCRA has designed 
conservation literature which provides the tips for saving of petroleum products for 
different types of users. The Committee desire that such a data bank should be made 
available on the w eb for easy access to the public and other agencies so that they can 
participate in the petroleum conservation efforts in an effective way. The Committee 
note that PCRA advertises its activities through various mass media to promote 
conservation of oil and gas. However, the Committee desire that to give better impact to 

31 
 
the conservation programmes, elected public representatives and eminent personalities 
should also be associated with the promotion of PCRA activities.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Impact asses sment data of 2012 -13 on PCRA activities indicates awareness 
about PCRA up to 54.5% on national basis for people covered.  As per another study, 
impact of PCRA conducted activities has been in the range of 70-80% in various sectors 
and the responses have b een encouraging. To enhance awareness and visibility of 
conducted activities, following notable actions have been taken by PCRA in last one 
year: 
(i) PCRA is active on social media like Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and its website by 
way of imparting daily fuel saving tips, contest, invitation of suggestion, films and 
documentaries, write ups, reviews, feedback, etc. Hits with “PCRA” on Google has 
risen to 4.25 Lakh in Sep 2015 with average hits as 2.44 Lakh per month. 
Facebook Likes on PCRA page and visits to PCRA website are 1.13 Lacs and 6.52 
Lacs respectively. 
(ii) Leveraging of digital media (Digital Cinema, My Gov, Mass SMSes, etc.), Radio, 
TV and Print Media. 
(iii) Running of Mega Campaigns during OGCF and on specific intervals to attract 
concentrated attention of masses by conducting people connect activities. 
(iv) PCRA conducted a National Level Painting & Essay competitions (in 23 
languages) during Oct -Dec 15 for school students in 4632 schools, wherein 4.80 
Lakh students participated.   
(v) PCRA has already designed and sub mitted its proposal to MoP&NG for onwards 
submission to MHRD to include a chapter on petroleum conservation and energy 
efficiency in the curriculum of NCERT text books for school students. On approval 
of same, energy conservation shall become an integral p art of studies of school 
going children inculcating a sense of judicious utilization of energy resources in 
young minds.  Since, younger generation of today will emerge as a potential 
consumer in future, it is expected that substantial energy savings can b e realized 
by this segment. 
(vi) PCRA also conducts regular activities of professing petroleum conservation to 
young generation by conducting its field activities in the formats of Youth Program 
and Domestic Workshops.  Target segment for these activities is sc hool/college 
going students and Gen -Next.  In FY 2015 -16 (Till Mar 16) PCRA has conducted 
2230 Youth Programs in various schools / colleges and 1437 Domestic Workshops 
with large number of participants. 
(vii) During OGCF 2016 (16-31 January 2016) organized all over India, large number of 
students centered activities were conducted including Radio, TV broadcast of 
conservation talks, plays etc.  
(viii) Further, 37.64 Lakh participants across the country took pledge to conserve 
petroleum products and protect environment. 

32 
 
(ix) PCRA shall continue its efforts for maximum outreach to this most important asset 
of our society. 
 PCRA has designed and hosted most of its literature, brochure, films, 
documentaries, in house quarterly journal (ACT), major events etc., on web as desired 
by the Committee and shall be widening the scope of putting in various studies & 
reports (Energy Aud its, Case Studies etc.) also after due discussions with stake 
holders.  
 PCRA acknowledges the importance of involvement and contribution of elected 
public representatives and eminent personalities in boosting the efforts of PCRA 
towards conservation. PCRA has been involving public functionaries in promotion of its 
conservation efforts.  Details of some of the elected representatives, who attended 
PCRA programs in current FY 2015-16 is given below:  
Name of the 
Activity 
Location Details of Public Representative 
Exhibition Jaipur Sh. Sanwar Lal Jat, Union Minister of State for Water 
Resources 
Exhibition Phalodi Sh. Gajendra Shekhawat,Member of Parliament 
Jodpur 
Sh. Pubbaram Vihnoi,MLA Phalodi Jodhpur 
Cyclothon Indore Smt. Sumitra Mahajan, Speaker, Loksabha 
Sh. Prakash Jawadekar,Min. for Environment & 
Climate  
Sh. Kailash Vijayvargiya,Min for Urban, MP 
Kisan Mela Raipur Sh. Brij Mohan Agrawal,Min for Agriculture, 
Chattisgarh 
Kisan Mela Rajkot Sh. Vijaybhai Rupani,Min for TPT,Gujarat 
Jayeshbhai Radadiya,Min of State for tourism, 
Gujarat 
Kisan Mela Rajkot Sh. Babubhai Bokhariya,Min for Agriculture, Gujarat 
Kisan Mela Raipur Sh. Brij Mohan Agrawal,Min for Agriculture, 
Chattisgarh 
Smt. Ramsheela Sahu,Min for Women and Child Dev, 
Chattisgarh 
 
Krishi Fair Puri Sh. Maheswar Mohanty,MLA,Puri 
Agriculture 
Workshop 
Manipur Sh. Okram Ibobi Singh Chief Minister, Manipur 
Sh. Gaikhangam, Dy CM,Manipur 
Sh. Govindas Konthoujam, Minister Industry/Vety & 
Ah Sen,Minpur 
Domestic 
Workshop 
Kolkata Smt. Pratima Mondal,MP,WB 
Kishan Mela Jharkhand Sh. Nilkanth Singh Munda, Minister, Jharkhand 

33 
 
 
 PCRA recognizes the mass appeal of elected representatives and brand icons in 
carrying forward the conservation messages to a deeper penetration in reducing 
wasteful consumption.  PCRA assures to reinforce its commitment to involve more and 
more elected pu blic representatives and well known personalities in its programmes in 
future.   
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.  P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Seminar Belgaum Sh. Suresh C Angadi ,Minister, Karnataka 
Seminar Kottayam Sh. Joy Abraham,Rajya Sabha Member ,Kerala 
Kisan Mela Hyderabad Sh. Pocharam Srinivas Reddy, Minister of Agriculture, 
Telengana 
Transport 
Workshop 
Cheyyar, TN Sh. Elumalai, 
Smt.Paval Ravichandran,(All MP), 
Kisan Mela Karimnagar Sh. E. Rajender, Minister for Finance & Planning, 
Telengana 
OGCF Bhopal Sh. Babulal  Gaur, Min,MP 
OGCF Raipur Dr. Raman Singh,CM,Chattishargh 
OGCF Jaipur Sh. Hem Singh Bhadana, Min Food, Civil Supply & 
Consumer Affairs 
OGCF Jaipur Sh. Ram Charan Vohra,MP, Jaipur 

34 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Functioning of PCRA 
During the oil shock in the early seventies, a Petroleum Conservation Action 
Group (PCAG) was set up in 1976 towards oil conservation in the country.  It was later 
constituted as Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA) in 1978 as a 
registered society under MoPNG with a man date to promote conservation of petroleum 
products in the major sectors of the economy. 
 
The Committee note that PCRA is engaged in promoting the conservation of 
petroleum products in various sectors of economy and assisting the Government in 
formulation o f policies and strategies for petroleum conservation. PCRA conducts 
various field activities to reach the target groups by carrying out awareness campaigns, 
energy audits, studies on conservation of oil/gas, Institutional training programme, 
workshops, dri ver training programme, youth programme etc. The Committee have 
been informed that there is a potential to save 20 to 30 per cent in the Petroleum sector 
in the country by conservation efforts.  
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that during l ast five years, 
PCRA could not achieve the targets set in many areas of Energy Audits, Fuel Oil 
Diagnostic Studies, service to small scale industries, Model Depot Projects etc.  The 
Committee feel that PCRA is the only body entrusted with the activities of  conservation 
of petroleum/natural gas and that failure of PCRA in achieving the targets has seriously 
hindered the efforts. The Committee therefore, recommend that PCRA should seriously 
pursue the targets set for various field activities and work towards removing all the 
hindrances in order to achieve the conservation objectives. 
The Committee are also not satisfied with the overall functioning of PCRA as 
efforts to expand its presence and reach of organization to masses is not visible and the 
awareness about the activities carried out by it is also very low. The Committee observe 
that in view of climate change concerns caused due to the use of fossil fuels, it is 
imperative that the fuel conservation measures get the top most priority and the desired 
attention by the Ministry and PCRA. Moreover, in view of announcement and intention 
of the Government to reduce import dependence of crude oil, the role of organization 
like PCRA assumes more importance as it can play a significant role in achieving this 
objective.  The Committee therefore, recommend that MoPNG should seriously review 
the role and functioning of PCRA thoroughly and revamp it completely to make it more 
effective in implementing their strategies of fuel conservation. 
 

36 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 PCRA has been continuously working to achieve higher milestones in terms of 
performance in Field Activities.  As such, PCRA has been setting higher targets in each 
sector year after year and surpassing the same overall except during 2012 -13.  Energy 
Audit, FODS, Follow Up and SSI fall under Industrial Sector while MDP is an activity of 
Transport Sector. Target of Energy Audits, FODS, etc. could not be met since the same 
is dependent upon the auditee organization‟s choice of agency to carry out the audit 
through one of more than 100 other audit agencies authorized by BEE.  
Sector-wise Performance data for last 5 years is given below:- 
Activity 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Target Achiev
ement 
Target Achiev
ement 
Target Achieve
ment 
Target Achiev
ement 
Target Achieve
ment 
Industrial 
Sector 
1940 1966 2432 2317 2280 1976 2526 2199 2215 2281 
Transport 
Sector 
1520 1412 1984 1596 1720 1929 1897 2306 2593 3614 
Domestic 
Sector 
2105 2582 2100 2443 2300 2536 2443 3094 2980 3667 
Agriculture 
Sector 
680 796 680 649 660 732 693 782 890 1054 
Misc 135 124 172 174 128 145 135 119 120 226 
Total 6380 6880 7368 7179 7088 7318 7694 8500 8798 10842 
 
 PCRA‟s performance in 2015 -16 has exceeded the targets. PCRA would 
continue to work towards achieving the targets by mobilizing the desired resources to 
fulfill the objectives of conservation. 
 
 MoP&NG fully realizes India‟s dependence on crude oil import and its overall 
impact on Indian economy. PCRA‟s role towards achieving energy security of the 
country by reducing en ergy intensity is very important. Ministry believes that most vital 
solution to address energy conservation and environment protection is to bring an 
attitudinal change by creating awareness amongst masses. PCRA has been mandated 
to create and sustain this  awareness across all sectors on continual basis. Steadily, 
PCRA has been diversifying its area of operation leading to new avenue of 
conservation. Energy Management System (EnMS) ISO 50001 is one such initiative 
PCRA has embarked upon in last 2 years. PCRA has helped 93 units of various sectors 
for getting ISO 50001 certifications on their energy management during 2015-16.   
 
 Similarly, under GOI plan of NMEEE (National Mission for Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency), PCRA has established itself as a major reliab le player to advise energy 

37 
 
intensive industries under PAT (Perform Achieve and Trade). So far, PCRA has been 
able to successfully complete the audits of 14 no. energy intensive units notified under 
PAT cycle-1. Oil Refineries having been included in PAT cy cle -2 (effective 01.04.16) 
have opened up new avenues for PCRA to work with these refineries which are 
considered as energy guzzlers.  
 
 In past, through PCRA, MoP&NG has run various people centric theme based 
campaigns focusing on specific subject.  Duri ng Oil & Gas Conservation Fortnight 
(OGCF) 2016, a nationwide campaign was run for a fortnight on Cleaner Fuels.  
Realizing gravity of the situation due to burning of bio mass resulting in Lakh of deaths, 
particularly women in India, PCRA carried a pan Ind ia campaign to not only educate the 
masses on health hazards of bio mass burning but also on superior calorific value 
obtained from Cleaner Fuels.  
 
 Similarly, last year campaign was run with an emphasis on overall reducing the 
consumption resulting in in creased monetary savings. It is pertinent to note here that 
during this campaign alone more than 125 Lakh consumers physically remained present 
to understand necessity, methods and benefits of conservation as way of their lives.  
 
 Ministry also understands the limitation of PCRA being a non -statutory body and 
without a regular cadre. Manpower of PCRA is drawn from different Oil and Gas PSUs 
for a short period on deputation. Within available frame work and resources, PCRA is 
able to establish its identity as an integrated energy solution provider.  
 To underline its contribution towards cause of conservation, PCRA has drawn 
ambitious plans.  One such plan is to train existing all 24 Lakh heavy duty vehicle 
drivers in next 3 years. PCR A shall train 1000 Driver Training Instructors (DTI) of the 
Driver Training Institutes who in turn shall train 24 Lakh heavy duty vehicle drivers. The 
training of DTIs shall be undertaken by PCRA after the amendment in CMVR (Central 
Motor Vehicle Rules) ma ndating PCRA‟s driving training module compulsory before 
issuance/renewal of commercial driving licenses.  
 In transport sector, PCRA has been working with various stake holders in 
formulating the energy efficiency norms for Heavy Duty Vehicles (buses and trucks). 
Post deliberations with stake holders in a series of interactions, the final report has been 
submitted. Once the norms are approved and notified for implementation, it will have 
wide reaching positive impact on fuel consumption by heavy vehicles.  
 
 With initiative of PCRA, energy efficiency standards for 3 products using 
petroleum fuel has already been notified by Ministry of Power.  
 
 
 

38 
 
 In addition to the regular activities carried throughout the year, PCRA also 
conducts focused programs to expan d its reach and visibility towards conservation. 
Some of the activities carried out during 2015-16 are given below: 
S.No. Activity No. of Programs No. of Participants 
1 Mass Awareness – Essay, Painting, Debate, 
Quiz competitions, Street Plays, Human Chain, 
TV/Radio panel discussions, etc during OGCF 
2016 
46703 64.10 Lakh 
2 All India Painting/Essay (in 23 languages) 
competition for school students 
4632 schools 4.80 Lakh 
3 Cyclothon / Walkathon 237 32792 
4 LPG/PNG/SKO clinics for 
houserwives/cooks/maids 
42582 91.35 Lakh 
5 Workshops for heavy duty, light duty and 2/3 
vehicle drivers, mechanics, managers 
56799 51.84 Lakh 
6 Workshops for farmers, scientists, students on 
saving diesel & lubricants in tractors and 
farming equipments 
314 25126 
7 Technical Seminars & Workshops in 
cluster/CDM for engineers, industrialists, 
workers, supervisors 
338 15267 
8 Social Media – Fuel saving tips, contests, 
suggestions and feedback through Facebook, 
Google, Twitter, Youtube & PCRA web 
Daily  5.11 Lakh 
9 Other Activities – Kisan Mela, Exhibition, Van 
Publicity 
309 4.12 Lakh 
10 Showcasing PCRA activities of conservation 
through IITF 
15 days 1.50 Lakh 
11 All India campaign through Post Office 
Passbooks 
- 30 Lakh 
12 Campaign through Post Cards - 2 Lakh 
 With above people centric activities, PCRA has reached more than 2.55 crore 
people during 2015-16. 
 PCRA is regularly adapting and incorporating changes in its activities in order to 
cope with current scenario and the need of the nation and the society towards achieving 
the fuel conservation goal.  PCRA tries to build up synergy by coordinating with exte rnal 
agencies like BEE, CII, TERI, ASSOCHAM, NPC, FICCI, IIP, etc., and uses Oil PSU 
network of 54000 Retail Outlets and 16000 LPG distributorships to pass on its 
message.  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 

39 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Research and development in the field of Energy Conservation 
 
 The Committee note that the efforts for conservation of petroleum products in 
India were started around 1978. The Committee have further been informed that PCRA 
has been conducting research programmes from research organizations such as CSIR, 
IITs, IOC-R&D etc. as it does not have its own research centre.  The Committee are of 
the view that PCRA is the nodal agency en trusted with the task of petroleum 
conservation in the country and must have its own Research and Development Centre 
alongside the research being carried out in other organizations. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the PCRA should strive towards est ablishment of a world 
class Research and Development Centre to carry out R&D activities in the field of 
petroleum conservation in the country. 
 The Committee further observe that in countries such as Japan, the conservation 
efforts were started years after  India adopted the strategy for petroleum conservation.  
However, at present, these countries are far ahead in the progress achieved in 
comparison to that in India. The Committee therefore, recommend that PCRA should 
make efforts to access the conservation  technologies through international cooperation 
and adopt suitable technologies for obtaining better results in India. The Committee 
further desire that Ministry/PCRA should pursue and finalize the renewal of MoU in the 
field of Energy conservation with En ergy Conservation Centre, Japan (ECCJ), Japan at 
the earliest.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 PCRA has collaboration with various technical bodies, Research institute, 
Universities, laboratories, etc. covering various fields, viz:    
Sector Collaboration with 
Oil & Gas Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
Indian Institute of Petroleum 
Transport Automobile Research Association of India 
International Centre for Automotive Technology 
Central Road & Research Institute (CRRI) 
The Energy Resource Institute (TERI) 
Agriculture Tie up / MoU with various Agricultural Universities: 
University of Agriculture Science, Dharwar, Karnataka 
Bidhanchandra Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Nadia 
Tamilnadu Agriculture University, Coimbatore 
Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture & Technology, Udaipur 
Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Raipur 
Uttar Banga Krishi Vishwavidhyalaya, Cooch Behar, etc. 
Industrial Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, Ludhiana, Durgapur 

40 
 
Indian Institute of Technologies 
Steel Authority of India Ltd., Ranchi 
Central Glass &Ceramic Research Institute, Khurja 
Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Ludhiana 
 
 Above mentioned bodies cater to specialized fields of research covering various 
sectors and meets the present research requirements of PCRA sponsored projects. 
Different IITs and other reputed institutes also approach PCRA for sanction of research 
projects and PCRA also invites reputed i nstitutes for specific project activities. Further, 
for new areas of research on fuel conservation in future wherever required, PCRA shall 
also use the option of collaboration with other institutions working in the field based on 
the type of the project.  
 PCRA has long association with ECCJ and has been regularly exchanging the 
latest developments of techniques, technologies and research results in the area of fuel 
conservation. As such, many conservation programs like Driver Training Program, Eco 
Driving Concept, Development of literatures on Fuel Conservation in Industry, 
Development of Energy Audit Manual, etc., have been undertaken and implemented in 
the country.  PCRA continuously keeps track of the developments of new technologies, 
techniques, researc h happening around the world and analyzes the scope of 
implementation in India specific scenario.    
 PCRA has been vigorously following up with ECCJ, METI directly as well as 
through MoP&NG to renew the MoU between PCRA and ECCJ enabling PCRA to work 
on s uperior technologies, capacity building and exchange of information on Energy 
Efficiency techniques and conservation methods.   
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-21022/02/2016-LPG dated 03/08/2016 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 8 December,  2016 
17 Agrahayana,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

42 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2016-17) 
FIFTH SITTING 
(07.12.2016) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7 December, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
10 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
11 Shri Rajesh Verma 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
15 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
16 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
17 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
18 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
19 Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
    SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
3. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
  

43 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the 10 th Report on the subject 'Functioning of Petroleum Conservation 
Research Association' and adopted the same without any modification.  
 
3. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
4. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
5. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
xxx:  Matter not related to the subject. 
 
  

44 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) ON ‘ FUNCTIONING OF PETROLEUM CONSERVATION RESEARCH 
ASSOCIATION'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 9 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9) 
 
7 
 Percentage to Total 77.78% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1 and 8) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 
 
22.22% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. NIL)  
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 
 
0 
 
 
 
 