  
22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016-17) on Centre for High Technology] 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 January, 2018/Pausha,1939 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2016-17) on Centre for High Technology] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.01.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.01.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018/Pausha,1939 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
12 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
16 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
17 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
20 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) 
held on 27.12.2017. 
23 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016-17) on 
the subject 'Centre for High Technology' 
25 

4 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2017-18) 
 
Sl. No. Names of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
4 Dr. P. K. Biju 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Shri Arvind Sawant 
15 Shri Raju Shetti 
16 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
17 Shri Ravneet Singh 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri Santosh Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
23 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
26 Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
29 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
30 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
31 Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director   
4 Shri N. Touthang   - Committee Officer  

5 
 
 (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
Second Report on Action Tak en by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Centre 
for High Technology (CHT)'. 
2. The Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 01.08.2017. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report were 
received on 31.10.2017. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2017 -18) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27.12.2017.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assis tance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 28 December,  2017 
 7 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (201 6-17) on ' Centre for High Technology ', which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.08.2017. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Minist ry in respect of all the 7 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 3 and 7 (Total 2) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Reco. No. NIL 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepte d by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 4, 5 
and 6 (Total 3)                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 1 and 2 (Total 2)               
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chap ter-V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

7 
 
Recommendation No.3 
Budgetary Allocation of CHT 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the expenditure of CHT is fully funded by OIDB and it 
has no other source of revenue generation and CHT is totally dependent on 
OIDB for its funds. The major capital expenditure of CHT is for funding of R&D 
projects and for special studies. The revenue expenditure is mainly on account of 
salaries to its staff. The budgetary allocation was Rs. 16.42 crore in 2014 -15 and 
Rs. 19.31 crore in 2015 -16 and expected expenditure is around Rs.21.35 crore 
during 2016 -17. The Committee find that the  fund allocated by OIDB is not 
adequate to handle the important responsibility assigned to CHT to fund capital 
intensive projects relating to refining sector. Simultaneously, the Committee are 
worried to observe the trend of expenditure being made by CHT d uring the last 
three years. It is surprising to note that CHT is even not able to spend the small 
allocation of Rs. 10 to 12 crore by OIDB for funding of R&D Projects and the 
studies in a balanced manner. The Committee, therefore, desire that CHT should 
scientifically project its estimates to commensurate with the industry 
requirements and assigned responsibilities and should improve its spending of 
the allocation during each financial year. 
  
The Committee further observe that CHT does not get any royalty for the 
technologies developed through CHT funding when it is implemented by the 
refineries. CHT does not carry out any R&D project incorporating private sector 
refineries also. The Committee do not find it a happy situation. Being a research 
sponsoring organization it does not augur well for CHT to depend on one agency 
for its entire funding and should try to raise resources on its own so as to reduce 
its dependency on OIDB. Therefore, the Committee recommend that CHT should 
also incorporate the private se ctor refineries along with Public Sector ones to 
carry out advanced studies and their requirements so as to benefit the industry 
as a whole and on implementation of technologies beneficial to them should try 
to earn revenues both from public as well as pri vate sector so as to make it more 
sustainable. CHT can also explore the possibility of selling the technology to 
private players of the industry and generate revenues". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted th e following reply in 
this regard: 
 "The R&D budget utilisation by CHT during the last 3 years is as under: 
 
 

8 
 
                                                             (Figs. in Rs crore) 
  BE Actual Utilisation w.r.t. BE 
2014-15 3.35 5.99 178.8 % 
2015-16 17.97 5.93 33.0 % 
2016-17 11.82 9.17 77.6 % 
 
The Budget provision was increased in 2015 -16 for the following new/continuing 
major projects which were recommended by SAC: 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name of the project New/ 
Continuing 
Participating Agencies Budget 
Provision 
Rs. crore 
1 Parametric Study and 
Technology development for 
desalter design 
New EIL R&D and BPCL 
R&D) 
  
4.00 
2 Development of catalyst and 
process for slurry phase 
residue Hydrocracking  
New IIP, HPCL(R&D) 
BPCL (R&D) and EIL 
(R&D) 
8.00 
3 Coal-to-Liquid project Continuing EIL(R&D), BPCL(R&D) 
and THERMAX 
3.00 
4 Development of process 
know-how for indigenous 
production of biphenyl for 
Thermic fluids and other 
application  
New BPCL (R&D) 1.00 
The lower utilisation during 2015-16 and 2016-17 w.r.t. BE was mainly on account of: 
2015-16 
 Extension of Coal-to-Liquid project by EIL (Rs 2.4 crore) 
 Delay in finalisation of specs & procurement of proto -type desalter for Desalter 
project by EIL (Rs 4.0 crore) 
 Delay in reactor procurement for Resid Hydrocraking project by IIP (Rs 4.2 crore) 
 Retendering of Pilot Plant for indigenous production of biphenyl for Thermic fluids 
by BPCL (R&D) (Rs 0.9 crore) 
 However, the actual was close to RBE of Rs 5.96 crore. 
 
2016-17 
 
The lower utilisation w.r.t. BE wa s mainly on account of extension of Coal -to-
Liquid project by EIL (Rs 2.3 crore).  
 
However, the actual was close to RBE of Rs 9.32 crore. 
  

9 
 
The projection for R&D expenditure is based on the requirements indicated by 
the participating agencies. The progre ss of the projects is reviewed by SAC and 
considering the challenges in the projects, extension is granted by SAC. As may 
be seen, the utilisation in 2016-17 has improved to 77.6 % w.r.t. BE.  
 
The technologies developed by the participating agencies throu gh partial funding 
from CHT have so far been utilised by the participating agencies themselves, 
including EIL. Royalty will accrue as and when these technologies are utilised by 
other than participating agencies. 
 
As per the Memorandum of Association & Art icles of Association of CHT, the 
members of the Society, Governing Council and the Executive Committee are 
only from PSU companies and CSIR, besides senior representatives from 
MoP&NG. Private sector refineries are not members of CHT or OIDB (which is 
the funding agency for CHT activities including sponsoring of R&D projects).  
 
Since June 2016, CHT has taken a new initiative on inviting R&D proposals in 
identified areas through EOI, twice in a year, for broader participation. The 
proposals from private com panies are also considered, if submitted in 
association with one of the PSU oil companies. The proposals are initially 
scrutinised by a Steering Committee nominated by Chairman, SAC for further 
consideration by the SAC". 
 
 
7. While observing the funding and spending pattern of CHT, the Committee 
had observed that CHT is totally dependent on OIDB for funding and had 
specifically desired that CHT should scientifically project its estimates to 
commensurate with the industry requir ements and assigned responsibilities and 
should improve its spending of the allocation made during each financial year.  
However, Ignoring the suggestions of the Committee , the  Ministry has simply 
stated t he procedure being followed  by it  for projection for  R&D expenditure 
where the budget requirements are indicated by the participati ng agencies and  
the progress of the projects is reviewed and extension is  granted by the 
Scientific Advisory Committee  (SAC) without any role of CHT in projection of 
estimates. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that CHT should play a proactive 
role in projection of estimates to commensurate with the industry requirements 
and assigned responsibilities and improve the spending of the allocation. 
  In response to recommendation o f the Committee  regarding providing 
R&D services to private sector and generation of revenues therefrom, the Ministry 
has replied that the technologies developed by the participating agencies through 

10 
 
partial funding from CHT have so far been utilised by th e participating agencies 
themselves, including EIL. Royalty will accrue as and when these technologies 
are utilised by other than participating agencies.  The Ministry in their reply  have 
further stated that a s per the Memorandum of Association and Articles private 
sector refineries are not members of CHT or OIDB, therefore, they are not using it. 
However, since June 2016, CHT has started inviting R&D proposals in identified 
areas through EOI, twice in a year  and the proposals from private companies are 
also considered, if they are submitted in association with one of the PSU oil 
companies.  The Committee do not approve such conditional participation of 
private sector and desire that the Ministry should make  systemic changes in 
order to facilitate R&D projects for private sector refineries also. The Committee 
are also disappointed to note  that the Ministry has not spel t out any concrete 
proposal to make CHT raise more revenues on its own rather than remain 
dependent on grants from OIDB. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry to take steps to bring appropriate changes in 
the mandate of the CHT to ensure that projects from private sector are also taken 
so that the CHT will generate revenues on its own.  
Recommendation No.4 
Manpower of CHT 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that CHT functions as a technology cell of the MoP&NG 
with a small manpower of 14 technical officers and 7 HR/Finance office rs drawn 
from Oil PSU on deputation. Retired officers from PSU oil companies are also 
engaged as advisors. The Committee further note that there is no permanent 
staff or officers on the rolls of CHT. This is a very undesirable situation of 
functioning of s uch an important organization responsible for advising the 
Ministry on futuristic requirements, assess, develop and adopt technologies in 
refinery processes and petroleum products. The Committee have not been given 
any convincing reason for not recruiting engineers, scientists, staff on a 
permanent basis in CHT. The Committee have been assured that the Ministry is 
open for appointing people from open market to CHT. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that CHT should attract people from other research organisat ions like 
CSIR, IIT etc. to work on specific projects in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should approach the manpower 

11 
 
requirements in CHT with an open mind to have a mix from PSUs and open 
market and devise a suitable polic y in CHT to attract the people from scientific 
and technical background with research experience from open market along with 
officials on deputation from Oil PSUs". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"While sponsoring R&D projects to various institutes, including CSIR & IITs, the 
cost associated with engaging of specialists to work on the specific projects are 
included in the CHT grant. 
Governing Council of CHT has powers for engaging specialists from outside the 
oil companies as consultants on contract, if necessary". 
 
10.  Realising a very small manpower availability and that too mostly on 
deputation in CHT, the Committee had desired that the CHT should attract people 
with scientific and technical background  from other Research O rganizations like 
CSIR, IIT etc. to work on specific projects in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee had also desire d that the Ministry should approach the manpower 
requirements in CHT wit h an open mind so that it has a mix of people from PSUs 
and open market . The Committee are dismayed to note the justification given by 
the Ministry that while sponsoring R&D projects to various institutes, including 
CSIR & IIT 's, the cost associated with engagement of specialists to work on the 
specific projects are included in the CHT grant  and also that the Governing 
Council of CHT has powers for engaging specialists from outside the oil 
companies as consultants on contract, if necessary.  The Committee are also 
unable to understand that how can the technology cell of the Ministry and most  
important R&D institution in the petroleum sector be allowed to run in such a 
lackadaisical manner without having its own manpower which in the view of the 
Committee is  an important deficiency in CHT.   The Committee feel that an 
Institution such as CHT ought to have a core workforce of its own which may be 
supplemented with personnel coming on deputation from other PSUs and 
appropriate number of personnel being hired from the open market and therefore, 

12 
 
reiterate that the Ministry should take appropri ate steps to ensure that the CHT 
have a mix of staffing from PSUs, open market and some permanent staff of its 
own.  
Recommendation No.5 
Coal to Liquid Project (CTL) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that CHT has funded a R&D project on Coal to Liquid 
(CTL) Fuels Technology Development by EIL, BPCL & Thermax at a cost of Rs. 
33 crore (including Rs. 14.84 crore funding by CHT). The Committee furthe r note 
that this project was first considered during 2007 and then a modified proposal 
was considered in April 2008. MoU between CHT, BPCL (R&D) and EIL (R&D) 
has been signed in March 2009. The Committee have noted that the project has 
been completed to th e extent of 94 per cent so far and the SAC has reviewed 
and granted time extension upto June 2017 for completion of the project. 
  
The Committee consider that by development of indigenous clean coal 
technology for conversion of Coal to Liquid will certainl y help the country in 
harnessing the coal reserves in an environment friendly manner and the break 
through in this technology would contribute in strengthening the energy security 
of the country. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry and the  
SAC should closely monitor the project at regular intervals and ensure that any 
difficulty being faced by the concerned agencies is remedied and the project 
reaches its successful completion by the extended time positively". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"As technology is not available to gasify high ash Indian coal in efficient manner, 
SAC approved the project at a cost of Rs 33.00 crore with CHT contribution of Rs 
14.84 crore in March 2009 with EIL as nodal agency. The technology is highly 
technical as well as capital intensive and involves lot of challenges in 
development. The project has been reviewed and closely monitored by SAC. 
Considering the various challeng es faced in the execution, the project has been 
extended by SAC from time to time, as under: 
 Upto April 2014 (72 nd meeting): As commercial gasifier was not available, M/s 
Thermax was roped in as development partner for gasifier. 

13 
 
 Upto June 2015 (74th meeting): As per expected delivery schedule of gasifier and 
syn-gas clean up in July 2014 and subsequent activities of commissioning & 
operation.  
 Upto June 2016 (77 th meeting): Gasifier commissioned in combustion mode. 
Additional time approved by SAC for operation of gasifier in gasification mode.  
 Upto March 2017 (78 th meeting-Aug’16): To address concerns in continuous 
running of pilot plant due to frequent choking, etc., and to build confidence before 
sizing bigger unit. Extended further upto June 2019 (79th meeting-March’17) due 
to choking of downstream and agglomeration.  
SAC, during its 80 th meeting held in Sept’17 constituted an Expert Group. The 
group held its meeting on 11 th October 2017 to discuss operational issues and 
has suggested short term & long term forward plan for sustained operation". 
 
13. Considering the importance of indigenous Coal to Liquid Project , the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry and the Scientific Advisory 
Committee ( SAC) should closely monitor the Project at proper regular intervals 
and ensure that any difficulty being faced by the concerned agencies is remedied 
so that it  reaches its successful completion by the extended time of June, 2017 
positively. The Committee find that SAC has further extended the time upto Ju ne, 
2019 and have discussed the operational issues and suggested about short term 
and long term forward plan for sustained operation. 
 The Committee are concerned that a project as important as the present 
one is being handled in such a casual manner by th e Ministry  causing long 
delays. The Committee after its approval in 2009  in Committee's view, the delays 
appear more to be a result of poor planning and execution rather than due to  
complexity of the project and such situations could have been easily avoided. In 
this situation, the Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation that the 
project should be expeditiously completed  with proper planning and execution  
and in no case later than the newly fixed timelin e of June 2019 and if required, by 
engaging other institutions which may help in reducing challenges in execution 
and achieve timely completion. 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Performance Benchmarking of Refineries 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that CHT undertakes studies on behalf of PSU refineries 
for performance benchmarking, performance improvement programmes and 
energy efficiency improvement. The performance benchmarking of the PSU 
refineries is done by engaging M/s Solomon As sociates on various parameters. 
The Committee further note that Solomon benchmarking is the main 
benchmarking in the world and it studies about 200 plus refineries and tells about 
where particular refinery stands at the world level. The Committee observe that in 
benchmarking, the main focus is on energy efficiency where Indian refineries are 
not performing well. Moreover, most of the Indian PSU refineries are old ones 
and have several complexities and an improvement in their performance at par 
with global s tandards will be a tough and challenging task. The Committee also 
note that the fuel quality in the country has been upgraded to BS -IV norms since 
April, 2017 and the Government has decided to skip BS -V and go to BS -VI fuel 
quality directly by the year 202 0. For meeting the BS -VI quality norms, the 
refineries have to modernize the units quickly by introducing new technology. 
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that CHT by regularly carrying out 
performance improvement programmes should ensure that the  old PSU 
refineries are modernized quickly and reach the desired standards in their 
performance and become ready to produce BS-VI fuel by 2020". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"Performance improvement studies including Benchmarking is carried out for all 
PSU refineries, including old refineries. 
Oil industry has assured readiness to supply BS-VI fuel by 2020". 
16. Since CHT assists the refineries in performance impr ovement and 
promoting R&D through funding of R&D projects, the  Committee, had 
recommended that CHT should ensure that the old PSU refineries are modernized 
quickly so as to reach the desired performance  level and become ready to 
produce BS -VI fuel by 2020.  The Ministry, in its reply, has only  stated that 
performance improvement studies including Benchmarking is being carried out 

15 
 
for all PSU refineries, including old refineries and has also mentioned that the Oil 
industry has assured that it will be in readiness to supply BS-VI fuel by 2020.  
 The Committee express their dissatisfaction with the reply of the Ministry 
as it does not mention anything about the measures being taken to ensure that 
the performance s of oil refineries are in line with global standar ds and 
improvement programmes being executed properly to ensure that they will be 
ready for rolling out of BS-VI in 2020 or even before that deadline. The Committee, 
therefore, simply reiterate that CHT should focus to undertake  proper 
benchmarking and assist the refineries in performance improvement so that they 
can attain global standards and  the Ministry should ensure to make them ready 
for production/supply of BS-VI fuel as per targets.  
Recommendation No.7 
Research on Alternative Energy Sources 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that CHT is also the nodal agency for taking up hydrogen 
projects and related activities from the Hydrogen Corpus Fund (HCF). The 
objectives of HCF are to develop hydrogen as an alternative energy  source, 
facilitate R&D activities, synergise hydrogen development activities between Oil 
companies and institutions and facilitate training and capability building. Initial 
Hydrogen Corpus Fund of Rs. 100 crore has been created with contribution of 
Rs. 40 crore by OIDB and Rs. 16 crore each by IOC, ONGC and GAIL and Rs. 6 
crore each by HPCL and BPCL and the fund will be managed by OIDB. All 
proposals under the HCF will be received by CHT and put up to Scientific 
Advisory Committee for approval. But the Com mittee find that CHT has not 
undertaken any serious activity relating to H 2 projects except the single project 
relating to coal gasification. Further, the Committee also observe that CHT has 
no research programme on bio fuels which is an important area for Indian 
scenario. 
  
The Committee feel that the projects relating to hydrog en as an alternative 
energy source are very important not only for the Government and CHT but also 
for the country as a whole as this is an advanced area of research and any 
breakthrough in this direction will strengthen the energy security of the country.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should accord top 
priority to H 2 projects and bio -fuel projects and expect CHT to play a pro -active 
role in taking up these projects and related activities by proper guidance, regular 

16 
 
monitoring and ne cessary funding in every area so that all the projects are 
completed in a time-bound manner". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"The recommendations of the Committee ha s been noted. However, it is 
submitted that eight projects have been undertaken under HCF with a total 
expenditure of Rs 28.42 crore". 
19. The Committee had recommended that the CHT, being the nodal agency for 
taking up hydrogen projects and related activities from the Hydrogen Corpus Fund 
credited with initial corpus of Rs. 100 crore  should accord top priority to those 
projects by issuing proper guidance, monitoring and necessary funding so that 
these are completed in a time -bound manner . The Committee had  also 
recommended that  bio-fuel projects should also be pro -actively taken up by the 
CHT. In its reply, the Ministry has stated that t he recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted  with a submission  that eight projects have been 
undertaken under the Hydrogen Corpus Fund (HCF) with a total expenditure of Rs 
28.42 crore. 
 The Committee observe that only eight projects have been undertaken  in 
regard to research in Hydrogen fuels , but find them at very primitive stage. The 
Ministry needs to do much mor e in the field. In many of the c ountries, Hydrogen 
fuel technology is well developed and necessary cooperation with such countries 
can be initiated for quick progress.  Similarly, the Committee feel that there has to 
be a multi-dimensional approach to address the issue of energy security  and the 
HCF need s to promote other alternative e nergy sources also such as bio -fuels 
through appropriate financial and technological interventions. Only then , the goal 
of reducing the use of fossil fuel without compromising on development can be 
realised. 
----- 

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
Budgetary Allocation of CHT 
  
 
The Committee note that the expenditure of CHT is fully funded by OIDB and it has  no 
other source of revenue generation and CHT is totally dependent on OIDB for its funds. 
The major capital expenditure of CHT is for funding of R&D projects and for special 
studies. The revenue expenditure is mainly on account of salaries to its staff. T he 
budgetary allocation was Rs. 16.42 crore in 2014 -15 and Rs. 19.31 crore in 2015 -16 
and expected expenditure is around Rs.21.35 crore during 2016 -17. The Committee 
find that the fund allocated by OIDB is not adequate to handle the important 
responsibility assigned to CHT to fund capital intensive projects relating to refining 
sector. Simultaneously, the Committee are worried to observe the trend of expenditure 
being made by CHT during the last three years. It is surprising to note that CHT is even 
not able to spend the small allocation of Rs. 10 to 12 crore by OIDB for funding of R&D 
Projects and the studies in a balanced manner. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
CHT should scientifically project its estimates to commensurate with the industry 
requirements and assigned responsibilities and should improve its spending of the 
allocation during each financial year. 
  
 
The Committee further observe that CHT does not get any royalty for the technologies 
developed through CHT funding when it is implemented by  the refineries. CHT does not 
carry out any R&D project incorporating private sector refineries also. The Committee 
do not find it a happy situation. Being a research sponsoring organization it does not 
augur well for CHT to depend on one agency for its en tire funding and should try to 
raise resources on its own so as to reduce its dependency on OIDB. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that CHT should also incorporate the private sector refineries 
along with Public Sector ones to carry out advanced studies and their requirements so 
as to benefit the industry as a whole and on implementation of technologies beneficial to 
them should try to earn revenues both from public as well as private sector so as to 
make it more sustainable. CHT can also explore the poss ibility of selling the technology 
to private players of the industry and generate revenues. 
  
  

18 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
The R&D budget utilisation by CHT during the last 3 years is as under: 
                                                             (Figs. in Rs crore) 
  BE Actual Utilisation w.r.t. BE 
2014-15 3.35 5.99 178.8 % 
2015-16 17.97 5.93 33.0 % 
2016-17 11.82 9.17 77.6 % 
 
The Budget provision was increased in 2015 -16 for the following new/continuing major 
projects which were recommended by SAC: 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name of the project New/ 
Continuing 
Participating Agencies Budget 
Provision 
Rs. crore 
1 Parametric Study and 
Technology development for 
desalter design 
New EIL R&D and BPCL 
R&D) 
  
4.00 
2 Development of catalyst and 
process for slurry phase 
residue Hydrocracking  
New IIP, HPCL(R&D) 
BPCL (R&D) and EIL 
(R&D) 
8.00 
3 Coal-to-Liquid project Continuing EIL(R&D), BPCL(R&D) 
and THERMAX 
3.00 
4 Development of process 
know-how for indigenous 
production of biphenyl for 
Thermic fluids and other 
application  
New BPCL (R&D) 1.00 
The lower utilisation during 2015-16 and 2016-17 w.r.t. BE was mainly on account of: 
2015-16 
 Extension of Coal-to-Liquid project by EIL (Rs 2.4 crore) 
 Delay in finalisation of specs & procurement of proto -type desalter for Desalter 
project by EIL (Rs 4.0 crore) 
 Delay in reactor procurement for Resid Hydrocraking project by IIP (Rs 4.2 crore) 
 Retendering of Pilot Plant for indigenous production of biphenyl for Thermic fluids 
by BPCL (R&D) (Rs 0.9 crore) 
However, the actual was close to RBE of Rs 5.96 crore. 
 
 
 

19 
 
2016-17 
 
The lower utilisation w.r.t. BE was mainly on account of extension of Coal -to-Liquid 
project by EIL (Rs 2.3 crore).  
 
However, the actual was close to RBE of Rs 9.32 crore. 
  
The projection for R&D expenditure is based on the requirements indicated by the 
participating agencies. The progress of the projects is reviewed by SAC and considering 
the challenges in the  projects, extension is granted by SAC. As may be seen, the 
utilisation in 2016-17 has improved to 77.6 % w.r.t. BE.  
 
The technologies developed by the participating agencies through partial funding from 
CHT have so far been utilised by the participating agencies themselves, including EIL. 
Royalty will accrue as and when these technologies are utilised by other than 
participating agencies. 
 
As per the Memorandum of Association & Articles of Association of CHT, the members 
of the Society, Governing Council and the Executive Committee are only from PSU 
companies and CSIR, besides senior representatives from MoP&NG. Private sector 
refineries are not members of CHT or OIDB (which is the funding agency for CHT 
activities including sponsoring of R&D projects).  
 
Since June 2016, CHT has taken a new initiative on inviting R&D proposals in identified 
areas through EOI, twice in a year, for broader participation. The proposals from private 
companies are also considered, if submitted in association with one of the PSU  oil 
companies. The proposals are initially scrutinised by a Steering Committee nominated 
by Chairman, SAC for further consideration by the SAC. 
  
 M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
  
Research on Alternative Energy Sources 
  
The Committee note that CHT is also the nodal agency for taking up hydrogen projects 
and related activities from the Hydrogen Corpus Fund (HCF). The objectives of HCF are 
to develop hydrogen as an alternative energy source, facilitate R&D activities, syner gise 
hydrogen development activities between Oil companies and institutions and facilitate 
training and capability building. Initial Hydrogen Corpus Fund of Rs. 100 crore has been 
created with contribution of Rs. 40 crore by OIDB and Rs. 16 crore each by I OC, ONGC 
and GAIL and Rs. 6 crore each by HPCL and BPCL and the fund will be managed by 

20 
 
OIDB. All proposals under the HCF will be received by CHT and put up to Scientific 
Advisory Committee for approval. But the Committee find that CHT has not undertaken 
any serious activity relating to H 2 projects except the single project relating to coal 
gasification. Further, the Committee also observe that CHT has no research programme 
on bio fuels which is an important area for Indian scenario. 
  
The Committee feel th at the projects relating to hydrogen as an alternative energy 
source are very important not only for the Government and CHT but also for the country 
as a whole as this is an advanced area of research and any breakthrough in this 
direction will strengthen t he energy security of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should accord top priority to H 2 projects and bio -fuel 
projects and expect CHT to play a pro-active role in taking up these projects and related 
activities by proper g uidance, regular monitoring and necessary funding in every area 
so that all the projects are completed in a time-bound manner. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
  
The recommendations of the Committee has been noted. However, it is submitted that 
eight projects ha ve been undertaken under HCF with a total expenditure of Rs 28.42 
crore. 
 
   M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
  
Manpower of CHT 
  
The Committee note that CHT functions as a technology cell of the MoP&NG with a 
small manpower of 14 technical officers and 7 HR/Finance officers drawn from Oil PSU 
on deputation. Retired officers from PS U oil companies are also engaged as advisors. 
The Committee further note that there is no permanent staff or officers on the rolls of 
CHT. This is a very undesirable situation of functioning of such an important 
organization responsible for advising the Mi nistry on futuristic requirements, assess, 
develop and adopt technologies in refinery processes and petroleum products. The 
Committee have not been given any convincing reason for not recruiting engineers, 
scientists, staff on a permanent basis in CHT. The  Committee have been assured that 
the Ministry is open for appointing people from open market to CHT. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that CHT should attract people from other research organisations like 
CSIR, IIT etc. to work on specific projects in a ti me-bound manner. The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry should approach the manpower requirements in CHT with an 
open mind to have a mix from PSUs and open market and devise a suitable policy in 
CHT to attract the people from scientific and technical background with research 
experience from open market along with officials on deputation from Oil PSUs. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
While sponsoring R&D projects to various institutes, including CSIR & IITs, the cost 
associated with engaging of specialists t o work on the specific projects are included in 
the CHT grant. 
Governing Council of CHT has powers for engaging specialists from outside the oil 
companies as consultants on contract, if necessary. 
    M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

23 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
  
Coal to Liquid Project (CTL) 
  
The Committee note that CHT has funded a R&D project on Coal to Liquid (CTL) Fuels 
Technology Development by EIL, BPCL & Thermax at a cost of Rs. 33 crore (including 
Rs. 14.84 crore funding by CHT). The Committee further note that this project was first 
considered during 2007 and then a modified proposal was considered in April 2008. 
MoU between CHT, BPCL (R&D) and EIL (R&D) has been signed in March 2009. The 
Committee have noted that the project has been completed to the extent of 94 per cent 
so far and the SAC has reviewed and granted time extension upto June 2017 for 
completion of the project. 
  
The Committee consider that by development of indigenous clean coal technology for 
conversion of Coal to Liquid will certainly help the country in harnessing the coal 
reserves in an environment friendly manner and the break through in this techn ology 
would contribute in strengthening the energy security of the country. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry and the SAC should closely monitor the project 
at regular intervals and ensure that any difficulty being faced by the concerned agencies 
is remedied and the project reaches its successful completion by the extended time 
positively. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As technology is not available to gasify high ash Indian coal in efficient manner, SAC 
approved the project at a cost of Rs 33.00 crore with CHT contribution of Rs 14.84 crore 
in March 2009 with EIL as nodal agency. The technology is highly technical as well as 
capital intensive and involves lot of challenges in development. The project has been 
reviewed and closely monitored b y SAC. Considering the various challenges faced in 
the execution, the project has been extended by SAC from time to time, as under: 
 Upto April 2014 (72 nd meeting): As commercial gasifier was not available, M/s 
Thermax was roped in as development partner for gasifier. 
 Upto June 2015 (74th meeting): As per expected delivery schedule of gasifier and 
syn-gas clean up in July 2014 and subsequent activities of commissioning & 
operation.  
 Upto June 2016 (77 th meeting): Gasifier commissioned in combustion mode. 
Additional time approved by SAC for operation of gasifier in gasification mode.  
 Upto March 2017 (78 th meeting-Aug’16): To address concerns in continuous 
running of pilot plant due to frequent choking, etc., and to build confidence before 
sizing bigger unit. Extended further upto June 2019 (79 th meeting-March’17) due 
to choking of downstream and agglomeration.  

24 
 
SAC, during its 80th meeting held in Sept’17 constituted an Expert Group. The group 
held its meeting on 11 th October 2017 to discuss operational issues and has 
suggested short term & long term forward plan for sustained operation. 
 
    M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
  
Performance Benchmarking of Refineries 
  
The Committee note that CHT undertakes studies on behalf of PSU refineries for 
performance benchmarking, performance improvement programmes and energy 
efficiency improvement. The performance benchmarking of the PSU refineries is done 
by engaging M/s Solomon Associates on various parameters. The Committee further 
note that Solomon benchmarking is the main benchmarking in the world and it studies 
about 200 plus refineries and tells about where particular refinery stands at the world 
level. The Committee observe that in benchmarking, the main focus is on energy 
efficiency where Indian refineries are not performing well. Moreover, most of the Indian 
PSU refineries are old ones and have several complexities and an improvement in their 
performance at par with global standards will be a tough and challenging task. The 
Committee also note that the fuel quality in the country has been upgraded to BS -IV 
norms since April, 2017 and the Government has decided to skip BS -V and go to BS-VI 
fuel quality directly by the year 2020. For meeting the BS-VI quality norms, the refineries 
have to modernize the units quickly by introducing new technology. The Committee 
would, ther efore, recommend that CHT by regularly carrying out performance 
improvement programmes should ensure that the old PSU refineries are modernized 
quickly and reach the desired standards in their performance and become ready to 
produce BS-VI fuel by 2020. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Performance improvement studies including Benchmarking is carried out for all PSU 
refineries, including old refineries. 
Oil industry has assured readiness to supply BS-VI fuel by 2020. 
  M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Mandate and Function of CHT 
The Committee note that Centre for High Technology (CHT) was established in 1987 as 
a dedicated technology cell of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The major 
functions of CHT include assessment of technology requirement, operation al 
performance evaluation and improvement of the refineries. CHT acts as a focal point of 
oil industry for centralized technical assistance, knowledge dissemination, performance 
data base, exchange of information and experience sharing. The Committee furth er 
note that CHT functions under the overall guidance and supervision of the Governing 
Council (GC) headed by the Secretary, MoP&NG as the Chairman. 
  
The Committee also find that the refining capacity in the country at present is about 240 
MMTPA and the r efining sector has seen a significant participation from private sector 
like Reliance, Essar etc. and also there are joint venture companies like HMEL and 
BORL in that business. The Committee further note that the country is importing 80 per 
cent of its cr ude oil requirements and at the same time there is significant exploration 
activities yet to be done in the country. There is a need for technological requirements in 
deep water exploration, high pressure -high temperature exploration, shale gas etc. in 
the country. Also, the country has recently identified gas hydrates resources which have 
immense potential to meet its energy requirements. However, there is no technology 
available within the country or at global level also as except US and Japan no other 
country seems to be interested in this energy source. The Committee find that CHT 
basically looks at performance assessment and experience sharing with select R&D 
projects relating to public sector refineries on recommendation of Scientific Advisory 
Committee on hydrocarbons and the technology developed through CHT funding is 
implemented at various refineries as per their requirement. The Budget available with 
CHT for funding such R&D projects and special studies is very small i.e. around Rs.10 
crore every ye ar. The Committee, are therefore, not satisfied with the narrow mandate 
of CHT limited to assist the refineries in performance improvement and promoting a few 
R&D projects carried out by dedicated R&D institutes with analytical and pilot plant 
facilities a vailable with R&D centres of OMCs and not developing it as a dedicated 
technology cell of the Ministry covering the technological requirements of whole oil 
industry including both the upstream and downstream sectors. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that MoP&NG should conduct a thorough review either by itself 
or through any external agency with an objective to redefine the role of CHT and widen 
its mandate so as to justify its name and include research areas of upstream sector also 

26 
 
of the petroleum indus try in addition to its role of improvement in the performance by 
technological innovation in refining sector. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Presently Technological needs of upstream sector are looked after by DGH and 
downstream by CHT. The domain expertise an d area of actions are different for 
upstream and downstream sector. However, a High Level Committee (HLC) has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Sh. Anil Kakodker, Ex -chairman, Atomic Energy 
Commission to examine various issues inter -alia including preparation of action plant to 
create synergy among R&D centers of Oil PSUs. The HLC would be requested to look 
into the aspect of strengthening and widening of mandate of CHT and submit a report to 
this Ministry. 
     M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
R&D infrastructure with CHT  
  
The Committee note that CHT assists refineries in performance improvement and 
promoting R&D through funding of R&D projects as recommended by Scientific 
Advisory Committee on Hydrocarbons. While performing the role in improving the 
performance of refineries, CHT actually engages consultant to carry out the studies and 
benchmark the performance of refineries. Moreover, CHT neither has any laboratory nor 
there is any mechanism to coordinate with any national or international research 
organization in R&D Projects. As a matter of fact, in case of funded projects, R&D work 
is carried out by the R&D Institutes of grantee organisations/institutes like IOCL -R&D, 
EIL-R&D, HPCL-R&D, BPCL-R&D, IIP, IIT etc. Therefore, CHT is actually not working 
as a dedicated technology cell of Ministry which prepares R&D Projects based on 
assessment of technology requirements of the industry, rather R&D activities of PSU 
refineries are only coordinated and supported by CHT. Projects are undertaken on the 
advice of Scientific Advisory Committee which receives the proposals from various 
research related institutes and also from the refineries. Moreover, CHT has no control 
over the intellectual property generated through the R&D Projects but CHT works as the 
cross learning platform through which the notes and benefits are exchanged with each 
other. 
  
While going through this working of CHT, the Committee observe that with this present 
design, CHT is not actually able to justify with its mandate. In Committee’s view, the 
Refining technology development require focused efforts and dedicated R&D Centre 
with analytical and pilot plant facilities which is not there with CHT. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that CHT should be developed as platform working for while oil 
industry with high profile team of experts and an independent fully developed R&D 

27 
 
laboratory capable to cater the needs of technological advancement of oil industry. The 
Committee further desire that CHT should also tie up with petroleum institutes within the 
country as well as abroad for their R&D activities. The Committee, therefore, hope that 
MoP&NG will strengthen CHT accordingly so that it can be able to work as a technical 
cell of the Ministry. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A High Level Committee (HLC) has been constituted under the chairmanship of Sh. Anil 
Kakodker, Ex -chairman, Atomic Energy Commission to examine various issues inter -
alia including preparation of action plant t o create synergy among R&D centers of Oil 
PSUs. The HLC would be requested to look into the aspect of strengthening and 
widening of mandate of CHT and submit a report to this Ministry. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
F.No. 27011/02/2016-OR-I/46488/E-15323 dated 31-10-2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 28 December,  2017 
7 Pausha,1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(27.12.2017) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 December, 2017 from 1600 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. '139', PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
3. Smt. Rama Devi 
4. Shri Elumalai V. 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
8. Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
10. Shri Arvind Sawant 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
12. Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 
 

29 
 
2. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject 'Centre for High Technology' and adopted the same without any modifications. 
 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the Report in both 
the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx: Matter not related to the subject. 
 
 
  

30 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) ON ‘CENTRE FOR HIGH TECHNOLOGY (CHT)'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 7 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3 and 7) 
 
2 
 Percentage to Total 28.57% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 4, 5 and 6) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 
 
42.86% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 and 2)  
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 
 
28.57% 
 
 
 
 