26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2018-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) on the subject Safety, 
Security and Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector] 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 January, 2019/Pausha,1940 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
 
CP&NG NO.     
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2018-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) on the subject Safety, Security and 
Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.01.2019 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.01.2019 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2019/Pausha,1940 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19)…………………………….. 4 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………….. 5 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
23 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………     
                    
36 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
37 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
40 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2018-19) held on 02.01.2019. 
44 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) on the subject 
'Safety, Security and Envi ronmental Aspects in Petroleum 
Sector'. 
46 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2018-19) 
 
Sl. No. Names of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi - Chairman 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
4 Dr. Parayamparambil Kuttappan Biju 
5 Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri Elumalai V.  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
13 Shri A.T. (Nana) Patil 
14 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
15 Shri Raju alias Devappa Anna Shetti 
16 Vacant  
17 Shri Ravneet Singh  
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri Santosh Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
23 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
26 Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
29 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
30 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
31 Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri Ganapati Bhat   - Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director   
  
  

5 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fourt h Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
the subject 'Safety, Security and Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector'. 
2. The Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.07.2018. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report were 
received on 17.10.2018. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum &  Natural Gas (2018 -19) considered 
and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 02.01.2019.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their app reciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
2 January, 2019 
12 Pausha, 1940 (Saka)     
         PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the r ecommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (201 7-18) on the subject 'Safety, Security and 
Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector', which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.07.2018. 
2. Action Taken Notes were received from the Ministry on 17.10.2018 in respect 
of all the 16 recommendations/observations contained in the r eport. These have 
been categorized as per the following: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 (Total 12) 
 
      (Chapter- II) 
      
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. Nos. Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
          
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 1 and 9 
(Total 2)                
     (Chapter- IV) 
          
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 5 and 10 (Total 2) 
 (Chapter- V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that  the Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I of this report and final 
replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Gov ernment (included in Chapter -V) should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by  the Government on 
some of its recommendations.  
 
  

7 
 
 
 
Recommendation 1 
Safety, Security And Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the petroleum and natural gas industry of the 
country comprises of three major streams namely exploration and production, 
refineries, marketing & distribution. The country has 23 refineries with 
installed capacity of 231 MMTPA, 15 gas processing plants, 4 LNG terminals, 
680 oil and LPG installations and more than 39,000 KM cross country 
pipelines spread across  the length and breadth of the country. In offshore 
exploration and production, there are 21 production complexes, 252 well 
platforms and 33 rigs while in on -land exploration and production, there are 
301 production installations & 230 rigs. This industry handles highly 
inflammable hydrocarbons in all forms namely solid, liquid and gas and 
operates processes under high temperature and pressure. Moreover, 
Petroleum industry has a significant influence on the total pollution of the 
environment by exploration and production operations, oil spillage, gas flaring 
and oil refining operations. Therefore, the safety and security and 
environment protection in petroleum and natural gas industry is of paramount 
and vital importance and its operation in a safe mode is n ecessary both for 
the employees and the society at large. The hydrocarbons are essential for 
economic development and propriety of nation for decades to come. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that, the Ministry should accord the top priority to 
the safety, security and environmental aspects relating to the petroleum and 
natural gas industry. All these aspects should be continuously monitored and 
necessary changes in statutes, rules and regulations be made so that the 
legislations enforcing these measures ar e strengthened regularly to enhance 
the level of safety and security of the installations and minimize the adverse 
impact on environment from the activities at installations at par with the 
current global situation". 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) regularly monitors and 
reviews the various safety issues in the Oil & gas Sector and directs the oil 
companies from time to time to take suitable measures to ensure safety of 
these vital installations. 
 
Safety, health and environmental aspects of the Oil & Gas installations is of 
paramount importance; and concerted efforts are being made by the Industry 
and MoP&NG to preserve such national assets without compromising the 
safety.  
 
OISD, technical body under the Ministry, makes necessary Safety Standards 
depending upon the emerging needs of the safety of oil installations and these 
standards are adopted after a due process and included in various 
rules/regulations". 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
 

8 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee had observed that since the petroleum industry handles 
highly inflammable products in its operations and transportations the safety, 
security and environmental protection is of paramount and vital importance 
both for the employees and the society at large. Therefore, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should accord 
top priority to safety, securi ty and environmental aspects and should 
continuously monitor and bring in changes in statutes rules and regulations in 
order to enhance them at the petroleum installations from time to time at par 
with global standards. 
 The Ministry has submitted a too ge neral action taken reply stat ing that 
the MoPNG regularly monitors and reviews various safety issues in oil and gas 
sector and directs oil companies to take suitable measures to ensure safety of 
the installations and efforts are made by the industry to preserve such national 
assets without compromising on safety. The Ministry  has also stated that 
OISD, a technical body under the Ministry makes safety standards depending 
upon the emerging needs which are adopted after due processes and included 
in various ru les and regulations.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
reply of the Ministry as it does not mention about the availability of any 
mechanism for continuous monitoring and enhancing the level of safety and 
security of the installations.  Moreover, the steps taken to study various safety 
aspects in other parts of globe as well as any institutionalized mechanism  for 
regular interaction,  coordination and cooperation  with external agencies in 
these aspects have also not been spelt out in the reply this shows that the 
Ministry has not carried out any review exercise in the light of the observation 
of the Committee. In Committee’s view OISD being a technical body under the 
Ministry and manned by the officials drawn from oil PSUs on deputation may 
not be able to effectively enforce the safety rules and regulations. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that safety, security and 
environmental aspects in the oil and gas sector particularly in its various 
installations, plants, units etc . should be given utmost priority  and direct the 
Ministry to take appropriate steps to institutionalize the review of rules and 
regulations governing the industry in a time bound manner so that their 
standards are at par with international standards. 

9 
 
 
 
Recommendation 3 
Role of Safety Council 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that OISD carries out investigations of all the process 
safety related major incidents to determine root causes and recommend 
corrective actions to eliminate or control these hazards. The accident data 
analysis submitted to the Safety Council by OISD, indicates that the major 
causes of the incidents / accidents across the oil and gas industry include not 
following the Standard Operating Procedures, violation of  work permit system 
and knowledge gap. It has further been stated that maximum number of such 
incidents could be avoided by ensuring strict adherence to SOPs and proper 
supervision. The Committee note with concern that Safety Council, an apex 
body under MO P&NG have not played their regulatory role in safety matters 
and procedures in respect of hydrocarbon sector. They have not been even 
able to ensure that all the companies strictly comply with safety audit 
recommendations. In Committee‟s view, after observ ing the deviations of 
SOPs during safety audits, compliance should be sought within a fixed time 
frame followed by punitive action / penalty so that not only the objective nil 
fatalities but nil incidents is achieved. The Committee therefore, desire that 
Safety Council should ensure to liquidate all the pending recommendations 
made in all the audit reports carried out by OISD within a fixed time frame. 
The Committee also find that there is no set procedure to fix the accountability 
for the accidents in oil and gas installations. The Committee feel that each 
major or minor incident should be taken seriously and any violation of SOPs 
should be dealt with firmly and decisively along with fixing of responsibility in 
each case. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Ministry and other 
agencies entrusted with enforcement of safety rules and regulations should fix 
accountability for violation of SOPs whenever any violation takes place. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the causes of accidents in the oil 
industry during the last three years and the action taken against the erring 
officials". 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"OISD carries out investigation of all the Process Safety related major 
incidents to determine root causes & recommend corrective actions to 
eliminate or control these hazards. All such significant incidents occurring in 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Industry are investigated in-depth by multi-functional 
OISD team to establish: 
•  The exact sequence of events leading to the incident 
•  The root cause of the incident 
• Concomitant corrective and/or preventive measures to obviate 
recurrence in future. 
Findings of the Investigation Committee is widely circulated not only to the 
concerned Industry es tablishment but also shared with all the industry 
members enabling them to take proactive measures.  Further, the findings are 

10 
 
 
 
also utilized as a feedback mechanism for updation of OISD standards. 
Compliance report of all such incidents investigations reco mmendations is 
also regularly reviewed by OISD/MoP&NG. 
Findings of root causes of incidents across the Industry segments i.e. 
Refineries & Gas Processing Plants, Marketing Installations (LPG/POL),  
Cross Country Pipelines and Exploration & Production reveal that majority of 
such accidents have occurred due to soft reasons like Disregard to 
established Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), Violation of work 
permits, Poor Supervision, Non-compliance to Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPEs) etc. Most of th ese incidents could have been avoided as major root 
cause of the incidents, year on year basis, continues to be attributed to soft 
reasons. Industry and OISD is putting concerted efforts to review extant safety 
management system so that effective measures can be taken to avoid 
recurrence of avoidable incidents. 
In the 33 rd Safety Council meeting held on 07.06.2016 all Oil PSUs was 
instructed to view all pending OISD recommendations seriously and liquidate 
them on top most priority. Further, a  meeting to re view the pendency of Audit 
recommendation with Oil PSUs in the Ministry was held on 19.07.2018. 
wherein the Oil PSUs were instructed as follows:- 
(a) To fix responsibility for delay in implementation of safety audits 
recommendations which are pending for m ore than 3 years and action must 
be initiated against responsible officers , if no reasonable reason is present. 
(b)  To submit a latest status with detailed action plan along with timelines 
for implementation of all the safety audits recommendations which  are 
pending for more than three years. 
(c)  OISD should prepare year wise compliance status of pending safety 
audits recommendations of more than 3 years in the forthcoming safety 
council meeting. 
It was also decided to review of pending OISD safety audits recommendations 
on quarterly basis by Ministry.  
Regarding action taken against errand officers during last 3 years, IOCL has 
informed that major penalty have been imposed on 2 employees and 
disciplinary action against 8 officers is in progress. Moreover , fine has been 
imposed on 6 contractors & 3 dealers as per contract conditions. 
ONGC has informed that four officials were issued Memorandum against the 
failure to adhere to the Safe Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
OIL has informed that punitive action have been taken against officers found 
responsible for the incident.   
BPCL has informed that Show Cause Notice has been issued to 2 errand 
employees and Caution letter to 2 errand employees. 
HPCL has informed that Major penalty has been imposed on two errand 
employees and penalty proceedings against three officer are in progress. 
Further, minor penalty has been imposed against 4 errand employees".  

11 
 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee in their report had recommended that the Safety Council 
under MOP&NG should ensure to liquidate all the pending recommendations 
made by OISD in the safety audit  reports about oil installations within a fixed 
time frame.  The Committee had further recommended that the Ministry and 
other agencies should fix accountability for violation of SOPs and  take action 
against officials  responsible for such violations during the last three  years.  
The Committee are happy to note  that as per the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry has directed the oil PSUs to submit the latest status 
and action taken plan along with timelines for implementation of audit 
recommendations which are pe nding for the last three years and has also 
directed them to take action against the officers responsible for delay in 
implementation of safety audits recommendations. It has also been decided to 
review the pending OISD safety audit recommendations on quarterly basis and 
details of action taken against erring  PSU officials. The Committee, however, 
note that the disciplinary action or penalty proceedings are in progress in 
certain cases. The Committee , therefore, would like to reiterate that  the Safety 
Council / Ministry should analyse all the details received from the PSUs and 
OISD regarding implementation of safety audit recommendations and ensure 
the compliance by each PSU without delay. Further the Ministry should also fix 
the accountability and responsibility for the delays in implementation of safety 
audits recommendations and the Committee may be informed accordingly.   
Recommendation 5 
Safety of Pipelines 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that OISD carries out periodic audits including pre -
commissioning audit of cross country pipelines, other additional safety checks 
and measures to ensure protection of oil and natural gas pipeline network in 
the country. It includes moni toring of the pipeline through 'Pipeline Integrity 
Management System', Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), 
sustained ground patrolling, inspection of Right of Way (RoW), surge analysis 
etc. However, despite such measures in place, a major acc ident occurred in 
the GAIL pipeline at Nagaram in East Godavari District of Andhra Pradesh in 
the year 2014 which caused extensive damage to life and property. The 

12 
 
 
 
explosion and fire tragically claimed 22 lives. The cause of the accident was 
pipeline / equipment failure due to violations of SOPs. In this case it has been 
reported that wet gas was being carried in the pipeline meant for dry gas 
without taking adequate precautions like pigging of pipeline at regular 
intervals. The Committee are deeply anguish ed on this incident and feel that 
accident could have been prevented by following proper procedures in the 
first place. The Committee also note that in this case other safety measures 
also seem to have failed pointing towards the failure of monitoring syst em. 
The Committee note that the PESO has submitted its report on the incident to 
the MoEF for further action. The Committee, therefore, desire that MoP&NG 
should take up the matter with MoEF and ensure an action against those 
found responsible for lapses and negligence which caused the accident.  
Looking at the serious impact of such incidents of leakage of gas, the 
Committee strongly recommend that there should be a fool proof mechanism 
for monitoring of pipeline infrastructure network of the country both through 
human and sensor based system and any deviations should be reported and 
preventive action initiated immediately. There should also be backup 
measures for operation of remote valves and these should be such that they 
are not damaged due to fire etc.  The communications lines could be placed 
underground or away and secured from tampering. There should also be 
audible warning system to warn the people of leaks etc. so that they can take 
precautions. The Committee, further, note that the safety of the po pulation 
that lives around those places where the oil and gas pipelines pass is the 
responsibility of the owner of the pipeline and should not be compromised in 
any way. Any report from the public about anything wrong like leaks in the 
pipeline or tampering should be taken seriously and investigated immediately 
to prevent any accident. Besides this, people should also be sensitized on the 
do's and don‟ts in the event of any accident on the pipeline. The Committee 
may also be apprised of all the initiatives for safety of pipelines taken in this 
direction".  
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Regarding action taken against officers responsible for major accident in the 
GAIL pipeline at Nagaram in East Godavari District of Andh ra Pradesh in the 
year 2014 Gail has informed that based on assigned roles and responsibilities 
disciplinary proceedings were initiated against 5 officials. Penalty of non -
consideration for promotion & withholding performance related payments was 
immediately imposed on charges officials with the initiation of disciplinary 
proceedings. Disciplinary authority has examined the submissions of charged 
officials which are yet to be concluded. 
Further, each of the oil companies both in private and public sector ar e 
required to maintain highest level of safety standards for ensuring safe 
operations in the respective pipelines. Some of the major safety measures 
undertaken by the Oil & Natural Gas Industry include:  
 Incorporation of in -built safety aspects in the i.e.  during the design phase 
itself. These include process safety, instrumentation & safety interlocks, safety 
while design of equipment following the best International Standards, etc.  

13 
 
 
 
 Each installation has its own dedicated firefighting facilities which are  
equipped with gadgets, well trained crew to fight fire in case of any 
eventuality.  
 The industry also carries out regular Internal Safety Audits and conducts 
periodic mock drills both on -site and off -site to ensure emergency 
preparedness. It has also developed its own Disaster Management Plan. 
 For real time monitoring of movement of line Patrolmen through Global 
Positioning System (GPS) has been adopted by pipeline industry.  
 Monitoring of Repeater -cum-Cathodic Protection Stations through Close 
Circuit Tel evision (CCTV) based surveillance has been adopted by pipeline 
industry. 
 OFC based Pipeline Intrusion detection system/ acoustic sensor based leak 
detection system is being implemented.  
 Application software based Leaked Detection System (LDS) in liquid pi pelines 
is implemented in liquid pipelines. 
 Provision of remote operation of pipeline‟s sectionalizing valves is kept for 
closing in case of any emergency. 
 Provision of alternate communication means (in addition to OFC based 
communication/ radio communication) such as leased line /GSM network from 
telecom operators etc. as stand -by for closure of remote valves in case of 
OFC / radio communication failure. 
 The pipeline is provided with electrical sirens of high range (3Km range) at all 
originating, intermedi ate pump / delivery stations, terminal station and all 
sectionalizing valve (SV) stations which are spread evenly along the length of 
pipeline.  
 Toll free number on all route markers along the ROU of pipelines are 
provided. 
 Regular interaction with village rs to sensitize them by conducting awareness 
programs like Hastakshar Abhiyaan/Sarpanch Meet/free medical check -up 
camps/Samyojak scheme/Sahyogi scheme etc. 
 Regular interaction is being held with respective Police & District 
Administration. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee had recommended for  creation of a  fool proof 
mechanism for monitoring of pipeline infrastructure network through both 
human and se nsor based systems to ensure safety, security and also enable 
reporting of leakage incident s. Further, the Committee had desired that 
measures should be in place for t he public to inform any leak, ta mpering etc. 
and the authorities of concerned companies should investigate these 

14 
 
 
 
incidents and take necessary action to prevent any accidents.  In this regard, 
the reply of the Ministry has enumerated various safety measures taken by the 
oil and gas industry to maintain highest level of safety standards for ens uring 
safety operations of their respective pipelines. But the Ministry has not 
mentioned any specific precautions being taken to check and prevent the flow 
of wet gas in the pipelines meant for dry gas  and for regular pigging of the 
pipelines for cleaning . The Committee , therefore,  reiterate that the safety of 
pipelines should be accorded priority by all PSUs particularly to prevent 
incidents caused due to lack of checking for moisture in gas and cleaning of 
pipelines by the pigging process  and desire that continuous measures should 
be taken to  create sufficient awareness among the public and make them 
partners in their efforts to ensure collection of information about tampering, 
leakage, damage etc. of pipelines.  The Committee may be apprised about all 
these measures.  
The Ministry has also informed that in connection with  accident in GAIL 
pipeline in E ast Godavari district in Andhra Pradesh in 2014, disciplinary 
proceedings were initiated against five officials and penalty was imposed on 
them immediately. However, the Committee note that the disciplinary authority 
has not yet conclude d the issue and  would like to await the outcome of the 
disciplinary proceedings and expect the Ministry/GAIL to conclude them at the 
earliest and apprise the Committee of the outcome. 
Recommendation 8 
Butcher Island Fire Incident 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the fire at one of the tank farms of BPCL situated at 
Butcher Island, near Mumbai on 06.10.2017 was the most recent major 
accident in the oil Industry. There was no loss of life but one tank that was 
used for storing HSD was fully damaged. For fire fighting, High Volume Long 
Range Monitors - HVLR (2000 GPM) of tank number 13 was started and foam 
was also applied. Despite this the fire could not be put out and the HSD in the 
tank was allowed to burn in a controlled manner. The cause of the fire was 
attributed to intense Lightning strike. The Committee were informed that a 
Committee constituted by OISD to investigate the i ncident has concluded that 
roof plates of tank were thinned out / pitted which got punctured due to 
lightning strike. The tank was also inspected by BPCL officials before the 
incident and was certified for use. However, the Marine Oil Terminal (MOT)  
facilities at Butcher Island  was not audited by OISD in the last External Safety 

15 
 
 
 
Audit (ESA) of BPCL, Mumbai Refinery on 26 th – 30th September, 2016 and 
these facilities were not offered for safety audit. The Committee are of the 
view that the frequency of safe ty audits of tank farms should be reviewed in 
view of this incident. The Committee specifically desire that the frequency of 
ESA should be increased in those areas that are susceptible to particular 
vagaries of weather more often and preventive measures taken. 
While analyzing the quality of firefighting equipment the Committee feel that at 
Butcher Island it was inadequate to put out the tank fire. While the Ministry 
and PSUs claim their capabilities for managing the fire incidents have 
improved after the im plementation of M.B. Lal committee recommendation, 
the way the fire incident in Butcher lsland was handled belie this, even though 
the adjacent tanks in the site were safeguarded from Fire, the entire fuel in the 
storage tank was allowed to burn out instead of fire fighting to put out the fire. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the firefighting capabilities at all 
the storage sites of petroleum products across the country be upgraded to 
ensure quick extinguishing of fire.' The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the further safety measures including the installation of advanced lightning 
protection system undertaken by the oil industry to prevent the recurrence of 
such incidents at par with the worldwide practices being followed to deal with 
such situation". 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Regarding reviewing the frequency of Safety Audits in Oil and Gas 
installations especially tank farm areas; the following steps have been taken 
by OISD: 
 Central Tank Farms (CTFs) will be considered as standalone facilities and 
shall be audited at a frequency of 3 years from earlier 5 years 
 For POL marketing installations having aggregate storage capacity of more 
than 1 Lac KL, the audit frequency is reduced to 5 years from earlier 7 years.  
 Clubbing the external & Surprise Safety Audits of the installations in a 
particular city/ neighbouring locations so that coverage of audits increases. In 
the process, OISD has audited 112 locations in the year 2017 -18 against the 
original plan of 70 numbers. 
Regarding upgrading the fire fighting capabilities at all the storage sites of 
petroleum products across the country and to ensure quick extinguishing of 
fire, it is submitted that OISD has already taken initiatives for evaluation  of 
functionality checks of the critical firefighting equipment like HVLRMs, 
ROSOVs, RSFPS, MEFG etc. at Marketing (POL) Installations. Presently, 115 
(out of total 276 nos.) POL locations have already been covered & compliance 
being monitored for 100% accomplishment of functioning of such equipment. 
Further, OISD has already undertaken revision of its Standard -180 on 
lightning protection through functional committee".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
 

16 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee , while analyzing the  fire incident at  Butcher Island had 
pointed out that the fire fighting capabilities were found inadequate in dealing 
with the fire incident and had recommended that the fire fighting capabilities at 
all storage sights of petroleum products across the country be upgraded to 
ensure quick extinguishing of fire.  As the lightning protection system was the 
main reason attributed to the fire incide nt at Butcher Island , the Committee 
had also desired that advance  lightning protection system should be installed 
to prevent recurrence of such incidents. The Ministry in its reply has  
mentioned that OISD had already taken initiatives for evaluation of c ritical fire 
fighting equipment  at marketing installations .  Also,  compliance is being 
monitored for hundred per cent accomplishment of functioning of such 
equipment. OISD has further undertaken to revise  its Standard-180 on 
lightning protection through  a functional committee. The Committee while 
expressing their satisfaction about the steps being taken would like to 
highlight that no commitment has been provided regarding the time by which 
upgradation of  the lightning protection system at installations would be 
completed to prevent any Butcher Island type incident.  Therefore, the 
Committee would like to reiterate that the steps may be taken by Ministry/PSUs 
to upgrade lightning protection system immediately at all the oil installations 
without waiting for the revision of OISD standard.  
Recommendation 9 
 
Setting up of Emergency Response Centres (ERCs) 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that after the Jaipur major fire incident, the M.B. Lal 
Committee which investigated the incident had recommended for the setting 
up of Emergency Response Centre (ERCs) in the country to handle major oil 
fires like storage tank fire in fastest and specialized way.  
The Committee also note that M.B. Lal Committee recommendations were 
approved by OMC and Ministry to be implemented immediately and all the 
recommendations including setting up of ERCs were to be completed by 
2014. The Committee note that even after approv al of the Ministry, the 
recommendation of setting up of ERCs is still pending.  
The Committee further note that it has now been decided to set up five ERCs 
to be piloted by each of the oil companies at the following locations:  

17 
 
 
 
IOCL-Jaipur, HPCL-Vizag, BPCL-Manmad, ONGC-Hazira, and GAIL at Guna. 
The Fire Advisor, Ministry of Home Affairs too has recommended in 2006 & 
2017 for establishing and positioning of ERCs at strategic locations. The 
Committee note that initially EIL was appointed as a consultant but was 
dropped due to high rates quoted by it, and now a global tender for 
appointment of consultant for Fire Expertise with PMC work for setting up of 5 
ERCs has been floated. The Committee desire that engaging a Fire 
Consultant for setting up ERC before PMC  work be expedited to ensure 
setting up of ERC, supply of equipment and operation of ERC at the earliest.  
The Committee deplore the casual approach of the Ministry resulting in 
inordinate delay in the setting up of ERCs. It appears that the oil industry i s 
waiting for another major disaster to happen to get on its feet. The Committee 
disagrees with the Ministry‟s contention that the firefighting capabilities of the 
industry is adequate to meet any major fire emergency and that the concept of 
ERC is a secon d line of defence in case of catastrophic events for which 
various other avenues like mutual aid partner industry, state fire brigade etc., 
are already in place. The Committee further note that an ERC would take up 3 
to 4 years to be set up and any inciden t during the intervening period may 
cause huge losses. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that for 
the interim period the OMCs should procure required advanced firefighting 
equipments viz. robotic monitors, high capacity pumps with portable foam 
monitors, large hoses etc. for all the 22 locations for the proposed ERCs and 
later such equipments could become a part of the ERC. The Committee also 
desire that till the ERCs are set up, the OMCs should appoint an experienced 
agency on temporary basis wh o can provide 24x7 emergency firefighting 
services with advanced equipments as mentioned above immediately without 
any further delay.  
The Committee agree with the views of the industry experts who deposed 
before them and are of the opinion that OMCs shoul d consider procuring 
equipments/setting up of ERCs as they are an investment in safety. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take immediate action for the 
setting up of all 22 ERCs starting with 11 ERCs at strategic locations specially 
where there is cluster of oil companies/terminals to meet any disaster, taking 
into consideration the requirements of a rapidly growing industry". 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"With the installation of state of the art equipm ent at installations of all the 
OMCs, the firefighting capability of our Oil & Gas Installations in the country is 
adequate to meet any major fire emergency arising out on account of routine 
operations. With in-plant firefighting facilities, all the OMCs are equipped with 
fire fighting facilities to handle emergency scenarios like tank fires, leakages 
etc. for a duration of four hours.  
 
Further, in addition to the installed firefighting facilities, which are adequate for 
any operational related emergency as mentioned above, other avenues like 
mutual aid partner industries, state fire brigade etc. can also be pressed into 
service in case any catastrophic event occurs in these installations as a 
second line of defense. It may be reiterated that ERCs once ava ilable, shall 
also act as second line of defense to the installed firefighting facilities. 
 

18 
 
 
 
With regard to setting of ERCs in the country, it is mentioned that it has now 
been decided to set up five ERCs to be piloted by each of the oil companies 
at the following locations: 
 
IOCL-Jaipur, HPCL -Vizag, BPCL -Manmad, ONGC -Hazira, GAIL, Dibiyapur 
(Earlier location Guna is changed).  
It is submitted that for appointment of consultant for PMC for setting up 5 
ERCs as above, a Global tender was floated but there was no response to get 
PMC services to establish 5 pilot ERCs by IOC/BPC/HPC/GAIL/ONGC. 
Based on inputs provided by prospective vendors during pre -bid meeting of 
the last tender, detailed  BQC (bid qualification criteria) and Tender 
scope for engagement of PMC consultant have been finalized. To invite more 
no of bids, JVs/Consortium are being allowed in the new tender to have wider 
participation from prospective PMC consultants. Global/open tender is likely to 
float shortly". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
19. The Committee  had highlighted the need for setting up of Emergency 
Response Centres (ERCs) to handle major oil fires at petroleum installations in 
the country and had desired that Ministry to take immediate action to set up 22 
ERCs starting with 11 ERCs at strategic locations especially where ther e is 
cluster of oil companies/terminals to meet any disaster. The Ministry in  its 
reply ha s stated that ERCs shall act as a second line of defence along with 
mutual aid partner industry, state fire brigade etc., in addition to fire fighting 
facilities installed at installations. The reply also states that it has now been 
decided to set up 5 ERCs to be piloted by each of the oil companies and global 
tender for engagement of the PMC consultant for setting up of five ERCs are 
likely to be floated shortly. 
 The Committee are , however, dismayed with the reply of the Ministry 
particularly the line of approach being taken with regard to ERCs treating them 
as a second line of defence along with mutual aid partner and state fire 
brigade.  The Committee would expect the Ministry to change this approach 
and make ERCs as one of the first and mai n line of defence in addition to fire 
fighting facilities available in the plants/units/installation in responding to 
major fire emergency arising out of routine operations at oil and gas 
installations. The Committee would also like to observe that the  MB Lal 
Committee had also recommended setting up of ERCs which the Ministry was 

19 
 
 
 
to  implement by 2014 .  The  Ministry has not given any cogent reasons for 
rejecting the need to set up ERCs at 22 locations which have cluster of oil and 
gas installations in  the country.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and would like to point out that the process of appointment 
of PMC for setting up of ERCs have been dragging for too long and it would 
expect the Ministry to accord highest priority for  the same and finalize the 
PMC for five ERCs at the earliest so that the  process for setting up of 11 ERCs 
on priority may gain momentum and completed within the shortest possible 
time frame. 
Recommendation 10 
Formation of Unified Safety Board 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that depending on the type of installations, there are 
various statutory authorities involved in the safety enforcement in the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry. In the E&P onshore and offshore 
industry segments Exploration and Production the DGMS and OISD under the 
administrative Ministries of Labour and Employment and P&NG respectively 
have jurisdiction. In the Downstream & Gas (Natural) Processing Plants 
(GPP) segments the PESO and PNGRB under the administrative Ministries of 
Commerce & Industry and P&NG respectively are enforcing safety. The 
Committee also note that the proposal for having a unified Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Safety Board has been under consideration since the last four 
years and nothing has been finalised as yet. The Committee were informed 
that the matter was considered by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) and 
they were of the view for strengthening the existing regulatory bodies over 
creation of a new organization. Thereafte r, the recommendations of the CoS 
were considered by the Ministers of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Commerce and Labour. They have decided that a report should be 
prepared after studying the safety and security aspects keeping in view the 
international practice. The Committee are not satisfied with the current state 
of affairs as such an important issue is being unduly delayed. It appears that 
the three Ministries are reluctant to give up their role in the safety related 
aspects as they perceive it akin to losing power. 
The Committee have been informed that among the three bodies namely 
PESO, DGMS and OISD, almost 97 percent of the premises are regulated for 
safety by PESO and 2 percent by DGMS and 1 percent by OISD. PESO has 
been handling the s afety regulations in hazardous premises like refineries, 
cross country pipelines, manufacturing, storage and transportation of 
exploring storage & use of explosives in oil mines, Auto LPG and CNG 
dispensing stations. The Committee feel that the MoPNG wants  to retain its 
dominant role through the OISD. The Committee would like to point out here 
that the OISD has no permanent staff of its own and most of its officers are on 
deputation from the Oil Companies. Therefore, the concept of arm‟s length in 

20 
 
 
 
the safet y aspect is certainly not fulfilled here. Due to conflict of interests, 
such officers cannot be expected to give adverse reports against their own 
employers. Therefore, in Committee‟s view, considering the capabilities, 
infrastructure and proportion of wor k administered in Hydrocarbon sector, 
PESO is more suitable body to reposition it to administer safety regulations in 
entire hydrocarbon sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that PESO may be empowered to work as a single framework for regulation of 
safety in entire hydrocarbon sector. For that purpose the capacity of PESO 
should be enhanced by providing it prosecution powers and strengthening the 
Human Resource and coordination with District authorities, upgradation of 
Research and Testing i nfrastructure and capacity building of external 
stakeholders". 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The Ministry has brought a proposal before the Committee of Secretaries 
(CoS) for establishment of Petroleum and Natural Gas  Industry Safety Board 
(PNGISB) to regulate the safety of petroleum and Natural Gas Industry in the 
entire country. The proposal also envisage establishment of Directorate 
General of Natural Gas and Industry safety. Three meetings of the CoS have 
been held  on 01.07.2014, 7.11.2014 and 19.08.2016. After detailed 
deliberations held in the third meeting of CoS on 19.08.2016, it was interalia 
decided that MoPNG may weigh the option of strengthening the existing 
upstream and mid/downstream regulators vis -à-vis, a single safety regulator 
for all segments and take a considered view in this regard.  
In order to settle the issues an inter -ministerial meeting involving Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG), Ministry of Labour and Employment 
(MoLE) & Ministry of Commerce & Industry was held on 20.12.2016 and it 
was agreed to examine further the issue of existing structure of Safety in 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry and also examining best practice of 
Safety issues in Hydrocarbon Industry in other countries. 
OISD was requested on 06.04.2017 to examine the best practices of safety 
issues in the hydrocarbon industry in other countries and submit a report. 
OISD has since submitted a report in the matter. 
Further, Performance Audit Report of PESO has been obtaine d. Forensic 
Audit report of DGMS has not been received from Ministry of Labour. 
From above, it would be evident that inter -ministerial consultation is going on 
to settle the issue".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee had observed that various statutory authorities are 
involved in regulating different standards in petroleum and natural gas sector 
thereby causing difficulty  in enforcement and compliance . Considering PESO 

21 
 
 
 
as the most suitable body to administer the safety regulation in Hydrocarbon 
sector, t he Committee , had recommended that it should be empowered to 
work as a single framework  for regulation of safety in the entire hydrocarbon 
sector.  
 The Ministry in its reply has stated about the initiatives taken in the 
direction of establishment of Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry Safety Board 
(PNGISB) to regulate the safety of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the entire 
country and Directorate General of Natural Gas and industrial safety. It is 
stated that OISD had submitted a report on the best practices of safety issues 
in hydrocarbon industry in other countries. A performance audit report of  
PESO has been obtained and for ensic audit report on DGMS has not been 
received from the Ministry of Labour.  The Ministry has further stated that inter 
ministerial consultation is going on to settle the issue  of establishment of 
PNGISB.  However, t he Committee are not satisfied with th e reply as no 
meeting seems to have been held with the Ministries and organizations 
concerned after th e presentation of the report by the Committee to expedite 
the matter. The last deliberation among the Ministries concerned was held on 
20.12.2016 and two years have passed with little progress on the issue. The 
Committee therefore, reiterate their  recommendation for the need of a single 
regulator on safety and other issues for the entire hydrocarbon industry with 
statutory powers and expect the Ministry to show pragmatism, accommodative 
spirit and far sightedness in order to consider the recommendation  and 
accordingly, would expect the MoPNG to take the lead to settle the issue on 
priority.  
Recommendation 12 
Geo-physical Mapping of Potential Disasters 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee have been informed that ONGC has developed an in -house 
GIS mapping of its pipelines laid in onshore locations and the mapping is 
nearly complete. ONGC is also undertaking a conceptual study in this regard. 
The Committee also note that no guidelines for GIS mapping of upstream 
assets has been brought out by OISD. 
The Committee desire that all the oil and gas companies should mandatorily 
carry out GIS mappin g of their assets. This will not only enable for tracking 
purpose both onshore and offshore but also as a tool for risk assessment of 

22 
 
 
 
the areas around petroleum and gas installations/pipelines during major 
accidents. The Committee recommend that the world wide practice should 
also be studied for adopting the same in the Indian scenario for advance 
planning to minimise damage and to deal with accidents efficiently and 
effectively". 
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"IOCL has  informed that GIS based Pipeline Asset Integrity Management 
System has been implemented in new cross country pipelines. Maps 
indicating pipeline routes are shared with respective police 
stations/administration as part of Emergency Response Disaster Management 
Plan (ERDMP). 
ONGC undertakes survey of all the offshore pipelines inclusive of GIS 
mapping once every five years. An in -house common portal has also been 
developed for mapping of the pipelines. GIS mapping is done regularly for the 
areas where seismic survey is carried out. 
GAIL has mapped its existing pipelines assets on GIS platform. Further, with 
the expansion of the truck pipeline in other parts of the country including 
providing the last mile connectivity, the same will also be mapped on the 
platform periodically". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
25. The Committee in their  report had observed that ONGC had  developed 
in house GIS mapping of its pipelines at its onshore locations and undertaking 
a conceptual study and had pointed  out no guidelines for mapping are  
available.  As this practice helps in advance planning to minimize damage and 
deal with accidents, the Committee had desired that all oil an d gas companies 
should mandatorily carry out GIS mapping of their assets.  The Ministry in its 
reply has stated that IOCL has implemented a GIS based Pipeline Asset 
Integrity Management System and further, GAIL has mapped its existing 
pipelines Assets on GIS platform.  Though the Committee are satisfied at the 
initiatives being taken by IOCL and GAIL, the reply remains silent on the work 
carried out by BPCL, HPCL and OIL in GIS mapping about their pipelines and 
other assets.  The Committee therefore, would reiterate their recommendation 
and expect the Ministry/PSUs to undertake GIS mapping of their a ssets at the 
earliest and inform the Committee about the action taken by them in this 
regard. 
----- 

23 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation 2 
Safety aspects in Petroleum sector 
The Committee understands that oil installations handle hazardous and highly 
inflammable hydrocarbons. Therefore, safety of vital plants, installations, employees 
and public at large is accorded the highest priority. Safety Management System 
relating to oil wells, pipelines, refineries and oil marketing installations is governed by 
Safety Management Practices starting from careful selection of technology and 
design and incorporation of be st engineering services and include well laid down 
systems and procedures for operation, maintenance, inspection, safety audits and 
fire protection systems. Despite, all these systems, accidents occur in oil sector 
causing significant damage to property / loss of lives. As per the data provided by the 
Ministry for the period 2014 -17 (up to 30.11.2017) pertaining to both the upstream / 
downstream oil companies, a total number of 309 accidents took place in which 
there were 81 fatalities and 193 people were i njured. The Committee although find 
that the number of accidents has come down in some of the PSUs but in HPCL and 
ONGC the numbers are still high which is alarming. 
While going into the details of investigation process of accidents, the Committee note 
that the Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) carries out safety audits and 
investigations and sends the report to the concerned company with 
recommendations for compliance. Besides this, the oil companies also carry out 
Internal Safety audit through their multi-disciplinary teams annually as per OISD 
standards. In addition to this, there are other statutory authorized Agencies like 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), The Petroleum and Explosives Safety 
Organisation (PESO), Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) who 
also have a mandate to oversee and enforce safety measures under various Acts 
and Rules in the oil and gas installations including pipelines and transport. The 
Committee, therefore, fail to understand that despite the provision  of regular external 
and internal safety audits of installations and defined responsibilities of various 
enforcing organizations, the accidents keep recurring in the oil and gas sector 
installations. In Committee‟s view there should be zero tolerance towar ds fire 
incidents/accidents in oil and gas installations as the products are highly inflammable 
and any carelessness and casual approach may lead to serious problems. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the all concerned with safety of oil and 
natural gas sector installations should review the causes for accidents/ fire incidents 
and overcome the shortcomings identified in design, process, procedures, 
supervision, training, etc. so that safe working culture becomes a habit and the goal 
towards an accident free work is achieved. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Any Safety related incident in the Oil & Gas Industry is taken very seriously and 
Industry at large has adopted a policy of zero tolerance towards such incidents. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, remains committed to ensure that the vital Oil & 
Gas installations in the country that provide security to the Nation and its safety are 

24 
 
 
 
given highest priority and focused attention that it deserves. Every incident which 
occurs in the Industry, be it small or m ajor, is viewed very seriously by the Ministry 
and suitable measures are taken to ensure that companies concerned take adequate 
preventive measures so that such incidents do not occur again. 
To identify root cause & prevent the recurrence of any incident, the concerned 
industry and OISD are advised to investigate all the major onsite incidents which 
occur in oil installations and follow -up action is taken on the findings of the 
investigation. 
In the Safety Council meeting chaired by Secretary, P&NG, which i s represented by 
CEOs of both PSU and Private sector Oil & Gas Companies, safety performance of 
the Industry is reviewed.  
Further, it is mentioned that the number of incidents is showing decreasing trends for 
recent years. Nevertheless, MoP&NG is making a ll efforts for making Oil & Gas 
industries not only accident free but incident free by ensuring that industries are 
following all statutory guidelines & safe practices. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 3 
Role of Safety Council 
The Committee note that OISD carries out investigations of all the process safety 
related major incidents to determine root causes and recommend corrective actions 
to eliminate or control these haz ards. The accident data analysis submitted to the 
Safety Council by OISD, indicates that the major causes of the incidents / accidents 
across the oil and gas industry include not following the Standard Operating 
Procedures, violation of work permit system and knowledge gap. It has further been 
stated that maximum number of such incidents could be avoided by ensuring strict 
adherence to SOPs and proper supervision. The Committee note with concern that 
Safety Council, an apex body under MOP&NG have not played  their regulatory role 
in safety matters and procedures in respect of hydrocarbon sector. They have not 
been even able to ensure that all the companies strictly comply with safety audit 
recommendations. In Committee‟s view, after observing the deviations o f SOPs 
during safety audits, compliance should be sought within a fixed time frame followed 
by punitive action / penalty so that not only the objective nil fatalities but nil incidents 
is achieved. The Committee therefore, desire that Safety Council should  ensure to 
liquidate all the pending recommendations made in all the audit reports carried out 
by OISD within a fixed time frame. 
The Committee also find that there is no set procedure to fix the accountability for 
the accidents in oil and gas installations. The Committee feel that each major or 
minor incident should be taken seriously and any violation of SOPs should be dealt 
with firmly and decisively along with fixing of responsibility in each case. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that th e Ministry and other agencies entrusted 
with enforcement of safety rules and regulations should fix accountability for violation 
of SOPs whenever any violation takes place. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the causes of accidents in the oil industry during the last three years and 
the action taken against the erring officials. 

25 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
OISD carries out investigation of all the Process Safety related major incidents to 
determine root causes & recommend corrective actions to elim inate or control these 
hazards. All such significant incidents occurring in Petroleum & Natural Gas Industry 
are investigated in-depth by multi-functional OISD team to establish: 
•  The exact sequence of events leading to the incident 
•  The root cause of the incident 
•  Concomitant corrective and/or preventive measures to obviate recurrence 
in future. 
Findings of the Investigation Committee is widely circulated not only to the 
concerned Industry establishment but also shared with all the industry members 
enabling them to take proactive measures. Further, the findings are also utilized as a 
feedback mechanism for updation of OISD standards. Compliance report of all such 
incidents investigations recommendations is also regularly reviewed by 
OISD/MoP&NG. 
Findings of  root causes of incidents across the Industry segments  i.e. Refineries & 
Gas Processing Plants, Marketing Installations (LPG/POL),  Cross Country Pipelines 
and Exploration & Production reveal that majority of such accidents have occurred 
due to sof t reasons like Disregard to established Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs), Violation of work permits, Poor Supervision, Non -compliance to Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPEs) etc. Most of these incidents could have been avoided 
as major root cause of the incidents, year on year basis, continues to be attributed to 
soft reasons. Industry and OISD is putting concerted efforts to review extant safety 
management system so that effective measures can be taken to avoid recurrence of 
avoidable incidents. 
In the 33rd Safety Council meeting held on 07.06.2016 all Oil PSUs was instructed to 
view all pending OISD recommendations seriously and liquidate them on top most 
priority. Further, a  meeting to review the pendency of Audit recommendation with Oil 
PSUs  in the Ministry was held on 19.07.2018. wherein the Oil PSUs were instructed 
as follows:- 
(a) To fix responsibility for delay in implementation of safety audits recommendations 
which are pending for more than 3 years and action must be initiated against 
responsible officers , if no reasonable reason is present. 
(b) To submit a latest status with detailed action plan along with timelines for 
implementation of all the safety audits recommendations which are pending for more 
than three years. 
(c) OISD should prepare  year wise compliance status of pending safety audits 
recommendations of more than 3 years in the forthcoming safety council meeting. 
It was also decided to review of pending OISD safety audits recommendations on 
quarterly basis by Ministry.  
Regarding act ion taken against errand officers during last 3 years, IOCL has 
informed that major penalty have been imposed on 2 employees and disciplinary 

26 
 
 
 
action against 8 officers is in progress. Moreover, fine has been imposed on 6 
contractors & 3 dealers as per contract conditions. 
ONGC has informed that four officials were issued Memorandum against the failure 
to adhere to the Safe Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
OIL has informed that punitive action have been taken against officers found 
responsible for the incident.   
BPCL has informed that Show Cause Notice has been issued to 2 errand employees 
and Caution letter to 2 errand employees. 
HPCL has informed that Major penalty has been imposed on two errand employees 
and penalty proceedings against three officer are in progress. Further, minor penalty 
has been imposed against 4 errand employees.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 4 
 
Training to workers handling risk operations 
 
The Committee note that in the oil and gas industry several works are being done  
through the contractors. One of the important reasons of accidents at the oil 
installations has been found as the poorly trained personnel of these contractors and 
lack of their proper supervision. During the period 2014 -17, 78 accidents were 
caused due t o such workers of these contractors in which 43 contract workers lost 
their lives. The oil installations are hazardous work places and therefore, all the 
persons working here should be properly trained, skilled and alert at all times to 
prevent any acciden ts. Untrained workers and supervisors increases the risk of 
accidents due to human errors. The Committee note that as per OISD guidelines all 
the workers including the contract and security personnel involved in risk operations 
should be imparted regular t raining and refresher training. But such large number of 
incidents caused due to untrained contractual workers and loss of life creates an 
apprehension that whether OISD guidelines are being followed by the companies in 
letter and spirit or not. The Commit tee, therefore, strongly recommend that special 
attention should be paid for imparting regular training and refresher training of all the 
workers including contract workers and security personnel. OISD should also strictly 
check the aspect of training duri ng their audits and fix the responsibility, if there is 
any gap in that regard. The Committee also desire that appropriate clauses 
regarding training to workers handling risk operations should be incorporated in the 
agreements with contractors and in case of violation, responsibility should be fixed 
against all the responsible persons either the contractor or PSU officials for any such 
violation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A number of training courses are being conducted by the Companies intended to 
develop th e skills and safety consciousness of employees including of those on 
contract also. 

27 
 
 
 
As per stipulations laid down in OISD standards all the workers including the contract 
and security personnel involved in risk operations are imparted regular training and 
refresher trainings as per the guidelines prescribed in the standards i.e. OISD-STD-
154, OISD-GDN-228, OISD-GDN-176,  OISD-GDN-192 and OISD-GDN-207. 
Monitoring of Compliance with OISD Standards by OISD 
During External Safety Audits of the Oil & Gas Install ation by OISD, efficacy of the 
trainings imparted is checked and gaps, if any, are recommended for corrective 
actions. Compliance of audits recommendations is monitored by OISD/MoP&NG on 
quarterly basis. A ll the clauses regarding incorporation of training to workers such 
clauses are already part of the contract agreement in the form of either General 
Contract Condition (GCC) or Special Contract Conditions (SCC) of the companies 
concerned.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 6 
Safety during Transportation of Petroleum Products 
Petroleum products viz. Petrol, Diesel, LPG etc. are distributed from refineries, 
bottling plants to retail outlets and LPG distributors by roads using trucks. Since they 
carry hazardous and inflammable material, their movement on road has to be done 
with utmost care and safety to avoid accidents. During the year 2014 -15 there were 
484 accidents, in 2015 -16 it was 597 and in 2016 -17, 517 accidents took place that 
involved trucks transporting petroleum products of the three major oil marketing 
companies viz. IOCL, BPCL and HPCL. The Committee note that various measures 
have been taken by oil marketing companies to prevent transportation related 
incidents. This includes the provision of Vehicle Tracking System (VTS), speed 
governors and fabrication drawing app roved by PESO in the Tank Trucks and 
Lories. The Committee desire that these measures should be enforced strictly for 
compliance to ensure safe and accident free transportation of petroleum products on 
road. The Committee, however, note that at present it is not mandatory to install 
GPS along with VTS in the tank trucks. The Committee, therefore, recommend that it 
should be made mandatory along with geo-fencing so that the movement of trucks is 
monitored in real time. PESO which is the nodal body should exa mine this matter 
and come out with appropriate rules / guidelines. The Committee, further, note that 
with the implementation of PMUY and proposed targets under the scheme would 
increase the number of consumers considerably. The Government also has 
ambitious targets for PNG and CNG consumers under city gas distribution network. 
Also the transportation, storage and usage of petroleum products in rural areas will 
also increase swiftly. The Committee desire that, therefore, consumers and other 
stakeholders like  distributors, agencies, etc. should be educated for the safe 
handling of LPG cylinders in particular and other products like kerosene, petrol and 
diesel, PNG and CNG.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The movement of the Petroleum products on road are done with ut most care and 
safety to avoid accidents. Transportation contract conditions stipulates that Carrier 
shall engage TT driver who has undergone training on transportation of hazardous 
goods as stipulated under the Motor Vehicle Acts/Rules. The driving license  of the 

28 
 
 
 
driver should be endorsed by Road Transport Authorities to this effect. The tender 
document of OMC includes clauses for provision of “Any Vehicle Tracking System 
(VTS) (for e.g.: Global Tracking System) to track the movement of the Tank Truck”. 
OISD, during the course of its audit of locations reviews the implementation of VTS 
and makes observations / recommendations on efficacy of the same. Training to 
consumers and other stakeholders like distributors, agencies etc. is undertaken by 
the respective  Oil Companies. The officers are trained to provide knowledge on 
hazards associated with LPG sales and to evoke correct and prompt response in any 
emergency situation covers customer education on safety. The delivery boys are 
trained in safe handling of LP G cylinders and handling of emergencies covers safe 
handling of cylinders at customer‟s premises and guidance to customer on safety 
aspects. OISD-STD-154 laid down detailed guidelines on preparation and execution 
of typical training programme, use of appro priate training technique of evaluation of 
the effectiveness of training programme.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Recommendation 7 
Pilferage from Pipelines 
The Committee observe that pilferage  from oil pipelines by anti -social elements is a 
major concern. Such instances pose a major hazard and such activities put the lives 
of many at risk. The Committee note that preventive measures include maintaining 
regular interaction with the civil adminis tration, electronic surveillance, patrolling by 
local police. The Petroleum and Mineral Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of Use in 
Land) Act, 1962 has also been amended and made more stringent against the 
offenders. Despite all this, such pilferage from pip elines has not been stopped. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that pilferage from the pipelines should be 
prevented by proper monitoring of the pipeline network especially in those areas 
from where the pipeline runs through vacant land. The Committee, f urther, desire 
that appropriate warning signages requiring dangers and punishment for tampering 
with the pipeline should also be put up along the pipelines and those found involved 
in such pilferage activities should be punished severely. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Various safety measures taken by pipeline operators, including the steps to avoid 
pilferage, are already explained under the reply to observation/recommendation No 5 
above. With regard to appropriate warning signages requiring dangers and 
punishment for tampering with the pipeline, it  is mentioned that as on date all 
pipeline operators are installing warning boards as stipulated in OISD standard 
which informs the general public about dangers involved with hydro carbon pipeline. 
In all such signages and signboards punishment admissible under the Petroleum 
and Mineral Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of Use in Land) Act, 1962 is clearly 
mentioned. 
Some of the other measures taken by industry to minimize pilferages are: 
 Provision of Leak Detection System  (LDS) for online monitoring and detection of 
any leakage in the pipeline.  
 Provision of CCTVs at all Stations as well as SV/RCP stations. 

29 
 
 
 
 Carrying out night patrolling at all vulnerable pipeline stretches in addition to day 
patrolling.  
 For better co-ordination and with law enforcing agencies, regular Oil Security Co -
ordination Committee (OSCC) meetings are being held with top brass of each 
state police where all the oil industry members are being present. 
 Implementation of installing Pipeline Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) phase 
wise in all the cross country pipelines to have early warning for any kind of 
pilferage activity and any leakage. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Recommendation 8  
Butcher Island Fire Incident 
The Committee note that the fire at one of the tank farms of BPCL situated at 
Butcher Island, near Mumbai on 06.10.2017 was the most recent major accident in 
the oil Industry. There was no loss of life but one tank that was use d for storing HSD 
was fully damaged. For fire fighting, High Volume Long Range Monitors - HVLR 
(2000 GPM) of tank number 13 was started and foam was also applied. Despite this 
the fire could not be put out and the HSD in the tank was allowed to burn in a 
controlled manner. The cause of the fire was attributed to intense Lightning strike. 
The Committee were informed that a Committee constituted by OISD to investigate 
the incident has concluded that roof plates of tank were thinned out / pitted which got 
punctured due to lightning strike. The tank was also inspected by BPCL officials 
before the incident and was certified for use. However, the Marine Oil Terminal 
(MOT) facilities at Butcher Island  was not audited by OISD in the last External 
Safety Audit (ESA)  of BPCL, Mumbai Refinery on 26 th – 30th September, 2016 and 
these facilities were not offered for safety audit. The Committee are of the view that 
the frequency of safety audits of tank farms should be reviewed in view of this 
incident. The Committee spec ifically desire that the frequency of ESA should be 
increased in those areas that are susceptible to particular vagaries of weather more 
often and preventive measures taken. 
While analyzing the quality of firefighting equipment the Committee feel that at 
Butcher Island it was inadequate to put out the tank fire. While the Ministry and 
PSUs claim their capabilities for managing the fire incidents have improved after the 
implementation pf M.B. Lal committee recommendation, the way the fire incident in 
Butcher lsland was handled belie this, even though the adjacent tanks in the site 
were safeguarded from Fire, the entire fuel in the storage tank was allowed to burn 
out instead of fire fighting to put out the fire. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the fi refighting capabilities at all the 
storage sites of petroleum products across the country be upgraded to ensure quick 
extinguishing of fire.' The Committee would like to be apprised of the further safety 
measures including the installation of advanced ligh tning protection system 
undertaken by the oil industry to prevent the recurrence of such incidents at par with 
the worldwide practices being followed to deal with such situation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Regarding reviewing the frequency of Safety Audits in  Oil and Gas installations 
especially tank farm areas; the following steps have been taken by OISD: 

30 
 
 
 
 Central Tank Farms (CTFs) will be considered as standalone facilities and shall 
be audited at a frequency of 3 years from earlier 5 years 
 For POL marketing installations having aggregate storage capacity of more than 
1 Lac KL, the audit frequency is reduced to 5 years from earlier 7 years.  
 Clubbing the external & Surprise Safety Audits of the installations in a particular 
city/ neighbouring locations so that  coverage of audits increases. In the process, 
OISD has audited 112 locations in the year 2017 -18 against the original plan of 
70 numbers. 
Regarding upgrading the fire fighting capabilities at all the storage sites of petroleum 
products across the country and to ensure quick extinguishing of fire, it is submitted 
that OISD has already taken initiatives for evaluation of functionality checks of the 
critical firefighting equipment like HVLRMs, ROSOVs, RSFPS, MEFG etc. at 
Marketing (POL) Installations. Present ly, 115 (out of total 276 nos.) POL locations 
have already been covered & compliance being monitored for 100% accomplishment 
of functioning of such equipment. 
Further, OISD has already undertaken revision of its Standard -180 on lightning 
protection through functional committee.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 11 
Creation of Buffer Zones around installations 
The Committee note that one of the recommendations of the M.B. Lal Committee 
was to create a buffer zone around installations and regulating land use pattern 
around high hazard petroleum installations. Accordingly, all the Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs were requested in April 2013 to ensure adequate provisions in their land 
allotment rules to prohibit habitations to come up within a band of at least 250 -300 
meters around the periphery of the oil installations and to maintain a buffer zone to 
minimize the impa ct on the surrounding areas in case of a major accident. In this 
regard, the Committee were informed that no feedback has been received from the 
state governments. The Committee understand that buffer zones around petroleum 
installations are an important a spect for maintenance of safety and therefore, desire 
that there should be no let -up in pursuing the matter with the States/UTs and the 
importance of creation of buffer zones should be impressed on them so that M.B. Lal 
Committee recommendation regarding s afety of high hazard installations is 
implemented without any further delay. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to regulate the land use around Oil installations, a communication was sent 
to all the Chief Secretaries of States/UT in the matter on 02.04.2013 wherein it was 
requested to issue appropriate instructions to the concerned authorities to make 
adequate provision under the relevant Acts and Rules to prohibit proliferation of 
unauthorized hutment, shops or residential houses within a band of at least 250 -300 
metres around periphery of the Oil installation. The communication was followed by 
a reminder o n 20.01.2016. Reports were received only from 4 States/UTs. As 

31 
 
 
 
response was very poor, another communication has been sent to States/UT on 
30.08.2018.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 12 
Geo-physical Mapping of Potential Disasters 
The Committee have been informed that ONGC has developed an in -house GIS 
mapping of its pipelines laid in onshore locations and the mapping is nearly 
complete. ONGC is also undertaking a conceptual study in this regard. The 
Committee also note that no guidelines for GIS mapping of upstream assets has 
been brought out by OISD. 
The Committee desire that all the oil and gas companies should mandatorily carry 
out GIS mapping of their assets. This will not only  enable for tracking purpose both 
onshore and offshore but also as a tool for risk assessment of the areas around 
petroleum and gas installations/pipelines during major accidents. The Committee 
recommend that the world wide practice should also be studied for adopting the 
same in the Indian scenario for advance planning to minimise damage and to deal 
with accidents efficiently and effectively. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IOCL has informed that GIS based Pipeline Asset Integrity Management System has 
been implem ented in new cross country pipelines. Maps indicating pipeline routes 
are shared with respective police stations/administration as part of Emergency 
Response Disaster Management Plan (ERDMP). 
ONGC undertakes survey of all the offshore pipelines inclusive o f GIS mapping once 
every five years. An in -house common portal has also been developed for mapping 
of the pipelines. GIS mapping is done regularly for the areas where seismic survey is 
carried out. 
GAIL has mapped its existing pipelines assets on GIS platf orm. Further, with the 
expansion of the truck pipeline in other parts of the country including providing the 
last mile connectivity, the same will also be mapped on the platform periodically. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 13 
Onshore Security 
The Committee note that the security for the on -shore installations is provided by the 
owner oil companies owned security staff along with the Central Industrial Security 
Force (CISF), through patrolling. Technology such as Intrusion Detection System 
(IDS), remote surveillance, GIS, GPS, is also extensively being used for monitoring 
security of installations and pipelines. There is an Onshore Security Committee 
Chaired by the DGPs which acts as an inter-state linkage. The same pattern is being 

32 
 
 
 
followed in s ecuring the Oil & Gas installations in the North -Eastern region. The 
Committee desire that the security of such vital installations should be fool proof to 
deal with all possible types of threats in the current security scenario. Security audit 
should be c arried out at periodic intervals to update and upgrade the security 
systems in all the oil and gas installations. Worldwide practices in this area should 
also be examined and adopted wherever feasible. Apart from the internal security 
mechanisms, the State Governments and the local administration also have a major 
role in the security of the oil & gas installations. Regular interaction with the state 
authorities should be an essential feature of the security system for sharing of 
information on threats and for timely action during an emergency. The illegal 
encroachments/construction around the periphery of the oil & gas installations and 
on the Right of Way (RoW) around pipelines should not be allowed to come up as 
they pose a security threat. In this regard  the Committee desire that Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF) should be empowered to register cases against 
violators. The Committee further desire that the security risk assessment of all the 
onshore oil and gas installations should be carried out a nd the security strengthened 
by addressing and filling the gaps found therein. The Committee further desire that 
the best of the equipment and technology is used by the oil industry to secure their 
installations. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The security of all  installations is being ensured by deploying unarmed and armed 
security guards 24x7 through CISF. The security audit of all the vital installations are 
carried out by Intelligence Bureau (MHA) and state Intelligence Bureau in 
coordination. Mock drills are also conducted periodically. Moreover internal security 
audits are also carried out by security in charge on regular intervals. All the locations 
are declared as „Prohibited Areas‟ by administration and notices displayed along with 
peripheral patrolling an d ROW patrolling. Provisions of technology -based devices 
including Intrusion Detection System, forced entry barriers, GPS/RFID based 
patrolling monitors are in the process of implementation at critical installations.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 14 
Offshore Security 
The Committee note that Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Offshore Defence Advisory 
Group (ODAG) a dedicated group of the Navy, are presently engaged to provide 
security to the Western and Eastern Offshore Oil and Gas platforms. The on boat 
security is exclusively been done by ONGC. The state police or the coastal police 
looks after the security from onshore to 12 nautical miles. The Offshore Security Co -
ordination Committee  (OSCC) comprising of the members from the Indian Coast 
Guard, Navy and the Ministry of Shipping reviews the security issues. The 
Committee were further informed that the offshore activity of vessels both sea borne 
and air is closely monitored through the Vessel and Air Traffic Management System 
(VATMS), besides this the Navy, ODAG, and the Indian Air Force also keep a watch 
on the movement of vessels. The Immediate Support Vessels of the Navy carry out 
regular patrolling of the waters. The Committee also n ote that to address underwater 
threats a comprehensive security solution is also being developed. 

33 
 
 
 
The Committee are satisfied to note the present security mechanism in place for 
protection of offshore oil and gas installations, nevertheless, desire that th e maritime 
security and surveillance should keep abreast with the latest technology and further 
enhanced with equipment that are required for the protection of important offshore 
assets of the nation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Offshore Security Co -ordination Committee (OSCC) forum is utilized to review, 
explore and improve existing offshore security apparatus and introduction of new 
pragmatic methods. Being a multi agency forum, inputs and expertise from various 
agencies is discussed to evolve Credible Re sponse Mechanism. The 
Comprehensive Security Solution is being developed by ONGC taking inputs from 
Indian Naval Specialists and other expertise to include latest technologies for 
security and surveillance. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 15 
Environment Protection in and around oil refineries 
Today India‟s oil refining capacity is of about 5 million barrels per day and it exceeds 
the countries demand of oil products resulting in exports of more than one million 
barrel per day. Efforts are also being made to develop India as a refining hub in 
coming years. Surging demands in domestic and export market offers at attractive 
growth for Indian refineries. The Committee, however, feel that the growth if the 
Indian‟s refinery industry and country‟s sustainable future are closely linked 
tightening emission standards of international levels. Refineries emit a wide variety 
of pollutants. Common air pollutants coming out of refineries are Sulphur Dioxide, 
Oxides of Nitrogen, Carbon Monoxide, green house gases and other carcinogenic air 
pollutants. Similarly, pollutants from the refineries are also responsible for pollution of 
water bodies and contamination of ground water. Noise pollution from the refineries 
is also cause of concern. All these pollutants have harmful health effects relating to 
respiratory sy stem, heart, eyes, skin, digestion etc and other serious health 
disorders. Prevention and control of air, water and noise pollution is being done 
under various acts of environment protection. This includes water pollution, air 
pollution  and noise pollutio n monitoring and control, developments of green belts 
and eco parks, carbon management, use of renewable and alternate energy and 
solid waste and e -waste management etc. The committee, however, are not sure 
whether refining emission standards are strictly being followed by the refineries and 
also whether the effluent treatment facilities in all the refineries are of global level 
because the population living around the refineries face respiratory and other 
problems and water bodies in the adjoining areas to  the refineries are heavily 
polluted. There are refinery modernization/expansion projects in progress and in 
pipeline. The Committee caution the Ministry that such projects should not be 
undertaken at the cost of increase in pollution of environment and co ntamination of 
water. The committee desires, in view of global environment standards improvement, 
the environment management in Indian refineries also need shift from conventional 
to more pragmatic approaches. Refineries should ensure that there is a regul ar 
monitoring and control of environment pollution and the level is not disturbed further 
due to expansion/modernization of refineries. They should put in efforts for mitigating 

34 
 
 
 
environmental pollution using the latest and cleaner technology, recovery of t he 
byproducts and resource conservation and effluent treatment facilities and all these 
factors should be monitored and upgraded regularly at par with the international 
standards. The committee may be apprised about the efforts made in this direction 
and the outcome thereof. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The pollution levels are monitored and meet the MoEF&CC & Pollution Control 
Board‟s stipulations and are online uploaded to the CPCB/KSCB servers. As per the 
Hazardous waste and other (Management and Trans bounda ry Movement) Rules, 
2016 and consent to operate, low oily sludge is treated by adopting bioremediation 
using bacteria specialized for oil degradation with faster rate and thereby converting 
the low oily sludge into fertile soil.  
All continuous air monitor ing stations have been upgraded. Additional analyzers for 
monitoring of parameters namely Ozone, Benzene, Ammonia and H2S have been 
added along with new Sox and NOx analyzer. Data from these stations have been 
uploaded on Central Pollution Control Board website. 
 
The refineries have various Environmental system and procedures in place to 
control and mitigate significant aspects and their impacts. State of the art New 
Integrated Effluent Treatment Plant consisting of primary, secondary and tertiary 
treatment section  has been in operation consistently. The technology confirms to 
existing MINAS (Environmental Standards) and can also cater to further stringent 
standards in the future.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
Recommendation 16 
Incidents of Oil Spill 
The Committee notes that oil spill is a major problem in hydrocarbon sector which 
adversely effects the environment. There have been few incidents of oil spill, notably 
the recent one in Chennai coast in  January, 2017 due to the collision of the two 
vessels. Similarly many incidents of the oil spill due to accidents involving vessels, oil 
platforms/rigs/pipelines etc have happened in the past in Indian coast. As the country 
has long coast both on the East erner and Western side, there has to be an effective 
monitoring mechanism to avoid such incidents. 
The Committee note that oil spill causes enormous impact on environment on marine 
life as well as to environment along with the economic cost associated with  the 
cleaning and treating oil sludge. The management of oil spill involves significant 
financial, technical and human resource. The Committee are surprised to note that 
oil companies have not undertaken any serious R&D activities to develop the best 
capabilities in this regard. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should coordinate with other agencies like NDMA, Indian Coast Guard, Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate change, Ministry of Shipping, etc. to monitor and 
enhance the indigenous capabilities of managing the oil spill effectively. 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is the nodal agency for dealing with the incidents of oil spill 
within territorial limits of India. It has established Pollution Response Team (PRT) at 
Mumbai, Chennai and Port Blair. ICG has commissioned three dedicated pollution 
control Vessels based at Porbandar, Mumbai and Vizag. ICG regularly interacts with 
Oil Handling Agencies. The ICG has prepared  Nation Oil Spill Disaster Contingency 
Plan (NOS-DCP) for oil spill response. Further, ICG is entrusted with responsibility of 
surveillance of Maritime Zones and coordinating authority for combating oil pollution 
against oil spills, combating oil spills (except for water in ports and within 500 m eters 
of off-shore exploration and production platforms, coastal refineries and associated 
facilities), implementing NOS -DCP which obliges all ports (Major and Non -major 
ports), oil equipment for tier -I response (i.e. Oil spills up to 700 tons) & coastal S tate 
Administration to be suitably equipped for undertaking shoreline clean -up in their 
area of responsibility and conducting regular training and national level pollution 
response exercise with active participation of stakeholders viz. Ports, Oil handling  
agencies. Further, the International Convention for Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships (MARPOL) is being implemented by Ministry of Shipping. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
 
  

36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation 1 
Safety, Security And Environmental Aspects In Petroleum Sector 
 
The Committee note that the petroleum and natural gas industry of the country 
comprises of three major streams namely exploration and production, refineries, 
marketing & distribution. The country has 23 refineries with installed capacity of 231 
MMTPA, 15 gas processing plants, 4 LNG terminals, 680 oil and LPG installations 
and more than 39,000 KM cross country pipelines spread across the length and 
breadth of t he country. In offshore exploration and production, there are 21 
production complexes, 252 well platforms and 33 rigs while in on -land exploration 
and production, there are 301 production installations & 230 rigs. This industry 
handles highly inflammable h ydrocarbons in all forms namely solid, liquid and gas 
and operates processes under high temperature and pressure. Moreover, Petroleum 
industry has a significant influence on the total pollution of the environment by 
exploration and production operations, o il spillage, gas flaring and oil refining 
operations. Therefore, the safety and security and environment protection in 
petroleum and natural gas industry is of paramount and vital importance and its 
operation in a safe mode is necessary both for the employ ees and the society at 
large. The hydrocarbons are essential for economic development and propriety of 
nation for decades to come. The Committee, therefore, desire that, the Ministry 
should accord the top priority to the safety, security and environmental aspects 
relating to the petroleum and natural gas industry. All these aspects should be 
continuously monitored and necessary changes in statutes, rules and regulations be 
made so that the legislations enforcing these measures are strengthened regularly to 
enhance the level of safety and security of the installations and minimize the adverse 
impact on environment from the activities at installations at par with the current 
global situation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&N G) regularly monitors and reviews 
the various safety issues in the Oil & gas Sector and directs the oil companies from 
time to time to take suitable measures to ensure safety of these vital installations. 
Safety, health and environmental aspects of the Oil  & Gas installations is of 
paramount importance; and concerted efforts are being made by the Industry and 
MoP&NG to preserve such national assets without compromising the safety.  
OISD, technical body under the Ministry, makes necessary Safety Standards 
depending upon the emerging needs of the safety of oil installations and these 
standards are adopted after a due process and included in various rules/regulations. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 

38 
 
 
 
Recommendation 9 
Setting up of Emergency Response Centres (ERCs) 
The Committee note that after the Jaipur major fire incident, the M.B. Lal Committee 
which investigated the incident had recommended for the setting up of Emergency 
Response Centre (ERCs) in the country to handle major oil fires like storage tank fire 
in fastest and specialized way.  
The Committee also note that M.B. Lal Committee recommendations were approved 
by OMC and Ministry to be implemented immediately and all the recommendations 
including setting up of ERCs were to be completed by 2014. The Committe e note 
that even after approval of the Ministry, the recommendation of setting up of ERCs is 
still pending.  
The Committee further note that it has now been decided to set up five ERCs to be 
piloted by each of the oil companies at the following locations:  
IOCL-Jaipur, HPCL -Vizag, BPCL-Manmad, ONGC -Hazira, and GAIL at Guna. The 
Fire Advisor, Ministry of Home Affairs too has recommended in 2006 & 2017 for 
establishing and positioning of ERCs at strategic locations. The Committee note that 
initially EIL was appointed as a consultant but was dropped due to high rates quoted 
by it, and now a global tender for appointment of consultant for Fire Expertise with 
PMC work for setting up of 5 ERCs has been floated. The Committee desire that 
engaging a Fire Consultant for setting up ERC before PMC work be expedited to 
ensure setting up of ERC, supply of equipment and operation of ERC at the earliest.  
The Committee deplore the casual approach of the Ministry resulting in inordinate 
delay in the setting up of ERCs. It ap pears that the oil industry is waiting for another 
major disaster to happen to get on its feet. The Committee disagrees with the 
Ministry‟s contention that the firefighting capabilities of the industry is adequate to 
meet any major fire emergency and that the concept of ERC is a second line of 
defence in case of catastrophic events for which various other avenues like mutual 
aid partner industry, state fire brigade etc., are already in place. The Committee 
further note that an ERC would take up 3 to 4 years  to be set up and any incident 
during the intervening period may cause huge losses. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that for the interim period the OMCs should procure required 
advanced firefighting equipments viz. robotic monitors, high capac ity pumps with 
portable foam monitors, large hoses etc. for all the 22 locations for the proposed 
ERCs and later such equipments could become a part of the ERC. The Committee 
also desire that till the ERCs are set up, the OMCs should appoint an experienced  
agency on temporary basis who can provide 24x7 emergency firefighting services 
with advanced equipments as mentioned above immediately without any further 
delay.  
The Committee agree with the views of the industry experts who deposed before 
them and are of the opinion that OMCs should consider procuring 
equipments/setting up of ERCs as they are an investment in safety. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to take immediate action for the setting up of all 22 
ERCs starting with 11 ERCs at strategi c locations specially where there is cluster of 
oil companies/terminals to meet any disaster, taking into consideration the 
requirements of a rapidly growing industry. 
 

39 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
With the installation of state of the art equipment at installa tions of all the OMCs, the 
firefighting capability of our Oil & Gas Installations in the country is adequate to meet 
any major fire emergency arising out on account of routine operations. With in -plant 
firefighting facilities, all the OMCs are equipped wit h fire fighting facilities to handle 
emergency scenarios like tank fires, leakages etc. for a duration of four hours.  
 
Further, in addition to the installed firefighting facilities, which are adequate for any 
operational related emergency as mentioned abo ve, other avenues like mutual aid 
partner industries, state fire brigade etc. can also be pressed into service in case any 
catastrophic event occurs in these installations as a second line of defense. It may 
be reiterated that ERCs once available, shall al so act as second line of defense to 
the installed firefighting facilities. 
 
With regard to setting of ERCs in the country, it is mentioned that it has now been 
decided to set up five ERCs to be piloted by each of the oil companies at the 
following locations: 
IOCL-Jaipur, HPCL -Vizag, BPCL-Manmad, ONGC -Hazira, GAIL, Dibiyapur (Earlier 
location Guna is changed).  
It is submitted that for appointment of consultant for PMC for setting up 5 ERCs as 
above, a Global tender was floated but there was no response to g et PMC services 
to establish 5 pilot ERCs by IOC/BPC/HPC/GAIL/ONGC. Based on inputs provided 
by prospective vendors during pre -bid meeting of the last tender, detailed  BQC (bid 
qualification criteria) and Tender scope  for engagement of PMC consultant have 
been finalized. To invite more no of bids, JVs/Consortium are being allowed in the 
new tender to have wider participation from prospective PMC consultants. 
Global/open tender is likely to float shortly. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

40 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation 5 
Safety of Pipelines 
The Committee note that OISD carries out periodic audits including pre -
commissioning audit of cross country pipelines, other additional safety checks and 
measures to ensure protection of oil and natural gas pipeline network in the country. 
It includes moni toring of the pipeline through 'Pipeline Integrity Management 
System', Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), sustained ground 
patrolling, inspection of Right of Way (RoW), surge analysis etc. However, despite 
such measures in place, a major acc ident occurred in the GAIL pipeline at Nagaram 
in East Godavari District of Andhra Pradesh in the year 2014 which caused 
extensive damage to life and property. The explosion and fire tragically claimed 22 
lives. The cause of the accident was pipeline / equ ipment failure due to violations of 
SOPs. In this case it has been reported that wet gas was being carried in the 
pipeline meant for dry gas without taking adequate precautions like pigging of 
pipeline at regular intervals. The Committee are deeply anguish ed on this incident 
and feel that accident could have been prevented by following proper procedures in 
the first place. The Committee also note that in this case other safety measures also 
seem to have failed pointing towards the failure of monitoring syst em. The 
Committee note that the PESO has submitted its report on the incident to the MoEF 
for further action. The Committee, therefore, desire that MoP&NG should take up the 
matter with MoEF and ensure an action against those found responsible for lapses 
and negligence which caused the accident.  
Looking at the serious impact of such incidents of leakage of gas, the Committee 
strongly recommend that there should be a fool proof mechanism for monitoring of 
pipeline infrastructure network of the country both through human and sensor based 
system and any deviations should be reported and preventive action initiated 
immediately. There should also be backup measures for operation of remote valves 
and these should be such that they are not damaged due to fire etc.  The 
communications lines could be placed underground or away and secured from 
tampering. There should also be audible warning system to warn the people of leaks 
etc. so that they can take precautions. The Committee, further, note that the safety of 
the population that lives around those places where the oil and gas pipelines pass is 
the responsibility of the owner of the pipeline and should not be compromised in any 
way. Any report from the public about anything wrong like leaks in the pipeline or 
tampering should be taken seriously and investigated immediately to prevent any 
accident. Besides this, people should also be sensitized on the do's and don‟ts in the 
event of any accident on the pipeline. The Committee may also be apprised of all the 
initiatives for safety of pipelines taken in this direction.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Regarding action taken against officers responsible for major accident in the GAIL 
pipeline at Nagaram in East Godavari District of Andhra Pradesh in the year 2014 
Gail has informed that based on assigned roles and responsibilities disciplinary 
proceedings were initiated against 5 officials. Penalty of non -consideration for 

41 
 
 
 
promotion & withholding performance related payments was immediately imposed 
on charges officials with the initiation of disciplinary proceedings. Disciplinary 
authority has examined the  submissions of charged officials which are yet to be 
concluded. 
Further, each of the oil companies both in private and public sector are required to 
maintain highest level of safety standards for ensuring safe operations in the 
respective pipelines. Some of the major safety measures undertaken by the Oil & 
Natural Gas Industry include:  
 Incorporation of in -built safety aspects in the i.e. during the design phase itself. 
These include process safety, instrumentation & safety interlocks, safety while 
design of equipment following the best International Standards, etc.  
 Each installation has its own dedicated firefighting facilities which are equipped 
with gadgets, well trained crew to fight fire in case of any eventuality.  
 The industry also carries out regul ar Internal Safety Audits and conducts periodic 
mock drills both on -site and off -site to ensure emergency preparedness. It has 
also developed its own Disaster Management Plan. 
 For real time monitoring of movement of line Patrolmen through Global 
Positioning System (GPS) has been adopted by pipeline industry.  
 Monitoring of Repeater -cum-Cathodic Protection Stations through Close Circuit 
Television (CCTV) based surveillance has been adopted by pipeline industry. 
 OFC based Pipeline Intrusion detection system/ acoustic sensor based leak 
detection system is being implemented.  
 Application software based Leaked Detection System (LDS) in liquid pipelines is 
implemented in liquid pipelines. 
 Provision of remote operation of pipeline‟s sectionalizing valves is kept for closing 
in case of any emergency. 
 Provision of alternate communication means (in addition to OFC based 
communication/ radio communication) such as leased line /GSM network from 
telecom operators etc. as stan d-by for closure of remote valves in case of OFC / 
radio communication failure. 
 The pipeline is provided with electrical sirens of high range (3Km range) at all 
originating, intermediate pump / delivery stations, terminal station and all 
sectionalizing val ve (SV) stations which are spread evenly along the length of 
pipeline.  
 Toll free number on all route markers along the ROU of pipelines are provided. 
 Regular interaction with villagers to sensitize them by conducting awareness 
programs like Hastakshar Abh iyaan/Sarpanch Meet/free medical check -up 
camps/Samyojak scheme/Sahyogi scheme etc. 
 Regular interaction is being held with respective Police & District Administration. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 

42 
 
 
 
Recommendation 10 
Formation of Unified Safety Board 
The Committee note that depending on the type of installations, there are various 
statutory authorities involved in the safety enforcement in the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Industry. In the E&P onshore and offshore industry segments Exploration and 
Production the DGMS and OISD under the administrative Ministries of Labour and 
Employment and P&NG respectively have jurisdiction. In t he Downstream & Gas 
(Natural) Processing Plants (GPP) segments the PESO and PNGRB under the 
administrative Ministries of Commerce & Industry and P&NG respectively are 
enforcing safety. The Committee also note that the proposal for having a unified 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Safety Board has been under consideration since the 
last four years and nothing has been finalised as yet. The Committee were informed 
that the matter was considered by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) and they 
were of the view for stre ngthening the existing regulatory bodies over creation of a 
new organization. Thereafter, the recommendations of the CoS were considered by 
the Ministers of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Commerce and Labour. 
They have decided that a report sho uld be prepared after studying the safety and 
security aspects keeping in view the international practice. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the current state of affairs as such an important issue is being unduly 
delayed. It appears that the three Minis tries are reluctant to give up their role in the 
safety related aspects as they perceive it akin to losing power. 
The Committee have been informed that among the three bodies namely PESO, 
DGMS and OISD, almost 97 percent of the premises are regulated for s afety by 
PESO and 2 percent by DGMS and 1 percent by OISD. PESO has been handling 
the safety regulations in hazardous premises like refineries, cross country pipelines, 
manufacturing, storage and transportation of exploring storage & use of explosives in 
oil mines, Auto LPG and CNG dispensing stations. The Committee feel that the 
MoPNG wants to retain its dominant role through the OISD. The Committee would 
like to point out here that the OISD has no permanent staff of its own and most of its 
officers are on  deputation from the Oil Companies. Therefore, the concept of arm‟s 
length in the safety aspect is certainly not fulfilled here. Due to conflict of interests, 
such officers cannot be expected to give adverse reports against their own 
employers. Therefore, in Committee‟s view, considering the capabilities, 
infrastructure and proportion of work administered in Hydrocarbon sector, PESO is 
more suitable body to reposition it to administer safety regulations in entire 
hydrocarbon sector. The Committee, therefore , strongly recommend that PESO may 
be empowered to work as a single framework for regulation of safety in entire 
hydrocarbon sector. For that purpose the capacity of PESO should be enhanced by 
providing it prosecution powers and strengthening the Human Res ource and 
coordination with District authorities, upgradation of Research and Testing 
infrastructure and capacity building of external stakeholders. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Ministry has brought a proposal before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) for 
establishment of Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry Safety Board (PNGISB) to 
regulate the safety of petroleum and Natural Gas Industry in the entire country. The 
proposal also envisage establishment of Directorate General of Natural Gas and 
Industry safety.  Three meetings of the CoS have been held on 01.07.2014, 
7.11.2014 and 19.08.2016. After detailed deliberations held in the third meeting of 

43 
 
 
 
CoS on 19.08.2016, it was interalia decided that MoPNG may weigh the option of 
strengthening the existing upstream and mid/downstream regulators vis -à-vis, a 
single safety regulator for all segments and take a considered view in this regard.  
In order to settle the issues an inter -ministerial meeting involving Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoP&NG), Ministry of  Labour and Employment (MoLE) & Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry was held on 20.12.2016 and it was agreed to examine further the 
issue of existing structure of Safety in Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry and also 
examining best practice of Safety issues in Hydrocarbon Industry in other countries. 
OISD was requested on 06.04.2017 to examine the best practices of safety issues in the 
hydrocarbon industry in other countries and submit a report. OISD has since submitted a 
report in the matter. 
Further, Performance Audit Report of PESO has been obtained. Forensic Audit report of 
DGMS has not been received from Ministry of Labour. 
From above, it would be evident that inter -ministerial consultation is going on to settle the 
issue.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-11037/12/3/2018-OR-II/E-26376 Dated 17.10.2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
2 January, 2019 
12 Pausha,1940 (Saka)     
               PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2018-19) 
 
FOURTH SITTING 
(02.01.2019) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 2 January, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo 
4 Smt. Rama Devi 
5 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
6 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
8 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
10 Shri A.T. (Nana) Patil 
11 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
12 Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
13 Smt. Ranee Narah 
14 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
15 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
16 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

45 
 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject 'Safe ty, Security and Environmental Aspects in Petroleum 
Sector', for consideration and adopted the same without modification.  
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the 
Report in both the Houses of Parliament.   
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FOURTH  REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM 
AND NATURAL GAS (2017 -18) ON  THE SUBJECT  ‘SAFETY, SECURITY AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS IN PETROLEUM SECTOR'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 16 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15 and 16) 
 
12 
 Percentage to Total 75% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations No. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1 and 9) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 
 
12.50% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 5 and 10)  
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 
 
12.50% 
 