 
 
3 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
ALLOCATION AND PRICING OF GAS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Nineteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2013-14)] 
THIRD REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2015/ Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
ALLOCATION AND PRICING OF GAS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth 
report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2013-14)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.4.2015 
 
 
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2015/ Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) 
 

 
 
(iii) 
 
     CONTENTS      
Page 
 
            
 
 
 
(iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15)………………………                    (iv) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………                    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report ………………………………………………….     
                   
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepte d 
by the Government           
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee                         
 
CHAPTER V 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited                       
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
              I. 
Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15) held on 27.1.2015 
 
 
 
             II. 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014 -15) on `Allocation and 
Pricing of Gas' 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & 
NATURAL GAS (2014-15) 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi – Chairman 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
*4 Shri Haribhai Chaudhary 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Shrimati Rama Devi 
7 Shri Elumalai V. 
8 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
13 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
14 Shri Arvind Sawant 
15 Shri Raju Shetty 
16 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
17 Shri Ravneet Singh 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
# 23 Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 

 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
24 
 
(v) 
 
Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
25 Shri Prabhat Jha 
26 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
27 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
28 Shri Ahmed Patel 
29 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
30 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
31 Shri Sharad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S.C.Chaudhary – Director 
3. Shri H Ram Prakash – Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on becoming Minister in the Union 
Council of Government  w.e.f. 9th November, 2014. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from 
the membership of the Rajya Sabha w.e.f 25th November, 2014. 

 
 
(vi) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on thei r behalf, present this 
Third  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommend ations 
contained in the  Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  the 
subject ‗Allocation and Pricing of Gas‘. 
2. The Nineteenth  Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2013 . The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommend ations contained in the Nineteenth Report were 
received on 19.11.2014. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2014 -15) considered 
and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27.1.2015.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
23 April,  2015 
3 Vaisakha,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                                Chairman,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendat ions contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2013 -14) on ‗Allocation and Pricing of Gas ‘, which was presented 
to Hon'ble Speaker on 18.10.2013 and thereafter presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2013. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 
12 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report.   These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have be en accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 3,9,11 and 12 (Total 4) 
               
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‘s replies :- Reco. Nos. 5 and 6 (Total 
2) 
               
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 2 
and 10  (Total 2)        
               
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 1,4,7 and 8 (Total 4)                
(Chapter-V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations.  

 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Demand and Supply of Natural Gas 
 
5. The Committee  had noted that Natural Gas ha d emerged as one of the 
principal source s of energy in the world and accounted  for 23.94% of total global 
energy mix. Due to its inherent advantages  over other fossil fuels there wa s a global 
trend of shift in energy mix from oil to natural gas. However, in case of India, share of 
natural gas in total energy mix accounts only 8.7% which was even lower than the 
Asia Pacific share of 11.27%. 
 
As the Government pursued the economic policy to achieve high growth, the 
demand for natural gas ha d also sharply increased in India during the past few 
years, and expected to esca late further. The Committee we re however, constrained 
to note the widening gap betw een demand and supply of gas in the country, as 
during 2012-13 there was only 134 mmscmd of gas available including the imported 
LNG against the demand of 286 mmscmd. Thus there was huge unmet demand of 
152 mmscmd. During the year 2015 -16, the expected gap  would be to the tune of 
300 mmscmd as against the demand of 439 mmscmd the available gas supply 
would be 139 mmscmd only. The chunk of this growing supply deficit wa s expected 
to be met through LNG imports from different countries. However, the Committee  
had noted that present LNG terminal capacity wa s 53 mmscmd only unable to 
support the increased purchase of LNG. Though the LNG infrastructure was 
expected to grow to 180 mmscmd by 2016 -17, it would not still be sufficient to cater 
to the increasing LNG import in the coming years.  
 
The Committee were of the view that MoP &NG should evolve a plan to 
explore all possible options to increase the production and supply of natural gas in 
the country. Towards this end, the Committee  had desired that the Ministry s hould 
increase the blocks awarded for exploration, intensify activities for exploration and 
production of shale gas, pursue strong diplomatic efforts to expedite construction of 
transnational pipelines from neighbouring regions to bring gas and try to ente r into 
long term contract for import of LNG at cheaper cost. The Committee  had further 
desired that unconventional sources of gas like Gas Hydrates, CBM, Shale Gas 
should be seriously monitored for exploitation and development. Therefore, the 
Committee rec ommend that Ministry should prepare a blue print to improve the 

 
 
production and supply of natural gas in the country so that there is no deficit in 
meeting the domestic demand. 
 
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"It is true that at present there is wide gap between production of domestic 
natural gas and demand in the country. However, this demand is price 
sensitive. The demand of natural gas in the country is mainly from fertilizer 
and power sector . Both the sectors have low affordability for imported LNG. 
The demand from customers in sectors other than power and fertilizer is also 
price sensitive. Therefore, the gap in demand and supply in the country can 
be met only partially by imported LNG. On one side, there is need to construct 
new LNG Terminals and increase the capacity of existing ones to meet the 
short fall in demand from domestic sources. On the other side, one cannot 
overlook the fact that demand of natural gas is price sensitive and the 
construction of LNG Terminal is highly capital intensive.  If large capacity of 
LNG import and regasification is created without proper study of 
market/demand, LNG Terminals may remain under -utilized, putting huge 
investments to risk.  
 
In the year 2013 -14, out of total average daily supply of about 121.13 
mmscmd, the supply from domestic production was 80.02 mmscmd and from 
imported LNG was 41.11 mmscmd.  
 
At present, the country has capacity to import and re -gasify 22 MMTPA 
(79.2 MMSCMD) of LNG. This capac ity is likely to increase to 41 MMTPA 
(147.6 MMSCMD) by the year 2016 -17. Additional LNG Terminals of capacity 
around 27 MMTPA are at various stages of planning.  
 
The details of existing Re -gasified LNG (R -LNG) Terminals are as 
under: 
 
Location of LNG 
terminal 
Owner of the 
Terminal 
  2014-15  
Existing 
Capacity 
 2015-16  
Projected 
Capacity 
2016 – 17 
Projected 
Capacity 
Dahej Petronet 10 10 15 
Hazira Hazira LNG  5 5 7.5 * 
Kochi Petronet 5 5 5 
Dhabol GAIL  2 5 5 
Total capacity (MMTPA) 22 25 32.5 
Total capacity (MMSCMD) 
  79.2 90 117 
      
*  The increase in capacity from 5 to 7.5 MMTPA will become available at 
the end of year 2016-17. 
 
In addition, Regasification terminal for a capacity of 35.5 – 36.5 MMTPA in 
eastern and western coast of India are also being planned by different 

 
 
entities. The development of these projects purely depends on techno 
commercial feasibility.  
 
LNG tie-up: 
 
Long term contracts for LNG have conditions of TAKE or PAY. As the demand 
of natural gas in India is price sensitive, long term contracts of LNG need to 
be planned on the basis of proper study of market and demand, considering 
the affordability of LNG.  
 
Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) and GAIL have executed long term LNG Sale 
Purchase Agreements (SPAs), the details of which are as follows : 
 
PLL 
  7.5MMTPA with Rasgas, Qatar for 25 years. The  supplies have  
started in 2004. 
 
  1.44MMTPA with Exxon Mobil for supp lies from Gorgon Project in 
Australia for 15 years starting from  2015. 
 
GAIL 
  3.5 MMTPA with Sabine Pass Liquefaction LLC for supplies from 
Sabine Pass terminal in Louisiana, USA starting in 2018. 
 
  2.3 MMTPA of liquefaction capacity booking in the Cove Point LNG 
terminal proposed to be commissioned by Dominion Cove Point LNG LP in 
2017. 
 
In addition to long term contracts, GAIL has executed 2 short term 
contracts, details of which are as follows: 
 
  0.8MMTPA with GNF, Spain for supplies from 2013 to 2015. 
 
  GAIL has also contracted 2.5 MMTPA of LNG to be supplied by 
Gazprom Marketing and Trading Singapore (GMTS). 
 
GSPC has contracted with British Gas for supply of 1.25 MMTPA from June 
2015 and 2.5 MMTPA from June 2017. 
 
In addition, LNG is being imported on spot  by PLL, GAIL, Reliance 
Industries Limited (RIL), Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation (GSPC) etc. 
 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) 
 
(1) Amendment to CBM policy 
 
CCEA meeting held on 19.12.2013 approved the policy for Exploration &  
Exploitation of CBM for coal mining areas.  However, the approval for para 6.1 
except para 6.1 (iv) was not reflected in the minutes of CCEA meeting.  
Accordingly, this Ministry requested Cabinet Secretariat to revise minutes of 
the CCEA meeting held on 1 9.12.2013.  In reply, Cabinet Secretariat vide 
O.M. dated 13.2.2014 has indicated to bring a fresh proposal for consideration 
of the CCEA note for a change decision, if required.  The Cabinet Note is 

 
 
under preparation by MoP&NG.  In view of recent judgment  passed by 
Supreme Court in Coal Blocks case, certain issues are being re -examined 
and note is under submission to Hon‘ble Minister, P&NG.  
 
In pursuance of CBM policy, till date 4 rounds of CBM blocks have been 
launched in which 33 of blocks were awarded.  30 were awarded through 
international Competitive Bidding while 2 were given on nomination basis and 
1 CBM block was awarded through Foreign Investment Promotion Board 
(FIPB) route. Out of these 33 blocks, 8 blocks are in the development phase, 
5 blocks a re in the Exploration phase, 16 blocks are relinquished/under 
relinquishment and there are 4 blocks which are yet to be effective for want of 
PEL/PEL deed by the State Government.      
 
(2) Ten CBM blocks identified for exploration under Uniform Licensing 
Policy in 10th round of NELP 
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is proposing to launch tenth bid 
round of NELP (NELP -X) shortly, wherein blocks shall be offered for 
Exploration and Exploitation of conventional as well as unconventional 
hydrocarbon resources under Uniform Licensing Policy. Ten CBM rich blocks 
(6 in Gujarat, 2 in Madhya Pradesh and 2 in Maharashtra) have been 
identified primarily for exploration and exploitation of CBM. 
 
TRANS-NATIONAL PIPELINE PROJECTS 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) 
The Government is pursuing the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-India 
(TAPI) transnational Gas Pipeline Project.  
On 11th December, 2010 the four countries involved in the TAPI Gas pipeline 
project, signed an Inter -Governmental Agreement alon g with a Gas Pipeline 
Framework Agreement in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. To accelerate the project, 
parties have formed a Minister level Steering Committee and Technical 
Working Group (TWG). 
To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement 
(GSPA), bilateral and multilateral meetings have been held amongst the four 
countries and their gas companies participating in the Turkmenistan -
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline project.  Regarding security & 
safety of the pipeline, suitable provis ions have been made in the Inter -
Governmental Agreement (IGA) and Gas Pipeline Framework Agreement 
(GPFA) signed by the Governments of Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and India in December 2010. On 23 rd May, 2012 GAIL (India) Ltd. and 
Pakistan‘s Inter State Gas Systems signed their respective Gas Sales 
Purchase Agreements (GSPA) with Turkmenistan‘s state gas company 
Turkmen Gaz which envisage Turkmen gas being supplied to India and 
Pakistan via Afghanistan in 2018.  Turkmenistan and Afghanistan have als o 
signed anMoU for cooperation in the gas sector, leaving the signing of a 
bilateral GSPA till negotiations on gas price is concluded. 
 
ADB has been appointed as the Transaction Advisor consequent to the 
signing of Transaction Advisory Services Agreement (TASA) between the 4 
entities (3 buyers & the Seller) and ADB on 19 th November, 2013. The major 

 
 
scope of work of TA includes (i) Formation of TAPI Limited and (ii) Selection 
of the Consortium Leader. 
 
During PETROTECH 2014 (January 12 -15, 2014), the Turkme n side has 
indicated that the shortlist of prospective Consortium Leaders will be provided 
during the first quarter of 2014. 
 
The Turkmen Party provided a shortlist which contained only one company 
viz. M/s TOTAL of France, which has expressed its interest  in becoming the 
Consortium Leader for TAPI Limited.  In addition, the Turkmen Party also 
informed that the three international companies working in offshore E&P 
blocks in Turkmenistan may also be interested in becoming the consortium 
members in TAPI Limit ed. Accordingly, the SC advised the TA to carry out 
discussions with TOTAL as well as with the other three companies.  The SC 
has asked the TA and Turkmen Party to present the status of discussions on 
this subject in November 2014.  
 
During a recent meeting held among the TA and the 4 TAPI entities from 27 th 
to 29 th August, 2014 at Dubai, the TA has informed that a detailed 
presentation had been made earlier to the Turkmenistan Government 
highlighting the principles on which Technical Service Contracts (based on the 
Iraqi Service Contract model) may be used to provide sufficient incentives for 
investment by a potential Consortium Leader (particularly with respect to 
booking reserves). The Turkmenistan Government indicated these principles 
were acceptable, an d authorized the Transaction Advisor to convey them to 
TOTAL.  
 
In parallel, the TA is undertaking actions for preparation of the Information 
Memorandum for issuing to the shortlist of potential leaders.  
 
The Steering Committee had desired that the Consortium Leader should be 
selected by September 2015 and the Consortium Agreement be signed by 
March 2016. However, these timelines are contingent upon the outcome of 
the November 2014 status update.  
 
During t he 25 th TWG meeting held in Dubai on 26 -27 Feb, 2014, an 
agreement has been reached on the payment modalities for the transit fee 
payable by GAIL to the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan. The 
indexation formula is yet to be agreed.  
 
Shale Gas 
The Government has issued ―Policy Guidelines for Exploration and 
Exploitation of Shale Gas and Oil by National Oil Companies under 
Nomination regime‖ on 14 th October, 2013. Under this Policy, the right to 
exploration and exploitation of Shale Gas & Oil will li e with the NOCs holding 
Petroleum Exploration License (PEL)/Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) granted 
under the nomination regime. A Phase II policy for grant of exploration and 
exploitation of shale gas and oil in the pre -NELP, NELP & CBM area is 
presently under consideration. 

 
 
ONGC has recently commenced drilling of one well (Jambusar # 55) in 
Gujarat for assessment of shale gas/shale oil potential of Cambay Shale. 
Currently, there is no commercial production of shale gas in the country. 
Under the first phase o f assessment of shale gas and oil, exploration and 
exploitation, at present, 56 PEL/PML blocks (ONGC 50, and OIL -6) have 
been identified by NOCs. These blocks are located in the states of Assam (7 
blocks), Arunachal Pradesh (1 Block), Gujarat (28 blocks), Rajasthan (1 
Block), Andhra Pradesh (10 blocks) and Tamil Nadu (9 blocks). ONGC has 
drilled one well where coring has been completed. In addition, ONGC has 
collected cores from another 7 wells". 
7. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should prepare a 
blue print to improve the production and supply of natural gas in the country 
so that there is no deficit in meeting the domestic demand.  The Ministry in 
their reply ha s spelt out its measures being taken for  increasing the natural 
gas production from the unconventional sources like CBM, shale gas/oil and 
efforts made in TAPI project and import of LNG .  The Committee, however, are 
concerned to note that the Ministry is altogether silent on the efforts being 
made to increase the natural gas production from existing fields or new 
discoveries within the country.   The Committee are further dissatisfied that 
MoP&NG have no blue print  as yet to improve the production of natural gas in 
the country so as to meet the growing demand.  The Committee th erefore, 
reiterate its recommendation  that MoP&NG should focus on preparation of a 
blue print to increase the natural gas production in the country.   The 
Committee would also  want the government to expedite the finalisation of 
TAPI by impressing upon the participating countries in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Gas Allocation by EGoM 
 
8.The Committee in its earlier report had recommended that the  allocation of natural 
gas should be made on a pragmatic basis taking into account the projected 
production during the year and should not exceed by more than 10% of the 
production.  The Committee had further pointed out that due to shortfall in production 
in KG-D6 basin, the MoP&NG was forced to cut back allocation to various sectors.   
 

 
 
 
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"The allocation of all categories of domestic gas (APM, Non APM, Pre -NELP, 
NELP) put together is 242.57 MMSCMD. The allocation of KG -D6 gas by 
EGoM is only 93.34mmscmd out of total 242.57mmscmd.  The contractors of 
KG-D6 had projected that production from KG-D6 will reach plateau of around 
80 MMSCMD by 2012. Based on the above projection, EGoM allocated 
63.171 MMSCMD of KG -D6 on firm basis and 30.165 MMSCMD of gas on 
fallback basis. The firm allocation of KG D -6 was less than the projected 
production.  The total allocation of KG D -6, including fallback allocation, is 
only 16.67% more than the projected production". 
 
10. The Ministry in its reply ha s mentioned that the allo cation out of KG -D6 
production was 93.34 mmscmd which was only 16.67 per cent more than the 
projected production of 80 mmscmd in 2012 -13.  However, the actual 
production in KG-D6 basin was only 25 mmscmd.  The Committee do not find 
the reply of the Ministr y tenable as during the year 2012 -13 against the total 
gas allocation of 119.4 mmscmd from APM field s and 17.73 mmscmd from pre 
NELP fields, the actual supply was only to the tune of 49.58 mmscmd and 9.02 
mmscmd respectively of the actual allocations made for the year.  Thus the 
huge mismatch between the allocations and actual supply was not only 
restricted to the allocations pertaining to the gas produced from KG -D6 blocks 
but also from other fields.  The Committee , therefore, urge the Ministry to be 
more prudent in their fut ure allocations so as to reduce  the variation between 
allocation and actual supply of natural gas. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Rangarajan Committee on PSC 
 
11. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that since the 
Rangarajan Committee recommendations have wide ramifications on the 
investments in the E & P sector, it needs to be examined in greater detail before any 
decision is taken on their implementation as the E & P activities under NELP has not 
achieved the desired partici pation from adequate number of both domestic and 
international companies.  
 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 

 
 
"The Uniform Licensing Policy (ULP) and revenue sharing model is under 
consideration of the Government. A Model Revenue Sharing Contract 
(MRSC) was posted on website of the Ministry to seek comments from all the 
stakeholders. The comments have been received and  are being analyzed by 
the Ministry". 
 
13. The Committee had recommended that the Rangarajan Committee 
recommendations needs to be examined in greater details, as it has vide 
ramifications on th e investments in the E&P sector.   The MoP&NG in their 
reply has informed that a Uniform Licensing Policy and revenue sharing model 
is still under the consideration of the Government.  It has been stated that a  
model revenue sharing contract was posted on the website of the Ministry to 
seek comments from all stakeho lders the same have been re ceived and being 
analyzed by the Ministry.   The Committee while hoping early action in this 
regard by the Ministry would  like to be informed about the progress made on 
the Uniform Licensing Policy and Revenue Sharing Model .  The Committee 
would also like to be apprised by the Ministry about the action taken by it on 
the other suggestions made by the Rangarajan Committee.      
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Gas Price formula by Rangarajan Committee 
 
14. The Committee  had noted that the Rangarajan Committee appointed to 
review Production Sharing Contract (PSC) entered between contractors and 
Government under NELP regime had  devised a new formula regarding the price of 
natural gas produced.  In this regard, its report ha d stated that, ―…the producers in 
India get at least the average price of what producers elsewhere are getting‖ .  The 
proposed formula was a simple average of two methodologies.  In the first method, it 
takes the price of imports of LNG into India by different supp liers while in the second 
method, the weighted average of prices of natural gas prevailing at Henry Hub (HH) 
in USA, National Balancing Point (NBP) in London and netback import price at the 
wellhead of suppliers into Japan in the preceding quarters is considered.  
 
The Committee had noted that during the year 2012, the natural gas prices in 
these three selected hubs were around US $ 2.5 to 3.5 per mmbtu in HH (USA), US 
$ 8 to 10 at NBP and $ 14 to 16 at Japan respectively. However, it was observed 
that the benefit of lower gas price at HH had  been largely diluted by the inclusion of 

 
 
Japan‘s LNG FOB prices which includes 60 % royalty component linkage to JCC and 
host of other factors. 
 
The note prepared by Ministry of Finance for EGoM on the Rangarajan 
Committee formula argue d that there wa s no logic in inclusion therein of the 
consumption by Japan which is having very high import LNG price and that nowhere 
in the world, we llhead prices of natural gas had  been linked to spot LNG contract 
basis. The Committee had found merit in this view of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
The Committee further observed that Russia, being the second largest among 
the gas producing and consuming countries, exporting 40 to 50 percent of its gas to 
Europe at a price of about $ 8.77 per mmbtu, could be a valuable and better 
indicator of gas price. The Committee  had desired that Russian prices could be 
incorporated as one of the reference price in the pricing formula.  
 
The Committee had also  point out the glaring omission of factoring  of 
domestic cost of production of natural gas by NOCs namely ONGC and OIL which 
was pegged at $ 3.63 and $ 3.21 respectively during the year 2012 -13. Similarly the 
cost of production for RIL in 2012 -13 stood at US $ 2.48 per MMBTU from KG -D6 
field.  
 
The Committee had further highlighted that the price of domestic natural gas 
need not be dollar denominated due to huge volatility in dollar vis -à-vis Rupee which 
often leads to gains to operators for no reasons and adversely impact the 
Government financials.  As the present price of $ 4.2/MMBTU at an exchange rate of 
Rupees 45/ -, works out to be Rupees 189/MMBTU and as against Rs. 60/USD, 
equals to Rs. 252/MMBTU which is 30 % windfall gain accrued due to rupee 
devaluation from Rs 45 to 60 against the US dollar. 
 
The Committee taking into consideration all the factors analyzed above had 
recommended that the Rangarajan Committee formula for arriving at the natural gas 
price should be thoroughly reviewed and reconsidered. The Committee had 
recommended factoring domestic cost of production of gas for arriving at the price, 
and fixation of price of gas in rupee terms in PSC under NELP regime. 
 
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 

 
 
"1.  Government considered the gas price issue in CCEA meeting held on 25th 
June, 2014 and noted that the whole issue of gas pricing would need 
comprehensive re-examination. Accordingly, it was directed that the Domestic 
Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 notified by the previous government on 
10th January, 2014 be kept in abeyance up to 30.09.2014 and till that time, the 
domestically produced gas would continue to be priced at the rate prevailing 
on 31.03.2014.  
 
2.  Further, in pursuance of the CCEA decision on 25.06.2014, MOPNG 
constituted a Committee consisting of the Secretary (Power), Secretary 
(Expenditure) and Secretary (Fertilizers) with Additional Secretary (MOPNG) 
as Member Secretary to carry out re -examination of the issue of gas pricing. 
The Committee submitted its report on 16.09.2014. 
 
3.  The Government further considered the gas price issue in CCEA meeting 
held on 24 th September, 2014 and directed that the Domestic Natural Gas 
Pricing Guidelines, 2014 notified on 10 th January, 2014 may further be kept in 
abeyance up to 15.11.2014 and till that time, the domestically produced gas 
would continue to be priced at the rate prevailing on 31.03.2014. A circular on 
this was issued by MOPNG dated 29th – 30th September, 2014. 
 
4.  MOPNG submitted a note for CCEA on  17.10.2014 regarding pricing of 
domestically produced natural gas on basis of recommendations of the 
Committee. CCEA considered the proposal in meeting held on 18.10.2014 
and approved MOPNG proposals. The formula approved by CCEA includes 
the price and vo lume consumed by Former Soviet Union Countries and 
excludes the Japanese LNG prices as was recommended by the Standing 
Committee (copy of guidelines enclosed as Annex -I).  The New Domestic 
Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have been notified by the Gove rnment 
and the prices determined under these guidelines have become applicable 
with effect from 1 st November, 2014 and are to remain valid up to 31 st March, 
2015. The price notified by PPAC is US $ 5.05/mmbtu on Gross Calorific 
Value (GCV) basis". 
 
16. The Committee in its report had recommended that the gas price 
formula proposed by Rangarajan Committee should be thoroughly reviewed 
and reconsidered.  The Committee had desired that the Gas prices of Russia 
could be incorporated as one of the reference p rice in the formula instead of 
Japan's LNG FOB prices.  The Ministry had replied that the CCEA had in its 
meeting held on 18.10.2014 approved a formula which replaces the Japanese 
LNG prices with the price and volumes consumed by former Soviet Union 
Countries as was recommended by the Standing Committee  on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas .  The Committee appreciate the action taken by the Ministry to 

 
 
review the gas price formula as recommended by this Committee and 
incorporating its suggestions in the new formula approved by CCEA.   The 
Committee would also expect the Ministry to be sensitive in future to the price 
of gas so that it reflects the global natural gas prices as well as the interests of 
consumers of the country.   
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Strategy to attract investments in Exploration and Production sector 
 
17. The Committee , in their earlier Report not agreeing with  the strategy of the 
Government on deploying the single instrument of price to achieve multiple 
objectives of incentivizing domestic gas  exploration and production on the supply 
side and meeting the huge unmet dema nds for gas at reasonable cost and knowing 
that flow of private investment in exploration has actually started tapering down 
every year from 2009-10 had recommended a thorough review of the whole strategy 
of price-led investment growth to attract investment in E&P of hydrocarbons. 
 
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"Based on the recommendations made in the Report submitted by the 
Committee of Secretaries on 16.09.2014, MOPNG submitted a note for CCEA 
on 17.10.2014 regarding pricing of domestically produced natural gas.  CCEA 
considered the proposal in meeting held on 18.10.2014 and approved 
MOPNG proposals.  
 
The New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have been notified 
by the Government and the prices determined under these guidelines have 
become applicable with effect from 1 st November, 2014 and are to remain 
valid up to 31 st March, 2015. The price notified by PPAC is US $ 5.05/mmbtu 
on Gross Calorific Value (GCV) basis.   
 
The gas price notified on the basis of this formula provides 33% increase at 
the current gas price level and is expected to incentivize the investments in 
upstream sector and would also consider the requirements of the consuming 
sector". 
 
19. The Committee had recommended that MoP&NG should do a through 
review of price led investment growth strategy to attr act investments in 
exploration and production of hydrocarbon.  The Committee note that t he 
Ministry in their reply ha d stated that the  new gas price  is expected to 
incentivize the investments in upstream sector.  
 

 
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as 
precisely it had wanted to review the price led investment strategy for 
Exploration & Production activities.  The Committee  would like to emphasize 
that pricing of natural gas should not be the only component and other 
measures like a stable tax regime, proper regulatory framework, faster 
clearances, transparency in revenue sharing etc. will go a long way to attract 
investment in this crucial and important sector.  The Committee , therefore, 
would reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry  should review its 
strategy to attract investments in Exploration & Production sector.  
 
 
***** 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Allocation of gas to various sectors 
 
 The Committee note that allocation of natural gas is to be made to various 
consuming sectors as per the priority  order decided by EGoM. As per this priority 
order, fertilizer industry comes at first place followed by LPG plants at the second 
and power plants at third place. The city gas distribution network rank fourth in 
priority. 
 
 The Committee, however note that  due to less supply, allocation to the 
sectors have been much below the demand. In case of power sector, the allocation 
has been only 42.53 mmscmd against demand of 135 mmscmd in 2012 -13 which is 
projected to go up to 207 mmscmd in 2016 -17. However, large investments have 
been made in gas based power plants which has become infructous due to non -
availability of gas. The power plants have the option of using imported LNG or coal in 
place of natural gas. As the cost of imported LNG is high, its use is unecono mical. 
As regards the usage of coal, the plants which have been designed for using natural 
gas have to make extra investments for shifting to coal as fuel. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to indicate the clear picture regarding the 
availability of gas for power sector in the next 5 to 10 years so that before making the 
investments in gas based power plant, the gas availability is factored in by the 
companies. 
 
 The Committee note that during 2012 -13, power and fertilizer sectors 
cumulatively received 61.6% of natural gas whereas CGD sector received only 
11.6% of the total available gas. Besides being an efficient environment friendly fuel, 
natural gas presently used in PNG and CNG does not also contain any subsidy 
element in its cost structure. Even a small quantity of natural gas allocation can cater 
to a large number of customers in the CGD network. The Committee seriously feel 
that in order to benefit a wider section of society, expansion of PNG/CNG network 
will be the way forward as thi s will also save the subsidy burden of the Government 
on the use of LPG and diesel. Hence, the Committee recommend that the CGD 
networks must be allocated an increased quota of gas due to a slew of benefits that 
could be achieved by the use of natural gas over the other conventional fuels. 
 
 The Committee would also like to point out that requirement of natural gas 
varies from time to time and hence the allocation policy of Government needs to be 
dynamic and responsive towards the societal needs and changin g economy. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that the allocation policy should be reviewed to 
reflect the changing demand supply scenario of the various sectors and the direction 
in which the Government wants to move forward. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
At pre sent, the projection of production of domestic gas till 2016 -17 is 
available with the Ministry. The data with regard to projected production is shared 

 
 
with the Ministry of Power.  The existing policy of the Ministry regarding allocation of 
domestic gas is available in public domain.  Based on this information, the industries 
in various sectors, including that of power, may take appropriate decision regarding 
investment.     
 
 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, vide order dated 14.11.2013, has 
issued gui delines for allocation/supply of domestic natural gas to CGD entities for 
CNG (transport) and PNG (domestic) segment. In the guidelines dated 14.11.2013, 
Central Government has increased the total amount of domestic gas supply to CNG 
(transport) and PNG (d omestic) segment from 5.75mmscmd in 2012 -13 to 
6.4mmscmd.  
 
 Thereafter in order to comply with the directions of Supreme Court in W.P. 
No. 13029/1985 ordered in April, 2002, r evised guidelines dated 3.2.2014 were 
issued wherein the allocation to CGD entit ies for CNG (transport) and PNG 
(domestic)  was increased to 8.32 mmscmd in order to meet the 100% requirement 
of CGD entities  
 
 In the latest guidelines dated 20.8.2014, GAIL has been directed to review the 
allocations every six months. Further, GAIL has  also been authorised to supply 10% 
over and above the allocation to CGD entities for CNG (transport) and PNG 
(domestic) segments to meet the fluctuation in demand of CGD sector (CNG 
(transport) and PNG (domestic).  GAIL was further informed that the guide lines will  
be applicable till divertible gas from non-priority sector is available with GAIL. 
 
Further, in the above guidelines, Government of India has directed to supply 
the domestic gas in uniform proportion and at uniform base price to CGD entities fo r 
purpose of CNG (transport) and PNG (domestic). This scheme ensures uniformity in 
supply of domestic gas across all CGDs for CNG (transport) and PNG (domestic) 
without discriminating amongst CGD entities, subject to operational imperatives. 
 The domestic natural gas allocation policy has evolved over a period of time 
and is reviewed from time to time to ensure proper prioritization amongst various 
sectors. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Gas Price formula by Rangarajan Committee 
 
The Committee note that the Rangarajan Committee appointed to review 
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) entered between contractors and Government 
under NELP regime has devised a new formula regarding the pric e of natural gas 
produced. In this regard, its report has stated that, ―…the producers in India get at 
least the average price of what producers elsewhere are getting.‖ The proposed 
formula is a simple average of two methodologies. In the first method, it takes the 
price of imports of LNG into India by different suppliers while in the second method, 
the weighted average of prices of natural gas prevailing at Henry Hub (HH) in USA, 

 
 
National Balancing Point (NBP) in London and netback import price at the well head 
of suppliers into Japan in the preceding quarters is considered.  
 
The Committee has noted that during the year 2012, the natural gas prices in 
these three selected hubs were around US $ 2.5 to 3.5 per mmbtu in HH (USA), US 
$ 8 to 10 at NBP and $ 14 t o 16 at Japan respectively. However, it is to be observed 
that the benefit of lower gas price at HH has been largely diluted by the inclusion of 
Japan‘s LNG FOB prices which includes 60 % royalty component linkage to JCC and 
host of other factors. 
 
The not e prepared by Ministry of Finance for EGoM on the Rangarajan 
Committee formula argues that there is no logic in inclusion therein of the 
consumption by Japan which is having very high import LNG price and that nowhere 
in the world, wellhead prices of natur al gas has been linked to spot LNG contract 
basis. The Committee find merit in this view of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
The Committee further observe that Russia, being the second largest among 
the gas producing and consuming countries, exporting 40 to 50 pe rcent of its gas to 
Europe at a price of about $ 8.77 per mmbtu, could be a valuable and better 
indicator of gas price. The Committee desire that Russian prices could be 
incorporated as one of the reference price in the pricing formula.  
 
The Committee would also like to point out the glaring omission of factoring of 
domestic cost of production of natural gas by NOCs namely ONGC and OIL which 
was pegged at $ 3.63 and $ 3.21 respectively during the year 2012 -13. Similarly the 
cost of production for RIL in 20 12-13 stood at US $ 2.48 per MMBTU from KG -D6 
field.  
 
The Committee would further like to highlight that the price of domestic natural 
gas need not be dollar denominated due to huge volatility in dollar vis -à-vis Rupee 
which often leads to gains to operat ors for no reasons and adversely impact the 
Government financials. As the present price of $ 4.2 / MMBTU at an exchange rate 
of Rupees 45/-, works out to be Rupees 189 / MMBTU and as against Rs. 60 / USD, 
equals to Rs. 252 / MMBTU which is 30 % windfall ga in accrued due to rupee 
devaluation from Rs 45 to 60 against the US dollar. 
 
The Committee taking into consideration all the factors analyzed above would 
like to recommend that the Rangarajan Committee formula for arriving at the natural 
gas price should b e thoroughly reviewed and reconsidered. The Committee 
recommends factoring domestic cost of production of gas for arriving at the price, 
and fixation of price of gas in rupee terms in PSC under NELP regime. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.    Government consi dered the gas price issue in CCEA meeting held on 25 th 
June, 2014 and noted that the whole issue of gas pricing would need 
comprehensive re-examination. Accordingly, it was directed that the Domestic 
Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 notified by the pre vious government on 
10th January, 2014 be kept in abeyance up to 30.09.2014 and till that time, the 
domestically produced gas would continue to be priced at the rate prevailing on 
31.03.2014.  
 

 
 
2.    Further, in pursuance of the CCEA decision on 25.06.2014 , MOPNG 
constituted a Committee consisting of the Secretary (Power), Secretary 
(Expenditure) and Secretary (Fertilizers) with Additional Secretary (MOPNG) as 
Member Secretary to carry out re -examination of the issue of gas pricing. The 
Committee submitted its report on 16.09.2014. 
 
3.   The Government further considered the gas price issue in CCEA meeting held 
on 24 th September, 2014 and directed that the Domestic Natural Gas Pricing 
Guidelines, 2014 notified on 10 th January, 2014 may further be kept in 
abeyance up to 15.11.2014 and till that time, the domestically produced gas 
would continue to be priced at the rate prevailing on 31.03.2014. A circular on 
this was issued by MOPNG dated 29th – 30th September, 2014. 
 
4.   MOPNG submitted a note for CCEA on 17 .10.2014 regarding pricing of 
domestically produced natural gas on basis of recommendations of the 
Committee. CCEA considered the proposal in meeting held on 18.10.2014 and 
approved MOPNG proposals. The formula approved by CCEA includes the 
price and volum e consumed by Former Soviet Union Countries and excludes 
the Japanese LNG prices as was recommended by the Standing Committee 
(copy of guidelines enclosed as Annex -I).  The New Domestic Natural Gas 
Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have been notified by the Governm ent and the prices 
determined under these guidelines have become applicable with effect from 1 st 
November, 2014 and are to remain valid up to 31 st March, 2015. The price 
notified by PPAC is US $ 5.05 / mmbtu on Gross Calorific Value (GCV) basis. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
 (please see para 16 of Chapter-I) 
Annex-I 
New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 
No.22013/27/2012­ONG D.V. 
 
In supersession of this Ministry‘s  Gazette notification no. 22011/3/2012­ONG.D.V 
dated 10.1.2014, the Government of India hereby notifies the New Domestic Natural 
Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014, as hereunder:— 
 
1. The wellhead gas price* (P), under these guidelines would be determined as per  
the formula given below:­ 
 
V HH P HH + V AC P AC + V NBP P NBP +V R P R 
 
P =  ---------------------------------------------------------- 
 
VHH   + VAC  + VNBP + VR 
 
Where 
 
(i) VHH = Total annual volume of natural gas consumed in USA & Mexico.  
 
(ii) VAC = Total annual volume of natural gas consumed in Canada.  

 
 
 
(iii) VNBP = Total annual volume of natural gas consumed in European Union 
(EU) and Former Soviet Union (FSU) countries, excluding Russia.  
 
(iv) VR = Total annual volume of natural gas consumed in Russia.  
 
(v) PHH  and PNBP are the annual average of daily prices at Henry Hub  
 
(HH) and  National  Balancing  Point  (NBP)  respectively,  less  the  
 
transportation and treatment charges as given in para 2. 
 
 
PAC and P R are the annual average of monthly prices at Alberta Hub and 
Russia (as published by Federal Tariff of the Russian Government or 
equivalent source) respectively, less the transportation and  
 
treatment charges as given in para 2.  
 
(*Well head price refers to the price of gas receivable by the producer of 
gas at the con tract area/lease area from the buyer of gas. In case of 
on­land blocks, the price receivable by the contractor (producer) in the 
contract area will be the well head price. In case of offshore blocks, if the 
gas is processed and sold in the offshore contrac t area, the price 
receivable at the offshore will be the well head price. If the gas is brought 
to landfall point for processing and is sold at landfall point, the facilities 
located in the landfall point will be considered part of the contract area and 
the price receivable at land fall point will be the well head price).  
 
2. The wellhead price for three different hubs and Russia would be determined 
by deducting US $ 0.50/MMBTU towards transportation and treatment charges from 
each of the three Hub prices and Russian price.  
 
3. The gas price, determined, under these guidelines would be applicable to all 
gas produced from nomination fields given to ONGC and OIL India, New Exploration 
and Licensing Policy (NELP) blocks, such Pre­NELP blocks where, the Production 
Sharing Contract, (PSC) provides for Government approval of gas prices and Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) blocks except as indicated in para 4 and 5 below.  
 
4. The gas price, so determined under these guidelines shall not be applicable, 
where prices have been fixed c ontractually for a certain period of time, till the end of 
such period. This gas price shall also not be applicable where the PSC concerned 
provides for a specific formula for natural gas price indexation/fixation and to such 
Pre­NELP PSCs which do not pro vide for Government approval of formula/basis for 
gas prices. Further, the pricing of natural gas from small/isolated fields in the 
nomination blocks of NOCs will continue to be governed by the extant guidelines in 
respect of these fields issued on 8th July, 2013.  
 
5. The matter relating to cost recovery on account of shortfall in envisaged 
production from D1, D3 discoveries of Block KG­DWN­98/3 is under arbitration. The 
difference between the price, determined under these guidelines converted to NCV 
basis and the present price (US $ 4.2 per million BTU) would be credited to the gas 

 
 
pool account maintained by GAIL and whether the amount so collected is payable or 
not, to the contractors of this Blocks, would be dependent on the outcome of the 
award of pending arbitration and any attendant legal proceedings.  
 
6. The periodicity of price determination/notification shall be half yearly. The 
price and volume data used for calculation of price under these guidelines shall be 
the trailing four quarter data with one qua rter lag. The first price on the basis of 
aforementioned formula in these guidelines would be determined on the basis of 
price prevailing at Henry Hub, NBP, Alberta Canada and Russia, between 1 st July, 
2013 and 30 th June, 2014. This price would come into e ffect from 1 st November, 
2014 and would remain valid till 31 st March, 2015. Thereafter, it would be revised for 
the period 1 st April, 2015 to 30 th September, 2015 on the basis of said prices 
prevalent between 1st January, 2014 and 31 st December, 2014, i.e., with the lag of a 
quarter and so on. The price determined under these guidelines would be 
announced in advance of the half year, for which it is applicable. 
 
7. The price determined under these guidelines would be applied prospectively 
with effect from 1st November, 2014.  
 
8. Director General of Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (DG PPAC) under 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas shall notify the periodic revision of prices 
under these guidelines.  
 
9. For all discoveries after the issuance of these guid elines, in Ultra Deep Water 
Areas, Deep Water Areas and High Pressure High Temperature (well head shut­in 
pressure > 690 bars, bottom hole temperature> 150 degree centigrade) areas, a 
premium would be given on the gas price determined as per the formula gi ven in 
para 1. The premium under this para shall be determined as per prescribed 
procedure.  
 
10. Price determined under these guidelines would be on GCV basis.  
 
11. The price, determined under these guidelines would be in US $ per MMBTU.  
 
12. In the North Eastern R egion (NER), the 40% subsidy would continue to be 
available for gas supplied by ONGC/OIL. However, as private operators are also 
likely to start production of gas in NER, and would be operating in the same market, 
this subsidy would also be available to th em to incentivize exploration and 
production.  
 
13. The price determined under these guidelines shall be applicable to all sectors 
uniformly.  
  
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Impact of Gas Price Revision on Power / Fertilizer Sector 
 
The Committee note that under the  allocation policy for natural gas, the top 
priority has been accorded to gas based fertilizer plants, followed by power plants 
supplying to grid. The allocation of Natural Gas to Fertilizer and Power sector during 
2012-13 was 40.18 MMSCMD and 42.53 MMSCMD  respectively and accounted for 
29.9 % and 31.6 % of the total allocation. The Committee have been informed that 

 
 
presently fertilizer sector is getting natural gas at a price of $ 4.2 per MMBTU and 
increase of 1 US dollar per MMBTU will result in extra exp enditure of Rupees 3155 
crore per annum towards fertilizer subsidy. Similarly the Power Ministry has in its 
note submitted to CCEA have stated that if base price of domestic natural gas is 
increased beyond US $ 5 / MMBTU, it would be unviable for power sector.  
 
 Considering the above it is clear that in the event of increase in gas prices, 
the Government will have to provide more money for the purpose of fertilizer 
subsidy. Simultaneously since power is an important input to most of the industries, 
increase in its cost will have a cascading impact on the economy as a whole. 
 
 In this regard, the Ministry while justifying the revision of natural gas prices 
have informed the Committee that the 12 th Five Year Plan document has the 
underlying philosophy of the Government that the energy prices in the country must 
align with global energy prices. Hence, as the country is thriving on imported fuel, the 
pricing has to be linked to international prices. 
 
 The Committee while understanding the need to adopt market li nked pricing 
of energy in the country also wish to point out that being a developing nation and 
having a huge population with very little surplus purchasing capacity, it would not be 
advisable to switch to market linked energy prices from a protected price  
environment. 
 
The Committee therefore, recommend that the new formula for natural gas 
pricing as suggested by the Rangarajan Committee should be reviewed and 
reconsidered; the issue of market linked price of natural gas should be dealt and 
considered in d ue consideration of its impact on other sectors like fertilizer, power 
etc including their viability, resources to fund increased subsidy by the Government 
and related issues. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
As recommended by the Committee, new formula for natu ral gas prices as 
suggested by the Rangarajan Committee was reviewed. The new government 
considered the gas price issue in CCEA meeting held on 25 th June, 2014 and noted 
that the whole issue of gas pricing would need comprehensive re -examination. 
Accordingly, it was directed that the Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 
notified by the previous government on 10th January, 2014 be kept in abeyance up to 
30.09.2014 and till that time, the domestically produced gas would continue to be 
priced at the rate prevailing on 31.03.2014.  
 
The New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have been notified 
by the Government and the prices determined under these guidelines have become 
applicable with effect from 1 st November, 2014 and are to remain valid u p to 31 st 
March, 2015. 
 
The price notified by PPAC is US $ 5.05 / mmbtu  on Gross Calorific Value 
(GCV) basis. 
 
The estimated impacts of increase in natural gas price of one US$ (1 US$ =Rs. 60) 
are as under: 
 

 
 
i. Fertilizer : Increase in cost of production of u rea by Rs. 1370/MT.  For the 
2013-14 production level of 23 million MT, this works out to Rs. 3151 crore 
per annum. 
ii. Power : Increase in cost of power generation from gas based power plants by 
Rs. 0.45/unit at 70% Plant Load Factor (PLF). 
iii. LPG : Increase in cost of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), [produced from 
natural gas having higher fractions, by Rs. 12.21 per non -subsidized gas 
cylinder.  For subsidized gas cylinder, the subsidy would go up by this 
amount. 
iv. CNG : Increase in cost of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) by Rs. 2.93 per kg. 
[Price in Delhi is Rs. 38.15/kg]. 
v. PNG : Increase in cost of Piped Natural Gas (PNG) by at least Rs. 1.89 per 
Standard Cubic Meter (SCM) [Price in Delhi is Rs. 25.5/SCM upto a 
consumption of 36.5 SCM in two months]. 
 
The increase in Governments revenue for every dollar increase in gas price, at the 
production level of 2013-14 is estimated as follows: 
 
i. Royalty : Rs. 597.12 crore 
ii. Profit Petroleum : Rs. 106.08 crore  
iii. Tax Revenue: Rs. 1965.66 crore (considering Flat Tax Rate of 33.33%) 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
Recommendation No. 12 
Pooling of Gas 
  
 The Committee note that natural gas is produced from different category of 
fields like nominated blocks, Pre -NELP blocks and NELP blo cks on both onshore 
and offshore fields. However by and large the priority in allocation for gas produced 
from different fields is same. 
 
 The Committee have also noted that the price for gas varies depending upon 
the type of fields from which the gas has been produced. The gas produced from 
APM fields is priced at $4.20/MMBTU whereas from PMT and RAVA fields it is 
priced at $5.57 and $3.5 – 6.8 respectively, whereas for KG – D6 basin it is priced at 
$4.2/MMBTU. 
 
 The Committee however, are of the view that  the differential pricing of gas do 
not provide clarity and transparency about gas pricing to consumers. The Committee 
desire the MoP&NG to consider pooling of the entire production and then allocate to 
the sectors as per the priority at a uniform price. 
 
 The Committee is also of the firm opinion that for pooling gas prices, prices of 
gas from different fields must be premised on the respective cost of production and 
this necessitate factoring of domestic cost of production for arriving at the gas price. 
 
 The Committee note that a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of 
Dr. SaumitraChaudhari, Member, Planning Commission to examine the need for and 
to suggest a viable scheme for a pooled price for natural gas delivered to customers. 

 
 
This Committee ha ve since given the report. The various stake holders like Ministry 
of Fertilizer and Power have expressed reservations on the recommendations of the 
Committee. While appreciating the reservations expressed by the stake holders, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should try to evolve a consensus on pooling 
of gas, so that a uniform price policy can be put in place for natural gas in the 
country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, vide order dated 14.11.2013, 
03.2.2014 and  20.8.2014 has issued guidelines for allocation/supply of domestic 
natural gas to CGD entities for CNG (transport) and PNG (domestic) segment.  The 
new guidelines, ensures supply of domestic gas in uniform proportion and at uniform 
base price to all existi ng CGD entities for purpose of CNG (transport) and PNG 
(domestic) without discriminating amongst CGD entities, subject to operational 
imperatives.  
 
 Regarding pooling in other sector it is reiterated that the acceptability of a 
pooled gas price would depe nd on the ability of the sector, mainly power and 
fertilizer, to absorb the pooled price and manage a pass -through to their consumers. 
So long as the pooled price is acceptable to end consumers, MoP&NG has no 
objection for a pooled price mechanism.   
 
 Based on the recommendations made in the Report submitted by the 
Committee of Secretaries on 16.09.2014 and subsequent approval of CCEA, the 
New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have been notified by the 
Government and the prices determined under  these guidelines have become 
applicable with effect from 1st November, 2014.  
 
 The gas price, determined, under these guidelines would be applicable to all 
gas produced from nomination fields given to ONGC and OIL India, New Exploration 
and Licensing Pol icy (NELP) blocks, such Pre -NELP blocks where, the Production 
Sharing Contract, (PSC) provides for Government approval of gas prices and Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) blocks except as indicated in para (i) and (ii) below: 
 
The gas price, so determined under thes e guidelines shall not be applicable, where 
prices have been fixed contractually for a certain period of time, till the end of such 
period. This gas price shall also not be applicable where the PSC concerned 
provides for a specific formula for natural gas price indexation/fixation and to such 
Pre-NELP PSCs which do not provide for Government approval of formula/basis for 
gas prices. Further, the pricing of natural gas from small/isolated fields in the 
nomination blocks of NOCs will continue to be governed by the extant guidelines in 
respect of these fields issued on 8th July, 2013. 
 
 The matter relating to cost recovery on account of shortfall in envisaged 
production from D1, D3 discoveries of Block KG DWN98/3 is under arbitration. The 
difference between t he price, determined under these guidelines converted to NCV 
basis and the present price (US $ 4.2 per million BTU) would be credited to the gas 
pool account maintained by GAIL and whether the amount so collected is payable or 
not, to the contractors of th is Blocks, would be dependent on the outcome of the 
award of pending arbitration and any attendant legal proceedings. 

 
 
 The periodicity of price determination/notification shall be half yearly. The 
price and volume data used for calculation of price under t hese guidelines shall be 
the trailing four quarter data with one quarter lag. The first price on the basis of 
aforementioned formula in these guidelines would be determined on the basis of 
price prevailing at Henry Hub, NBP, Alberta Canada and Russia, betw een 1st July, 
2013 and 30 th June, 2014. This price would come into effect from 1 st November, 
2014 and would remain valid till 31st March, 2015. Thereafter, it would be revised for 
the period 1 st April, 2015 to 30 th September, 2015 on the basis of said pric es 
prevalent between 1 st January, 2014 and 31 st December, 2014, i.e., with the lag of 
a quarter and so on. The price determined under these guidelines would be 
announced in advance of the half year, for which it is applicable. 
 
 The price determined under these guidelines would be applied prospectively 
with effect from 1 st November, 2014. Price determined under these guidelines would 
be on GCV basis.  
 
 Director General of Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (DG PPAC) under 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Na tural Gas shall notify the periodic revision of prices 
under these guidelines. The price, determined under these guidelines would be in 
US $ per MMBTU.  
 
 For all discoveries after the issuance of these guidelines, in Ultra Deep Water 
Areas, Deep Water Are as and High Pressure High Temperature (well head shut­in 
pressure > 690 bars, bottom hole temperature> 150 degree centigrade) areas, a 
premium would be given on the gas price determined as per the formula. The 
premium shall be determined as per prescribed procedure.  
 
 In the North Eastern Region (NER), the 40% subsidy would continue to be 
available for gas supplied by ONGC/OIL. However, as private operators are also 
likely to start production of gas in NER, and would be operating in the same market, 
this s ubsidy would also be available to them to incentivize exploration and 
production.  
 
 The price determined under these guidelines shall be applicable to all sectors 
uniformly.  
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Allocation to States 
 
 The Committee note that the natural gas produced from different denominated 
fields like APM, Non -APM, KG D6 and PMT are allocated as per the gas utilization 
policy by the EGoM. As per the policy the allocation of gas is done sectorwise in the 
order of priority as decided by EGoM and the geographical location of any oil/gas 
producing asset does not influence the allocation criteria of Government. Hence, this 
means that even though natural gas is produced from or adjoining areas of a State, 
there is no guarantee of any allocation to the State whereas industries in the priority 
sector in any state including far off ones would get preference in allocation of gas. 
 
 The Committee observe that total gas production during 2012 -13 was 40678 
million cubic metres, out of which the share of private/JV in the KG D6 basin located 
in coastal area a djoining Andhra Pradesh was 13700 million cubic metres. This 
accounts for 30% of the total natural gas production of the country. However, the 
allocation to Andhra Pradesh is pegged at 29.02 mmscmd in 2012 -13, out of a total 
allocation of 216.27 mmscmd whi ch works out to less than 15%. The Committee 
note that only regional preference given to Andhra Pradesh is that the power plants 
have been allocated KG D6 gas based on 75% plant load factor whereas power 
plants outside Andhra Pradesh have been allocated to  operate at 70% PLF. The 
Committee are of the opinion that this is an insignificant privilege given to Andhra 
Pradesh considering the quantum of gas produced in the State. Further, though the 
gas producing and nearby states have enough demand for gas, it is transported from 
East to West Coast and vice -versa thus entailing extra expenditure increasing the 
cost of gas.. The Committee feel that utilization of gas in nearby areas or states, 
could be more pragmatic and economical than transporting it to longer d istances 
until a nation vide gas pipeline network is in place.  
 
 The Committee are of the strong view that this policy should be re -examined 
and the industries in the state concerned or in the neighboring regions should be 
given priority in matter of allo cation of gas as the state in which the field is located 
will be very eager and interested to use the gas for its economic development. The 
Committee, therefore recommend MoPNG to supply atleast 50% of the gas 
produced to industries belonging to the state where the fields are situated.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Previous reply: 
 
Under Article 297 of the Constitution of India, Natural Gas vestswith the Union 
of India, and under entry 53 in Schedule VII of the Constitution, Natural Gas is the 
part of the Unio n List.  The powers of allocation of domestic gas vest with Union of 
India.  As the domestic natural gas is a scarce commodity at present, the Central 
Government has been following the policy of sectoral priority in allocation of 
domestic gas.  Broadly, at  present, the following order of priority is being followed in 
allocation of domestic gas:  

 
 
 
 Gas based fertilizer plants 
 LPG; 
 Gas based power plants supplying power to distribution 
companies at regulated tariff; 
 CGD for domestic and transport sector; 
 
At p resent, there is no policy of allocating domestic gas to individual states.  The 
natural gas reserves are available in very few states and those states are also 
mostly on coast. If it is decided to allocate 50% of share of domestic gas to the 
states where fields are situated, the industries in other states would be put to severe 
disadvantage, leading to regional imbalance in development of the country. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Royalty to States on Natural Gas Production 
 
The Committee notes that oil and natural gas is produced from the fields 
located in onshore, shallow water and offshore. Some of the fields for exploration 
and production were awarded under nomination basis and  once NELP regime came 
into being, the fields were awarded under competitive bidding. As per Production 
Sharing Contract (PSC) the contractor has to pay royalty to the Central / State 
Government depending on the area from where the natural gas is produced.  The 
royalty rates on natural gas production are 10 % of wellhead value for on -land and 
shallow water areas applicable uniformly for all regime and it is paid to respective 
states in which the fields are located. The royalty rates applicable for gas produc ed 
from deep water fields under NELP is 5 % of the wellhead price for first 7 years and 
10 % thereafter on ex-royalty basis. However, in case of production from deep water, 
royalty accrues only to Central Government on the consideration that all the 
resources which are in the offshore areas belong to the Union of India. 
 
The Committee feel that this policy has put the States where the gas is being 
produced from offshore fields to disadvantageous position as they are being 
deprived of royalty arising out of production of natural gas. In the case of KG D6 
basin which is one of the biggest discovery of natural gas in the recent years, the 
royalty on the production accrues only to the Central Government and no revenue is 
earned by the Andhra Pradesh State Govern ment. As the royalty payment to States 
where the natural resources are located and produced is substantial as seen in the 
case of Rajasthan where State Government is earning to the tune of Rs. 5000 crore / 
annum by way of royalty from Barmer fields, depriv ing other states of its rightful 
share of royalty from offshore fields is unjustified. Even though, the offshore fields lie 
in the coastal areas, the contractors would set up offices and source other 
infrastructure to carry out the work in the adjoining st ate to the offshore. Hence, it is 
reasonable for the state to expect some benefits from such economic activities being 
carried out adjacent to their coast will incentivize the states to extend all cooperation 
to carry out the exploration and production activities. 
 

 
 
As the production of oil and natural gas is expected to increase substantially 
with the new discoveries from offshore fields being made, the issue relating to non -
sharing of royalty from offshore areas with State Governments needs to be revisited  
and the State Government should also be benefited from the economic activities 
being carried out in their coastal region. Since the exploration and production 
activities are expected to increase in offshore and deep waters in the years to come, 
the Commit tee therefore recommends that MOPNG should devise a policy for 
sharing the royalty earned from offshore areas also with the concerned State 
Governments.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1. By virtue of Article 297 of the Constitution of India, Petroleum in its n atural state in 
the Territorial Waters and the Continental Shelf of India is vested in the union of India. 
 
2. The ―regulation and development of oil fields and mineral oil resources; petroleum 
and petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law 
to be dangerously inflammable‖ is included as entry 53 in the Union List of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution of India. Accordingly, the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1948 (ORDA) was enacted by the Parliament. The Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 (P & NGR), framed under this Act, lay down the terms and 
conditions for grant of exploration licenses and mining leases in respect of petroleum 
and natural gas.  
 
3.  Section 6A of the Oilfields (Regulation and Develop ment) Act, 1948 and Rule 14 of 
the PNG Rules, 1959 provide that lessee of offshore leases pay royalty to the Central 
Government. 
 
4. Present royalty regime under NELP is brought out under the Article ―Taxes, 
Royalties, Rentals, Duties etc‖ of the PSC. It i s stipulated that, ―Companies (Lessee) 
shall be required to pay royalty to the Government (Lessor) for Offshore areas at the 
rate of ten percent (10 %) of the wellhead value of Crude Oil and Natural Gas. In case 
of an on -shore area, Companies shall be requ ired to pay to the State Government(s) 
(Lessor) at the rate of twelve point five zero percent (12.5 %) of the wellhead value of 
crude oil and ten percent (10 %) of the wellhead value of Natural Gas. In case of an 
Offshore area falling beyond four hundred ( 400) metresisobath, the rate of royalty 
payable by the Companies (Lessee) to the Government (Lessor) shall be at the rate of 
five percent (5 %) of the wellhead value of Crude Oil & Natural Gas for the first seven 
years from the date of commencement of Commercial Production in the Field…‖ 
 
5. Therefore, the royalty from offshore mining lease areas accrue to the Union of India 
and the extant statutory provisions do not provide for sharing of offshore mining 
royalties with the State Governments.  
 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 

 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Gas Allocation by EGoM 
 
 The Committee note that domestic production of Natural Gas during the 12 th 
plan was projected to be 111.54 mmscmd in the year 2012 -13 and is expected to go 
up to 175 mmscmd by the end of the plan i.e. by 2016 -17. The Committee however 
are surprised to note that the al locations made by EGoM for the year 2012 -13 were 
to the tune of 238.27 mmscmd, which is more than double the projected production 
during the same period. This shows huge mismatch devoid of any realistic 
estimations on part of EGoM. Though the Committee und erstands that the minimal 
surplus allocations are unavoidable but at the same time such excess allocations is 
not acceptable. 
 
 Further the shortfall in the actual production which plunged to 91.36 mmscmd 
in 2012-13 forced the Ministry to cut back the allo cations to various sectors on pro -
rata basis. So much so, that the consistent decline in production of gas from KG -D6 
basin ultimately resulted in nil gas supply from the KG -D6 basin to power sector. 
These developments have an adverse impact on the project s and investment plans 
of many sectors of the economy which expects assured gas supply on basis of 
allocations made by the Government. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
allocations should be made by adopting a more pragmatic approach, and should n ot 
be more than 10% of the projected production. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The allocation of all categories of domestic gas (APM, Non APM, Pre -NELP, 
NELP) put together is 242.57 MMSCMD. The allocation of KG -D6 gas by EGoM is 
only 93.34mmscmd out of total 2 42.57mmscmd.  The contractors of KG -D6 had 
projected that production from KG -D6 will reach plateau of around 80 MMSCMD by 
2012. Based on the above projection, EGoM allocated 63.171 MMSCMD of KG -D6 
on firm basis and 30.165 MMSCMD of gas on fallback basis. T he firm allocation of 
KG D -6 was less than the projected production.  The total allocation of KG D -6, 
including fallback allocation, is only 16.67% more than the projected production. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 (please see para 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Strategy to attract investments in Exploration and Production sector 
 
The Committee is not sufficiently convinced on the efficacy of the strategy of 
the Govern ment on deploying the single instrument of price to achieve multiple 
objectives of incentivizing domestic gas exploration and production on the supply 
side and meeting the huge unmet demands for gas at reasonable cost. Doubts have 

 
 
been raised in the Commit tee as to whether a big rise in gas price would attract 
additional investment from within and abroad in the field of exploration. Data 
supplied by the Ministry on flow of investment by private / JV companies in 
exploration of gas reveal that flow of privat e investment in exploration has actually 
started tapering down every year from 2009 -10 onward compared to similar 
investments in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 despite there be substantial jump in the gas 
price from 2009 onward and also country‘s gas output marked a drastic decline. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends a thorough review of the whole strategy of price -
led investment growth. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Based on the recommendations made in the Report submitted by the Committee of 
Secretaries on 16.09.2014 , MOPNG submitted a note for CCEA on 17.10.2014 
regarding pricing of domestically produced natural gas.  CCEA considered the 
proposal in meeting held on 18.10.2014 and approved MOPNG proposals.  
 
The New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014 have b een notified by the 
Government and the prices determined under these guidelines have become 
applicable with effect from 1 st November, 2014 and are to remain valid up to 31 st 
March, 2015. The price notified by PPAC is US $ 5.05 / mmbtu on Gross Calorific 
Value (GCV) basis.   
 
The gas price notified on the basis of this formula provides 33% increase at the 
current gas price level and is expected to incentivize the investments in upstream 
sector and would also consider the requirements of the consuming sector. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 (please see para 19 of Chapter-I) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
Demand and Supply of Natural Gas 
 
 The Committee note that Natural Gas has emerged as one of the principal 
source of energy in the world and accounts for 23.94% of total global energy mix. 
Due to its inherent advantages over other fossil fuels there is a global trend of shift in 
energy mix from oil to natural gas. However, in case of India, share of natural gas in 
total energy mix accounts only 8.7% which is even lower than the Asia Pacific share 
of 11.27%. 
 
 As the Government pursu ed the economic policy to achieve high growth, the 
demand for natural gas has also sharply increased in India during the past few 
years, and expected to escalate further. The Committee are however, constrained to 
note the widening gap between demand and su pply of gas in the country, as during 
2012-13 there was only 134 mmscmd  of gas available including the imported LNG 
against the demand of 286 mmscmd . Thus there was huge unmet demand of 152 
mmscmd. During the year 2015 -16, the expected gap would be to the tune of 300 
mmscmd as against the demand of 439 mmscmd the available gas supply would be 
139 mmscmd only. The chunk of this growing supply deficit is expected to be met 
through LNG imports from different countries. However, the Committee note that 
present LNG terminal capacity is 53 mmscmd only unable to support the increased 
purchase of LNG. Though the LNG infrastructure is expected to grow to 180 
mmscmd by 2016 -17, it would not still be sufficient to cater to the increasing LNG 
import in the coming years.  
 
The Committee are of the view that MoPNG should evolve a plan to explore all 
possible options to increase the production and supply of natural gas in the country. 
Towards this end, the Committee desire that the Ministry should increase the blocks 
awarded for exploration, intensify activities for exploration and production of shale 
gas, pursue strong diplomatic efforts to expedite construction of transnational 
pipelines from neighbouring regions to bring gas and try to enter into long term 
contract for im port of LNG at cheaper cost. The Committee further desire that 
unconventional sources of gas like Gas Hydrates, CBM, Shale Gas should be 
seriously monitored for exploitation and development. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that Ministry should prepare a  blue print to improve the production and 
supply of natural gas in the country so that there is no deficit in meeting the domestic 
demand. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 It is true that at present there is wide gap between production of domestic 
natural gas and demand in the country. However, this demand is price sensitive.The 
demand of natural gas in the country is mainly from fertilizer and power sector. Both 
the sectors have low affordability for imported LNG. The demand from customers in 
sectors other than po wer and fertilizer is also price sensitive. Therefore, the gap in 
demand and supply in the country can be met only partially by imported LNG. On 
one side, there is need to construct new LNG Terminals and increase the capacity of 

 
 
existing ones to meet the s hort fall in demand from domestic sources. On the other 
side, one cannot overlook the fact that demand of natural gas is price sensitive and 
the construction of LNG Terminal is highly capital intensive.  If large capacity of LNG 
import and regasification i s created without proper study of market/demand, LNG 
Terminals may remain under-utilized, putting huge investments to risk.  
In the year 201 3-14, out of total average daily supply of about 1 21.13 
mmscmd, the supply from domestic production was 80.02 mmscmd and from 
imported LNG was 41.11 mmscmd.  
 
At present, the country has capacity to import and re -gasify 22 MMTPA (79.2 
MMSCMD) of LNG. This capacity is likely to increase to 41 MMTPA (147.6 
MMSCMD) by the year 2016 -17. Additional LNG Terminals of capacity around 27 
MMTPA are at various stages of planning.  
 
The details of existing Re-gasified LNG (R-LNG) Terminals are as under: 
 
 
Location of LNG 
terminal 
Owner of the 
Terminal 
  2014-15  
Existing 
Capacity 
 2015-16  
Projected 
Capacity 
2016 – 17 
Projected 
Capacity 
Dahej Petronet 10 10 15 
Hazira Hazira LNG  5 5 7.5 * 
Kochi Petronet 5 5 5 
Dhabol GAIL  2 5 5 
Total capacity (MMTPA) 22 25 32.5 
Total capacity (MMSCMD) 
  79.2 90 117 
      
*  The increase in capacity from 5 to 7.5 MMTPA will become available at the 
end of year 2016-17. 
 
In addition, Regasification terminal for a capacity of 35.5 – 36.5 MMTPA in eastern 
and western coast of India are also being planned by different entities. The 
development of these projects purely depends on techno commercial feasibility.  
 
LNG tie-up: 
 
Long term contracts for LNG have conditions of TAKE or PAY. As the demand 
of natural gas in India is price sensitive, long term contracts of LNG need to be 
planned on the basis of proper study of market and demand, considering the 
affordability of LNG.  
 
Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) and GAIL have executed long term LNG Sale 
Purchase Agreements (SPAs), the details of which are as follows : 
 
PLL 
 7.5MMTPA with Rasgas, Qatar for 25 years. The  supplies have  started in 2004. 
 

 
 
 1.44MMTPA with Exxon Mobil for supplies from Gorgon Project in Australia for 15 
years starting from  2015. 
 
GAIL 
 3.5 MMTPA with Sabine Pass Liquefaction LLC for supplies from Sabine Pass 
terminal in Louisiana, USA starting in 2018. 
 
 2.3 MMTPA of liquefaction capacity booking in the Cove Point LNG terminal 
proposed to be commissioned by Dominion Cove Point LNG LP in 2017. 
 
 In addition to long term contracts, GAIL has executed 2 short term contracts , 
details of which are as follows: 
 
 0.8MMTPA with GNF, Spain for supplies from 2013 to 2015. 
 GAIL has also contracted 2.5 MMTPA of LNG to be supplied by Gazprom 
Marketing and Trading Singapore (GMTS). 
 
GSPC has contracted with British Gas for supply of 1.25 MMTPA from June 2015 
and 2.5 MMTPA from June 2017. 
 
In addition, LNG i s being imported on spot  by PLL, GAIL, Reliance Industries 
Limited (RIL), Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation (GSPC) etc. 
 
 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) 
 
1. Amendment to CBM policy 
 
 CCEA meeting held on 19.12.2013 approved the policy for Exploration & 
Exploitation of CBM for coal mining areas.  However, the approval for para 6.1 
except para 6.1 (iv) was not reflected in the minutes of CCEA meeting.  Accordingly, 
this Ministry requested Cabinet Secretariat to revise minutes of the CCEA meeting 
held on 19.12.2013.  I n reply, Cabinet Secretariat vide O.M. dated 13.2.2014 has 
indicated to bring a fresh proposal for consideration of the CCEA note for a change 
decision, if required.  The Cabinet Note is under preparation by MoP&NG.  In view of 
recent judgment passed by Su preme Court in Coal Blocks case, certain issues are 
being re-examined and note is under submission to Hon‘ble Minister, P&NG.  
 
In pursuance of CBM policy, till date 4 rounds of CBM blocks have been launched in 
which 33 of blocks were awarded. 30 were awar ded through international 
Competitive Bidding while 2 were given on nomination basis and 1 CBM block  was 
awarded through Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) route. Out of these 33 
blocks, 8 blocks are in the development phase, 5 blocks are in the Exp loration 
phase, 16 blocks are relinquished/under relinquishment and there are 4 blocks which 
are yet to be effective for want of PEL/PEL deed by the State Government.      
 
2. Ten CBM blocks identified for exploration under Uniform Licensing 
Policy in 10th round of NELP 
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is proposing to launch tenth bid round of 
NELP (NELP -X) shortly, wherein blocks shall be offered for Exploration and 
Exploitation of conventional as well as unconventional hydrocarbon resources under 

 
 
Uniform Licensing Policy. Ten CBM rich blocks (6 in Gujarat, 2 in Madhya Pradesh 
and 2 in Maharashtra) have been identified primarily for exploration and exploitation 
of CBM. 
 
TRANS-NATIONAL PIPELINE PROJECTS 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) 
The Government is pursuing the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-India 
(TAPI) transnational Gas Pipeline Project.  
 On 11th December, 2010 the four countries involved in the TAPI Gas pipeline 
project, signed an Inter -Governmental Agreement along with a Gas Pip eline 
Framework Agreement in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. To accelerate the project, parties 
have formed a Minister level Steering Committee and Technical Working Group 
(TWG). 
 To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement 
(GSPA), bilatera l and multilateral meetings have been held amongst the four 
countries and their gas companies participating in the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline project.  Regarding security & safety of the pipeline, 
suitable provisions have been made in the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) and 
Gas Pipeline Framework Agreement (GPFA) signed by the Governments of 
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India in December 2010. On 23 rd May, 
2012 GAIL (India) Ltd. and Pakistan‘s Inter State Gas Syste ms signed their 
respective Gas Sales Purchase Agreements (GSPA) with Turkmenistan‘s state gas 
company Turkmen Gaz which envisage Turkmen gas being supplied to India and 
Pakistan via Afghanistan in 2018.  Turkmenistan and Afghanistan have also signed 
anMoU for cooperation in the gas sector, leaving the signing of a bilateral GSPA till 
negotiations on gas price is concluded. 
 
ADB has been appointed as the Transaction Advisor consequent to the signing of 
Transaction Advisory Services Agreement (TASA) between the 4 entities (3 buyers & 
the Seller) and ADB on 19 th November, 2013. The major scope of work of TA 
includes (i) Formation of TAPI Limited and (ii) Selection of the Consortium Leader. 
 
 During PETROTECH 2014 (January 12 -15, 2014), the Turkmen side has 
indicated that the shortlist of prospective Consortium Leaders will be provided during 
the first quarter of 2014. 
 
The Turkmen Party provided a shortlist which contained only one company 
viz. M/s TOTAL of France, which has expressed its interest in becoming th e 
Consortium Leader for TAPI Limited.  In addition, the Turkmen Party also informed 
that the three international companies working in offshore E&P blocks in 
Turkmenistan may also be interested in becoming the consortium members in TAPI 
Limited. Accordingly, the SC advised the TA to carry out discussions with TOTAL as 
well as with the other three companies.  The SC has asked the TA and Turkmen 
Party to present the status of discussions on this subject in November 2014.  
 
During a recent meeting held among th e TA and the 4 TAPI entities from 27 th 
to 29th August, 2014 at Dubai, the TA has informed that a detailed presentation had 
been made earlier to the Turkmenistan Government highlighting the principles on 
which Technical Service Contracts (based on the Iraqi  Service Contract model) may 
be used to provide sufficient incentives for investment by a potential Consortium 
Leader (particularly with respect to booking reserves). The Turkmenistan 

 
 
Government indicated these principles were acceptable, and authorized th e 
Transaction Advisor to convey them to TOTAL.  
 
In parallel, the TA is undertaking actions for preparation of the Information 
Memorandum for issuing to the shortlist of potential leaders.  
 
The Steering C ommittee had desired that the Consortium Leader sho uld be 
selected by September 2015 and the Consortium Agreement be signed by March 
2016. However, these timelines are contingent upon the outcome of the November 
2014 status update.  
 
During the 25 th TWG meeting held in Dubai on 26 -27 Feb, 2014 , an 
agreement has been reached on the payment modalities for the transit fee payable 
by GAIL to the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan. The indexation formula is 
yet to be agreed.  
 
Shale Gas 
The Government has issued ―Policy Guidelines for Exploration and Exploi tation of 
Shale Gas and Oil by National Oil Companies under Nomination regime‖ on 14 th 
October, 2013. Under this Policy, the right to exploration and exploitation of Shale 
Gas & Oil will lie with the NOCs holding Petroleum Exploration License 
(PEL)/Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) granted under the nomination regime. A 
Phase II policy for grant of exploration and exploitation of shale gas and oil in the 
pre-NELP, NELP & CBM area is presently under consideration. 
ONGC has recently commenced drilling of one well (Jambusar # 55) in Gujarat for 
assessment of shale gas/shale oil potential of Cambay Shale. Currently, there is no 
commercial production of shale gas in the country. 
Under the first phase of assessment of shale gas and oil, exploration and 
exploitation, at  present, 56 PEL/PML blocks (ONGC 50, and OIL -6) have been 
identified by NOCs. These blocks are located in the states of Assam (7 blocks), 
Arunachal Pradesh (1 Block), Gujarat (28 blocks), Rajasthan (1 Block), Andhra 
Pradesh (10 blocks) and Tamil Nadu (9 b locks). ONGC has drilled one well where 
coring has been completed. In addition, ONGC has collected cores from another 7 
wells. 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 (please see para 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Production of Natural Gas from KG – D6 Basin 
 
The Committee notes that KG-D6 basin is one of the successful discoveries in 
the NELP regime which gave hope to the country in its quest for exploration of 
hydrocarbon resources. The Committee notes that the planned production as per the 
approved Field Development Plan (FDP), which was 33.83 MMSCMD in 2009 -10 

 
 
was to go up to 86.73 MMSCMD in 2012 -13. However, the production from the KG – 
D6 basin started declining as the actu al production was 55.89 in 2010 -11 to 26.18 
MMSCMD in 2012-13. 
 
 The Committee find that one of the reasons stated by the Ministry for the 
declining production was due to non -drilling of required number of gas producer 
wells by the contractor in line with Addendum to Initial Development Plan (AIDP). 
Whereas according to the contractor, the decline has been due to substantial 
variance in reservoir behavior and higher pressure decline than envisaged. The 
Committee have further been informed that the contracto r has been advised certain 
corrective measures to increase natural gas production in KG -D6 block. However, 
the contractor has failed to adhere to the corrective measures. 
 
The Committee also observe that DGH had commissioned a study by an 
expert on the dec line in production and the expert has concluded that reserves as 
estimated earlier, which is around 10 tcf are still available and remedial measures 
will help the production to go up. The expert has also observed that the shortfall in 
gas production is due  to non -drilling of adequate number of wells as per ADP 
(Approved Development Plan) and delays in commissioning additional producers 
would trigger water drive in the reservoir and consequent reduction of the ultimate 
recovery as a result of water encroachment as well as permanent loss of some of the 
gas reserves. Based on the aforesaid report the cost disallowance amounting to US 
$ 1.005 billion has been imposed upon the contractor which the contractor has taken 
for arbitration. 
 
The Committee is worried an d express unhappiness at the whole series of 
events. The KG -D6 basin was success story of NELP regime which invited private 
companies and MNCs in the exploration and production regime which until then was 
a NOCs forte. However, the contractor has not adher ed to the measures suggested 
by the upstream regulator DGH to drill wells to increase natural gas production. Also 
coincidentally, the demand for increase in the price of natural gas by the contractor 
over and above the discovered price by arms length mech anism as provided in the 
PSC has also brought question mark regarding the interest of the contractor to abide 
by the sanctity and stability of the PSC. 
 
The Committee has taken serious note of the statement made by the Ministry 
that the contractor (RIL) failed to adhere to the approved field development plan both 
in terms of gas production as well as drilling and putting on stream the required 
number of wells, even after repeated reminder. The Committee also note that the 
action taken by the Ministry in res pect of cost disallowance of US $ 1.005 billion to 
contractor based on arbitration procedure. In view of the above, the Committee is of 
the opinion that non-adherence by the contractor to approved field development plan 
should be construed as ‗default‘ and  not just failure and remedial action by the 
Ministry in this regard must be premised on ‗default‘ by the contractor and not on 
‗failure‘. 
 
The Committee would like to point out that Supreme Court has observed that 
natural resources are national assets and  are to be utilized for larger good of the 
people. Therefore, the Committee would recommend to MOPNG to explore all 
possible options and take corrective measures to increase the natural gas production 
from KG-D6 basin, as observed in the study commissioned by DGH. 
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1. The reserve estimates of D1 / D3 gas discoveries were revised and 
Addendum to the Initial Development Plan (AIDP) was approved in 2006 by the 
Management Committee (MC) of the block, based on the contractor‘s geologic al 
assessment. The reserve estimate of about 10 tcf for these discoveries envisaged in 
AIDP was evaluated by reputed international consultants engaged by the contractor 
and cross verified by DGH through another expert. Further, after production started 
declining, DGH engaged an expert in 2011 to review performance of D1 / D3 
discoveries. The expert has concluded in the Report that, ―the Gas -Initial-In-Place 
(GIIP) in D1 / D3 field is adequate to achieve the planned gas rates as per approved 
development plan . There is no geological or reservoir constraint to achieve the 
recommended gas production rate as per AIDP‖. 
 
2. The contractor‘s submissions regarding complexity of the reservoir and 
geological surprise leading to downward revision of in -place gas volume s and 
ultimate recoverable reserves has not been agreed by DGH. The GOI members on 
MC in the MC meeting held on 1 st October, 2013 rejected downward revision based 
on data, its interpretation and analysis, it has been stated in the MC Resolution 
forwarded to the contractor that DGH / GOI is unable to agree with findings of the 
contractor due to following reasons: 
 
(i) 50 wells were planned to be drilled in 2P area of D1 / D3 with 34 wells 
being in the main channel A & B and 16 wells outside the main channel area. 
The development well drilling efforts are not in proportion to the reserves 
estimated and as envisaged in AIDP 
 
(ii) The Operator has ruled out presence of gas sands in inter -channel 
area mainly on the basis of results from SB -1 well which has been d rilled just 
outside main channel area. The operator is of the opinion that area outside 
the main channel is predominantly mud rich. However, DGH is of the view that 
areas outside main channels also contain significant reservoir sands which 
require physical inputs, as envisaged in AIDP.  
 
(iii) The areas outside the main channels require drilling of new wells.  
 
(iv)  The reservoir pressure has declined more than that envisaged in FDP 
due to production in field at a gas rate higher than the rate envisaged in  
production profile approved by MC under AIDP. This resulted in preferential 
water encroachment also. Hence, the in -place gas volume in main Channel 
may not be less than that envisaged in AIDP. 
 
3. Since the Government nominees on the Management Committee have 
rejected the Revised Field Development Plan (RFDP) proposal for the reasons given 
by DGH in MCR, the production targets and estimates of gas reserves agreed under 
AIDP are still valid under the PSC. The contractor has not completed commitments 
made un der the PSC despite several earlier reminders by DGH. Hence, GOI 
determined that the contractor is in breach of PSC and issued orders disallowing 
cost recovery on 2/5/2012 and subsequently on 14/11/2013 and 10/07/2014. 
 
4. Thus, it is clear that in respect  of D1-D3 discoveries of KG -DWN-98/3,DGH / 
MOPNG has not accepted the contractor‘s contention that the decline in gas 

 
 
production is not due to default in implementation of AIDP, but due to downgrading 
of reserves. The matter is under arbitration subsequent  to the cost disallowance 
order based on shortfall in the cumulative production up to 31.03.2012. Cost 
recovery to the extent of US $ 1.005 billion was denied to the contractor of the above 
block vide GOI order dated 2 nd May, 2012. DGH further informed tha t based on the 
same principles, the amount of cost recovery to be denied to the contractor up to 
31.03.2013 will be US $ 1.797 billion. MOPNG issued order disallowing cost 
recovery for 2012-13 in November, 2013 . Using the same methodology, the US $ 
2.376 b illion has been disallowed up to FY 2013 -14. MoPNG issued order 
disallowing cost recovery for 2013 -14 in July, 2014. The matter is under 
arbitration.  
 
5. Given the gas potential of KG -DW-98/3 Block, the requirement of energy 
security for the country demands that all legally permissible steps be taken within the 
framework of the PSC to monetize gas resources as quickly as possible. Termination 
of the contract could be considered as a last resort when all other measures to 
remedy the situation have failed. R eference is also invited to the Article 30.6 of the 
PSC which reads as, ―If the circumstance or circumstances that would otherwise 
result in termination are the subject matter of proceedings under Article 33, then 
termination shall not take place so long a s such proceedings continue and thereafter 
may only take place when and if consistent with the arbitral award‖.  
 
6. Since arbitration proceedings have been initiated and the matter is before the 
Supreme Court for appointment of presiding arbitrator, appro priate action will be 
taken based on outcome of the arbitration proceedings under Article 33.  
  
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Supply of APM Gas to TTZ Area 
 
The Committee note that  in pursuance of Supreme Court order, MoPNG has 
been supplying natural gas to the industrial units most of which are glass – bottle 
manufacturing units in Taj Trapezium Area,  in Ferozabad near Agra since 1996. The 
allocation of gas for this purpose now sta nds at 1.7 mmscmd. The price of the 
natural gas charged to these units are APM price which has remain unchanged since 
2005. 
 
 The Committee are given to understand that the number of factories in this 
area has grown manifold taking advantage of the low pri ced APM natural gas. The 
Committee feel that this has defeated the purpose of the Supreme Court order which 
wanted that Taj Area should be preserved from environmental pollution from the 
factories in the nearby area. The Committee also wish to observe that  glass units in 
other town/cities in the country which buy gas at market related prices are at a 
distinct competitive disadvantages compared to the units located in TTZ Area. 
 
 In view of the above, the Committee desire the MoPNG to implement the 
Supreme Court order and the objectives set out in it in the right spirit without creating 
any imbalances in competitive factors for other similar industrial units in the country. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the MoPNG to initiate concrete corrective 

 
 
action and supply natural gas at competitive market price to these units so as to 
check the Mushrooming of industries in TTZ area which are taking unfair advantage 
of low gas price. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Gas supplies to industrial units in TTZ were made as  per Supreme Court 
orders dated 30.12.1996 and 05.04.2002 directing (i) 292 industries of Agra to use 
Natural Gas in lieu of conventional fuel (ii) first priority to CNG and thereafter if any 
gas is available the same may be allocated to industries with pr eference being 
shown to PSU and power projects. Accordingly, Govt. of India had allocated 0.6 
MMSCMD of APM Gas on 02.05.1995 and additional 0.5 MMSCMD on 05.06.2000. 
APM allocation of 1.1 mmscmd was made in favour of GAIL, which in turn made 
allocations in favour of individual customers. On 29.09.2011 the allocation of GAIL 
was transferred to GAIL Gas Ltd. a 100% subsidiary of GAIL. Subsequently, new 
industrial units came into operation in Agra & Firozabad and they also required 
natural gas for their opera tion. Since, no additional APM gas was available for 
allocation these units had to depend on high priced imported R -LNG & at such high 
fuel cost the operation was unsustainable in longer run. In view of above, GAIL Gas 
requested MoPNG to allow them to pool APM gas with R-LNG & charge pooled price 
from all the customer which will provide a level playing field to all customers in TTZ. 
Accordingly, MoPNG allowed  GAIL Gas to pool APM gas with R -LNG w.e.f. 
02.06.2012. At present, the customers in TTZ area are re ceiving gas under uniform 
price mechanism, where the price is higher than domestic gas but lower than RLNG. 
 
 The Ministry is examining the possibility of implementing recommendations of 
the committee in this regard. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Rangarajan Committee on PSC 
 
The Committee note that the Production Sharing Contracts are entered 
between contractors and Government on a host of issues under the NELP. 
Government appointed the Rangarajan Committee to review Production Sharing 
Contract (PSC). Some of the important recommendations of the Committee include a 
new revenue sharing model, pricing formula for natural gas and tax holidays. The 
revenue sharing model has been proposed to overcome the present system of pre 
tax investment model and cost recovery mechanism. 
 
The Committee desire that since Rangarajan Committee recommendations 
have wide ramifications on the investments in the E & P sector, it needs to be 
examined in greater detail before any decision is taken on the implementation as the 
E & P activities under NELP has not achieved the desired participation from 
adequate number of both domestic and international companies.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
 
The Uniform Licensi ng Policy (ULP) and revenue sharing model is under 
consideration of the Government. A Model Revenue Sharing Contract (MRSC) was 
posted on website of the Ministry to seek comments from all the stakeholders. The 
comments have been received and are being analyzed by the Ministry. 
 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. L-15016/9/2013-GP (Vol. II) dated 19.11.2014 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 (please see para 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
23 April,  2015 
3 Vaisakha,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                                Chairman,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) 
 
TENTH SITTING 
(27.01.2015) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27 January, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 
1245 hrs. in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Pralhad Joshi  - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3. Shri P.K. Biju 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Elumalai V.  
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Smt. Pratima Mondal 
9. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
10. Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
11. Smt. Anupriya Patel 
12. Shri Arvind Sawant 
13. Shri Raju Shetty 
14. Dr. Bhola Singh 
15. Shri Ravneet Singh 
16. Shri Rajesh Verma 
17. Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
18. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
19. Smt. Gundu Sudharani 
20. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2.         At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then considered the draft  Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 19th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
the subject ‗Allocation and Pricing of Gas'. 
3.         The Committee, therefore, adopted the above Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalise and present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
************* 

 
 
Annexure II 
                                                                                
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2013-14) ON 'ALLOCATION AND PRICING OF GAS' 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3,9,11 and 12 ) 
 
4 
 Percentage to Total 33.33% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‘s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 5 and 6) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 16.66% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 and 10) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 16.66% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,4,7 and 8)  
4 
 Percentage of Total 33.33% 
 
 
 