 
17 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF 
HYDROCARBONS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 


2 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF 
HYDROCARBONS 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2015-16)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)……………………………..                      4 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                      5 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
17 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
20 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
26 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
31 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the fifth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2016 -17) held on 
07.12.2016. 
32 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015-16) on 
the subject 'Functioning of Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons'. 
34 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2016-17) 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
13 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
14 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
15 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16 Shri Raju Shetti 
17 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
23 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
26 Shri Ahmed Patel 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
28 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya                     
31 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala  - Committee Officer 

5 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the 
subject „Functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons'. 
2. The Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 06.0 5.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report were 
received on 19.08.2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2016 -17) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.12.2016.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers o f the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 8 December,  2016 
17 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2015 -16) on 'Functioning of Directo rate General of Hydrocarbons', which 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.05.2016. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 10 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been  categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 4, 6 and 7 (Total 3) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. Nos. 8, 9 and 10 (Total 
3) 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted  by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 
3 and 5  (Total 4)                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No. NIL               
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the a ction taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  

7 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Need for an Independent and Statutory DGH  
5. The Committee had noted that:  
"With major discoveries in Mumbai High and Western offshore, the hydrocarbon 
sector received a big boost and after the adoption of liberalized economic policy 
in July 1991, the Government of India felt the need to deregulate and de -license 
this sector along with other  measures. As a result, the hydrocarbon sector was 
opened to private and joint sectors. In this changed scenario, the expert 
committees appointed by the Government recommended the creation of an 
independent regulatory body. Accordingly, the Government of I ndia set up 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) on 8 April, 1993 through a cabinet 
resolution. It was modelled as a technical arm of the Ministry on the lines of 
Norwegian model after studying and suitably modifying the structure, functions 
and responsibilities of various regulatory authorities with an objective to promote 
sound management of Indian petroleum and natural gas resources and also 
having a balanced regard for environment, safety, technological and economic 
aspects of petroleum activities.  The functions assigned to DGH have been 
revised from time to time by the Government and it also includes safety related 
issues and monitoring of Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs).  
 The Committee observe that the private sector participation has significantly 
increased ever since the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was launched 
in 1998. Through nine NELP rounds 254 blocks have been awarded till date. The 
Committee, however, are anguished to note that the entire hydrocarbon sector is 
in limbo with the last round of NELP having begun almost four years ago. There 
have been several litigations and arbitration proceedings involving DGH and 
operators. As a result, it has not only dam pened investment scenario in the 
country but also withheld investments in production and exploration activities. 
This situation perhaps has been created because the functions of DGH do not 
refer to 'regulation' in the name of DGH and decisions of the DGH d o not lie in 
any appellate body or court which is the hallmark of an independent regulator.  
In Committee's view, when there is a participation of public sector as well as 
private sector in hydrocarbon sector, it is necessary to have an independent 
regulator with certain statutory powers to adjudicate matters in line with the policy 
of the Government. The presence of independent regulators in sectors like 
telecom, power, financial services, etc. vested with statutory powers further 
supports the views of the  Committee. Need of such regulator is also justified 
because the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) is a 
regulator in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas only for a small part of the 
downstream sector and the upstream sector does not have any regulator at all. 
Basically, the DGH carry out contract management and some of regulatory 
functions on behalf of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that MoPNG should vest the regulatory functions being 

8 
 
performed by DGH with PNGRB so that it can be regulator for both upstream 
sector as well as for downstream".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Reply of the Government 
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"DGH was setup by a Resolution dated 8 th April, 1993 by the Government of 
India, in the Ministry of Petroleum of Natural Gas, consequent upon approval of 
Cabinet.  As per the Resolution the objective of DGH is to promote sound 
management of Indian Petroleum & Natur al Gas resources, having a balance 
regard for environment, technological and economic aspects of petroleum 
activity.  DGH provides advice to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 
technical and regulatory aspects of E&P activities. 
 The establishment  of upstream regulator has been deliberated in the past also 
and it was felt that normally a regulator in any field is required when level playing 
field to all the parties (private / foreign & public) needs to be provided.  In the 
upstream sector, policies  such as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP 
provide a level playing field to all the companies.  Therefore the Ministry is of the 
view that a separate independent regulator for upstream sector is not required in 
the present circumstances".  
7. The Committee had viewed that given the participation of both public and 
private sectors in hydrocarbon industry, it was necessary to have an independent 
regulator with certain statutory powers to adjudicate matters in line with the 
policy of the Government .  The Committee had also observed in their report that 
PNGRB was a regulator, only for a small part of the downstream sector in 
petroleum industry and as such the upstream sector does not have any regulator 
at all. The Committee do not accept the view of the Government that policies such 
as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP provide a level playing field to all 
companies in the upstream sector.  In this regard, the Committee reiterate their 
observation that there have been several litigations and arbitrat ion proceedings 
involving DGH and other operators over disputes arising from the implementation 
of production sharing contracts under NELP rounds.  The Committee also 
reassert their earlier view that legal battles have not only dampened investment 
scenario in the country but also with held investments in exploration and 
production sector.  

9 
 
 The Committee, therefore, firmly believe that an independent and statutory 
status can only confer actual regulatory powers upon DGH. The Committee also 
opine that decisions of DGH must be reviewed by an appellate authority to ensure 
level playing field for both public and private companies in oil industry.  The 
Committee also view that oil industry as one of the core sectors of the economy 
cannot afford to remain an exclus ivist industry at a time when various other 
industries like telecom, power and financial sectors of the Government have 
appointed independent regulatory bodies for ensuring level playing field in their 
respective services for both public and private players. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that MoPNG should vest the regulatory functions 
being performed by DGH and PNGRB with one single independent regulator for 
the entire hydrocarbon sector.  
Recommendation No.2 
Filling up of the post of Director General of Hydrocarbons  
8. The Committee had noted that:  
"The Directorate General of Hydrocarbon came into being in 1993 and there 
have been eight officials who have held the post of Director General of 
Hydrocarbons during the last 23 years. The previous DGH was from the Ministry 
who held the post as additional charge. The Committee have also noted that the 
post of DGH has been filled up by technical people in most of the cases. 
However, in June 2012, the  government appointed an official from Indian 
Administrative Service to the post of DGH and the said official served for 21 
months. The post of Director General of Hydrocarbons was lying vacant since 
July 2015 and the Committee are surprised to learn that one of the main reasons 
for inordinate delay in appointment is that there have been no recruitment rules 
for the post of Director General. Now, the Committee have been informed that 
the rules have been approved in consultation with DoPT and UPSC which 
provide for technical people with experience in the upstream sector only be 
eligible for the post of DGH. The process for the recruitment after framing new 
recruitment rules has been completed and the post has been filled recently. 
The Committee have a strong view that the post of Director General of 
Hydrocarbons is a technical one and it should be filled up only by people who 
have considerable exposure and experience in upstream sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that t he post of Director 
General Hydrocarbons is not kept vacant or held as additional charge by senior 

10 
 
officials of the Ministry rather through advance action it should be filled up 
timely". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
 "Ministry has formulated Recruitment Rules (RRs) to the post of DG, DGH in 
consultation with UPSC and DoPT which has been notified on 28 th October, 
2015. Based on the RRs, circular inviting application for the post of DG, DGH 
was issued.  However, after scrutiny of the received application it was observed 
that the officers who had been able to meet the minimum requirement were in the 
rank of General Manager in their respective organizations.  The post of DG, DGH 
is an Additional Secretary level post and requires considerable administrative, 
personnel and technical skills for discharging the responsibilities smoothly.  The 
responsibilities associated with the post include regulatory functions and involve 
high level responsibilities in the context of development of upstream sector in the 
country.   
 DGH has to perform technical, financial and legal functions in regulating the 
operations of various fields. The position has previously been manned by officers 
of All India Service as well as from the officers of senior management level in the 
Public Sector.  Also, the organization structure is such that there are Deputy DGs 
who are in the rank of Exe cutive directors and are reporting to DG.  Therefore, it 
was viewed that the applications which had come out of the advertisement made 
by MoP&NG may create problems in reporting structure of the organization as 
well and may be detrimental to the overall fu nctioning of the organization.  
Accordingly, Ministry informed DoPT requesting for appointment of a suitable 
officer to the post of DG, DGH 
Presently the post of DG, DGH is being held by Shri Atanu Chakraborty w.e.f. 
12.04.2016.  His appointment to the pos t has been made with the approval of 
ACC".   
10. The Committee were of the view that the post of DGH was a technical one 
and accordingly, in their report, had recommended  to the Ministry to ensure that 
the post of DGH might not be kept vacant or held as an additional charge by any 
senior official  of the Ministry and  the post should be filled up by persons with 
considerable exposure and experience in the upstream sector.   
 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that on the basis of 
recruitment rules formulated in consultation with UPSC and DoPT, applications 
were sought for the post of DG, DGH . However, the officers who had been able to 

11 
 
meet the minimum requirement were in the rank of General Manager in their 
respective organizations and as such they were not eligible to be appointed to the 
post of DG, DGH as the post of DG was equivalent to an officer of Additional 
Secretary level in the  Government. The applications which had come out of the 
advertisement might create problem s in reporting structure and might become 
detrimental to the overall functioning of the organization.  The Ministry has also 
intimated that the post of DG, DGH is being held by a new incumbent w.e.f. 
12.04.2016 but there is no mention of experience and tenure of the new DG, DGH . 
It is also not convincing that this time they did not get  officer meeting minimum 
requirement and thus the appointment was made through D oPT with the approval 
of ACC.  
 The Committee are aware that there is a tough competition among suitable 
officers whenever there is a vacancy to hold regulatory bodies in various sectors 
of the Government like TRAI, SEBI, RBI, IRDA and NHAI . But, it is surprising to 
note that no officer beyond the level of General Manager applied for the post of 
DG, DG H.  As the functions of DGH are technical in nature , the post of DGH 
should be filled up by a candidate with appropriate technical qualificatio ns and 
requisite experience in the upstream sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and urge the Ministry to  analyse the actual reasons for 
such poor response and i f necessary  widen the ambit of recruitment rules 
judiciously and notify once again fresh advertisement to seek applications from 
eligible and suitable officers for the post of DG, DGH.   
Recommendation No. 3 
Human Resources issues of DGH  
11. The Committee had noted that:  
"DGH has been entrusted with varying functions like carving of blocks for NELP, 
monitoring of PSCs, providing technical advice to Ministry on issues relevant to 
exploration and optimal exploitation of hydrocarbons, issuance of essentiality 
certificates, im plementation of NELP and CBM Policies, etc. The Committee, 
further, note that as against the sanctioned staff strength of 255, the actual 
strength of DGH is 187 only. The Committee observe that the officers are 

12 
 
appointed on deputation at DGH on tenure basi s in consultation with CEOs from 
various oil PSUs and 80% of them are from ONGC and 20% from remaining oil 
PSUs such as OIL, IOCL, GAIL, HPCL, etc. 
The Committee observe that the officers of DGH on deputation may have conflict 
of interest in assessing the work of their own PSUs. There seems no effort or 
plan in the Ministry or DGH to create permanent cadre for DGH. The Committee 
observe that DGH has been advised to appoint an expert consultant on 
restructuring of DGH and it is in the process of hiring a consultant for this job. 
The Committee believe that DGH should have its own cadre of employees for 
discharging its functions independently. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the hiring of consultant should be completed on priority basis within a 
reasonable time frame and DGH should be restructured suitably to develop it 
with permanent cadre of employees after the receipt of report thereon". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
 "In terms of Government Resolution dated 08.04.1993 creating DGH, the 
Directorate is manned by staff drawn from oil industry on deputation/tenure basis 
mainly from upstream oil sector PSUs like ONGC and Oil India Ltd. Keeping in 
view the concerns regarding conflict of interest, the Issue of own cadre of 
employees for DGH has been under deliberations of the Government from time 
to time. It may be pertinent to mention that DGH requires oil industry experienced 
and trained staff with adequate onsite o perational field experience in specialized 
disciplines like geology, geophysics, reservoir, production, drilling etc. Such 
requirement could be met through experienced staff drawn from oil sector PSUs 
only. Some of the issues that need to be considered whi le creating separate 
Cadre for DGH are as under:  
(i)  Desirability of building a separate cadre, framing of rules/ regulations for 
recruitment, promotion and career growth for only a small number of DGH cadre 
staff which may be around 250-300 for the years to come.  
(ii)  DGH being under the administrative control of Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, the creation of DGH cadre within the broad frame work of Central 
Government emoluments/ pay structure including salary, wages, allowances and 
perks and car eer growth prospects which may not be comparable with the 
prevailing oil Industry levels including oil PSUs".   
 
13. The Committee were of the view that DGH should have its own permanent 
cadre of employees for discharging its functions independently and accordingly, 

13 
 
in their report had recommended the Ministry to expedite the process of 
appointment of an expert consultant for restructuring of DGH. 
 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that in t erms of 
Government Resolution dated 08.04.1993, the DGH is manned by staff drawn from 
oil industry on deputation. The C ommittee, however,  are not satisfied with the 
reply of the Government and decry the way it has taken shelter under the 
Government resolution of 1993 w.r.t. the manning of DGH by the staff drawn from 
oil industry on deputation . The Committee observe that it has been more than 
twenty three years since DGH was created and during the last two decades the 
country's economy has undergone phenomenal transformation and accordingly, 
the functions of DGH have also been multiplied in tandem with an ever increasing 
requirements of the oil industry . The Committee are not in conformity with the 
Government's view that 'creating a small number of DGH staff of  250 to 300 may 
not be a desirable proposition'. Further, the Committee also do not accept the 
argument of Government that the creation of DGH cadre within the broader 
framework of Central Government's pay structure and emoluments would not be 
able to match with the prevailing levels of oil industry PSUs.  
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that DGH must 
set up  its own cadre of employees for functional independence and regulatory 
autonomy. The Committee also emphasize that providing the permanent cadre of 
DGH with robust training in various specialized disciplines like geology, 
geophysics, reservoir, production and drilling activities and ensuring their 
constant association with upstream oil industry activities would certainly create a 
strong expertise in hydrocarbon sector in the long run.  The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Government to initiate suitable modifications  and amendments in the 
DGH resolution if necessary, to create its own permanent cadre of employees  for 
overall betterment of the oil industry.     
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 DGH and Production Sharing Contracts  
14. The Committee had noted that:  
"The Committee note that the Government had assigned the work relating to 
implementation of production sharing contracts (PSCs) under NELP to DGH and 
it has discharged the powers of Central Government where a contract or an 
agreement for exploration and pro duction of hydro carbons has been signed by 
the Central Government. Under the PSC regime, all companies are required to 
submit their cost of production for the year in the beginning and this has to be 
approved by the Managing Committee. These are evaluated  by the officers of 
DGH in line with the approved development plans and past performance. The 
Committee have noted that DGH has officers with different backgrounds like 
exploration, finance and legal etc., who vet, interpret and analyse all documents 
and o ther production signing contracts. DGH suggest mid course corrections 
wherever the production is lesser than the targets. The Committee note that 
there have been many instances of disputes arising out of execution of 
production sharing contracts between DG H and companies. Certain disputes 
have also led to court/arbitration proceedings in Indian and foreign courts. The 
Committee believe that companies have no choice but to approach courts for 
appeal against decisions of DGH as there is no appellate authority  or other 
mechanisms where companies can appeal or challenge orders of DGH. As a 
result, companies have lost their precious time, costs and efforts and there has 
been delay in carrying out exploration activities. The Committee, therefore, 
observe that this  may not be a good sign for development of hydro carbon 
industry and therefore, desire that Ministry should strive for setting up a 
regulatory authority as mentioned in recommendation No.1.  
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should consult all 
stakeholders and other departments towards setting up of an authority to 
adjudicate or to hear review orders passed by DGH. The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should review the existing production sharing contract system 
and bring out a more s implified forms of contracts with clear definitions and with 
less scope for misinterpretation in line with the stated objective of the 
Government i.e. “Ease of Doing Business” initiative". 
Reply of the Government 
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural G as has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"DGH has been delegated certain powers to perform functions under Production 
Sharing Contract on behalf of the Government while for addressing the issues 
where powers are vested with Ministry, the role of DGH is advisory in nature.  
Ministry takes decisions on the basis of merit of the proposal considering DGH‟s 

15 
 
advice.  Even in many cases, where powers have been delegated to DGH, it acts 
on the advice of Management Committee.  Further, for blocks having discoveries 
or where production has started, the decis ions are taken by the Management 
Committee taking technical inputs from DGH.  These MCs have representatives 
of the Ministry as well 
 Pursuant to approval of Cabinet on 10.03.2016, Government has formulated a 
new Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (H ELP) for award of hydrocarbon 
acreages.  Salient features are as under: 
 Single License for exploration and production of conventional as well as non -
conventional hydrocarbon resources  
 Open Acreage Policy -option to select the exploration blocks without waiting for 
formal bid round. 
 Revenue Sharing Model-simple, easy to administer- no cost recovery - no micro-
management by the Government  -  operational freedom to the operator  
 Pricing and Marketing Freedom- a major incentive for investment".  
 
16. The Co mmittee had observed in their report that there have been several 
cases of disputes arising out of execution of production sharing contracts 
between DGH and companies  and certain disputes had also led to  
court/arbitration proceedings in Indian and foreign courts. The Committee had 
also believed that companies had  no choice but to approach courts for appeal 
against decisions of DGH since there was no appellate authority or mechanism to 
challenge decisions of DGH . Further, these litigations had resulted in time and 
cost overruns and also led to delays in exploration activities.  The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the Ministry should consult all stakeholders for 
setting up of an authority to adjudicate review orders of DGH and also desired the 
Ministry to streamline the existing PSC regime without any ambiguity for realising 
the stated objective of the Government i.e. “Ease of Doing Business”.  
 The Ministry in its reply has stated that certain powers have been delegated 
to DGH under production sharing contracts on behalf of the Government. 
However, the powers to address issues are lying with the Ministry as the role of 
DGH was just advisory in nature.  Further, it has been stated that in many cases, 
where powers have been delegated to DGH, it acts on the advice of Management 

16 
 
Committee. In addition , for blocks having discoveries or where production has 
started, the decisions are taken by the Management Committee taking technical 
inputs from DGH.  
 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government . First of 
all, there is no mention in the reply on the core p art of the recommendation i.e. 
appellate authority for adjudica ting review decisions of DGH . Secondly, t he 
Committee are  very unhappy to note that as technical wing of the Ministry, the 
functions of DGH have remained mere advisory in nature and are not mandatorily 
binding on the Government and as such the Ministry of P&NG is the sole and final 
arbiter in all issues related to upstream activities of oil industry . The Committee 
are, therefore, strongly believe that as long as DGH remain s without any 
independent regulatory status, the exploration and production sector in 
hydrocarbon industry of the country would find it difficult to attract desired levels 
of investments in the field.     
 
----- 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Budgetary Allocation for DGH  
 The Committee note that DGH is one of the most important technical wings of the 
Ministry assisted by an Advisory council and an Administrative council. As per DGH 
resolution, the expenditure of the DGH is fully funded by grants from Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB). The expendit ure is incurred on Secretarial expenditure, 
E&P activities, promotion of hydrocarbon activities etc. 
 The Committee note that DGH is fully dependent on another arm of the Ministry 
namely OIDB for its funds. Even though it has been stated that the present f unding 
arrangement is considered appropriate and adequate to carry out its various activities, 
the Committee do not treat this as a happy situation. The Committee observe that DGH 
has taken several initiatives like Survey of unapprised regions, reappraisal  of 
hydrocarbon resources, multi -client speculative survey through service providers, 
National Data Repository etc. All these initiatives are very important for understanding 
and harnessing hydrocarbon potential of the country. The Committee, while concurr ing 
with the DGH resolution that its expenditure will be fully met from the grants of OIDB, 
hold the view that it would have been appropriate at the time of DGH formation but 
considering the new projects entrusted to it, it would be in fitness of things to  review the 
funding mode and have its own budgetary allocation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that DGH gets suitable budgetary allocation prepared for it either through 
budgetary allocation or from the Ministry‟s budget. The Committee also expect tha t 
having vested with such an important role and functions, DGH should no longer depend 
upon OIDB for its funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 DGH has been created by the resolution dated 8 th April, 1993 by the Government 
of India and performing its activities as per mandate provided in the para 7 of the 
Resolution  which states that the expenditure of the Directorate General will be fully 
funded by grants from the Oil Industry Development Fund. 
 Since then DGH has been receiving grants from OIDB which in turn provides this 
grant from a corpus built over years.  OIDB‟s grant to DGH does not come out of any 
annual budgetary funding of OIDB received from Consolidated Fund of India.  In fact, 
OIDB has not received any budgetary support for the last 22 years.  Therefore, if DGH 
is to be funded from the budget of MoP&NG, then it would mean that the Ministry of 
Finance would have to provide an additional amount to MoP&NG to meet the annual 
funding needs of DGH.  Considering the recommendations of the Standing Committee, 

18 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas will take up with Ministry of Finance for providing 
the requisite budget grant for functioning of DGH. 
Recommendation No. 6 
 National Data Repository  
 The Committee note that National Data Repository has been established in DGH 
at Noida. The role of DGH in NDR is collection, uploading, preservation and 
dissemination of vast geo -scientific information available in the country. NDR has been 
entrusted with data population, quality checks and creation of database and once NDR 
is completed then DGH will coordinate with national and international companies by 
facilitating data viewing against requisite payment. 
 The Committee note that the data compilation  for NDR is supposed to be 
completed by March 2016. The Committee also expect that in future all the geo 
scientific data collected by DGH from its various projects like reassessment of 
hydrocarbon resources and survey of un -apprised areas of Indian sedimen tary basins 
will also be uploaded on NDR. The successful establishment and operationalization of 
NDR will help paving the way towards Open Acreage Licensing policy (OALP), which is 
the future objective of the Ministry. 
 The Committee, acknowledge the significance of a reliable E&P data base for an 
accurate analysis and assessment of hydrocarbon potential in the country and expect 
the Ministry to set up and maintain National Data Repository for better management of 
petroleum and natural gas reserves in the c ountry. The Committee also expect that 
NDR will allow more transparency and effective dissemination of information regarding 
hydrocarbon resources and will also lead to better exploration and subsequently fulfilling 
energy requirements of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry and DGH should ensure that work of data compilation in NDR is completed in 
time and the data is disseminated so that DGH can emerge as a key institution for data 
viewing for national and international companies. 
Reply of the Government 
 National data repository has been established at DGH, OIDB Bhawan, Noida. 
Initial population phase of NDR project was completed on 02.03.2016. During initial 
population phase, G & G (Geology & Geophysical) data of relinquishe d blocks (Private 
Operators /NOCs), active NELP blocks was loaded.  Operation phase of NDR project 
was started on 03.03.2016 wherein data loading pertaining to nomination blocks of 
NOCs is in progress. A total of thirty three (33) representatives of ten (1 0) E&P 
Operators (end-users) were trained on different NDR applications including online data 
order/purchase through NDR web portal. IT security audit completed by 25th May, 
2016. NDR is ready and expected to be launched in near future.  
  

19 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Survey of Un-appraised areas of Indian sedimentary basins 
 The Committee note that ONGC and OIL have been entrusted with the task of 
surveying 48% of unapprised areas of the country. OIL has been assigned to carryout 
2D seismic survey API of 7408 LKM  falling in north eastern apart of India and ONGC 
has been assigned to carryout 2D seismic API of approx. 40835 LKM in inland part of 
22 sedimentary basins in India. The proposed 2D seismic survey work is expected to 
start in March 2016 and will take five years to cover the entire area. The fund 
requirement for these projects would be to the tune of about Rs. 4375 crore and initially 
the expenditure will be made by these national oil companies. The Committee note that 
the Ministry has sent a proposal to Min istry of Finance for reimbursement of the same 
through oil industry development cess.  
 The Committee, however, have an apprehension as to whether ONGC and OIL 
would accord priority to these works and spend such huge funds for this work from their 
budget. The Committee also wonder as to why more agencies which may have better 
specialization in such works were not engaged through global tendering so as to 
complete the project more speedily and in a better manner. The Committee, therefore, 
opine that the surv ey of unapprised areas of Indian sedimentary basins is an important 
project and accordingly, would expect the DGH/Ministry to attach high importance and 
priority to this work and also desire that the national level committee headed by 
Petroleum Secretary w hich monitors and reviews the reassessment of hydrocarbon 
resources should also include this project for direct monitoring. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry should try to expedite completion of the project at the 
earliest and also seek funds from Ministry of Finance so that the project does not get 
delayed for want of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 Government has formulated a project to appraise all sedimentary basins of India 
where no / scanty data is available.  ONGC and OIL have been entrusted with the task 
of surveying the “to be Appraised Areas” of on -land part. The project will be funded by 
OIDB (expenditure incurred on outsource agencies only). However, ONGC and OIL will 
incur the expenditure upfront and will seek reimbursement fro m OIDB.  However, a 
proposal, with the consent of Ministry of Finance (MoF), for funding the project by 
Ministry of Finance through cess provided to OIDB, is being sent to Expenditure 
Finance Committee for approval. 
 ONGC and OIL have invited open global t ender for conducting 2D seismic 
Survey in “to be appraised areas” of Indian sedimentary basins. This global tender is 
open for participation by all domestic and international interested companies. ONGC 
and OIL, have completed tender procedure for the most of the areas and work may start 
in coming field season 2016 -17. The progress is being reviewed periodically by the 
Ministry. 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation No. 8 
Certification of Good International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) 
 The Committee note that the Government had constituted a Standing Committee 
on Petroleum Industry Practices on 27.12.2013 for identification and codification of 
Good International Practices in areas of exploration, discovery appraisal, field 
development etc,. The work was carried out by the consultant M/s Petro Tel Inc USA 
and the final report was submitted to the standing Committee on 14.07.2015. The 
project cost  of US $ 1.2 Million was funded through DGH budget. The Committee, 
further, note that this report is under review of afore mentioned standing Committee. 
The Committee consider the need for codification of Good International Petroleum 
Industry Practices (GI PIP) as a right step to move towards improving processes at par 
with global standards. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the report may be 
reviewed and actionable points to the concerned agencies may be issued so that this 
practice is put into use at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 Standing Committee on GIPIP has submitted its report titled “Good International 
Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP) - 2016” to MoPNG on 21.03.2016.  Report has 
been examined and placed on MoP&NG‟s website for information and compliance of all 
concerned.  DGH has also circulated the report to all stakeholders. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 26 sedimentary basins and deep 
offshore areas upto Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), only 48 per cent of the basin area 
has been appraised. Therefore, currently, a large number of sedimentary basins have 
either no or scanty data and require additional geo-scientific data coverage and analysis 
for proper under standing. The Committee also note that the last assessment of 
hydrocarbon resources base in India was done for fifteen sedimentary basins and deep 
water areas more than twenty years ago. This shows all the policy makers in poor light 
especially DGH which has been providing technical advice to the Ministry for more than 
twenty years. The Committee, further, note that to address the same, some projects 
have been initiated by the Government through DGH recently. 
 To reassess the hydrocarbon resources in all se dimentary basins of India, a 
multi-organisational team has been formed for that purpose where DGH is a Member. 
The process of tendering for award of job is under progress through international 
competitive bidding. Similarly, another project for appraisal o f unapprised areas of all 

21 
 
sedimentary basins has also been initiated which is to be completed in 5 years. DGH is 
monitoring the project as an interface between Oil India Limited and ONGC and MoPNG 
are also holding technical interaction with them. 
 Moreover, a new policy on non -exclusive multi -client speculative survey for 
unexplored sedimentary basins through service providers is also being implemented 
with an objective to acquire geophysical data in poorly explored and unexplored areas. 
DGH has been receiv ing and reviewing proposals and forwarding them for further 
necessary clearances. However, seven proposals have been forwarded to MoPNG till 
date. 
 The Committee welcome all these initiatives being taken by the 
Government/DGH and hope that these efforts wi ll certainly help the country to know its 
hydrocarbon resources potential and henceforth devise policies and strategies to 
manage its exploitation. The Committee, however, desire that all the initiatives to 
reassess the hydrocarbon resources and appraisal of unapprised areas in all 
sedimentary basins of the country must be completed under a fixed time frame and by 
strictly adhering to the given timelines by using all the latest tools, techniques and 
technologies in the field. 
 Considering the stagnant domestic production, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should constitute a multi -organisational team to review thoroughly all the 
exploration activities in details being carried out by upstream PSU companies for each 
block, investment made, technol ogy deployed, prospects, production, if any in respect 
of the exploration and production activities in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Resources 
 Last assessment of Hydrocarbon Resources was carried out, by ONGC about 20 
years back. With the increase in exploration spread and quantum jump in availability of 
geo-scientific data generated under NELP there is a need to re -visit the Hydrocarbon 
resource assessment of India in all the 26 sedimentary basins and Deep water areas of  
India.  
 Initially, project was planned to be carried out through international companies 
through competitive bidding. An open ICB tender was floated on 21.11.14 to hire expert 
agency / agencies to carry out the job at KDMIPE. Though thirteen agencies pur chased 
the bid documents, only four bids were actually received, however, none of the bids 
could qualify the specified tender (BEC) conditions laid down. Accordingly, all the four 
bids were rejected due to deficient documents and non -qualifying tender cond itions. 
None of the company was having basin level experience. Subsequently, Multi 
Organizational Team (MOT) decided following line of action: 
• The job has been taken up by ONGC in association with OIL. DGH will provide 
G&G data support for other than ONG C and OIL operated areas. The project will be 
executed simultaneously at designated work centres of ONGC 

22 
 
• The project work has been started from September, 2015 and is likely to be 
completed in 27 months (by November, 2017) 
 Technical Monitoring Group (TM G) comprising members from ONGC, OIL and 
DGH was constituted to review and monitor the progress of the work in order to 
complete the project in the given time frame. 
Present status: The work has been started for nine sedimentary basins at seven work 
centres of ONGC and the progress of the work is as per schedule. DGH is continuously 
monitoring the progress of the work. 
 Ministry has been continually monitoring both, projects „Reasses sment of 
Hydrocarbon Resources‟ and „Appraisal of Unappraised Areas of all Sedimentary 
Basins of India‟.  MoP&NG monitors the progress of E&P activities in each blocks / 
fields from time to time by convening meeting of the DGH, ONGC & OIL.  Further as per 
provision of PSC, there is a Management Committee comprising representatives of 
contractors, DGH and MoP&NG, for each blocks, to monitor progress of the work, 
investment made, expenditure etc.  Government monitors all activities of each blocks 
through MC Meeting from time to time.  
Recommendation No. 10 
DGH and Alternate Sources of Energy 
 The Committee note that in addition to crude oil and natural gas, there are other 
sources of hydrocarbons which can supplement and enhance energy security of the 
country. Some of these sources are Coal Bed Methane, Shale gas, Gas Hydrates etc. 
The Committee note that the projected CBM resources in the country are about 92 TCF 
and there is a policy for its exploration and exploitation. The Government has so far 
awarded 33 C BM blocks to harness CBM potential. However, several problems like 
overlapping issues, land acquisition, low productivity of CBM per annum, delay in grant 
of PML/TEML from State Governments have been plaguing CBM block operators and 
as a result, it has hin dered optimum exploitation of these non -conventional energy 
resources. The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry/DGH to promptly address and 
resolve these issues in consultation with the agencies concerned and facilitate for 
exploitation of CBM as an alternate source of energy. 
 Similarly, Shale gas has emerged as the latest source of hydrocarbons with 
encouraging prospects. Shale gas exploitation is costlier and requires intensive 
technology than the oil. The Committee note that as per the policy guide lines 
announced in October 2013 that Shale gas development in the country will be carried 
out by national oil companies under nomination regime. Accordingly, ONGC and Oil 
India Limited (OIL) have been allotted 50 and 05 blocks respectively. Research in 
blocks allotted to ONGC and OIL has not yet begun. The Committee are concerned that 
there has been no progress since two years and ONGC/OIL should be held accountable 
for their work programme in the development of shale oil and gas. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to impress upon DGH to closely monitor Shale gas exploration 
projects so that these would be completed well in time. 

23 
 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is 
steering National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP) in the  country. Many national 
research institutions and national E&P companies are participating in this programme 
and the NGHP Expedition -02 has been completed recently. The Committee note that 
results have been encouraging and further expeditions for testing/e xploiting these 
resources need to be carried out. 
 The Committee find that the progress in exploitation of alternate energy 
resources has been very tardy in the country. The Committee, therefore, emphasise 
that DGH should give due attention to all these pr ogrammes relating to alternative 
sources of energy i.e. CBM, Shale Gas and Gas Hydrates. Further, for better 
exploration and exploitation of these resources, all contentious issues that may arise in 
the process may be sorted out amicably so that hydrocarbo n production of the country 
could be increased and energy security would be enhanced. 
Reply of the Government 
Shale Gas Exploration & Exploitation in India    
 
    In respect of Shale gas & Oil resources of India, US Energy Information 
Administration (US Department of Energy) in association with Advanced Resources 
International, INC, in May 2013, estimated a total of 584 Tcf of shale gas in -place for 
India. The technically recoverable shale gas resource is estimated at 96 Tcf in India. In 
addition, it was estimated that shale oil in -place for India 87 billion barrels. The 
technically recoverable shale oil resource is estimated at 3.8 billion barrels for India. 
  
          Presently, the National Oil Companies (ONGC and OIL) are carrying out Shale 
Gas explor ation in their on -land Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) / Petroleum 
Mining Lease (PML) areas awarded under the nomination regimes.  In India, Shale Gas 
is still in exploration stage.  ONGC and OIL are required to undertake a mandatory 
minimum work progr amme in a fixed time frame for shale gas and oil exploration and 
exploitation. ONGC has identified and initiated shale gas and oil exploration activities in 
50 PEL/PML areas and OIL has identified and initiated shale gas exploration activities in 
6 PEL/PML areas. So far ONGC has drilled 18 assessment wells for Shale gas.  G&G 
studies are in progress in the Blocks identified by OIL for shale gas exploration & 
exploitation. 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) 
Enhancing CBM production is one of the priority areas identifie d by the Ministry to 
increase domestic gas production.  Government is actively engaged in partnership of 
State Governments to remove impediments which hamper the development of CBM in 
the country such as getting statutory clearances, getting PEL/PML from t he state 
governments and overlapping issues with coal bearing areas.  During last one year, a 
number of initiatives have been taken to expedite exploration and production of CBM 
resources which can be listed as follows: 

24 
 
i) CBM activities are reviewed in the M inistry periodically. Committee of 
Secretaries also reviewed the same.  
 
ii) A Core Group comprising officials from MoPNG, MoC, DGH, ONGC, DGMS 
and SAIL has been constituted. The Core group deliberated on the issue of 
Co-development of CBM &  Coal in the same area with a view to finalize the 
Co-development agreement between coal miner and CBM Operator to 
resolve the issue of overlapping.    
   
iii) Further, to increase the area under CBM exploration, Government has issued 
a notification in November , 2015, allowing CIL and its subsidiaries to explore 
and produce CBM from the coal mining lease areas held by them. 
 
iv) A group of Officers from CIL, DGH, MoC & MoPNG are working to frame 
modalities for exploitation of CBM by CIL. 
 
v) At the instance of this Min istry a CBM workshop was organized by “Petrofed” 
wherein, issues related to CBM production were deliberated and discussed by 
all stakeholders viz. DGH, CBM Operators and CIL 
 
Gas Hydrate 
National Gas Hydrate Programme (NGHP) was formulated by the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas (MoPNG). NGHP is a consortium of National E & P companies, namely 
ONGC, GAIL, OIL, IOC and national research institutions like NIO, NIOT and NGRI. 
National Gas Hydrate Programme is steered by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural  
Gas and technically coordinated by Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH). NGHP 
expeditions 01 & 02 have been completed. The details of NGHP expedition 02 are as 
under: 
NGHP Expedition-02 
NGHP Steering Committee approved NGHP -02 with the aim of identif ying sand 
dominated depositional systems within the Gas Hydrate stability zone on the east coast 
of India within the Krishna Godavari and Mahanadi deepwater Basins. The cost of 
NGHP Expedtion-02 is shared by OIDB (50%), ONGC (20%), OIL (10%), GAIL (10%) 
and IOCL (10%). NGHP -02 commenced on 3rd March 2015 and has been completed 
on 28th July 2015. During expedition -02 total of 42 gas hydrate wells have been 
completed in 147 days in area A,B,C and E at 25 sites. The initial results of NGHP -02 
are encouraging. Area A in the Mahanadi deep water basin, which had several sand 
zones devoid of Gas hydrates. 
Areas „B‟ & „C‟ have shown presence of sand reservoirs within Gas Hydrate Stability 
Zone. Two distinctive gas hydrate units one layer -type unit developed in sand -rich 
facies at depths of about 400 meters below sea floor, and the other accumulation is a 

25 
 
fracture-type unit at shallow levels. Fracture -type and Layer -type gas hydrates were 
observed in all areas B, C and E. 
Future Plan for NGHP 03 
The Expedition-02 has been completed.  The data gathered in phase 2 will be analyzed 
and next course of action will be decided for taking the project forward.  The plan for 
NGHP 03 is being worked out and is expected to be finalized in near future. 
 
 
 
  
  

26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No.1 
Need for an Independent and Statutory DGH  
 The Committee note that with major discoveries in Mumbai High and Western 
offshore, the hydrocarbon sector received a bi g boost and after the adoption of 
liberalized economic policy in July 1991, the Government of India felt the need to 
deregulate and de -license this sector along with other measures. As a result, the 
hydrocarbon sector was opened to private and joint sector s. In this changed scenario, 
the expert committees appointed by the Government recommended the creation of an 
independent regulatory body. Accordingly, the Government of India set up Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) on 8 April, 1993 through a cabi net resolution. It was 
modelled as a technical arm of the Ministry on the lines of Norwegian model after 
studying and suitably modifying the structure, functions and responsibilities of various 
regulatory authorities with an objective to promote sound mana gement of Indian 
petroleum and natural gas resources and also having a balanced regard for 
environment, safety, technological and economic aspects of petroleum activities. The 
functions assigned to DGH have been revised from time to time by the Government and 
it also includes safety related issues and monitoring of Production Sharing Contracts 
(PSCs).  
 The Committee observe that the private sector participation has significantly 
increased ever since the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was launched in 
1998. Through nine NELP rounds 254 blocks have been awarded till date. The 
Committee, however, are anguished to note that the entire hydrocarbon sector is in 
limbo with the last round of NELP having begun almost four years ago. There have 
been several l itigations and arbitration proceedings involving DGH and operators. As a 
result, it has not only dampened investment scenario in the country but also withheld 
investments in production and exploration activities. This situation perhaps has been 
created because the functions of DGH do not refer to 'regulation' in the name of DGH 
and decisions of the DGH do not lie in any appellate body or court which is the hallmark 
of an independent regulator.  
 In Committee's view, when there is a participation of public s ector as well as 
private sector in hydrocarbon sector, it is necessary to have an independent regulator 
with certain statutory powers to adjudicate matters in line with the policy of the 
Government. The presence of independent regulators in sectors like te lecom, power, 
financial services, etc. vested with statutory powers further supports the views of the 
Committee. Need of such regulator is also justified because the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) is a regulator in the Ministry of Petro leum and Natural 
Gas only for a small part of the downstream sector and the upstream sector does not 
have any regulator at all. Basically, the DGH carry out contract management and some 
of regulatory functions on behalf of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural  Gas. The 

27 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPNG should vest the regulatory functions 
being performed by DGH with PNGRB so that it can be regulator for both upstream 
sector as well as for downstream.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Reply of the Government 
 DGH was setup by a Resolution dated 8 th April, 1993 by the Government of 
India, in the Ministry of Petroleum of Natural Gas, consequent upon approval of 
Cabinet.  As per the Resolution the objective of DGH is to promote sound management 
of Indian Petroleum & Natural Gas resources, having a balance regard for environment, 
technological and economic aspects of petroleum activity.  DGH provides advice to the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on technical and regulatory aspects of E&P 
activities. 
 The establishment of upstream regulator has been deliberated in the past also 
and it was felt that normally a regulator in any field is required when level playing field to 
all the parties (private / foreign & public) needs to be provided.  In the upstream sector, 
policies such as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP provide a level playing field to 
all the companies.  Therefore the Ministry is of the view that a separate independent 
regulator for upstream sector is not required in the present circumstances.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Filling up of the post of Director General of Hydrocarbons  
 The Committee note that the Directorate General of Hydrocarbon came into 
being in 1993 and there have been eight officials  who have held the post of Director 
General of Hydrocarbons during the last 23 years. The previous DGH was from the 
Ministry who held the post as additional charge. The Committee have also noted that 
the post of DGH has been filled up by technical people i n most of the cases. However, 
in June 2012, the government appointed an official from Indian Administrative Service to 
the post of DGH and the said official served for 21 months. The post of Director General 
of Hydrocarbons was lying vacant since July 2015  and the Committee are surprised to 
learn that one of the main reasons for inordinate delay in appointment is that there have 
been no recruitment rules for the post of Director General. Now, the Committee have 
been informed that the rules have been approve d in consultation with DoPT and UPSC 
which provide for technical people with experience in the upstream sector only be 
eligible for the post of DGH. The process for the recruitment after framing new 
recruitment rules has been completed and the post has been filled recently. 
 The Committee have a strong view that the post of Director General of 
Hydrocarbons is a technical one and it should be filled up only by people who have 
considerable exposure and experience in upstream sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the M inistry should ensure that the post of Director General 

28 
 
Hydrocarbons is not kept vacant or held as additional charge by senior officials of the 
Ministry rather through advance action it should be filled up timely. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has form ulated Recruitment Rules (RRs) to the post of DG, DGH in 
consultation with UPSC and DoPT which has been notified on 28 th October, 2015. 
Based on the RRs, circular inviting application for the post of DG, DGH was issued.  
However, after scrutiny of the rece ived application it was observed that the officers who 
had been able to meet the minimum requirement were in the rank of General Manager 
in their respective organizations.  The post of DG, DGH is an Additional Secretary level 
post and requires considerable  administrative, personnel and technical skills for 
discharging the responsibilities smoothly.  The responsibilities associated with the post 
include regulatory functions and involve high level responsibilities in the context of 
development of upstream sector in the country.   
 DGH has to perform technical, financial and legal functions in regulating the 
operations of various fields.  The position has previously been manned by officers of All 
India Service as well as from the officers of senior management l evel in the Public 
Sector.  Also, the organization structure is such that there are Deputy DGs who are in 
the rank of Executive directors and are reporting to DG.  Therefore, it was viewed that 
the applications which had come out of the advertisement made by MoP&NG may 
create problems in reporting structure of the organization as well and may be 
detrimental to the overall functioning of the organization.  Accordingly, Ministry informed 
DoPT requesting for appointment of a suitable officer to the post of DG, DGH 
 Presently the post of DG, DGH is being held by Shri Atanu Chakraborty w.e.f. 
12.04.2016.  His appointment to the post has been made with the approval of ACC.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Human Resources issues of DGH  
 The Committee note that DGH has been entrusted with varying functions like 
carving of blocks for NELP, monitoring of PSCs, providing technical advice to Ministry 
on issues relevant to exploration and optimal exploitation of hydrocarbons, issuance of 
essentiality certificates, implementation of NELP and CBM Policies, etc. The 
Committee, further, note that as against the sanctioned staff strength of 255, the actual 
strength of DGH is 187 only. The Committee observe that the off icers are appointed on 
deputation at DGH on tenure basis in consultation with CEOs from various oil PSUs and 
80% of them are from ONGC and 20% from remaining oil PSUs such as OIL, IOCL, 
GAIL, HPCL, etc. 
 The Committee observe that the officers of DGH on de putation may have conflict 
of interest in assessing the work of their own PSUs. There seems no effort or plan in the 

29 
 
Ministry or DGH to create permanent cadre for DGH. The Committee observe that DGH 
has been advised to appoint an expert consultant on restr ucturing of DGH and it is in 
the process of hiring a consultant for this job. 
 The Committee believe that DGH should have its own cadre of employees for 
discharging its functions independently. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
hiring of consult ant should be completed on priority basis within a reasonable time 
frame and DGH should be restructured suitably to develop it with permanent cadre of 
employees after the receipt of report thereon. 
Reply of the Government 
 In terms of Government Resolution dated 08.04.1993 creating DGH, the 
Directorate is manned by staff drawn from oil industry on deputation/tenure basis mainly 
from upstream oil sector PSUs like ONGC and Oil India Ltd. Keeping in view the 
concerns regarding conflict of interest, the Issue of own cadre of employees for DGH 
has been under deliberations of the Government from time to time. It may be pertinent 
to mention that DGH requires oil industry experienced and trained staff with adequate 
onsite operational  field experience in specialized disciplines like geology, geophysics, 
reservoir, production, drilling etc. Such requirement could be met through experienced 
staff drawn from oil sector PSUs only. Some of the issues that need to be considered 
while creating separate Cadre for DGH are as under:  
(i) Desirability of building a separate cadre, framing of rules/ regulations for recruitment, 
promotion and career growth for only a small number of DGH cadre staff which may be 
around 250-300 for the years to come.  
(ii) DGH being under the administrative control of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
the creation of DGH cadre within the broad frame work of Central Government 
emoluments/ pay structure including salary, wages, allowances and perks and career 
growth prospects which may not be comparable with the prevailing oil Industry levels 
including oil PSUs.    
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 DGH and Production Sharing Contracts  
 The Committee note that the Go vernment had assigned the work relating to 
implementation of production sharing contracts (PSCs) under NELP to DGH and it has 
discharged the powers of Central Government where a contract or an agreement for 
exploration and production of hydro carbons has b een signed by the Central 
Government. Under the PSC regime, all companies are required to submit their cost of 
production for the year in the beginning and this has to be approved by the Managing 
Committee. These are evaluated by the officers of DGH in lin e with the approved 
development plans and past performance. The Committee have noted that DGH has 

30 
 
officers with different backgrounds like exploration, finance and legal etc., who vet, 
interpret and analyse all documents and other production signing contra cts. DGH 
suggest mid course corrections wherever the production is lesser than the targets. The 
Committee note that there have been many instances of disputes arising out of 
execution of production sharing contracts between DGH and companies. Certain 
disputes have also led to court/arbitration proceedings in Indian and foreign courts. The 
Committee believe that companies have no choice but to approach courts for appeal 
against decisions of DGH as there is no appellate authority or other mechanisms where 
companies can appeal or challenge orders of DGH. As a result, companies have lost 
their precious time, costs and efforts and there has been delay in carrying out 
exploration activities. The Committee, therefore, observe that this may not be a good 
sign for development of hydro carbon industry and therefore, desire that Ministry should 
strive for setting up a regulatory authority as mentioned in recommendation No.1.  
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should consult all 
stakeholders and other departments towards setting up of an authority to adjudicate or 
to hear review orders passed by DGH. The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
should review the existing production sharing contract system and bring out a more 
simplified forms of contract s with clear definitions and with less scope for 
misinterpretation in line with the stated objective of the Government i.e. “Ease of Doing 
Business” initiative. 
Reply of the Government 
DGH has been delegated certain powers to perform functions under Production 
Sharing Contract on behalf of the Government while for addressing the issues where 
powers are vested with Ministry, the role of DGH is advisory in nature.  Ministry takes 
decisions on the basis of merit of the proposal considering DGH‟s advice.  Even in 
many cases, where powers have been delegated to DGH, it acts on the advice of 
Management Committee.  Further, for blocks having discoveries or where production 
has started, the decisions are taken by the Management Committee taking technical 
inputs from DGH.  These MCs have representatives of the Ministry as well 
 Pursuant to approval of Cabinet on 10.03.2016, Government has formulated a 
new Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) for award of hydrocarbon 
acreages.  Salient features are as under: 
• Single License for exploration and production of conventional as well as non -
conventional hydrocarbon resources  
• Open Acreage Policy -option to select the exploration blocks without waiting for 
formal bid round. 
• Revenue Sharing Model-simple, easy to administer- no cost recovery - no micro-
management by the Government - operational freedom to the operator  
• Pricing and Marketing Freedom- a major incentive for investment. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
'NIL' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 8 December,  2016 
17 Agrahayana,1938 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

32 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2016-17) 
FIFTH SITTING 
(07.12.2016) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7 December, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
9 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
10 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
11 Shri Rajesh Verma 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
15 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
16 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
18 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
19 Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy      
    SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
3. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
  

33 
 
2.  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
3. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
4. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report on 
the 13 th Report on the subject 'Functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons' 
adopted the same with some minor modifications. The Committee then authorised the 
Chairperson to present/lay the Reports to the Parliament.  
 
5. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
xxx:  Matter not related to the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2015 -16) ON ‘ FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF 
HYDROCARBONS'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 6 and 7) 
 
3 
 Percentage to Total 30% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 8, 9 and 10) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 30% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5) 
 
4 
 Percentage of Total 
 
40% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. NIL)  
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 
 
0 
 
 
 