 
 
 
 
20 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
'CENTRE FOR HIGH 
TECHNOLOGY (CHT)' 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2017 / Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 


2 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
'CENTRE FOR HIGH 
TECHNOLOGY (CHT)' 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01.08.2017 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.08.2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2017 / Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)  4 
 INTRODUCTION  5 
 REPORT 
 
 
 PART-I  
 Introductory  
 Role and Objectives of CHT 6 
 Activities of CHT  8 
 CHT and Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 12 
 Manpower in CHT 20 
 
PART- II 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  ............... 
 
23 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee (2016-17) 
held on 23.12.2016 
 
30 
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the Twenty First sitting of the Committee (2016 -17) 
held on 27.07.2017 
32 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
13 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
14 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
15 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16 Shri Raju Shetti 
17 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
18 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
19 Shri Rajesh Verma 
20 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
23 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
26 Shri Ahmed Patel 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
28 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya                     
31 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri A.K.Singh Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai Director 
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this 
Twentieth Report on „Centre for High Technology (CHT)‟. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the represen tatives of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas at their sitting held on 23.12.2016. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
27.07.2017. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Public Sector 
Undertakings/Organisations for placing their views before them and furnishing the 
information desired in connection with examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee also place on record their apprecia tion for the assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 31 July,  2017 
 9 Shravana,1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                            Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
    
  

6 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Centre for High Technology (CHT) was established as a dedicated technology 
cell of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MOP&NG) in 1987 . CHT acts as a focal 
point of oil industry for centralised technical assistance, knowledge dissemination, 
performance data base , exchange of information and experience sharing. CHT also 
coordinates funding of research work in downstream hydrocarbon sector and pursue 
the programmes of “Scientific Advisory Committee on Hydrocarbons” of MOP&NG.  
2. CHT was registered as a Society in 1992. CHT functions under the overall 
guidance and supervision of the Governing Council (GC) headed by the Secretary, 
P&NG as the Chairman. The members include Addl. Secretary, AS&FA, JS(R), 
JS(M), JS(E), Secretary OIDB, Chief Executives of IOCL, HPCL, BPC L, CPCL, 
MRPL, NRL, EIL, GAIL, IIP with ED, CHT as the Member Secretary.  
3. There is also an executive committee to carry out the directions of  the 
Governing Council and for implementing plans and programmes of CHT . The 
Executive Committee is headed by Joint Secretary (Refining), MoP&NG and consists 
of Director (Refineries) or IOCL, BPCL, HPCL; Director Planning GAIL; Director IIP; 
Director (T) , EIL; Director, MoP&NG; Secretary IODB and ED, CHT as Members. 
4. Current manpower at CHT is 14 Technical Officers and 7 HR/Fin officers/staff, 
drawn from oil industry, GAIL on deputation / retired officers from PSU oil companies 
engaged as advisors.  
Role and Objectives of CHT 
5. Major functions of CHT include assessment of technology requirement, 
operational performance evaluation and improvement of the refineries. Over the 
period, the activities of CHT have undergone change as the oil companies have 
been empowered for Technology Selection, Import of Technology etc.  
 

7 
 
 Currently, the focus areas of CHT are as under: 
 i)  Benchmarking  and Performance Improvement of PSU refineries 
 through special studies\ 
 (ii) Performance Evaluation & Monitoring 
 (iii) Energy Efficiency Improvement  
 (iv) Product Quality Improvement and liaison with BIS 
 (v) Co-ordination of activities of Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) on 
 Hydrocarbons of MoP&NG for Promoting Research & Development in 
 Downstream Sector 
 (vi) Long Term Strategic Studies 
 (vii) Sharing of Best Practices through Activity Committee Meetings on 
 Major Areas of Refinery Operations  
 (viii) Information and Knowledge Dissemination through Refinery 
 Technology Meet 
 (ix) Technical Support/Assistance to MoP&NG.  
  
6. The expenditure of CHT is funded through grants from OIDB.    Budget of the CHT 
for last three years along with RE and actuals is as under:      
                                                                                                          (Figs in Rs. crore) 
Particulars  
2014-
15 
2015-16 2016-17 
Actual RBE Actual 
  BE Actual 
upto 
Dec-16 
Estimated 
Jan17 to 
Mar 17 
Total 
(RBE)    
REVENUE EXPENDITURE  
Salary 7.43 8.15 8.28 9.00 5.26 2.41 7.67 
Other than Salary 2.11* 1.65 1.49 2.10 1.47* 0.47 1.94* 
Sub-total 9.54 9.80 9.77 11.10 6.73 2.88 9.61 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.03 
PROJECTS  
Funding of R&D Projects 5.99 5.96 5.94 11.82 2.11@ 7.22 9.33 
Special Studies 0.84 3.90 3.58 5.00 0.00 2.40 2.40 
Sub-total 6.83 9.86 9.52 16.82 2.11 9.62 11.73 
TOTAL EXPENDITURE 16.42 19.69 19.31 27.95 8.86 12.51 21.37 
   * includes contribution of Rs 0.25 crore from OIDB for RTM and expenses on Awards 
   @ Demand for Rs 1.45 crore sent to OIDB 
 

8 
 
7. In response to specific query whether there are other sources of funds for 
CHT In addition to funding by the OIDB,  the Ministry stated in a written reply that a ll 
expenditure of CHT is funded by OIDB. 
8. When asked about the utilisation of the money received as grants from OIDB, 
the Secretary MoPNG during the oral evidence stated the following:  
 "It is only Rs. 20 crore which is spent mostly in salaries and research 
projects". 
Activities of CHT  
9. When asked about the innovations developed by CHT in operations and 
improvement in performance of oil refineries as a result of adoption of such 
innovations, the Ministry in its written reply stated the following: 
 "CHT assists refineries in performance/operational improvement through: - 
 Sharing of best practices and dissemination of information 
 Organising Activity Committee Meetings in critical areas of operations  
 Organising Refinery Technology Meet to keep abreast with the latest 
developments world-wide 
 Carrying out Performance/Energy Improvement Studies through  global 
consultants 
 Benchmarking Studies for PSU refineries through global consultant 
 Assisting in Performance Monitoring 
 Conducting Surveys in refineries (including JV/Private refineries) 
alternately on Furnace Efficiency and Steam Leaks during 
OGCF/Saksham in January every year 
 Assisting oil companies/R&D institutes through grant -in aid in building 
knowledge base and R&D activities in key areas recommended by SAC". 
10. The details of major activities undertaken by CHT in various areas during l ast 
few years are summarised below:  
 Integrated Refinery Business Improvement Programme  (IRBIP) 
through Shell at BPCL-Kochi, IOCL-Mathura, CPCL-Manali and HPCL-
Visakh refineries - Cumulative net benefit of over US  $ 50 million per 
year realised 
 IRBIP Phase -II through Shell at BPCL -Mumbai, HPCL -Mumbai and 
MRPL. Cumulative potential saving of around US $ 30 million per year  
 Performance Benchmarking  of refineries for study cycle 2010, 2012 
and 2014 through Solomon As sociates, USA. Study for cycle 2016 in 
progress 

9 
 
 Centralised Technical Services Agreement  (TSA) with Shell Global 
Solutions, Netherlands to provide refineries/GAIL/EIL access to the 
international standards and best practices. 
 Comprehensive Energy Efficiency Improvement 
o Regular monitoring of Specific Energy Consumption (SEC): New 
Methodology (MBN-Thousand BTU per barrel per energy factor) 
developed and implemented from 2015 -16 for Performance 
Evaluation and Awards 
o PSU average SEC (MBN) has come down by 19.6 % during 
2005-06 to 2015-16.  
o Study for PSU refineries through EIL initiated to bring down 
Specific Energy Consumption in both short/medium term 
o Refinery Sector included in PAT (Perform Achieve & Trade) 
Scheme Cycle-II (April 2016 to March 2019) 
o CHT assis ted in setting refinery -wise targets including JV/ Pvt. 
Refineries 
o Overall Energy Reduction Target of 5.97 % mandated by 
Ministry of Power  through BEE. Refinery sector contribution 
under PAT Cycle-II is 12.4%. 
 Regular monitoring of distillate yield.   PSU a verage distillate yield 
increased from 73.3 to 79.8 % during 2005-06 to 2015-16.  
 Annual Performance Evaluation of MBN , validation and 
recommendation of awards for best performance 
 Annual Survey on Furnace/Boiler Efficiency &  Insulation Effectiveness 
and Steam Leak in refineries during Oil Conservation Fortnight followed 
by evaluation for awards 
 Institution of Innovation Awards  
 Monitoring Quality Improvement Projects of refineries for  BS-VI 
 Activity Committee Meetings on 10 major refinery processes, 
Maintenance, P&U and pipelines for dissemination of 
experience/expertise, technological improvements and best practices 
 Promotion of R&D in downstream sector : Position paper on futuristic 
areas of research, Inviting proposals thro ugh EOI introduced in July, 
2016 
 Compendium on Experience Sharing 
 Publication of Compendium on Refineries 
 

10 
 
11. When the Committee wanted to know about the methodology adopted to 
arrive at Cumulative net benefit of over US $ 50 million per year  realised by CHT 
research projects, the Secretary of MoPNG stated the following during the oral 
evidence: 
 "Our technical experts from Engineers India Limited have the details. But my 
understanding is that it would be the rough estimates of the benefits accruing 
out of those research projects and even the projects which have been 
indigenously developed". 
12. When a sked about the infrastructure available with CHT f or carrying out its 
R&D projects, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
 "CHT assists refineries in performance improvement and promoting R&D 
through funding of R&D projects. As such, CHT does not have its own 
laboratory.  
 In case of funded projects, R&D work is carried out by the R&D institutes of 
grantee o rganisations / institutes like , IOCL-R&D, EIL -R&D, HPCL -R&D, 
BPCL-R&D, IIP, IITs  etc. CHT  also, through grant -in aid,  provides financial 
assistance in putting-up necessary infra -structure at these institutes required 
for the CHT funded R&D projects". 
13. Further elaborating the specific role of CHT in enhancement of performance 
of refinery, the Secretary MoP&NG submitted the following details during the oral 
evidence: 
"One of their activities is benchmarking the performance of refineries through 
Soloman Associates which is on e of the best consultants in that field.  So, we 
engaged Soloman Associates through this organization to carry out the 
studies and benchmark the performance of refineries. So, they have a role in 
improving the performance of refineries".  
14. When Committee asked whether CHT has any mechanism to coordinate with 
other research organization such as the PCRA etc. and to work together as per the 
need of industry  in petroleum sector , the Ministry in its written reply submitted the 
following:  
 "The role of CHT is mainly in the area of refining sector for assisting refineries 
in performance improvement and promoting R&D through funding of R&D 
projects as recommended by SAC.  
 PCRA, on the other hand, is engaged in formulating policies and strategies for 
petroleum conservation and promoting energy efficiency in various sectors of 
economy. It sponsors R&D activities for the development of fuel -efficient 

11 
 
equipment / devices and organizes multi -media campaigns for creating mass 
awareness for the conservation of petroleum products.  
 Considering the expertise of PCRA of carrying out Energy Audits in areas 
other than Refining Process Technology, CHT on behalf of PSU refineries 
have engaged PCRA for conductin g Mandatory Energy Audit as required 
under PAT of Government of India". 
 Elaborating the role of EIL in research activities of CHT, the CMD , EIL made 
the following submission: 
 "Sir, I think I will elaborate on two or three points which are related to 
technology upgradation and indigenization and what we are doing in that.  Sir, 
actually for all these projects, which we have in the hydro-carbon sector, first it 
is hi-tech and second, it is highly capital intensive.  So, along with that we also 
need very cri tical technology as Mr. Sanjeev Singh has explained and also 
very proficient and detailed engineering activities. So, the whole technology 
gamut is actually divided into three major factors. One is basic engineering, 
another is licensed engineering and thi rd is detailed engineering.  I think the 
Hon. Members would be very happy to note that in this country on the third 
segment, which is detailed engineering, we have achieved 100 per cent 
indigenization in spite of the growing complexity which we have in our  
refineries and petrol.  Everything is engineered in India.  
 On the frontal part, which is the licensed component, we are all driven by 
fundamental research. So, most of the European and the US researches on 
that and are all catalytic oriented processes. Those are technologies which up 
till now were only privy to these major countries.  India has made a very 
strong beginning in that through a collaborative effort. So, all the oil majors in 
India have joined together and we have many plants now which are 
commercialized through collaborative arrangement. The first diesel hydro 
treated plant together between EIL and IOCL is already operating in 
Bongaigaon and there are two more which are coming up as part of the Euro -
6 and there are many other technologies whi ch we have commercialized 
together.  So, that particular jinx that this is only going to remain in Europe 
with our vast experience in refineries is also gradually seeping in.  So, we are 
also getting into the fundamental part of the research.   
 I think IO CL very recently has set some kind of a technology which possibly 
could be a model because, I thought some  Hon. Members have asked that if 
you are doing so much of technology, is there avenue for us to also licence 
the technology and make some money out o f it.  I think the time has already 
come. IOCL has already installed one of the very big INDMAX units at 
Paradip refinery which is possibly giving extremely positive results. I think the 
time has come not only in Indian refineries, but perhaps abroad also,  where 
we will able to licence and also earn some revenues for India. 
 On the basic engineering front, I think there is almost all the projects in India 
are being engineered indigenously and we are also taking that engineering 
abroad. So, there are a lot o f service components which we are doing in all 
the other countries. A very recent example is what we are doing in Nigeria. 

12 
 
Everything has been engineered in India. So, we are exporting services 
abroad including basic engineering. So, that is also happening as a part of it".  
15. In response to specific query whether CHT executes projects for refineries in 
the private sector also and the number of such projects executed by CHT so far and 
revenues generated in the process , the Ministry state in its written reply that CHT is 
not involved in execution of projects for refineries in the private sector. 
16. Similarly when asked by the Committee w hether CHT have any collaborative 
arrangements with other national and international insti tutions for technology 
exchange, the Ministry submitted  that CHT does not have any collaborative 
arrangements with other institutions for technology exchange.  
CHT and Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 
17. Asked by the Committee about the contribution of CHT in the Auto Fuel Vision 
and Policy 2025, the Ministry submitted the following in its written reply:   
 "CHT pr ovided secretarial and technical support to the Expert Committee 
constituted by MOP&NG under the Chairmanship of Shri Saumitra Chaudhuri, 
the then Member, Planning Commission, Government of India for formulating 
Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025.  
 CHT provided technical inputs in respect of historical and current auto fuel 
quality specifications and emerging trends in various countries, existing 
technical capability of refin eries, modifications/additional facilities required by 
refineries for upgradation, estimated investment on industry basis etc. CHT 
was also actively involved in preparation of the Draft Report".  
18. When th e Committee wanted to know about the role of CHT in the 
implementation of auto fuel policy  by the refineries , the Joint Secretary (Refineries) 
Shri Sandeep Poundrik during the oral evidence submitted the following: 
 "In public sector refineries, there were  two stages of upgradation. .....We are 
upgrading our fuel quality.  We started with BS -I around 2000.  Now we are 
going to BS -IV.  By 1 st April 2017, we will be having BS -IV fuel quality 
throughout the country which is equivalent to Euro -IV in Europe.   For doing 
that, the PSU refineries have invested about Rs. 30,000 crore because when 
you upgrade to a higher quality fuel, you have to install many new units.  What 
we are broadly saying is that the sulphur content has to be reduced in both 
petrol and diesel.  For that, we have to install large number of additional units 
for which we have invested Rs. 30,000 crore.  All those parameters have 
already been fixed.  There is a scientific process that goes into it.  We are 
broadly going by the Euro norms but catering to Indian conditions.  So, we are 
going for BS -IV.  After that, the Government has decided to skip BS -V stage 

13 
 
which is perhaps the fi rst example of doing so in the entire world.  We will 
directly go to BS -VI which is a much more stringent norm.  That will be from 
the 1st April, 2020". 
 Supplementing further on the topic, the representatives from CHT submitted 
the following during the oral evidence: 
"... we are saying that earlier when the Auto Vision Document was referred to, 
in that it was recommended that we would first come to BS -V and then by 
2023-24, we would go to BS-VI. But the Government has said that it would be 
done by 2020. For that again, the refineries will induce about Rs. 30,000 crore 
plus. That is the funding for public sector refineries for investing to meet the 
auto fuel quality; and the sulphur in both petrol and diesel will come from 50 
down to 10. That is the best in t he world as of now. BS -VI or Euro VI is the 
best norm". 
19. When asked about the sulphur content that will be in BS-VI, the officials from 
CHT made the following submission during the oral evidence:  
"It will be reduced from 50 ppm to 10 ppm, that is 20 pe r cent of what it is 
now. Earlier, in BS -III, it was even higher. As I said, there are many 
parameters which have to be controlled and for which we will need to invest a 
lot of money". 
20. When the Committee asked w hether CHT has any institutional arrangement 
with individual oil refineries for undertaking studies on their behalf to improve their 
productivity and the Ministry gave the following written reply: 
 "CHT undertakes studies on behalf of PSU refineries for e. g., Performance 
Benchmarking, Performance Improvement Programmes and Energy 
Efficiency Improvement Studies". 
21. When the Committee asked as to whether the R&D work of individual oil 
companies and the research project of CHT will not amount to duplication,  the 
officials from CHT made the following submission during the oral evidence: 
"When it comes to PSU refineries, for example, IOC has about ten, HPCL has 
three including one in joint venture; and BPCL another three. They are trying 
to improve their own re fineries. The CHT is co -ordinating on common issues 
which are of importance to the country and to the refineries as a whole. So, 
for example, Solomon benchmarking is the main benchmarking in the world. It 
studies about 200 plus refineries in the world and tells us where our refineries 
stand at the world level. They have various parameters. For example, you 
have seen in the presentation that there is a lot of focus on energy efficiency. 
We are not performing well since most of our refineries are old and capa city 
has been expanded in stages. So, efficiency -wise they are not good. The 
older refineries do not perform well in that. The Solomon benchmarking tell us 

14 
 
for each refinery how is the refinery vis -à-vis world standard, Asian standard, 
and all that. Those are things which are important for the country as a whole. 
 The next is the cross -learning. What HPCL is doing, IOC should know; 
what IOC is doing, BPCL should know. So, cross -learning of best practices is 
co-ordinated by CHT. They do not have any research  of their own as the 
Secretary said. There is a Scientific Advisory Committee with renowned 
scientists for that. Shri Kakodkar is there is the Scientific Committee. There 
were others earlier. The individual scientists propose projects that they want 
to research on for a particular project". 
22. Elaborating about the usefulness of CHT, the Director (Refinery) IOCL during 
the oral evidence submitted the following:  
"Sir, I would like to clarify one thing.  Till late nineties, the diesel specification 
sulphur was one per cent. Today we are targeting 10 ppm (parts per million).  
When we were switching to BS, there was a need to go for diesel 
decentralisation units.  In the country, we had none till that time.  We were not 
aware of technologies.  There were a lot of technologies which were available 
globally and everyone was trying to sell his concept to India.  So at that time 
CHT, on industry basis, evaluated what best technology was available in the 
world. They evaluated and recommended what should be followed by the 
industry.  So, it was a tremendous exercise done for the industry. Probably 
individually IOCL, HPCL and BPCL would not have got the best solution.  Sir, 
you very well noted this 55 million benefit or 28 million benefits.  So, now the 
CHT, as such, are not recommending anything for these benefits. Now, these 
are by engaging external consultants for the industry.  Now, if I do it for Indian 
Oil, probably, I wi ll have to repeat it for each refinery.  But, when we do it on 
industry basis, if HPCL has done a similar study, we need not repeat that 
study.  We exchange our notes and we exchange the benefits to see what 
can be done. It is not only exchange of providin g platform, they are the 
technical wing of the Ministry.  They help the Ministry in monitoring those and 
see that whatever has been recommended whether we all are following that 
or not.  So, I think that platform is a very good platform which is provided b y 
CHT". 
23. Asked by the Committee as to whether all equipment/technologies used in the 
refineries have been indigenously developed  and the contribution of CHT in that , the 
Ministry in its written reply submitted the following:  
 "The technologies employed  in petroleum refining is complex and 
sophisticated and are licensed by global process licensors. India has made 
significant progress in developing some of the sophisticated technologies like 
Indmax, DHDT, SRU etc. which competes with the best in the world. India has 
also developed capability for detailed engineering.  
 CHT, through SAC,  has played important role by sponsoring R&D projects 
leading to development of knowledge base (fundamental), specific studies 

15 
 
related to improvement in the existing process es, hardware and catalyst 
development".  
24. When the Committee enquired as to h ow are the technology developed by 
CHT is adopted by the oil companies, the Ministry in its written reply stated the 
following: 
 "Refining Technology has high gestation period from conceptualisation to 
commercialisation involving several steps like basic research, simulation & 
modeling, scale -up, setting up of semi -commercial followed by full scale 
commercial units. Such technology developments require concerted effort s 
and dedicated R&D Institutes with analytical and pilot plant facilities which are 
available with major R&D Centre like IOCL -R&D, IIP, EIL -R&D etc. CHT , 
through SAC, has played important role by sponsoring R&D projects leading 
to development of knowledge base (fund amental), specific studies related to 
improvement in the existing processes, hardware and catalyst development.  
 The list of technologies developed through CHT funding and implemented is 
given below : 
 Aromatic extraction for Be nzene/Toluene developed by  IIP/EIL: 
Implemented at BPCL-Mumbai & Kochi  and NOCIL 
 Food Grade Hexane Technology developed by IIP/EIL: Implemented at 
BPCL, CPCL, HPCL, ONGC-Hazira 
 Bimetallic Reforming Catalyst developed by IIP/IPCL: Implemented at 
CPCL & IPCL 
 NMP extra ction for LOBS d eveloped by IIP/EIL/ CPCL : Implemented at 
IOCL- Haldia Refinery 
 Delayed Coker developed by IIP/EIL: Implemented at BRPL, NRL. 
 Debottlenecking of Dewaxing/ Deoiling of Lubes by IIP: Implemented at 
CPCL, IOCL - Haldia Refinery 
 Improved Soaker Visbreaking tech nology developed by IIP/EIL : 
Implemented at 7 refineries 
 Distributor design based on Hydrodynamics of Trickle Bed Reactor by EIL 
& IOC (R&D) – implemented for DHDS at IOCL -BGR and FGH unit of 
HMEL (GGSRL), Bathinda". 
25. When asked by the Committee whether CHT is also exporting its know-how in 
its area of expertise to other countries , the Ministry stated that CHT is not exporting 
its know-how. 
26. When asked by the Committee to f urnish a note on the status of developing 
the technology for converting c oal to liquid, the Ministry in its written reply submitted 
the following: 

16 
 
 "A Brief Note on Coal to Liquid (CTL) Fuels Technology Development by EIL, 
BPCL & Thermax funded through CHT is given below: 
Energy mix in India is dominated by fossil fuels and the  share of Coal is more 
than 50% in the mix, which is projected to remain at the same level in 
foreseeable future. India is bestowed with large reserves of coal, 4 th largest in 
the world, but ash content in Indian coal is more than 40%. Thus there is need 
to develop clean coal technology to harness our coal reserves in an 
environment friendly manner. Gasification of coal is considered to be 
environmental friendly technology. During the gasification process any 
carbonaceous material is converted to Syn Gas (C O+H2), which can be 
cleaned and put to use for the production of variety of chemicals, 
petrochemicals, power, Hydrogen etc.  This route has been mainly pursued in 
South Africa and China. However, technology is not available to gasify high 
ash Indian coal i n efficient manner. The technology is highly technical as well 
as capital intensive. 
In order to develop indigenous technology suiting Indian coal, CHT, based on 
the recommendations of SAC, has funded a Project on “Coal to Liquid (CTL) 
Fuels Technology Development by EIL, BPCL & Thermax”  at a cost of Rs 33 
crore (including Rs 14.84 crore funding by CHT). 
The project has been envisaged in three major steps: 
Step1: Gasification of coal to syn gas  
Step2: Cleaning of syn gas (Removal of H 2S, NH 3, HCN, CO 2, COS, 
etc.) 
Step3: Conversion of syn gas to liquid fuels through Fischer -Tropsch 
(FT) synthesis 
The catalyst and process for FT synthesis have been developed for 
production of liquid fuel from synthetic syn gas. For gasification part, 
simulation and modelli ng has been completed and a pilot plant has been set 
up in EIL along with Thermax and presently validation of model is in progress. 
So far, plant run has been established in combustion mode. Gasification of 
coal has been done upto 4 bar pressure and Syn ga s cleaning is being done 
simultaneously. The pressure will be raised gradually upto 20 bar pressure, 
needing certain modification in the gasification system.  
This project is 94% completed so far. SAC has reviewed the project regularly 
and granted time ext ension up to June 2017 considering the complexity and 
steps required".  
 
27. Elaborating the efforts of EIL in the Coal to Liquid Fuels (CTL), the Chairman 
EIL made the following submission during the oral evidence:  
"I think there is an important initiative which has been taken between BPCL 
and EIL to handle and look into the specific coal which we have in India.  
Indian coal is high ash coal. It is a very different kind of a coal which we have 
in other countries. Thi s coal requires a specific and appropriate technology to 

17 
 
address this issue.  So, together we are engaged in this process.  The plant 
has already been set up in EIL (R&D) premises.  The initial start ups were 
done. There is certain troubleshooting which is  going on that. In this plant, 
there are certain components which are given some problems. We are into 
the process of troubleshooting that.  One section of the plant might get 
operational very fast and along with that we believe that the next section will 
also be put in position shortly.  The plant has already been installed. So, I 
think there is a very good research which is going on this and since we have 
abundance of coal probably there is a good solution also available in terms of 
technology which could  be domestically developed and probably utilized in a 
larger way.  So, I think there is a lot considerable amount of work which has 
been done during that time when the project was initiated as a pilot".   
28. When the Committee enquired about the coordinat ion of CHT with 
consultancy service companies such as EIL, the Ministry gave the following written 
reply:  
 "CHT is associated with EIL for undertaking Energy Efficiency Improvement 
Studies for PSU refineries on a centralised basis. CHT carried out a works hop 
of oil refineries and R&D institutes/EIL for sharing information on technologies 
available indigenously. CHT, based on the recommendations of SAC, also 
provide grant-in aid for R&D projects to EIL".  
29. When asked about  the work being undertaken by CHT in developing 
technologies for manufacturing of different by -products after refining of crude oil, the 
following submission was made by the Ministry:  
 "By-products like petcoke, sulphur are produced as co -products during 
refining of crude oil. So far, CHT has not worked in the areas of manufacturing 
of by-products".  
30. When asked about whether CHT has any research project on upstream 
activities in the petroleum sector, the officials of the CHT stated the following during 
the oral evidence:  
".... The CHT is not doing upstream. They are primarily on refineries and to 
some extent on alternative fuel and other things. 
...The Scientific Advisory Committee has already approved research projects 
for alternative fuel.  This basically means ethanol, bio -diesel or hydrogen 
which is a futuristic fuel; these are non -hydrocarbons, other than petrol and 
diesel".  
31. When asked about the role of CHT in development of alternative energy 
sources such as gas hydrates, shale gas, hydro energy etc. and whether technology 

18 
 
for exploitation of these sources have been developed or under developm ent, the 
Ministry submitted the following written reply:  
 "Development of alternative energy sources such as gas hydrates, shale gas 
etc. is done by R&D Institutes in Upstream Sector like ONGC etc. The role of 
CHT is mainly in the area of Refining Sector".  
32. Asked by the Committee as to whether CHT is also involved in enhancing the 
availability of ethanol for blending with auto fuel by developing alternative sources in 
order to achieve the mandated level of blending i.e. 10 per cent.   The Ministry stated 
that this work is being done by Public Sector OMCs.  
33. When the Committee asked as to furnish  note on the activities of CHT being 
undertaken in the fields of environmental pollution and in its management, the 
Ministry stated as under:  
 "CHT conducts Activity Committee Meetings on Environmental Management  
with active participation of all the refineries for dissemination of information 
and sharing of best practices/latest development. CHT was also actively 
involved in quality upgradation of MS and HSD". 
34. When the Committee asked the Ministry to g ive a brief note on the major 
projects being undertaken by CHT at present giving out details such as the company 
for which project is being undertaken, objectives of the project and fee charged by 
CHT in each case, the Ministry in its written reply submitted the following:  
 "Major projects being undertaken by CHT at present in the refineries are as 
under:- 
 Performance Benchmarking  of 15 PSU fuel refineries and 4 lube 
refineries through Solomon Associates, USA for cycle 2016 has been initiated 
at a cost of US $ 890,000 (~ Rs 6.0 Crore excluding taxes). CHT will bear 
50% of the base cost excluding service tax. 
 Comprehensive Energy Ef ficiency Improvement  for 15 PSU refineries 
through EIL has been initiated to bring down specific Energy Consumption in 
both short/medium term at a cost of Rs. 12.9 Crore excluding taxes. CHT will 
bear 50% of the base cost excluding service tax. 
 Integrated Refinery Business Improvement Programme (IRBIP) Phase-
II through Shell at BPCL - Mumbai, HPCL-Mumbai and MRPL is in progress. 
The fee is payable to the consultant depending upon actual demonstrated 
benefit. 
 Refinery Performance Improvement Programme (RPIP)  for all PSU 
refineries is being planned in a phased manner by 2021 -22 through global 
consultant". 
 

19 
 
35. When asked about number of patent applications made by CHT so far date -
wise and how many patents have been allotted/granted and the patents pending 
status of CHT at different stages, the Ministry in its written reply submitted the 
following: 
 "CHT is involved sponsoring R&D projects , recommended by SAC,  for 
development of knowledge base (fundamental), specific studies related to 
improvement in the exist ing processes, hardware and catalyst development 
by way of grant -in aid. All IPR (Intellectual Property Rights) vests with 
developing institutes who only file the patents. However, CHT has got the first 
right of using the developed know-how in any of the PSU refineries". 
36. When the committee wanted to know whether CHT has been undertaking any 
research project in exploiting gas hydrates which has been found to be in large 
quantity in Mahanadi Basin in the Country, the Secretary MoPNG during the oral 
evidence made the following submission: 
"Regarding gas hydrates that you have mentioned, gas hydrate as a research 
project is already undergoing.  Phase two has been completed.  Actually, 
research under this project is being undertaken basically in three countries, 
Japan, US and India.  We are al ready in talks and negotiations with those 
countries to go for the third project.  As the member has mentioned, this is in 
a very-very preliminary stage.  It has not been demonstrated even at the pilot 
stage.  Commercial extraction of gas hydrate project m ay take some more 
time.  It would depend on various other factors like the crude price in the 
international market and how it develops but definitely there is a huge 
potential particularly in the East coast.  We are cognizant of this fact.  We are 
undertaking these negotiations. 
The second phase of the project is completed and for the third phase we are 
already in negotiation.  The basic issue there is whether commercial scale 
exploitable technology can be developed.  That is the stage at which we are 
in.  This technology was being tested in pilot stage in Japan but not very 
encouraging results have come so far.  More and more research is needed in 
this field which we are already under negotiation".   
37. The Committee was desirous to know whether CHT is undertaking any project 
to use hydrogen as an alternative fuel along with natural gas , the Ministry  in its 
written reply have made the following submission: 
 "Two projects were undertaken by IOC (R&D) for use of hydrogen as an 
alternative fuel along with natural gas as under : 
 1. Setting up of HCNG dispensing station at IOCL COCO, Dwarka, New 
Delhi by IOC (R&D) - Completed in 2011 

20 
 
 The estimated cost of the project was Rs . 499 lakh with Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) contributing Rs . 250 lakh and the balance 
capital cost of Rs . 249 lakh under HCF. The project was approved by 
MNRE in July 2006 and completed in 2011. The objective of the project 
was to set up hydrogen and HCNG dispensing station at Dwarka for 
supplying fuel to vehicles,  gain experience for implementation of HCNG & 
Hydrogen under commercial environment and its acceptance as a safe 
fuel. 
 Hydrogen is produced by electrolysis of water and the electrolyzer has 
been designed for producing Hydrogen @ 5 Nm 3/ hr with 99.99% purity 
and delivery pressure of 10 bar. Hydrogen produced is subsequently 
compressed and stored in high pressure storage tank. CNG is blended 
with Hydrogen in the blender using supersonic nozzles technology to 
achieve blend of CNG & Hydrogen in the ratio of 82:18 by volume. 
 The salient features of the facility are: 
 
 HCNG Fill Pressure = 200 bar 
 Temperature compensated fill 
 Dispensing rate = 0.52 kg/ min to 25 kg/ min for HCNG blend 
 Hydrogen hose not connected as per PESO but H 2 filling can be done 
@350 bar 
2. Demonstration project on “Use of Hydrogen -CNG blends in Automotive 
Vehicles” by IOC (R&D) - Completed in September 2015 
 The project was undertaken with estimated cost of Rs . 1105 lakh in March 
2007. The project involved following activities:  
 
 European Steady -state Cycle (ESC) and European Transient Cycle 
(ETC) tests and optimisation of the complete system involving M/s 
ApiCom, Italy (TED supplier)  
 
 Endurance of Engine after Optimisation first for 100 hrs . with 
performance testing at 0 & 100 hrs. using 18% HCNG blend 
 
 Testing/ endurance studies with Ashok Leyland and Tata Motors 
engines and field trials for 20,000 km. 
 
  The project was completed in September 2015". 
 
Manpower in CHT 
38. The current manpower at CHT is 14 Technical Officers and 7 HR/Finance 
officers/staff.  The manpower required for functioning of CHT is drawn from Oil PSUs 
on deputation. In addition, retired officers from PSU Oil C ompanies are engaged as 
advisors on contract.  

21 
 
39. The Committee wanted to know w hether CHT has own employees . The 
Ministry in their reply stated that "CHT does not have regular employees". 
40. When the Committee sought to know why the CHT does not have its own 
employees and the staff are taken only on deputation from other PSUs, the 
representatives of the Ministry during the oral evidence stated as follows: 
"As far as their staffing is concerned, presently they are staffed through 
deputation of officers and senior executives largely from public sector 
enterprises. When this organisation was established, the role of private sector 
was very limited.  Private sector has entered this industry of late and not at 
the initial stage.  One reason why the officers have come on deputation is that 
we need the experienced people from the industry; we need people who have 
the experience of working in the refineries and have first hand experience of 
the functioning of these refineries. That perhaps would have been one 
consideration why people have been brought o n deputation from public sector 
enterprises. But we are always open to taking some people from open market. 
It is not that we will have people only from PSUs or through deputation". 
41. When pointed out that many organizations under Ministry of Petroleum are 
being manned by staff from PSUs, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum 
supplemented the following during the oral evidence: 
"We are looking into those aspects as well whether we can have some 
experts even from open market or private sector.  In fact, it  has been other 
way round also.  People who have been working in public sector have gone to 
private sector.  Originally the manpower was available in public sector only.  
As private sector entered into this industry, they have taken people from this 
side”. 
42. Supplementing on the issue of  deputing officers from PSUs to CHT, the 
Director (Refinery) of IOCL made the following submission during the oral evidence:  
"Firstly, Sir, in a refinery, we have different processes. It is not a single 
industry.  It is a combination of small industries and we have different licensed 
technologies which we use within the refinery. So, in CHT, these 15 or 16 
officers, each individual officer is drawn for a particular purpose or a particular 
technology.  They come with a very  specific background.  That is why, this 
organisation is small but experience wise they are very wide. They are 
providing a platform across the industry. 
... Sir, because they need people of specific background, so that is why 
probably there is a need that they are taken from industry on deputation basis. 
... Now, taking the retired people in CHT, in fact, the fault lies with us because 
although there had been a lot of demand from CHT because of lot of projects 

22 
 
which are undergoing for BS -4 and BS -6. We are , within Indian Oil, talking 
about more than 20 projects which are undergoing. We could not probably 
release.  My observation is it is only very recently it has happened.  It was not 
a practice for this organisation to have and even our own people who go t o 
CHT on deputation basis, they get tremendous value.  I think it is a wonderful 
platform for the industry which has been provided". 
 
----- 
  

23 
 
Part - II 
Observations / Recommendations 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Mandate and Function of CHT 
The Committee note that  Centre for High Technology (CHT) was 
established in 1987 as a dedicated technology cell of the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas. The major functions of CHT include assessment of 
technology requirement, operational performance evaluation and improvement 
of the refineries. CHT acts as a focal point of oil industry for centralised 
technical assistance, knowledge dissemination, performance data base, 
exchange of information and experience sharing.  The Committee further note 
that CHT functions under the o verall guidance and supervision of the 
Governing Council (GC) headed by the Secretary, MoP&NG as the Chairman. 
 The Committee  also find that the refining capacity in the country at 
present is about 240 MMTPA and the refining sector has seen a significant 
participation from private sector like Reliance, Essar etc. and also there are 
joint venture companies like HMEL and BORL in that business. The Committee 
further note that the country is importing 80 per cent of its crude oil 
requirements and at the same time there is significant exploration activities yet 
to be done in the country.  There is a need for technological requirements in 
deep water exploration, high pressure-high temperature exploration, shale gas, 
etc. in the country.  Also, the country has rece ntly identified gas hydrates 
resources which have immense potential to meet its energy requirements.   
However, there is no technology available within the country or at global level 
also as except US and Japan no other country seems to be interested in th is 
energy source.  The Committee  find that CHT basically looks at performance 
assessment and experience sharing with select R&D projects relating to public 
sector refineries on recommendation of Scientifc Advisory Committee on 
hydrocarbons and the technology developed through CHT funding is 
implemented at various refineries as per their requirement . The Budget 
available with CHT for funding such R&D Projects and special studies is very 

24 
 
small i.e. around Rs. 10 crore every year.  The Committee, are therefore , not 
satisfied with the narrow mandate of CHT limited to assist  the refineries in 
performance improvement and promoting a few R&D projects carried out by 
dedicated R&D institutes with analytical and pilot plant facilities available with 
R&D centres of OMCs and not  developing it as a dedicated technology cell of 
the Ministry covering the technological requirements of whole oil industry 
including both the upstream and downstream sectors. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that MoP&NG should conduct a tho rough review either 
by itself or through any external agency with an objective to redefine the role 
of CHT and widen its mandate so as to justify its name and include research 
areas of upstream sector also of the petroleum industry in addition to its role 
of improvement in the performance by technological innovation in refining 
sector.  
Recommendation No. 2 
R&D infrastructure with CHT 
 The Committee note that CHT assists refineries in performance 
improvement and promoting R&D through funding of R&D Projects  as 
recommended by Scientifc Advisory Committee on hydrocarbons . While 
performing the role in improving the performance of refineries , CHT actually 
engages consultant to carry out the studies and benchmark  the performance 
of refineries.  Moreover, C HT neit her has any laboratory nor there is any 
mechanism to coordinate with any national or international  research 
organisation in R&D Projects .  As a matter of fact,  in case of funded projects, 
R&D work is carried out by the R&D Institutes of grantee 
organisations/institutes like IOCL -R&D, EIL -R&D, HPCL -R&D, BPCL -R&D, IIP, 
IIT etc.  Therefore, CHT is actually not working as a dedicated technology cell 
of Ministry which prepares R&D Projects based on assessment of technology 
requirements of the industr y, rather R&D activities of PSU refineries  are only 
coordinated and supported by CHT. Projects are undertaken on the  advice of 
Scientific Advisory Committee which receive s the proposals from various 
research related institutes and also from the refineries.   Moreover, CHT has no 
control over the intellectual property generated through the R&D Projects  but 

25 
 
CHT works as  the cross learning platform through which  the notes and 
benefits are exchanged with each other. 
While going through this working of CHT, the  Committee observe that 
with this present design, CHT is not actually able to justify with its mandate.  In 
Committee’s view, the Refining technology development require focussed 
efforts and dedicated R&D Centre with analytical and pilot plant facilities which 
is not there with CHT .  The Committee, therefore, desire that CHT should be 
developed as platform working for whole oil industr y with high profile team of 
experts and an independent fully developed R&D laboratory capable to cater 
the needs of technological advancement of oil industry. The Committee further 
desire that CHT should also tie up with petroleum institutes within the country 
as well as abroad for their R&D activities.  The Committee, therefore, hope that 
MoP&NG will strengthen CHT accordingly  so that it can be able to work as a 
technical cell the Ministry.  
Recommendation No. 3 
Budgetary Allocation of CHT 
 The Committee note that the expenditure of CHT is fully funded by OIDB 
and it has no other source of revenue generation and CHT is totally dependent 
on OIDB for its funds. The major capital expenditure of CHT is for funding of 
R&D projects and for special studies.  The revenue expenditure is mainly on 
account of salaries to its staff.  The budgetary allocation was Rs. 16.42 crore in 
2014-15 and Rs. 19.31 crore in 2015-16 and expected expenditure is around Rs. 
21.35 crore during 2016 -17.  The Committee find that the fund allocated by 
OIDB is not adequate to handle the important responsibility assigned to CHT 
to fund capital intensive projects  relating to refining sector .  Simultaneously, 
the Committee are worried to observe the trend of expenditure being made by 
CHT during the last three years . It is surprising to note that CHT is even not 
able to spend the small allocation of Rs. 10 to 12 crore by OIDB for  funding  of 
R&D Projects and the studies in a balanced manner. The Commit tee, therefore, 
desire that CHT should scientifically project its estimates to commensurate 
with the industry requirements and assigned responsibilities and should 
improve its spending of the allocation during each financial year.   

26 
 
 The Committee further observe that CHT does not get any royalty  for 
the technologies developed through CHT funding when it is implemented by 
the refineries. CHT does not carry out any R&D p roject incorporating private 
sector refineries also.  The Committee do not find it a happy situation.  Being a 
research sponsoring organization it does not augur well for CHT to depend on 
one agency for its entire funding and should try to raise resources on its own 
so as to reduce its dependency on OIDB. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that CHT should also incorporate the private sector refineries 
along with Public Sector ones to carry out advanced studies and their 
requirements so as to b enefit the ind ustry as a whole and on implementation 
of technologies beneficial to them should try to earn revenues both from 
public as well as private sector so as to make it more sustainable.  CHT can 
also explore the possibility of selling the technology to private p layers of the 
industry and generate revenues.    
Recommendation No. 4 
Manpower for CHT 
 The Committee note that CHT functions as a technology cell of the 
MoP&NG with a small manpower of 14 technical officers and 7 HR/Finance 
officers drawn from Oil PSU on deputation. Retired officers from PSU oil 
companies are also engaged as advisors. The Committee further note that 
there is no permanent staff or officers on t he rolls of CHT.  This is a very 
undesirable situation of functioning of such an important organisation 
responsible for advising the Ministry on futuristic requirements, assess, 
develop and adopt technologies in refinery processes and petroleum products.  
The Committee have not been given any convincing reason for not recruiting 
engineers, scientists, staff on a permanent basis in CHT.  The Committee have 
been assured that the Ministry is open for appointing people from open market 
to CHT.  The Committee, t herefore, desire that CHT should attract people from 
other research organizations like CSIR, IIT etc. to work on specific projects in a 
time-bound manner. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
approach the manpower requirements in CHT with an open mind to have a mix 
from PSUs and open market and devise a suitable policy in CHT to attract the 

27 
 
people from scientific and technical background with research experience 
from open market along with officials on deputation from Oil PSUs.   
Recommendation No. 5 
Coal to Liquid Project (CTL)  
The Committee note that CHT has funded a R&D project on Coal to 
Liquid (CTL) Fuels Technology Development by EIL, BPCL & Thermax at a cost 
of Rs . 33 crore (including Rs . 14.84 crore funding by CHT).  The Committee 
further note that this project was first considered during 2007 and then a 
modified proposal was considered in April 2008. MoU between CHT, BPCL 
(R&D) and EIL (R&D) has been signed in March 2009.  The Committee have 
noted that the project has been completed to  the extent of 94 per cent so far 
and the SAC has reviewed and granted time extension upto June 2017 for  
completion of the project. 
 The Committee consider that by development of indigenous clean coal 
technology for conversion of Coal to Liquid will certai nly help the country in 
harnessing the coal reserves in an environment friendly manner and the break 
through in this technology would contribute in strengthening the energy 
security of the country. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
and the SAC should closely monitor the project at regular intervals and ensure 
that any difficulty being faced by the concerned agencies  is  remedied and the 
project reaches its successful completion by the extended time positively.  
Recommendation No. 6 
Performance Benchmarking of Refineries 
 The Committee note that CHT undertake s studies on behalf of PSU 
refineries for performance benchmarking, performance improvement 
programmes and  energy efficiency  improvement. The performance 
benchmarking of the PSU r efineries is done by engaging M/S Solomon 
Associates on various parameters.  The Committee further note that Solomon 
benchmarking is the main benchmarking in the world and it studies about 200 
plus refineries and tells about where particular refinery stand s at the world 
level. The Committee observe that in benchmarking, the main focus is on 

28 
 
energy efficiency where Indian refineries are not performing well. Moreover, 
most of the Indian PSU refineries are old ones and have several complexities 
and an improvement in their performance at par with global standards will be a 
tough and challenging task.  The Committee also note that the fuel quality in 
the country  has been upgraded to BS -IV norms since April, 2017 and the 
Government has decided to skip BS-V  and go to BS-VI fuel quality directly by 
the year 2020 .  For meeting the BS-VI quality norms, the refineries  have to 
modernise the units quickly by introducing new technology.  The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that CHT by regularly carrying out performance 
improvement programmes should ensure that the old PSU refineries are 
modernised quickly and reach the desired standards in thei r performance and 
become ready to produce BS-VI fuel by 2020. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Research on Alternative Energy Sources 
 The Committee note that CHT is also the nodal agency for taking up 
hydrogen projects and related activities from the Hydrogen Corpus Fund 
(HCF). The objectives of HCF are to develop hydrogen as an alternative energy 
source, facilitate R& D activities, synergise hydrogen development activities 
between Oil companies and institutions and facilitate training and capability 
building.  Initial Hydrogen Corpus Fund of Rs. 100 crore has been created with 
contribution of Rs. 40 crore by OIDB and Rs . 16 crore each by IOC, ONGC and 
GAIL and Rs. 6 crore each by HPCL and BPCL and the fund will be managed 
by OIDB. All proposals under the HCF will be received by CHT and put up to 
Scientific Advisory Committee for approval.   But the Committee find that CH T 
has not undertaken any serious activity relating to H2 projects except the 
single project  relating to coal gasification.  Further, the Committee also 
observe that CHT has no research programme on bio fuels which is an 
important area for Indian scenario. 
 The Committee feel that the projects relating to hydrogen as an 
alternative energy source are very important not only for the Government and 
CHT but also for the country as a whole  as this is an  advanced area of 
research and any  breakthrough in this direct ion will strengthen the energy 

29 
 
security of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should accord top priority to H2 projects and bio -fuel projects and 
expect CHT to play a pro -active role in taking up these projects and related 
activities by proper guidance , regular monitoring and necessary funding in 
every area so that all the projects are completed in a time-bound manner.  
 
----- 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
31 July, 2017 
9 Shravana,1939 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                            Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
                                                                    MINUTES    Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
Seventh Sitting 
(23.12.2016) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 23 December, 2016 from 1100 hrs. to 
1245 hrs. in Room  No. 'G-074', Parliament Library, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Elumalai V. 
5 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
6 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
7 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
8 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
9 Shri Ravneet Singh 
10 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
11 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
12 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
13 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
14 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
15 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
17 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya 
18 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
3. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
1 Shri K.D. Tripathi  - Secretary  
2 Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney - Addl. Secretary  
3 Shri Ajit Kumar - Deputy Secretary (Ref.) 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings and other Organisations 
 
 
1 Shri Sanjay Gupta - CMD, EIL 
2 Shri Brijesh Kumar - Executive Director, CHT 
3 Shri A.S. Pathak - Director, CHT 
4 Shri R. Krishnamurthy - Advisor, CHT 
5 Shri Vijay Prakash - Executive Director (Ops.), IOCL 
6 Shri R. Ramachandran - Director (R), BPCL 
7 Shri V.S. Sehnoy - Director (R), HPCL 
8 Shri V. Anand - Executive Director (Planning & Infr.), BPCL 
 
 
2.   At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson of the Committee welcomed Members 
of the Committee and representatives of the Ministry of P& NG to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the representative of the CHT made a power point 
presentation on the subject "Functioning of Centre for High Technology". 
 
3. Subsequently, Members of the Committee deliberated on issues related to the 
subject such as role and functioning of CHT, its funding pattern and budgetary 
allocations, infrastructure for its activities, staffing of the organisation, collaboration 
with academic institutions at the national and international level, augmentation of 
investments in refineries for improving auto fuel quality in the country, cost benefit 
analysis of exports of indigenous refining products vis a vis substitution to crude oil 
imports of the country, foreign exchange earnings accruing out of export of refinery 
products and detailed information on ongoing research projects at CHTetc. 
 
4. Further, issues like Coal to Liquid (CTL) project being undertaken jointly by 
EIL and BPCL, taking help of experts/scientists working in the field of petroleum 
sector/open market, s ulphur content in BS -V and BS -VI auto fuels, evaluation of 
petroleum related research projects by the scientific advisory committee, level of 
indigenisation of technology in engineering processes, percentage of ethanol 
blending in petrol and exploration of  shale gas in the country also came up for 
deliberation during the sitting of the Committee.     
 
 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
     
       
 

32 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2016-17) 
 
TWENTY FIRST SITTING 
(27.07.2017) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday 27 July, 2017 from 1600 hrs. to 1640 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Smt. Rama Devi 
4 Shri Elumalai V. 
5 Shri P.K. Biju 
6 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
7 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
8 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
9 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
10 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
13 Shri Rajesh Verma 
14 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
                         RAJYA SABHA 
15 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
16 Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
17 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
18 Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
19 Mahant Shambhuprasadji B. Tundiya 
20 Shri A. Vijaykumar 
 
  

33 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. Shri H.Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
 
2.   At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
subject "Centre for High Technology (CHT)" and adopted the same with  minor 
modifications.  
 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalize the report and 
present/lay in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 