 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
'ETHANOL BLENDED PETROL AND BIO-DIESEL POLICY' 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2016/Falguna, 1937 (Saka) 
 


 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
'ETHANOL BLENDED PETROL AND BIO-DIESEL POLICY' 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Seventh  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on   
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2016/Falguna, 1937 (Saka) 


 
 
CONTENTS 
               Page No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv)  
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
14 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
22 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
23 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
29 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the tenth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015 -16) held on 
10.03.2016.  
30 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15) on 
the subject 'Ethanol Blended Petrol and Bio -Diesel 
Policy'. 
32 

 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2015-16) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Raju Shetty 
15 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
16 Shri Ravneet Singh 
17 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
24 Shri Prabhat Jha 
25 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
26 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Shri Sharad Yadav 
31 Shri Praful Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash Additional Director 
4. Ms. Sonia Khanna Committee Officer 

 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendatio ns contained in the 
Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Ethanol 
Blended Petrol and Bio-Diesel Policy' of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas‟. 
2. The Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 13.08.2015.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
to all the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report were received on 
02.02.2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2015 -16) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 10.03.2016.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 March, 2016 
24 Falguna, 1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2014-15) on 'Ethanol Blended Petrol and Bio -Diesel Policy', which was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.08.2015. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of al l the 14 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 (Total 8) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. Nos. 6 (Total 1) 
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 1, 4, 
8 and 14 (Total 4)                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 3 (Total 1)               
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

-2- 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Implementation of Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme  
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the Government of India decided to launch Ethanol 
Blended Petrol (EBP) programme in January, 2003 for sale of 5% ethanol 
blended petrol. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas vide its notification 
dated 20th September, 2006 directed the public sector OMCs to sell 5% Ethanol 
Blended Petrol subject to commercial viability as per BIS standards in the notified 
20 States and 4 UTs of the country w.e.f. 1 st November, 2006. Thereafter, the 
CCEA in its meetin g held on 9 th October, 2007 decided on 5% mandatory 
blending of ethanol with petrol and 10% optional blending w.e.f. October, 2007 
and 10% mandatory blending from October, 2008.  
The Committee note that despite the fact that CCEA had directed for mandatory  
blending of petrol with ethanol within a specified time frame, the programme was 
not implemented by the Ministry/OMCs until 2012 due to the various reasons 
including that of sugar mills not finding supply of ethanol remunerative at the 
offered prices of OMCs.  
The Committee are of the view that with 5% Ethanol Blended Petrol and 
subsequently higher blending in future, the crude oil imports can come down 
saving significant amount of foreign exchange. Besides, studies have shown that 
use of Ethanol Blended P etrol leads to significant reduction of emissions into 
environment and can address the concerns of climate change and strengthen 
energy security. The Committee also observe that many countries in the world 
including USA and Brazil have successfully impleme nted bio -fuel programmes 
and feel that India being one of the largest producers of Sugar Cane in the world 
should also reap the benefits of this renewable bio-mass energy resource.  
 The Committee note that the Government has fixed the price of Ethanol in 
November, 2014 at Rs. 48.50/litre and the sugar mills have started to supply 
Ethanol at this price due to which 2% blending levels have been achieved. The 
Committee appreciate the recent initiatives by the Ministry taken for 
implementation of Ethanol Blend ed Petrol (EBP). The Committee desire that if 
the cost of Indian Crude oil basket goes up from the current levels due to 
increase in price of crude oil in the international market, the procurement price of 
Ethanol may also be increased suitably which will benefit the farmers as well as 
ethanol producers.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the implementation of EBP Programme 
will provide new opportunities to Sugar Industry in general and Sugar farmers in 
particular. The Committee strongly desire that the  Ministry should work seriously 
for EBP Programme and efforts should be made for removing the impediments 
being faced to achieve the specified blending targets across the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should devise a 

-3- 
 
 
 
comprehensive action plan for effective implementation of the programme with a 
clear-cut roadmap for achieving different blending percentages within a stipulated 
timeframe throughout the country". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural  Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
 "It has been noted". 
 
7. The Committee had observed that the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) 
Programme was not being implemented by the Ministry/OMCs due to various 
reasons.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended that Ministry should 
devise a comprehensive action plan for effective implementation of EBP 
Programme with a clear cut roadmap for achieving different blending percentages 
within a stipulated timeframe throughout the country.   But t he Ministry , in its 
Action Taken Reply has only stated that it has noted the Recommendation  
without giving any details of the action taken on the recommendation for an 
effective implementation of the programme.   The Committee seriously deprecate 
such casual attitude of the Ministry in responding to the recommendation of the 
Committee. 
 The Committee , therefore,  express their  displeasure at the lackadaisical 
approach of the Ministry on such an important initiative and expect that MoPNG 
should work out a comprehensive plan to achieve the blending percentage 
targets within a stipulated timeframe in the country and in this regard, a reply 
should be submitted by the Ministry within thirty days. 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Production of Ethanol from various sources 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observe that in response to the efforts made for procurement of 
Ethanol, OMCs have been able to receive only 54% of their total requirement for 
implementation of 5% EBP across the country.  The Committee have been 

-4- 
 
 
 
informed that at present, th e production of Ethanol is from molasses, which is a 
byproduct in sugarcane industry.  
The Committee note that other than sugarcane, ethanol can be produced from 
corn, maize, wheat and food grains having high starch content and many 
countries in the world have successfully implemented bio -fuel programmes 
based on variety of crops such as USA is running their Ethanol fuel programme 
on corn based Ethanol. The Committee observe that in India diversity of 
vegetation is available and it can avail the advantage b y speeding up R&D for 
producing Ethanol from different crops. 
The Committee have also been informed that  bio -ethanol can be produced from 
various food-grade and non- food grade feed stocks such as lingo -cellulosic bio-
mass, agricultural waste, algae etc. and from bio -wastes and non -food grade 
cellulose  such as rice husk and paddy straw and if a breakthrough is achieved, it 
will be a game changer and a solution to increasing energy needs of the country. 
 The Committee feel that OMC‟s sole dependence on mol asses based Ethanol 
can limit the implementation of EBPP.  The Committee therefore, desire that an 
Industry working group should be set up to look into the feasibility of production 
of Ethanol from variety of feed stocks based on edible/non -edible products and 
recommend that MoPNG should allocate more funds for research and 
development as the results of EBP will ultimately add to energy security and will 
be in national interest. The Committee also desire that MoPNG/OMCs should 
explore procurement of Ethanol  from the standalone units in Maharashtra which 
produce Ethanol from denatured/rectified Spirit. The Committee further desire the 
MoPNG to conduct a cost benefit analysis regarding production of Ethanol from 
different feed stocks". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
"As per the National Policy on Bio -fuels, ethanol for use as bio -fuels can be 
produced from various agricultural wastes and residues besides sugarc ane 
molasses. However, technologies for this purpose are still at research and 
development stage and no full scale projects have been set up in the country. 
The Policy endeavours to facilitate and bring about optimal development and 
utilization of indigeno us biomass feed -stocks for production of bio -fuels.  Beside 
this, the Research and Development in Bio -fuels, especially development of 
second and third generation bio -fuels, including bio-ethanol, from ligno-cellulosic 
biomass including other crops such as  sweet sorghum is being supported by 
various Ministry and Departments in the Country.  
2. In order to improve the availability of ethanol, the Government, on 
10.12.2014 has decided that ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks 

-5- 
 
 
 
besides molasses, like  cellulosic and ligno cellulosic materials including 
petrochemical route, has also been allowed to be procured subject to meeting 
the relevant BIS Standards. 
3. Also, pursuant to the recommendations of Committee of Secretaries in its 
meeting held on 1.10.2 015 under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 
“Exploring the possibility of commercial production of ethanol from ligno cellulose 
feedstock by Oil Marketing Companies”,  OMCs have been requested to take 
immediate steps to establish three pilot project s, each of reasonable scale, for 
producing ethanol from multi -feedstock lignocelluloses, covering different 
varieties of lignocelluloses feedstock available in large quantities, using 
indigenous technology including that being developed by Department of 
Biotechnology".   
10. In view of the lesser production and availability of ethanol than the total 
requirement for implementation of EBP programme and possibility of production 
of bio-ethanol from a variety of crops, t he Committee had recommended that an 
Industry Working Group must be set up to look into the feasibility of production 
of Ethanol from variety of edible and non -edible feed -stocks and more funds 
should be allocated by the Ministry for R&D in this field. The Committee had also 
desired for conductin g a cost benefit analysis of production of ethanol from 
different feed-stocks. 
 In its reply, the Ministry has informed that research and development in 
Bio-fuels, especially development of second and third generation bio -fuels from 
ligno-cellulosic biomass including other crops such as sweet sorghum is being 
supported by various Ministry and Departments in the country. Further, to 
improve the availability of ethanol, the Government has decided that ethanol 
produced from other non -food feed-stocks besides molasses, like cellulosic and 
ligno-cellulosic materials has also been allowed to be procured subject to BIS 
Standards.  The Ministry have further stated that  OMCs have been requested to 
take immediate steps to establish three pilot projects, each of reaso nable scale, 
for producing ethanol from multi -feedstock lignocelluloses, covering different 
varieties of lignocelluloses feedstock available in large quantities, using 
indigenous technology including that being developed by Department of 
Biotechnology.   
 

-6- 
 
 
 
 The Committee , however,  feel that  such isolated efforts by MoP&NG like 
asking OMCs to establish three pilot projects for production of Ethanol from feed-
stocks other than Sugarcane  may not give the desire results in this case where 
participation of other Ministries/Departments is also required.  Moreover, no 
specific allocation of fund  has also been made by the Ministry  for that purpose .  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that Ministry 
should undertake the  initiatives by f orming a industry working group in 
cooperation with the concerned Ministries/Departments for encouraging  the 
production of ethanol from other feed-stocks and sufficient funds for R&D should 
also be made with an objective to give a fillip to EBP programme.  The Committee 
may be apprised about the timeframe and outcome in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Transportation cost of Ethanol 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that approximately 134 crore litres of ethanol is required to 
blend upto 5% level for implementation of ethanol blended Petrol programme 
across the country. The Committee have been informed that against the tenders 
floated for the total quantity of 297.90 crore litres of ethanol, the OMCs have 
received offer of 122.17 crore litres and could finalize 70.37 crore litres only and 
the percentage of finalized quantity to the required quantity in the different 
tenders ranges between 18.9% to 28 .3%. Further, in certain States, such as 
Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Kerala and Jharkhand, no offers were received.   
The Committee observe that one of the discouraging factors for sugar mills in 
supply of ethanol is the transportation cost included in its prici ng mechanism.  
The Committee note that there are three slabs for price fixation for ethanol based 
on the differential distance of the destination from the sugar mills. It is seen that 
for a distance ranging between 101 -300 Kms, Rs. 49/ - are paid while for a 
distance of more than 300 Kms, Rs. 49.50 are paid by the OMCs. The 
Committee have been informed that if the delivery point is beyond 450 Kms, the 
cost realized by supply of ethanol becomes less for sugar mills due to higher 
transportation cost. The Commi ttee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should 
review the issue of transportation cost of ethanol for distances beyond 450 Kms 
keeping the realistic cost in view". 
 
 

-7- 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the  following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
"The Ministry is examining the issue and has requested Department of Food & 
Public Distribution (DFPD) to send required information to take decision".   
 
 
13. The Committee while noting that the supply of ethanol becomes less 
attractive for sugar mills due to higher transportation cost , had recommended 
that Ministry should review the issue of transportation cost for distances beyond 
450 kms. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply ha s informed that it is examining 
the issue by obtaining the required information from the  Department of Food & 
Public Distribution.  The Committee , therefore, desire that the  MoP&NG should 
expedite the examination and a decision be taken at the earliest  and the same 
may be apprised accordingly within thirty days.  
Recommendation No.4 
Simplification of procedure and reduction of taxes and duties 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note with serious concern the procedural difficulties faced by 
OMCs and Suga r Mills in various States. The Committee have been informed 
that there are number of procedural formalities which need to be completed with 
different authorities for obtaining licenses. Further, in some States, quarterly 
permissions are required by excise departments. The Committee have also been 
informed that the OMCs face delay in issuance of import/export No -Objection 
Certificate and other permits by state excise departments for inter -state 
movement of ethanol which hampers the implementation of EBP prog ramme. 
The Committee observe that there is no uniformity in the taxes/duties levied by 
different States. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that this matter 
may be taken up by the Central Government with state governments for 
simplification of procedural difficulties and for bringing uniformity in the taxes and 
duties levied by various States.   
 Since Ethanol is not available in all the States, the Committee feel that there 
should be hassle free inter -state movement of Ethanol for blending purpose s to 
give a fillip to EBP programme. Therefore, the Committee desire that the 
Government may take up the matter with State Governments to remove/ease the 
restrictions imposed on inter -state movement of Ethanol for blending purposes 
only. 

-8- 
 
 
 
 The Committee hav e further been informed that the responsibility of obtaining 
excise permission have been put on sugar mills by OMCs and they face 
difficulties in obtaining the requisite clearances.  Due to this, sometimes sugar 
mills are not able to supply ethanol quantit ies on time and have to pay penalties 
to OMCs for non -compliance of orders.  The Committee take a serious note of 
this situation and recommend that OMCs should actively pursue for obtaining 
clearances from various State level agencies/Departments instead o f putting the 
onus on sugar mills. It has further been noted that the NoCs are issued by 
movement of documents through posts which consumes a lot of time in transit 
between the two States. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
persuade the State  Governments to carry out these processes through modern 
electronic systems in order to save time". 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
15. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
"Pursuant to Government‟s decision dated 10.12.2014, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has been inter-alia requesting State Governments  from time to time 
in relation to address State specific issues relating to taxation, excise permits, 
import/export p ermits, renewable storage license, etc, which hinder  inter -State 
and intra-State movement of ethanol.  
2. Recently, on 19 th November, 2015, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
has again inter -alia requested State Governments of 12 States, viz., Andhra 
Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Telangana, to address 
various issues relating inter-State and intra-State movement of ethanol. 
 
3.         In addition to it, Nodal Off icers from OMC‟s have also been appointed for 
different States for coordination among OMCs, Sugar Mills and other 
stakeholders for effective implementation of EBP programme.  The list of the 
Nodal officers is as follows: 
Name of OMC Responsible Officer State 
BPCL Director (Marketing) Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat 
HPCL Director (Marketing) Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, 
Bihar  
IOCL Director (Marketing) Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, West Bengal 
  
 
4. Apart from above, Minister for Consumer Affairs Food and Public 
Distribution has taken up the issue of transaction barriers which impede smooth 
supplies for ethanol blending with the Chief Ministers of major ethanol producing 
states. State Governments have  been requested to initiate remedial steps to 

-9- 
 
 
 
ensure that such barriers in the form of procedural difficulties, varied structure of 
taxes and duties levied in the states and restrictions on inter -state movement of 
ethanol/molasses, which are impeding the i mplementation of EBP, are 
dismantled".   
 
16. The Committee in their report had taken note of the difficulties faced by 
OMCs and sugar mills in obtaining excise permission and requisite clearance 
from different authorities and had recommended that the MoPNG should 
persuade state government s to carry out these process es through electronic 
system to save time and hassle-free inter-state movement of ethanol. 
 In its Action Taken Reply , the Ministry ha s stated that it is pursuing with 
various state government s to address specific issues relating to taxation, excise 
permission, import/export permit, renewable storage license etc.  It has further 
stated that on 19 November, 2015, MoPNG has requested 12 Sta tes to address 
various issues relating to inter-state and intra -state movement of ethanol. It has 
also been stated that nodal officers have been appointed in 12 states.  Apart from 
these above steps, Minister f or Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribut ion 
has taken up the issue of transaction barriers which impede smooth supplies for 
ethanol blending with Chief Minister s of major ethanol producing states . State 
Governments have been requested to remove procedural difficulties  and varied 
structure of taxes which are impeding the implementation of EBP. 
 The Committee , however, note that  none of these measures ha s got any 
response from the state governments and n either the inter -state and intra -state 
movement of ethanol has smoothened nor there is any chang e in the procedural 
difficulties or the varied taxation structure.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
Ministry should closely monitor the developments and should hold a meeting 
with Chief Secretaries of States to  persuade the concerned  state government s 
towards simplification of procedural difficulties and also to remove other 
difficulties relating to taxes and duties which are creating hurdles in 
implementation of EBP programme  
 

-10- 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.13 
Levying of taxes/duties on ethanol 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the State Governments levy taxes/duties on fuel 
ethanol used for ethanol blended petrol programme . The Committee have been 
informed by the representatives of Indian Sugar Mills Association that as per 
Entry 97 of the Union List, any matter not enumerated in List II (State List) or List 
III (Concurrent List) shall be governed by the Union Government and Liquor fit for 
human consumption only has been mentioned in the State List. The Committee 
have been info rmed by ISMA that t he rest of the alcohols viz. industrial alcohol 
and fuel grade ethanol do not find mention in the State List and hence 
taxes/duties imposed on fuel ethanol by State Governments should be stopped 
and instead should be levied by the Union Government which can reduce the 
procedural formalities. 
The Committee are of the view that this matter needs to be clarified in the light of 
the proposed legislation on GST and therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should take  up with the concerned Ministries as to 
whether the State Governments have the authority to levy taxes/duties on 
ethanol unfit for human consumption".  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following repl y in 
this reply in the regard: 
"Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA), vide its letter dated 20 th January, 2015, 
submitted a detailed note regarding the free movement of fuel ethanol for its 
blending with petrol, especially with reference to the various co nstitutional 
provisions and judgements of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in this regard.  After 
due examination in Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the matter was 
referred to Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs for their advice.  
Ministry of Law and Justice opined that since the position of law on the subject 
under reference has authoritatively been examined and clarified by the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas may like to deal with the 
matter accordingly.  IS MA also represented to Department of Industrial Policy 
and Promotion (DIPP) about the need to issue a Statutory Order / Notification 
under Section 18 G of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, in 
order to make ethanol movement free of any hindrance.  Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas apprised DIPP about the advice of Ministry of Law and requested 
them to take appropriate action in the matter. 
 
2. Recently, Lok Sabha has passed a bill on 10 th of December 2015 (Bill No. 
266-C of 2015) amend ing “The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 

-11- 
 
 
 
1951 to transfer the authority to regulate 'potable alcohol' to States as 
recommended by the Law Commission in its 158th Report.   The existing 
heading "26 Fermentation Industries" in the First Schedule  of Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 shall be substituted with the heading 
"26 Fermentation Industries (other than potable alcohol)".  The said Amendment 
will help in resolving a long standing confusion about jurisdiction of Central and 
State - Government on Alcohol - Potable Alcohol and Industrial Alcohol and 
ensure that industries engaged in manufacturing alcohol meant for Potable 
purposes shall be under the total and exclusive control of States in all respects". 
 
19. The Committee in their report had recommended that MoPNG should  take 
up with concerned Ministries to clarify  as to whether the state government s have 
the authority to levy taxes/duty on ethanol unfit for human consumption.   MoPNG 
in its reply ha s stated that Lok Sabha has passed a Bill amending "Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act 1951" to transfer the authority to regulate 
'potable alcohol' to States and the said Amendment will help  in resolving a long 
standing confusion about jurisdiction of Central and State Gove rnments.  The 
Committee appreciate the action taken by the Ministry in pursuing the 
recommendation to its logical conclusion and bring an end to the long standing 
confusion that prevailed over jurisdiction of  alcohol, potable alcohol and 
industrial alcohol and taxes/duties on fuel ethanol will be levied accordingly. 
Recommendation No.14 
Bio-Diesel Policy 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the Bio-Diesel policy was announced by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in 2005. The Indian strategy for implementation of 
Bio-Diesel Policy is based on production of Bio -Diesel from non -edible oil seeds 
like Jatropha and P ongamia plants only and conducive conditions for its growth 
have been found in the country. The Committee note that these plants can grow 
in wastelands or degraded forests in arid to semi-arid conditions. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that activities li ke identification of wastelands, suitable varieties 
of Jatropha/Pongamia be conducted in a time bound manner.  
 The Committee have been informed that the production of Bio -Diesel producing 
seeds is commercially insignificant in India and at the 20 identifi ed purchase 
centers, no quantity of bio -diesel has been offered by the producers. The 
Committee feel that in case of bio -diesel policy, a lot of ground work needs to be 
completed before the policy could be implemented.  In this regard, the 

-12- 
 
 
 
Committee further note that the Bharat Renewable Energy Limited (BREL) which 
is a joint venture of BPCL for promotion of Bio -Fuels has completed around 
10,000 acres of plantations in last 3 -4 years out of the 1,50,000 acres of waste 
lands offered by the Government of U.P. Since barely 6% of the total offered land 
has been covered by BREL, the Committee desire that the other OMCs should 
also come forward to participate in this project and expand the cultivation of 
Jatropha on the offered land. The Committee also desire that  the MoPNG/OMCs 
should pursue other State Governments for allocation of wastelands for 
cultivation of seeds and to take up the work in identified areas.    
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
has been made custodian of  the National Policy on Bio -fuels and feel that 
different Ministries like MNRE, Ministry of Agriculture & Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should coordinate among themselves in order to give an early start 
to National Bio-Diesel Policy.  The Committee feel that the Bio-Diesel Policy is in 
its preliminary stage and therefore, desire that in order to realize the objectives 
specified in the Bio -Diesel Policy, a long term plan for its step -wise 
implementation should be devised and monitored properly".  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
21. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
"MNRE has reported that the Biodiesel development is at nascent stage also. 
Ministry is supporting Research and Development ( R&D) projects in the area of 
development of bio -diesel. Ministry is also coordinating various issues involved 
through Bio -fuels Steering Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary. This 
involves all the participating Ministries for activities related to both Bi odiesel and 
bio-ethanol. 
 
2.  Under Bio -diesel Purchase policy, OMCs would purchase bio -diesel, 
meeting the prescribed BIS standard, at a uniform price, as may be decided by 
the OMCs from time to time, for blending with High Speed Diesel (HSD) to the 
extent of 5%, at identified 20 purchase centres across the country.  
 
 3.        Government has issued notification on 10th August, 2015 to allow the sale 
of Bio-diesel (B100) by private manufacturers to bulk consumers like Railways, 
State Transport Corporations and other bulk consumers.  
 
4. As per Department of Heavy Industries, the automotive industry has 
already agreed for 5% Ethanol Gasoline Blends and the vehicles produced are 
compatible with the same. They are already taking the necessary steps for 
making the same compatible with increased percentage of ethanol up to 10%. 
Further the impact of the same on in -use vehicles, particularly two wheelers, 
could be of concern on some models which do not have the material compatibility 

-13- 
 
 
 
with 10% ethanol blends.  The  two wheelers which are mostly using carburettors 
will be giving sub - optimal performance at 10% blends when optimized for 5% 
blends and could also give lower fuel consumption in terms of km/litre as ethanol 
has a lower calorific value in comparison to petrol.  
 
5. They have further informed that to make optimum use of the blend, it is 
important that sustained availability of the blend fuel should be ensured across 
the country to enable the industry to optimize the vehicles for that particular 
blend. The de velopment of flexi fuel vehicles would be taken up once blend of 
20% - 85% is ensured across the country. They have also informed that Govt. of 
India has also issued notification enabling registration of vehicles operating on 
E85 and ED95 fuel. However it may not be possible for two wheelers as they are 
mostly operating on carburettor technologies. However operation of in -use 
vehicles on such blends will not be possible. Therefore, the oil industry has to 
ensure E5 at all retail outlets in addition to higher blends for in-use vehicles". 
 
 
22. The Committee had recommended that in order to realise the objectives of 
Bio-Diesel Policy  announced in 2005 , a long term plan should be devised and 
monitored.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated that OMCs would 
purchase bio -diesel meeting the prescribed BIS standard at a uniform price as 
may be decided from time to time. The reply further adds that government has 
issued notification to allow the sale of bio-diesel by private manufacturers to bulk 
consumers like Railways, STCs and other bulk consumers. 
 The Committee , however,  are not satisfied with the reply as it does not 
spell out any time frame by which the bio -diesel would be commercially available 
in major centres and how much blending will be achi eved at various stages . The 
Committee while noting that the M inistry of New and Renewable Energy is the 
nodal Ministry for Bio-Diesel policy, it is the oil marketing companies which come 
under MoPNG  that will procure and distribute  Bio-Diesel. Therefore, t he 
Committee reiterate their recommendation and desire that MoPNG/OMCs should 
take proactive steps to attract bio -diesel producers and also ensure quality of 
bio-diesel and work towards to make bio-diesel into a successful programme.  
 
  

-14- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Production of Ethanol from various sources 
The Committee observe that in response to the efforts made for procurement of 
Ethanol, OMCs have been able to receive only 54% of their total requirement for 
implementation of 5% EBP across the country.  The Committee have been informed 
that at present, th e production of Ethanol is from molasses, which is a byproduct in 
sugarcane industry.  
The Committee note that other than sugarcane, ethanol can be produced from 
corn, maize, wheat and food grains having high starch content and many countries in 
the world have successfully implemented bio -fuel programmes based on variety of 
crops such as USA is running their Ethanol fuel programme on corn based Ethanol. The 
Committee observe that in India diversity of vegetation is available and it can avail the 
advantage by speeding up R&D for producing Ethanol from different crops. 
The Committee have also been informed that bio -ethanol can be produced from 
various food-grade and non - food grade feed stocks such as lingo -cellulosic bio-mass, 
agricultural waste, algae etc. and from bio-wastes and non-food grade cellulose such as 
rice husk and paddy straw and if a breakthrough is achieved, it will be a game changer 
and a solution to increasing energy needs of the country. 
 The Committee feel that OMC‟s sole dependence on molas ses based Ethanol 
can limit the implementation of EBPP.  The Committee therefore, desire that an Industry 
working group should be set up to look into the feasibility of production of Ethanol from 
variety of feed stocks based on edible/non -edible products a nd recommend that 
MoPNG should allocate more funds for research and development as the results of EBP 
will ultimately add to energy security and will be in national interest. The Committee also 
desire that MoPNG/OMCs should explore procurement of Ethanol f rom the standalone 
units in Maharashtra which produce Ethanol from denatured/rectified Spirit.  The 
Committee further desire the MoPNG to conduct a cost benefit analysis regarding 
production of Ethanol from different feed stocks. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
As per the National Policy on Bio -fuels, ethanol for use as bio -fuels can be produced 
from various agricultural wastes and residues besides sugarcane molasses. However, 
technologies for this purpose are still at research and development stage and no full 
scale projects have been set up in the country. The Policy endeavours to facilitate and 
bring about optimal development and utilization of indigenous biomass feed -stocks for 
production of bio -fuels.  Beside this, the Research and Development in Bio -fuels, 

-15- 
 
 
 
especially development of second and third generation bio -fuels, including bio -ethanol, 
from ligno -cellulosic biomass including other crops such as sweet sorghum is being 
supported by various Ministry and Departments in the Country.  
2. In order to improve the availability of ethanol, the Government, on 10.12.2014 
has decided that ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks besides molasses, 
like cellulosic and ligno cellulosic materials including petrochemical route, has also been 
allowed to be procured subject to meeting the relevant BIS Standards. 
3. Also, pursuant to the recommendations of Committee of Secretaries in its 
meeting held on 1.10.2015 under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on “Exploring 
the possibility of commercial production of etha nol from ligno cellulose feedstock by Oil 
Marketing Companies”,  OMCs have been requested to take immediate steps to 
establish three pilot projects, each of reasonable scale, for producing ethanol from 
multi-feedstock lignocelluloses, covering different va rieties of lignocelluloses feedstock 
available in large quantities, using indigenous technology including that being 
developed by Department of Biotechnology.   
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Priority to Ethanol for blending purposes 
 The Committee observe that the ethanol is mainly consumed by three sectors 
viz. potable liquor sector, chemical industry and by petroleum sector for blending 
purposes.  The Committee have been informed that one of the main reasons behind 
inadequate supply of ethanol to OMCs is that the State Governments do not give priority 
to ethanol for blending purposes as they get more revenue from potable liquor sector 
and hence find it more remunerative.   
 The Committee are of the view that once the EBP programme is implemented 
successfully, the States and the country as a whole will be benefitted. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that MoPNG s hould take up the matter with the State governments 
for allocation of ethanol on priority basis to EBP programme apprising them of the 
benefits once it is implemented across the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
In the meeting held by Secretary, Food and Public Distribution with the state officials in 
charge of State Excise Departments on 24.8.2015; the State Governments have been 
asked to maximize their contribution towards supplies of ethanol for EBP. For this 
purpose States have been asked to ensure that all ethanol suppliers come on grid 
based micro plan devised in respect of ethanol logistics; existing alcohol units upgrade 

-16- 
 
 
 
to ethanol production and sugar mills create/expand capacities for ethanol/alcohol 
production, besides rationalizing trade barriers. In order to enhance ethanol production 
capacities, sugar mills can avail the concessional loans from SDF. It has also been 
impressed upon the states that the Government has fixed remunerative prices for 
ethanol supplies for EBP and therefore, it is more beneficial for the sugar mills if their 
ethanol production and supply it for EBP. Sugar mills are also free to produce ethanol 
from B-heavy molasses to optimize ethanol production which will take care of sectoral  
demands. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Recommendation No.7 
State-wise implementation of EBP Programme 
The Committee note with concern that the availability of Ethanol is not uniform 
across the country.  In response to the tenders floated by OMCs for procurement of 
Ethanol, comparatively higher quantities of Ethanol are available in some States, while 
in ot her, the response has not been upto the mark.  The Committee observe that in 
sugarcane rich States such as Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Tamil 
Nadu, higher quantities of Ethanol have been offered in comparison to the States of 
Bihar, Chh attisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, West Bengal where no offers have been 
received.  
 The Committee further observe that 5% mandatory blending with petrol still 
remains far from the target and at present Ethanol Blended Petrol programme (EBPP) is 
on only in 11 States.  The Committee feel that instead of planning to implement the EBP 
programme across the country, the Ministry should consider to take up the State -wise 
implementation of the programme starting with the States where adequate quantity of 
Ethanol is available.  
 The Committee are of the view that continuous monitoring of the progress of EBP 
programme is crucial to its successful implementation.  Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry/OMCs should set up State -level mechanism to monitor the 
procurement and blending of Ethanol with Petrol. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
For effective implementation of EBP programme, Nodal Officers from OMC‟s have been 
appointed by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for different States for coordination 
among OMCs, Su gar Mills and other stakeholders.  The list of the Nodal officers is as 
follows: 
 
 

-17- 
 
 
 
Name of 
OMC 
Responsible Officer State 
BPCL Director (Marketing) Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat 
HPCL Director (Marketing) Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar  
IOCL Director (Marketing) Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, West Bengal 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Awareness regarding Ethanol Blended Petrol 
 The Committee note that EBP programme with 5% mandatory blending across 
the country is to be implemented and the OMCs are making efforts for procurement of 
requisite quantities of ethanol for this purpose.  The Committee note that EBP is a new 
product for the users and the general public may have apprehension about the impacts 
of usage of Ethanol Blended Petrol in their vehicles.  Further, the public may not be 
aware of the existence and availability of such a product at the retail outlets.  
 The Committee feel that the public at large may be educated about the benefits 
of the use of EBP so that they may not feel reluctant to use EBP.  Further, the 
apprehension of certain sections with regard to the effect of ethanol based fuels on 
automobiles engines must b e removed. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
OMCs must strive for creating awareness among masses with regard to the use of 
ethanol as a safe fuel.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
To take forward the Bio -fuel Programme of the country, Ministry of Petrol eum & Natural 
Gas has constituted a Working Group on 9 th June, 2015.  The composition of the 
Working Group include representatives of Public Sector and Private Sector Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) and Petroleum Conservation Research Association 
(PCRA).  T he Working Group is inter -alia entrusted with the task of conducting road 
shows, workshops, seminars and other such awareness programmes to popularize and 
increase bio-fuel consumption in coordination with PCRA. 
 
2. Pursuantly, paste-on stickers are put by  Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) upon 
the dispensing units of Ethanol Blended Petrol at their Retail outlets.  Moreover, on 10 th 
August, 2015, i.e., World Biofuel Day, banners were put up at various retail outlets 
informing the public at large about the implementation of bio-fuel programme.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
 

-18- 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Storage capacity of OMCs 
 The Committee note that OMCs are floating quarterly tenders for procurement of 
ethanol from sugar mills.  The Committee have been informed by the Indian Sugar Mills 
Association that Ethanol is not being lifted by the OMCs as per schedule due to 
inadequate storage capacity and the sugar mills have to bear demurrages due to 
waiting for delivery of the ethanol to OMCs.  The Committee have further been informed 
that one of the major problems being faced by the sugar mills is that the OMCs accept 
only the required quantity at one particular depot and reject the remaining quantity. The 
Indian Sugar Mills Association have requested that instead of rejecting the remaining 
quantity, OMCs may regulate and receive it at their neighboring depots. OMCs have 
informed that at present they have a storage capacity for 15 -35 days which takes care 
of current requirements. However, they have informed that there is a need to augment 
the storage capacity at few locations which have already been identified based on the 
consumption pattern at these locations.  
 The Committee note that EBP programme has 5% mandatory blending target to 
be implemented across the country and then increase it to 10% and higher in the 
coming years. Since the present storage capacity appears to be less and with the 
increasing blending percentages, more storage capacity will be required in future. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry/OMCs should build adequate 
storage capacity and sort out issues of rejection due to depot restrictions for succ essful 
implementation of the EBP programme.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Following steps have been taken by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the 
direction of enhancing the present ethanol storage capacity: 
(i) Pursuant to the review meeting taken by Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 01.08.2015 
regarding „Issues in Sugar Sector‟ OMC‟s were inter-alia requested by Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to commence detailed planning in accordance with 
10% blending target taking into account the locations of OMC dep ots and their 
storage capacity.   
(ii) Also, pursuant to the 5 th Meeting of the Biofuel Steering Committee held on 
24.8.2015, this Ministry has inter -alia requested to OMCs to take steps for 
creating additional storage facilities by OMCs depots as per requ irement of 
ethanol storage.   
 
2. As per Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), they have earmarked substantial funds 
for augmentation of bio-fuel tankage for the storage of at least 15 days cover and same 
will be completed by March 2017.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 

-19- 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Incentivizing farmers and Ethanol Producers 
 The Committee note that the Ethanol based fuels are environment friendly and at 
the same time lead to enhancement of energy security of the country. However, low 
availability of ethanol has hindered the progress of EBPP due to shortage of feedstock 
i.e. molasses (a by-product of sugarcane processing) and demand of ethanol from other 
sectors. The Committee observe that th e sugar mills do not find it remunerative to 
supply Ethanol to OMCs. The Committee feel that there is a need to encourage farmers 
and Ethanol producers by providing suitable incentives such as sale of subsidized 
seeds, fertilizers and agricultural equipmen ts to encourage them to grow bio -fuel crops.
 The Committee also desire that MoPNG in coordination with Ministry of 
Agriculture should take up the cause of providing incentives to farmers/ethanol 
producers for cultivating/developing edible and non-edible feed stocks.   
 The Committee note that CCEA in December, 2013 had decided that the OMCs 
and Sugar Industry Associations may interact with each other on a regular basis to 
achieve the target . The Committee desire that the Ministry/OMCs should interact with 
sugar industry at regular intervals for resolving issues related to procurement of 
Ethanol. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers welfare are already 
implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme National Food Security Missi on-
Commercial Crops (NFSM -CC)-Sugarcane in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh w.e.f 2014-15. 
 
2. The scheme aims for enhancing pr oduction & productivity in sugarcane based 
cropping system through promotion of intercropping, supply of quality planting material, 
strengthening / Establishment of tissue culture and bio -agent laboratories, Breeder 
Seed Production & trainings. The compone nts and Pattern of Assistance under NFSM - 
Commercial Crops (NFSM-CC)-Sugarcane is enclosed. 
 
3. Also, pursuant to the recommendations of the Biofuel Steering Committee in its 
meeting dated 24.8.2015, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has requested OMCs t o 
coordinate with sugar mills for streamlining transportation of ethanol to the depots.    
 
4. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) also provides assistance only 
for R&D/ technology development and demonstration ethanol of ethanol based project 
using various non-food feed stocks. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 

-20- 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.12 
Flexi Fuel Vehicles 
  
 The Committee note that steps have been initiated for implementation of 5% 
mandatory blending of ethanol across the country.  Once this target is achieved, the 
blending percentage will be increased to 10% and more. The Committee have been 
informed that no change is required in the design of engines for use of 5% and 10% 
ethanol blended pet rol except for some rubber components. Once the blending 
percentages go beyond 10% in the country, the automobiles should be compatible with 
the fuel. The Committee have further learnt that Brazil has developed flexi fuel vehicles 
which are running on diff erent percentages of ethanol fuels (upto 100%). The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the MoPNG should initiate efforts in coordination 
with other concerned Ministries/ Automobile Research Association of India (ARAI) and 
IOC (R&D) for   development of fl exi-fuel engines and research in this direction may be 
speeded up.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Government has taken following steps to increase availability of ethanol  so that 
blending percentage of ethanol can be increased to the desired level : 
 
(i) The Government on 10.12.2014, has fixed the delivered price of ethanol in the 
range of Rs.48.50 per litre to 49.50 per litre.   
(ii) Ethanol produced from other non -food feedstocks besides molasses, like 
cellulosic and ligno cellulosic materials including p etrochemical route, has been 
allowed to be procured subject to meeting the relevant BIS Standards. 
 
2. During the Sugar Year 2014 -15, ten per cent blending of ethanol with Petrol was 
undertaken by OMCs in eight States.  For the Sugar Year 2015 -16, OMCs have floated 
tender, considering ten per cent blending of ethanol with Petrol across all the notified 
States and Union Territories.  Besides, the Government has also issued notification 
enabling registration of vehicles operating on E85 and ED95 fuel. 
 
3. Hence, by increasing the percentage of ethanol blending with Petrol will facilitate 
and encourage Automobile Industry to develop flexi-fuel engines. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Recommendation No.13 
Levying of taxes/duties on ethanol 
 The Committee note that the State Governments levy taxes/duties on fuel ethanol 
used for ethanol blended petrol programme . The Committee have been informed by the 
representatives of Indian Sugar Mills Association tha t as per Entry 97 of the Union List, 
any matter not enumerated in List II (State List) or List III (Concurrent List) shall be 

-21- 
 
 
 
governed by the Union Government and Liquor fit for human consumption only has 
been mentioned in the State List. The Committee have been informed by ISMA that t he 
rest of the alcohols viz. industrial alcohol and fuel grade ethanol do not find mention in 
the State List and hence taxes/duties imposed on fuel ethanol by State Governments 
should be stopped and instead should be levied by  the Union Government which can 
reduce the procedural formalities. 
 The Committee are of the view that this matter needs to be clarified in the light of 
the proposed legislation on GST and therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should take up with the concerned Ministries as to whether 
the State Governments have the authority to levy taxes/duties on ethanol unfit for 
human consumption.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA), vide its letter dated 20 th January, 2015, 
submitted a detailed note regarding the free movement of fuel ethanol for its blending 
with petrol, especially with reference to the various constitutional provisions and 
judgements of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in this regard.  After due examination in 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the matter was referred to Ministry of Law & 
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs for their advice.  Ministry of Law and Justice opined 
that since the position of law on the subject under reference has authoritatively been 
examined and clarified by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas may like to deal with the matter accordingly.  ISMA also represented to 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) about the need to issue a 
Statutory Order / Notification under Section 18 G of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, in order to make ethanol movement free of any hindrance.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas apprised DIPP about the advice of Ministry of Law 
and requested them to take appropriate action in the matter. 
 
2. Recently, Lok Sabha has passed a bill on 10 th of December 2015 (Bill No. 266 -C 
of 2015) amending “The Industries (Development  and Regulation) Act, 1951 to transfer 
the authority to regulate 'potable alcohol' to States as recommended by the Law 
Commission in its 158th Report.   The existing heading "26 Fermentation Industries" in 
the First Schedule of Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 shall be 
substituted with the heading "26 Fermentation Industries (other than potable alcohol)".  
The said Amendment will help in resolving a long standing confusion about jurisdiction 
of Central and State - Government on Alcohol - Potable Alcohol and Industrial Alcohol 
and ensure that industries engaged in manufacturing alcohol meant for Potable 
purposes shall be under the total and exclusive control of States in all respects. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
  

-22- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No.6 
Import of Ethanol 
 The Committee note that in pursuance to the CCEA's decision of November, 
2012, which allowed OMCs to import Ethanol in case of shortfall in domestic supply, 
OMCs had floated tenders for procurement of Ethanol. However, the orders could not 
be fina lized due to high landed price ranging between Rs. 69.45 to 91.98 per litre of 
Ethanol in comparison to the then benchmark price (Rs. 27 per litre) as procurement of 
Ethanol at this price could have affected the viability of EBP vis -à-vis petrol.  In view of 
the results of this tender, CCEA decided that the Ethanol will be procured from 
Domestic sources only (produced from molasses).   
 The Committee are of the opinion that as the efforts for import of Ethanol were 
made more than two years ago, the Ministry  should ascertain the prevailing price of 
Ethanol in the international market and apprise CCEA in this regard to allow import of 
Ethanol.  The Committee also desire that till the time the supply from domestic sources 
improves, the Ministry should keep a tr ack of the prevailing price of Ethanol in the 
international market and whenever it is advantageous to import, the Ministry and OMCs 
should avail the opportunity to import Ethanol. However, the Ministry may pursue a 
policy of giving first preference to proc urement of Ethanol through domestic sources 
only and the shortfall may be met through imports if price advantage prevails after 
getting approval of CCEA. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.   
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
  

-23- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Implementation of Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme  
The Committee note that the Government of India decided to launch Ethanol 
Blended Petrol (EBP) programme in January, 2003 for sale of 5% ethanol blended 
petrol. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas v ide its notification dated 20 th 
September, 2006 directed the public sector OMCs to sell 5% Ethanol Blended Petrol 
subject to commercial viability as per BIS standards in the notified 20 States and 4 UTs 
of the country w.e.f. 1 st November, 2006. Thereafter,  the CCEA in its meeting held on 
9th October, 2007 decided on 5% mandatory blending of ethanol with petrol and 10% 
optional blending w.e.f. October, 2007 and 10% mandatory blending from October, 
2008.  
The Committee note that despite the fact that CCEA had  directed for mandatory 
blending of petrol with ethanol within a specified time frame, the programme was not  
implemented by the Ministry/OMCs until 2012 due to the various reasons including that 
of sugar mills not finding supply of ethanol remunerative at the offered prices of OMCs.  
The Committee are of the view that with 5% Ethanol Blended Petrol and 
subsequently higher blending in future, the crude oil imports can come down saving 
significant amount of foreign exchange. Besides, studies have shown that u se of 
Ethanol Blended Petrol leads to significant reduction of emissions into environment and 
can address the concerns of climate change and strengthen energy security. The 
Committee also observe that many countries in the world including USA and Brazil have 
successfully implemented bio -fuel programmes and feel that India being one of the 
largest producers of Sugar Cane in the world should also reap the benefits of this 
renewable bio-mass energy resource.  
 The Committee note that the Government has fixed t he price of Ethanol in 
November, 2014 at Rs. 48.50/litre and the sugar mills have started to supply Ethanol at 
this price due to which 2% blending levels have been achieved. The Committee 
appreciate the recent initiatives by the Ministry taken for implemen tation of Ethanol 
Blended Petrol (EBP). The Committee desire that if the cost of Indian Crude oil basket 
goes up from the current levels due to increase in price of crude oil in the international 
market, the procurement price of Ethanol may also be increas ed suitably which will 
benefit the farmers as well as ethanol producers.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the implementation of EBP Programme 
will provide new opportunities to Sugar Industry in general and Sugar farmers in 
particular. The Committee s trongly desire that the Ministry should work seriously for 

-24- 
 
 
 
EBP Programme and efforts should be made for removing the impediments being faced 
to achieve the specified blending targets across the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry  should devise a comprehensive action plan for effective 
implementation of the programme with a clear -cut roadmap for achieving different 
blending percentages within a stipulated timeframe throughout the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
It has been noted. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No.4 
Simplification of procedure and reduction of taxes and duties 
 The Committee note with serious concern the procedural difficulties faced by 
OMCs and Sugar Mills in various States. The Committee have been informed that there 
are number of procedural formalities which need to be completed with different 
authorities for obtaining licenses. Further, in some States, quarterly permissions are 
required by excise departments. The Committee have also been informed that the 
OMCs face delay in issuance of import/export No -Objection Certificate and other 
permits by state excise departments for inter-state movement of ethanol which hampers 
the implementation of EBP programme. The Committee observe that there is no 
uniformity in the taxes/duties levied by different States. The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommend that this matter may be taken up by the Central Government with 
state governments for simplification of procedural difficulties and for bringing uniformity 
in the taxes and duties levied by various States.   
 Since Ethanol is not available in all the States, the Committee feel that there 
should be hassle free inter -state movement of Ethanol for blending purposes to give a 
fillip to EBP programme. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Government may 
take up the matter with State Governments to remove/ease the restrictions  imposed on 
inter-state movement of Ethanol for blending purposes only. 
 The Committee have further been informed that the responsibility of obtaining 
excise permission have been put on sugar mills by OMCs and they face difficulties in 
obtaining the requisite clearances.  Due to this, sometimes sugar mills are not able to 
supply ethanol quantities on time and have to pay penalties to OMCs for non -
compliance of orders.  The Committee take a serious note of this situation and 
recommend that OMCs should actively pursue for obtaining clearances from various 
State level agencies/Depa rtments instead of putting the onus on sugar mills. It has 

-25- 
 
 
 
further been noted that the NoCs are issued by movement of documents through posts 
which consumes a lot of time in transit between the two States. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should persuade the State Governments to carry out these 
processes through modern electronic systems in order to save time. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Pursuant to Government‟s decision dated 10.12.2014, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has been inter -alia reque sting State Governments  from time to time in 
relation to address State specific issues relating to taxation, excise permits, 
import/export permits, renewable storage license, etc, which hinder  inter -State and 
intra-State movement of ethanol.  
2. Recently, on 19 th November, 2015, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has 
again inter -alia requested State Governments of 12 States, viz., Andhra Pradesh, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, West Benga l and Telangana, to address various issues 
relating inter-State and intra-State movement of ethanol. 
 
3.       In addition to it, Nodal Officers from OMC‟s have also been appointed for different 
States for coordination among OMCs, Sugar Mills and other sta keholders for effective 
implementation of EBP programme.  The list of the Nodal officers is as follows: 
 
Name of OMC Responsible Officer State 
BPCL Director (Marketing) Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat 
HPCL Director (Marketing) Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Bihar  
IOCL Director (Marketing) Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, West Bengal 
  
4. Apart from above, Minister for Consumer Affairs Food and Public Distribution has 
taken up the issue of transaction barriers which impede smooth supplies for ethanol 
blending with the Chief Ministers of major ethanol producing states. State Governments 
have been requested to initiate remedial steps to ensure that such barriers in the form 
of procedural difficulties, varied structure of taxes and duties levied in the states and 
restrictions on inter -state movement of ethanol/molasses, which are impeding the 
implementation of EBP, are dismantled.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 

-26- 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Increasing production of Sugarcane 
 The Committee note that Brazil‟s Bio -fuel Programme is primarily being run 
based solely on sugarcane crop since Brazil has surplus production of sugarcane. The 
Committee note that the Ethanol Blended Petrol programme in India is based on 
Ethanol produced from cane molasses which is a by -product of the sugar industry. 
Though India being one of the largest producers of sugarcane in the world, the 
Government has preferred to use sugarcane for food purposes mainly i.e. production of 
Sugar. The Committee feel that I ndia should try to emulate Brazil's strategy for Ethanol 
Fuel programme and the Government must strive for introduction of high yield varieties 
of Sugarcane in the country which can bring favorable conditions for all the stake 
holders including farmers. 
 The Committee note that Brazil is one of the major Bio -ethanol (from sugarcane) 
producers and also an exporter. Facilities in Brazil are dedicated to produce exclusively 
Ethanol from sugar cane juice and its ethanol production is about 14 times of the India n 
production. The Committee observe that the sugar mills in India also have been 
demanding that production of ethanol may be allowed directly from sugarcane juice 
during the period of surplus production of Sugarcane. However, CCEA allows 
production of ethanol from molasses only.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should consider the suggestion of sugar mills for production of Ethanol from sugarcane 
juice especially during the years of surplus production of sugarcane and the matter may 
be pursued in consultation with other Ministries to give a fillip to EBP programme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Recommendation No.14 
Bio-Diesel Policy 
 The Committee note that the Bio -Diesel policy was announced by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in 2005. The Indian strategy for implementation of Bio -
Diesel Policy is based on production of Bio -Diesel from non -edible oil seeds like 
Jatropha and Pongamia plants only and conducive conditions for its growth have been 
found in the country. The Committee note that these plants can grow in wastelands or 
degraded forests in arid to semi -arid conditions. The Committee, therefore, desire that 

-27- 
 
 
 
activities like identification of wastelands, suitable varieties of Jatropha/Pongamia be 
conducted in a time bound manner.  
 The Committee have been informed that the production of Bio -Diesel producing 
seeds is commercially insignificant in India and at the 20 identified purchase centers, no 
quantity of bio -diesel has been offered by the producers. The Committee feel that in 
case of bio -diesel policy, a lot of ground work needs to be completed before the policy 
could be implemented.  In this reg ard, the Committee further note that the Bharat 
Renewable Energy Limited (BREL) which is a joint venture of BPCL for promotion of 
Bio-Fuels has completed around 10,000 acres of plantations in last 3 -4 years out of the 
1,50,000 acres of waste lands offered by the Government of U.P. Since barely 6% of 
the total offered land has been covered by BREL, the Committee desire that the other 
OMCs should also come forward to participate in this project and expand the cultivation 
of Jatropha on the offered land. The C ommittee also desire that the MoPNG/OMCs 
should pursue other State Governments for allocation of wastelands for cultivation of 
seeds and to take up the work in identified areas.    
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
has been made custodian of the National Policy on Bio -fuels and feel that different 
Ministries like MNRE, Ministry of Agriculture & Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
should coordinate among themselves in order to give an early start to National Bio -
Diesel Policy.  The Committee feel that the Bio -Diesel Policy is in its preliminary stage 
and therefore, desire that in order to realize the objectives specified in the Bio -Diesel 
Policy, a long term plan for its step -wise implementation should be devised and 
monitored properly.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
MNRE has reported that the Biodiesel development is at nascent stage also. Ministry is 
supporting Research and Development (R&D) projects in the area of development of 
bio-diesel. Ministry is also coordinating various issues involved through Bio -fuels 
Steering Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary. This involves all the participating 
Ministries for activities related to both Biodiesel and bio-ethanol. 
 
2.  Under Bio -diesel Purchase policy, OMCs would purchase bio -diesel, meeting 
the prescribed BIS standard, at a uniform price, as may be decided by the OMCs from 
time to time, for blending with High Speed Diesel (HSD) to the extent of 5%, at identified 
20 purchase centres across the country.  
 
 3.         Government has issued notification on 10 th August, 2015 to allow the sale of 
Bio-diesel (B100) by private manufacturers to bulk consumers like Railways, State 
Transport Corporations and other bulk consumers.  
 
4. As per Department of Heavy Ind ustries, the automotive industry has already 
agreed for 5% Ethanol Gasoline Blends and the vehicles produced are compatible with 
the same. They are already taking the necessary steps for making the same compatible 
with increased percentage of ethanol up to  10%. Further the impact of the same on in -

-28- 
 
 
 
use vehicles, particularly two wheelers, could be of concern on some models which do 
not have the material compatibility with 10% ethanol blends.  The two wheelers which 
are mostly using carburettors will be givin g sub - optimal performance at 10% blends 
when optimized for 5% blends and could also give lower fuel consumption in terms of 
km/litre as ethanol has a lower calorific value in comparison to petrol.  
 
5. They have further informed that to make optimum use o f the blend, it is important 
that sustained availability of the blend fuel should be ensured across the country to 
enable the industry to optimize the vehicles for that particular blend. The development 
of flexi fuel vehicles would be taken up once blend o f 20% - 85% is ensured across the 
country. They have also informed that Govt. of India has also issued notification 
enabling registration of vehicles operating on E85 and ED95 fuel. However it may not 
be possible for two wheelers as they are mostly operati ng on carburettor technologies. 
However operation of in-use vehicles on such blends will not be possible. Therefore, the 
oil industry has to ensure E5 at all retail outlets in addition to higher blends for in -use 
vehicles. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

-29- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.3 
Transportation cost of Ethanol 
 The Committee note that approximately 134 crore litres of ethanol is required to 
blend upto 5% level for implementation of ethanol blended Petrol programme across the 
country. The Committee have been informed that against th e tenders floated for the 
total quantity of 297.90 crore litres of ethanol, the OMCs have received offer of 122.17 
crore litres and could finalize 70.37 crore litres only and the percentage of finalized 
quantity to the required quantity in the different te nders ranges between 18.9% to 
28.3%. Further, in certain States, such as Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Kerala and Jharkhand, 
no offers were received.   
 The Committee observe that one of the discouraging factors for sugar mills in 
supply of ethanol is the transpor tation cost included in its pricing mechanism.  The 
Committee note that there are three slabs for price fixation for ethanol based on the 
differential distance of the destination from the sugar mills. It is seen that for a distance 
ranging between 101-300 Kms, Rs. 49/- are paid while for a distance of more than 300 
Kms, Rs. 49.50 are paid by the OMCs.  The Committee have been informed that if the 
delivery point is beyond 450 Kms, the cost realized by supply of ethanol becomes less 
for sugar mills due to hig her transportation cost. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should review the issue of transportation cost of ethanol for distances 
beyond 450 Kms keeping the realistic cost in view. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Ministry is examining the is sue and has requested Department of Food & Public 
Distribution (DFPD) to send required information to take decision.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-39018/2/2014-CC dated 2nd February, 2016 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 March,  2016 
24 Falguna,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

-30- 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
TENTH SITTING 
(10.03.2016) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10 March, 2016 from 1000 hrs. to 1100 
hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
3 Shrimati Rama Devi 
4 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
5 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
6 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
7 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
8 Shri Arvind Sawant 
9 Dr. Bhola Singh 
10 Shri Rajesh Verma 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
12 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                       
                     RAJYA SABHA 
 
13 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
14 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
15 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
16 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri H.Ram Prakash - Additional Director 
4. Shri Sujay Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

-31- 
 
 
 
 
 
2. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  
 
3. ...... the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report on 
the 7th Report on 'Ethanol Blended Petrol and Bio -Diesel Policy' and adopted the same 
with minor modification.    
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalize the report and present/lay 
in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
_____________________ 
xxx  Matter not related to the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

-32- 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) ON ‘ETHANOL BLENDED PETROL AND BIO-DIESEL POLICY'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 14 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12  
and 13) 
 
 8 
 Percentage to Total 57.14% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 6) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 7.14% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 14) 
 
4 
 Percentage of Total 
 
28.58% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 3)  
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 
 
7.14% 
 