 
 
  
9 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
NATIONAL AUTO FUEL POLICY 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2015/Agrahayana,1937 (Saka) 
 


 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
NATIONAL AUTO FUEL POLICY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2014-15)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana,1937 (Saka) 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                        
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2015 -16) held on 
08.12.2015 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2014 -15) on the subject 
`National Auto Fuel Policy' 
 

 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2015-16) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Dr. Ravindra Babu 
3 Shri P. K. Biju 
4 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
5 Shrimati Rama Devi 
6 Shri Elumalai V. 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9 Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
11 Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel  
12 Shrimati Anupriya Patel  
13 Shri Arvind Sawant 
14 Shri Raju Shetty 
15 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
16 Shri Ravneet Singh 
17 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23 Shri Ishwarlal Shankarlal Jain 
24 Shri Prabhat Jha 
25 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
26 Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shrimati Gundu Sudharani 
29 Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem 
30 Shri Sharad Yadav 
31 Shri Praful Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K.Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 

 
 
 (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth 
Report on Action  Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘National Auto Fuel 
Policy'. 
2. The Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 07.05.2015. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report were received on 07.08.2015 and 
14.08.2015. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2015 -16) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 08.12.2015.   
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
  December,  2015 
  Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2014 -15) on 'National Auto Fuel Policy' , which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
07.05.2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.05.2015. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry in respect of all the 12 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as per the following:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 12 (Total 8) 
              (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Reco. Nos. NIL  
              (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. NIL                
              (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 2, 9, 10 and 11 (Total 4)                
(Chapter-V) 
3. The Committee d esire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
 

 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Setting up of Inter-Ministerial Mechanism at the Highest level 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observe that implementation of Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 
2025 requires concerted efforts on the part of several stake holders i.e. Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry 
of Heavy Indu stries, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Ministry of Urban 
Development, Automobile Industry and State Governments. In this regard, the 
Committee have been informed that Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
(MoRT&H) has constituted Standing Committee on Emissions under the 
chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Transport) which is an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee with the representatives from Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoP&NG), Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF), Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) and Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) to deal with various 
pollution reducing measures. The Committee consider that the above Standing 
Committee on Emissions headed by JS (Transport) appears to be a low level 
Committee dealing only with the emissio n issue and as such it may not be 
effective in dealing with larger and complex issues on important aspects which 
require active involvement and coordination with other Ministries at the highest 
level.   
The Committee feel that the implementation of Auto Fuel Policy requires 
multisectoral approach due to the involvement of multiple agencies. The 
Committee, therefore expect the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to be 
proactive to play a leading role in co ordinating the implementation of various 
measures initiated by different stakeholders. Therefore, the Committee, 
recommend that being the Nodal Ministry for Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025, 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should work out modalities at the earliest 
for constituting an inter -ministerial committee comprising of Secretaries of the 
Ministries concerned to deal with various policy issues relating to transport, 
environment and heavy industry sectors.  The Committee further, desire that a 
study may be conducted to assess the benefits that arise out of the 
implementation of Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 vis-a-vis the expenditure that 
would be incurred to implement the entire gamut of issues dealt in the policy".  
6. The Ministry of Petrol eum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this reply in the regard: 
"On the suggestion of the Committee i.e. 
(i) Multi-sectoral approach for implementation of Auto Fuel Policy, 

 
 
(ii) Constitution of an inter -ministerial committee comprising o f Secretaries of 
concerned Ministries to deal with various policy issues relating to transport, 
environment and heavy industry sectors, and Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
(iii) Study to assess to benefits that arise out of the implementation of Auto 
Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 vis -a-vis the expenditure that would be incurred to 
implement the entire gamut of issues dealt in the policy. 
MoP&NG will firm up views and respond.  There is also a need to carry out 
environmental impact, health impact and toxicology relat ed periodic source 
apportionment studies in various cities and regions after implementation of BS IV 
norms in the entire country as recommended by the Expert Committee". 
7. The Committee had observed in their recommendation that the 
implementation of Auto Fuel Policy required a multi sectoral approach given the 
involvement of multiple agencies and the Ministry of P&NG was expected to play 
a proactive role in its implementation. Further, the Committee had desired the 
Ministry of P&NG to work out the modaliti es for constituting an inter -ministerial 
committee comprising of Secretaries of Ministries concerned to deal with various 
policy issues relating to transport, environment and heavy industry sectors and 
to conduct a study to assess benefits arising out of t he implementation of Auto 
Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 vis -a-vis the expenditure that would be incurred to 
implement the entire gamut of issues dealt in the policy. 
 The Committee, however, observe that though it has been more than six 
months since the pres entation of the report on the subject, the Ministry has not 
even firmed up its views on these recommendations of the Committee.  Moreover, 
it has neither spelt out the steps taken by it to set up an inter -ministerial 
mechanism to deal with various policy i ssues nor any action on the issue of 
conducting a study to assess benefits arising out of the implementation of Auto 
Fuel Vision and Policy 2025. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and expect the Ministry to act expeditiously and init iate steps 
on all these issues without any further delay.  
 
 

 
 
Recommendation No. 9 &10  
Pollution under Control System 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that one of the policy objectives of Auto Fuel Policy, 2003 
was reduction of pollution in in -use vehicles.  The Policy envisaged that the 
existing PUC system should be replaced and upgraded to a more reliable 
computerized system by 1 st April, 2005 for all categories of vehicles for ensuring 
better compliance, help to identify po lluting vehicles and transfer data to a 
centralized location for further analysis and interpretation. 
In this regard, the Committee have been informed that computerized PUC 
system for vehicles along with data collection are being undertaken by some 
states like Delhi, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh and in rest of the States, it has 
not taken off well so far.  The Committee have also learnt that the State 
Governments have been facing manpower and resource constraints for the 
maintenance of computerized emission control checking systems. 
In view of the above, the Committee would like to emphasize that an efficient 
mechanism for checking pollution from in -use vehicles is vital to bring down 
pollution levels due to vehicular emissions.  With the alarming rise of po llution 
levels becoming a major public health hazard in Indian cities, the Committee 
recommend that PUC centres should be set up in all the States of the country.  
Further, centralized national data centre should also be established at the 
earliest for col lecting information from all PUC centres regarding polluting 
vehicles.  The Committee also desire that if required, a Plan Scheme may be 
formulated and specific funds may be allocated for the purpose.  In this regard, 
the Committee expect Ministry of P&NG to play proactive role to coordinate with 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the State Governments so as to 
ensure an ambient air quality in the country". 
Recommendation No. 10 
Inspection and Maintenance System 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observe that robust vehicle inspection and certification system 
would enhance overall safety and emission performance of vehicles plying on the 
roads and also would ensure better fuel efficiency of vehicles.  The Committee 
observe that as per Auto Fuel Policy, 2003 inspection and maintenance system 
was initially scheduled to be introduced in 11 major cities on an urgent basis and 
subsequently throughout the country.  Further, the Policy required Inspection and 
Maintenance (I&M) system f or all categories of vehicles to be put in place by 1 st 
April, 2005 in National Capital Territory of Delhi, by 1 st April, 2006 in other 10 
major cities and by 1st April, 2010 in the entire country. 

 
 
The Committee, however, have learnt that there has been an  inordinate delay in 
setting up of I&M system in the country.  The Committee have been informed that 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MORTH) has sanctioned 10 model 
automated inspection and certification (I&C) centres one each in 10 States during 
the 11th Five Year Plan on pilot basis.  Further, the MORTH has decided to 
sanction 10 more I&C Centres during the 12 th Plan for which proposals are being 
sought from State Governments. 
The Committee are constrained to note that one of the important objectives of 
Auto Fuel Policy like the Inspection and Maintenance system has not taken off at 
all.  The Committee have learnt that proper maintenance of existing vehicles 
would contribute towards reduction of exhaust emission as well as improvement 
in fue l economy.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the MoP&NG to 
impress upon Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to set up I&C centres in all 
important cities and towns so as to facilitate for the successful implementation of 
Auto Fuel Policy. 
The Committe e also note that under the existing provisions of Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988 mandatory checks are presently required for commercial vehicles only.  
Private vehicles are required to undergo fitness test after 15 years before the 
validity of registration certificate is renewed.  Further, the Committee observe that 
Sundar Committee which was set up in 2009 by the Ministry of Road, Transport 
and Highways to review Motor Vehicles Act has recommended for reduction of 
periodicity of inspection and certification of p rivate vehicles from the existing 15 
years, however, there is no such proposal as yet in this regard.  The Committee 
have also learnt that the report of Sundar Committee has been circulated to all 
States to elicit feedback for further coordination on this matter. 
The Committee, therefore, expect the Central Government to prevail upon State 
Governments to provide feedback on Sundar Committee report at the earliest.  
Further, in order to ensure strict fitness regime the Sundar Committee’s 
recommendation to re duce the periodicity of inspection and maintenance and 
certification of private vehicles from the existing 15 years must be accorded top 
priority.  
While acknowledging the importance of Auto Fuel Policy document and its 
recommendation in regard to the mand atory operationalization of Inspection and 
Maintenance System by 1 st April, 2010 in the entire country, the Committee 
observe that the MORTH has displayed lackadaisical attitude in implementing the 
same by sanctioning only 10 centres each in 11 th and 12 th Five Year Plans 
respectively, thereby frittering away the objectives of the Policy.  The Committee, 
therefore, would expect MORTH to seriously review its role in initiating important 
measures to achieve the policy objectives of Auto Fuel Policy". 
10. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted a combined reply for 
recommendation Nos. 9&10 as under: 

 
 
"Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) has informed that the fitness 
tests of motor vehicles, being carried out presently are visual and sub jective 
evaluation by the inspecting officer. In order to have an effective system for 
inspection and certification of motor vehicles from safety and emission angles, 
MoRT&H decided to put in place a scheme for setting up suitably designed 
model automated Inspection and Maintenance (I&C)) centres for rigorous and 
objective inspection of in use motor vehicles.  
During 11 th Plan, the Government sanctioned 10 I& C Centre  to be set up, one 
each in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, U.P and Delhi. However, I&C 
Centre sanctioned to Himachal Pradesh could not take off because of not 
providing of  suitable land by the State Government. I&C Centre Nasik 
(Maharashtra) has already been inaugurated and will be functional within a 
month. The equipments are being installed at five centres i.e Delhi, Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Railmagra and Karnataka and it is e xpected that these centres will be 
operational in next two months. The work relating to remaining three centres is in 
progress and it is expected that these centres will be operational within this 
financial year.  
During 12th Five Year Plan, the Government  has decided to set up 10 more I&C 
Centres, one each in the states where I&C Centre was not sanctioned during 11 th 
Five Year Plan. So far, MoRT&H has sanctioned four I&C Centres, one each in 
the States of West Bengal, Odisha, Chhatisgarh and Kerala.  
However, one centre in a State cannot cater to the requirement of used vehicle 
population. As such the States would need to replicate the model centres in other 
parts of the States/UTs. MoRT&H has drafted a Road Transport & Safety Bill to 
enable construction of  such Centres in the Private Sector garages, work -shops, 
ensuring compliance of standards by National and State Authorities".   
11. The Committee take a serious note of casual approach on the part of 
Ministry by furnishing a combined reply on two distincti vely separate 
recommendations of the Committee relating to implementation of Auto Fuel 
Policy. One recommendation related to Pollution under Control System and 
another about Inspection & Maintenance System. The Committee in their 
recommendation regarding P UC centres had recommended that these centres 
should be set up in all the states and a centralized national data centre should 
also be established at the earliest for collecting information from all PUC centres 
regarding polluting vehicles. The Committee, had further recommended that if 
needed, a plan scheme might be formulated with an allocation of specific funds 
for that purpose. The Committee had also expected the Ministry of P&NG to be 

 
 
proactive to coordinate with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and State 
Governments to realize that objective. The Committee, however, are appalled to 
note that the Ministry have not even cared to mention a word regarding Pollution 
under Control System in its combined reply. Further, it also reflects that the 
Ministry of P&NG has not coordinated well with the Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways even for eliciting information on pollution and its control system. The 
Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry of P&NG appears to have 
shunned its responsibilit y to play a leading role in the implementation of Auto 
Fuel Policy. In view of this fact, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry of P&NG 
must coordinate sincerely with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways for the 
implementation of Pollution under C ontrol System(PUC) and come out with 
results as desired by the Committee.       
The Committee had also expected the Ministry of P&NG to request State 
Governments to provide feedback on Sunder Committee at the earliest which had  
recommended to reduce the p eriodicity of inspection and maintenance and 
certification of private vehicles from the existing 15 years. The reply of MoRT&H 
is silent in this regard. The committee expect MoRT&H to reply on the steps taken 
by it in this regard. 
 While submitting the status regarding Inspection and Maintenance System, 
the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways has informed that out of the 10 I&C 
centres proposed to be set up during 11th Five Year Plan, the work has started 
only in six centres and out of 10 centres propo sed for 12th plan period, only four 
have been sanctioned till date.  But no timeframe has been prepared for 
completion of these centres. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation in this regard and expect that Ministry of P&NG and Ministry o f 
RT&H would expedite the process and complete the work on all 20 I&C Centres 
proposed to be set up during 11th and 12th Five Year Plans within the shortest 
possible time and also replicate such model centres in remaining parts of the 
country after the pre sentation and passing of the Road Transport and Safety Bill 
on priority basis. 

 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Vehicular Retirement Policy 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee have learnt that under section 59 of the Motor Vehicles Act of 
1988, the Central Government is entrusted with powers to fix the age limit for 
retirement of the motor vehicles.  However, no age limit has been prescribed till 
date for retirement of motor vehicles by the Central Government given the socio 
economic conditions of the country.  The Committee observe that in the absence 
of retirement policy, it may not be possible to derive the intended benefits of air 
quality improvement.  Further, phasing out of old vehicles is an important 
requirement as the pollution levels f rom such vehicles is high in spite of using 
improved quality fuels.  The Committee feel that the formulation of vehicle 
retirement policy will certainly go a long way in ensuring ambient air quality in the 
country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to invoke the 
powers under Motor Vehicles Act of 1988 to fix an age limit for retirement of 
vehicles without any delay by taking into consideration various parameters like 
mileage clock, emission levels, age of vehicles or other suitable criteria as may 
be decided by the Government". 
13. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has submitted the following reply in 
this regard: 
"Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) has informed that they are 
working along with Ministry of Heavy Industry i n the matter of Vehicular 
Retirement Policy".  
14. While emphasizing an urgent need of formulation of vehicular retirement 
policy, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to invoke the powers under 
Motor Vehicles Act of 1988 to fix an age limit for reti rement of vehicles without 
any delay by taking into consideration various parameters like mileage clock, 
emission levels, age of vehicles or other suitable criteria. 
 In the reply received from the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways  
(MoRT&H), it has been informed that on the issue of Vehicular Retirement Policy, 
the Ministry is working along with the Ministry of Heavy Industry. The Committee 
feel that ageing vehicular population contributes to growing air pollution in the 
country and fixing  an age limit for old vehicles can certainly bring about 
perceptible changes in air quality. This is also essential as the Auto Fuel Vision 
and Policy 2025 envisages number of steps for different stakeholders and as 

 
 
such, the timely policy action from the Government will go a long way in 
achieving the desired objectives. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
Ministry of P&NG should coordinate effectively with Ministries of Road Transport 
& Highways and Heavy industry for an early finalization of Vehi cular Retirement 
Policy and accordingly, apprise the Committee about the outcome.       
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 1: 
 
Implementation of Expert Committee Report on Auto Fuel Vision & Policy, 2025 
 
 The Committee note that the Government constituted an Expert Committee on 
13th September 2001 under the Chairmanship of Shri R.A. Mashelkar to recommend an 
Auto Fuel Policy (AFP) for the country and also devise a roadmap for it s 
implementation.  The Expert Committee submitted their report in August, 2002 to the 
Government and based on the recommendations, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas formulated an Auto Fuel Policy in October 2003 which covered various issues like 
vehicular emissions, automobile technologies, auto fuel quality and air quality data etc. 
Further, the Policy while laying the roadmap for fuel standards and emission norms, 
progressively envisaged introduction of upgraded auto fuels in various cities to make a 
decisive impact on ambient air quality in the country.  It also recommended periodic 
revisions in the policy framework to allow adjustments that become inevitable in the light 
of technological and other changes. 
  
 The Committee observed that as a follow u p to the Auto Fuel Policy, 2003, the 
Government constituted another Expert Committee in December 2012 under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Saumitra Chaudhury, the then Member of Planning Commission, 
to prepare a draft Auto Fuel Vision & Policy of 2025.  Accordingly, the Expert Committee 
drafted ‘Auto Fuel Vision & Policy, 2025’ and submitted the same in May 2014.The 
Committee note that the Expert Committee have recommended a detailed roadmap for 
auto fuel quality till 2025 for the country. The Committee appreciat e the comprehensive 
coverage of various issues by the Expert Committee in its Report such as fuel quality, 
demand and supply of fuel, infrastructure and logistics of fuel quality related projects, 
promotion of alternate fuels, vehicular technologies, emiss ion norms, health issues, 
ambient air quality, reduction of pollution from in -use vehicles and fiscal measures for 
funding requisite up-gradation of oil refineries. 
  
 In view of the above, the Committee consider that the Auto Fuel Policy of 2003 
and the Expert Committee Report on Auto Fuel Vision and Policy, 2025 are vital public 
policy instruments at the disposal of the Government to address growing vehicular 
pollution in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to chalk out 
an action plan for the implementation of Expert Committee recommendations as per the 
timeline suggested or wherever possible earlier and adhere to the policy in letter and 
spirit.  The Committee would also expect the Ministry to review the implementation of 
the policy with the organizations concerned under its charge at regular intervals. 
 
  

 
 
Reply 
 
 In line with the Auto Fuel Vision & Policy 2025 Report recommendations, 
MOP&NG vide letter No. R -29011/23/2012-OR.I dated 19 th January 2015 has issued a 
communication to all concerned stake holders including Oil Marketing Companies for 
implementation and expansion of supply of BS -IV auto fuels in phases covering the 
entire country by 1 st April 2017. MOP&NG has also requested Mini stry of Road 
Transport & Highways to issue notification in this regard. Supplies of Bharat Stage -IV 
fuels to identified regions in phase-I has already started w.e.f. 1st April 2015. 
  
 F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                      dated  07-08-2015 
Recommendation No. 3: 
 
One Country – One Fuel Norm 
 The Committee note that National Auto Fuel Policy envisages phase -wise 
introduction of upgraded quality of fuels to reduce vehicular emissions in the country.  
According to Auto F uel Policy 2003, it is observed that BS -III quality of fuels i.e. Motor 
Spirit (MS) and High Speed Diesel (HSD) were proposed to be extended to entire 
country by 1 st April, 2010 and BS -IV quality fuels to 11 major cities by 1 st April 2010.  
Subsequently, t he Government has taken decision to extend BS -IV quality fuel to 50 
additional cities by March 2015.  However, BS -IV quality fuels have so far been 
introduced only in 26 highly polluted cities and remaining 24 cities are in the process of 
being covered by the aforementioned deadline. The Committee feel that given the 
successful implementation of BS-IV quality fuels for four wheelers in 50 cities by the end 
of March, 2015, a roadmap now needs to be drawn and notified for implementation of 
BS-IV for not just in 50 cities but across the country so as to achieve ‘One Country – 
One Fuel Norm’ in the shortest possible time. Further, the Committee observe that 
various existing logistical constraints for meeting the requirements of upgraded quality 
of fuels may be taken into consideration to realize this objective. 
 In this regard, the Committee note the recommendation contained in the Auto 
Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 on the implementation of BS -IV fuel in the entire country by 
April 2017 in phases.  The Committee, further note that the Expert Committee have also 
recommended for further introduction of BS -V fuel by 2020 and BS -VI fuel by 2024.  
The Committee have been informed that there is no change between BS -V and BS -VI 
fuel quality as both envisage sulphur content  at less than 10 ppm. The Government 
have informed the committee that it would like to introduce BS -VI quality fuel in the 
entire country by 2020. In regard to the implementation of uniform quality of fuels, the 
Committee observe that the presence of dual quality of fuel hampers the effective 
implementation of mandatory fuel efficiency norms in the country.  Further, it may also 
create confusion as there is low awareness among public about the availability and 
usage of right quality of fuel in the market. 
In view of the above, as the required infrastructure for production of BS -IV and BS-V/VI 
fuels are being developed in oil refineries, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 

 
 
strictly adhere to the implementation schedule of BS -IV quality of fuel for the ent ire 
country by April 2017 and further BS-VI by 2020 so that ‘One Country – One Fuel Norm’ 
will become a reality. 
Reply 
1. A roadmap for BS -IV fuel supplies in the entire country has been finalised by 
MOP&NG in line with the Auto Fuel Vision & Policy 2025 Repo rt. Accordingly, 
MOP&NG vide letter No. R -29011/23/2012-OR.I dated 19 th January 2015 has 
issued a communication to all concerned stake holders including Oil Marketing 
Companies for implementation and expansion of supply of BS -IV auto fuels in 
phases covering the entire country by 1 st April 2017. MOP&NG has also 
requested Mini stry of Road Transport & Highways to issue notification in this 
regard. Supplies of Bharat Stage -IV fuels to identified regions in phase -I has 
already started w.e.f. 1st April 2015. 
2. The Committee recommendation to adhere to the schedule of BS -IV quality of 
fuel for the entire country by April 2017 and further BS-VI by 2020 is noted.  
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated - 07-08-2015 
Recommendation No. 4: 
Up-gradation of Oil Refineries 
 The Committee observe that the up -gradation of infrastructure by OMCs is 
indispensable for the implementation of uniform fuel quality in the country.  The 
Committee have been informed that in order to meet the required fuel quality in line with 
the Auto Fuel Policy, 2003, the oil refineries have till now invested over Rs.35,000 crore 
for production and supply of BS-III and BS-IV gasoline and diesel fuel by upgrading their 
existing technologies. The Committee note that expansion of BS -IV quality of auto fuels 
throughout the country requires massive logistics exercise on the part of oil refineries.  
The Committee have also been informed that the Ministry is considering a proposal to 
switch over directly to B S-VI auto fuel from BS -IV by 2020 instead of step wise 
switching from BS-IV to BS-V by 2020 and then BS-V to BS-VI by April 2024 as there is 
not change in fuel quality from BS-V to BS-VI. 
 The Committee note that at present some of the refineries in the pu blic sector do 
not produce BS -IV quality fuel.  For achieving the key objective of One Country – One 
Fuel’, it is imperative that all oil refineries in the country should be upgraded in phase -
wise manner for production of BS -IV quality of fuel in a time bo und manner in tune with 
the rollout plan in the country by 2017. 
 In this regard, the Committee feel that the acceleration of upgradation process of 
fuels by refineries at the earliest would certainly pave way for the realization of ‘One 
Country – One Fuel Norm’ in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to monitor the projects of oil refineries to upgrade the fuel quality from their 
potential to the next higher level for meeting the production requirements of higher 

 
 
quality fuel and also ensure the rolling out of BS -VI quality fuel by all refineries in the 
country by 2020.  
Reply 
 The refineries have worked out upgradation plan and investments for introduction 
of BS IV in the entire country by 1 st April 2017. Further, firming up facil ities and 
investments for implementation of BS -VI by 1 st April, 2020.MOP&NG is monitoring the 
progress of oil refineries to upgrade the fuel quality so that both BS -IV and BS-V/ VI fuel 
quality is implemented in the entire country as per the schedule. 
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          date- 07-08-2015 
Recommendation No.5 
Mobilization of Funds for Up-gradation of Oil Refineries 
 The Committee observe that up -gradation of oil refineries for the production of 
BS-IV & BS -V/VI quality of auto fuels is one of the key components of the 
implementation of Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025.  The Committee have been given 
to understand that to meet the BS -IV quality of fuel, sulphur content in the fuel is to be 
brought down from 150 ppm to 50 ppm in Motor Sprit and 350 ppm to 50 ppm in High 
Speed Diesel (HSD).  The Committee have also been informed that to meet this 
requirement, new process units for sulphur reduction, hydrogen generation and sulphur 
recovery units as we ll as revamp / expansion of existing units are required to be 
installed in the refineries.  Further, the Committee have learnt that up -gradation of 
refineries for the production of BS -IV & BS -V/VI quality of auto fuels requires huge 
capital expenditure to the tune of Rs.80,000 crore.  In this regard, mobilization of funds 
has been projected as a matter of concern for oil refineries. 
 The Committee observe that due to the declining trend in the prices of 
international crude oil and the minimal under recoveri es, the mobilization of the 
projected capital expenditure of Rs.80,000crore for up -gradation of refineries may not 
be an insurmountable task for OMCs/Government.  Further, the Committee also note 
that the Ministry has not decided about levying of High Sulp hur Cess of 75 paise per 
litre on BS-III fuel to raise Rs.10,000 crore and special fuel upgradation cess of 75 paise 
per litre on all gasoline and diesel sold in India to mobilize approx.. Rs.64000 crore to 
fund fuel upgradation projects of refineries as e nvisaged in the Auto Fuel Vision and 
Policy 2025.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take a decision at 
the earliest on the levying of cess for ensuring required funds for fuel up -gradation 
projects of OMCs. 
Reply 
 As both diesel and petr ol are deregulated products, the OMCs can pass on the 
additional  costs to consumers & imposition of cess is no longer necessary. 
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated -07-08-2015. 

 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Promotion of Alternate Fuels 
 The Committee note that the Auto Fuel Policy, 2003 has envisaged the 
promotion of Research and Development (R&D) technologies for producing various 
alternative fuels like ethanol and bio -fuels from different energy sources.  I n this regard, 
the Committee are aware of the efforts initiated by the Government to promote various 
alternate fuels.  Further, the Committee note that as per the Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 
2025 the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has devised National 
Hydrogen Energy Road Map with the objectives to identify the paths leading to gradual 
introduction of hydrogen energy, accelerating commercialization efforts and facilitating 
creation of hydrogen energy infrastructure in the country. 
 The Committe e further observe that given the depleting pool of hydrocarbon 
reserves, it is imperative on the part of the Government to explore the commercial 
viability of various non -conventional fuel like bio -fuels and hydrogen fuel. The 
Committee also feel that the use of alternate fuels should be promoted for the sake of 
energy security and the reduction of vehicular emissions. 
 The Committee urge the Government to earnestly monitor the progress of 5% 
mandatory blending of ethanol with petrol in the entire country a nd also ensure its 
availability.  The Committee also expect the Government to make sincere efforts to 
expedite the commercial viability of non -conventional fuels like bio -diesel fuel.  Further, 
Research and Development (R&D) activities must be stepped up t o explore the 
commercial viability of hydrogen fuel. The Committee also recommend the Ministry of 
P&NG to coordinate with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for exploring the 
feasibility of vehicles run with solar powered batteries for overall energy  security of the 
country.  The Ministry is also urged to explore various other forms of non -conventional 
fuels being used in advanced countries. 
Reply 
1. MOPNG is regularly monitoring the EBP programme. 
2.  Research on bio -diesel development is being done by several R&D Centres in 
India including IOC (R&D). Biofuel production from other sources are being 
explored 
3. IOC (R&D) is also working on hydrogen development as fuel in combination with 
Natural gas. 
4. The recommendation for coordination with the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy for exploring the feasibility of vehicles run with solar powered batteries for 
overall energy security of the country as well as to explore various other forms of 
non-conventional fuels used in advanced countries is noted. 
 Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has stated that they have stepped up its 
efforts in supporting Research and Development projects relating to hydrogen 

 
 
production through renewable energy methods, storage of hy drogen and application of 
hydrogen in internal combustion engines and fuel cells for motive power and 
decentralised power generation after the National Hydrogen Energy Roadmap was 
formulated in 2006.  R&D efforts are underway for production of hydrogen thr ough 
biological route, gasification of biomass, splitting of water using solar and wind energy, 
etc.   
 
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated -07-08-2015 
Recommendation No. 7 
Promotion of CNG 
 The Committee observe that the Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 2025 has also laid 
emphasis on the use of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as viable fuel and it needs to 
be developed as a national mission.  CNG being sulphur free is an efficient and safe 
alternative fuel and ve hicles running on it produce very less pollution and particulate 
matter (PM) in comparison to petrol and diesel vehicles.  Moreover, CNG is much 
cheaper and India has also more natural gas reserves than petroleum reserves.  
However, the Committee are displ eased to find that though CNG has been in use in 
India as an alternative auto fuel for more than a decade, its share is low.  It is being 
supplied as an automotive fuel only in 44 geographical Area (Gas)/Districts in 13 States 
in addition to 47 locations i n Gujarat comprising total 969 CNG stations in the whole 
country.  The Committee further observe that only 2.26 million vehicles are served by 
these CNG stations throughout the country which is a meagre number in comparison to 
approximate 15 crore total vehicles registered in the country.  
 The Committee note that in pursuance to its recommendation, the Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) has begun the process of inviting bids for the 
Fourth, Fifth and Sixth rouns of City Gas Distribution net work covering about 85 
Geographical Areas/Districts in different States.  The Committee while considering the 
environmental and economic benefits, express its dissatisfaction over the slow pace of 
expansion of CNG use in vehicles, particularly in metropoli tan and semi -metropolitan 
cities including Delhi where air pollution has reached alarming levels.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry must give high priority for covering more and 
more areas under CNG so that ambient air quality could be ensured in the country. 
Reply 
 Government has put Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) -Transporton top priority in 
domestic gas allocation. This domestic gas is being supplied to all City Gas Distribution 
(CGD) entities for meeting their 100% requirement of CNG (transport) based on last six 
monthly consumption data at uniform base price. Further, MoP&NG has allowed GAIL 
to supply 10% additional domestic gas in order to meet the daily fluctuation of CNG 
demand. 
 
 At present, CNG stations are being developed by the  CGD entities in their 
respective Geographical Areas (GAs).Currently, there are total 1003 CNG Stations in 

 
 
the country(Annexure -A).Under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB) Act,2006, PNGRB grants the authorization to the entities for dev eloping a 
CGD network in a specified GA of the country. PNGRB identifies the GAs for inclusion 
in CGD bidding rounds depending on the natural gas pipeline connectivity/natural gas 
availability. PNGRB has, so far, held 5 round of bidding for awarding author ization to 
develop CGD networks. With these bidding rounds, there are now 55 Geographical 
Areas which have been covered under CGD network in 15 States and UTs. In its last 
bidding round, PNGRB has invited bids for development of CGD networks in 20 new 
Geographical Areas (Annexure-B). PNGRB has identified 26 more GAs/Districts, which 
also have natural gas pipeline connectivity for inclusion in 6th round CGD bidding 
(Annexure-C). Another 106 GAs/Districts that could have natural gas pipeline 
connectivity in f uture and could be considered for inclusion in future bidding rounds, 
have also been identified (Annexure -D). On successful completion of these bidding 
rounds, CNG will be available across the country. With regard to Metropolitan cities, 
Mumbai, Delhi, Pun e and Hyderabad have 180, 280, 30 and 20 CNG Stations 
respectively in order to meet the demand of CNG consumers. Recently, PNGRB has 
awarded the work to lay CGD network in the Bengaluru and it is expected that CNG 
supplies will start in Bengaluru in near future.  
 
 In addition, MoP&NG has formulated a draft guideline for allowing multiple gas 
marketing entities for faster roll -out of CNG stations along highways and in cities/towns 
across the country in tandem with evolution of National Gas Grid and more CGD  
networks. The public consultation on the draft guidelines has been completed. On 
finalization of the draft guidelines, multiple gas marketing entities will be able to develop 
their respective CNG retail network based on their techno-commercial feasibility.  
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated 07-08-2015 
Recommendation No. 8 
Fuel Economy Standards 
 The Committee note that one of the policy objectives of Auto Fuel Policy was the 
mandatory declaration of fue l economy standards by the automobile manufacturers.  In 
this regard, a sub-committee of the Standing Committee on Implementation of Emission 
Legislation (SCOE) constituted by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways had 
submitted its report on ‘Proposal for Fuel Efficiency Standards for New Passenger 
Vehicle’ (M1 Category, two wheelers and three wheelers in India).  Accordingly, Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways has initiated action to mandate fuel efficiency norms for 
M1 category vehicles of unladed weight equal to or less than 3500 kg and labelling of 
vehicle on fuel economy standards under CMVRs in consultation with Ministry of 
Energy.  
 Further, the Committee note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) in 
cooperation with the Petroleum Conserva tion and Research Association (PCRA) has 
also taken up the task of developing methodology for fuel economy standards and 
labelling programme for passenger cars i.e. Star Rating System.  Further, it has been 
noted that this programme provided consumers with  comparative information about the 

 
 
division of fuel economy range of cars in the market into five categories i.e. one star to 
five stars. 
 The Committee note that declaration of fuel economy standards of new vehicles 
by automobile manufacturers will go a long way in helping consumers to know about the 
fuel efficiency of their vehicles.  In this regard, the Committee expect the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries to accord equal priority to vehicular emission norms alo0ng with the 
declaration of fuel economy standa rds of vehicles.  Further, the Committee hope that 
given the rising cost of fuel, the star rating of fuel economy for new vehicles will not only 
help consumers in their decision making but also spur competitiveness among 
automobile manufactures to produce more fuel efficient vehicles.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to coordinate the 
efforts of PCRA with BEE of the Ministry of Power for expeditious implementation of 
labelling programme. 
Reply 
 
 Bureau of Energy  Efficiency(BEE) initiated development of labelling programme 
for passenger cars and formulated technical committee for the development.  Technical 
committee comprises of representatives from Ministry of Raod, Transport & Highways, 
Department of Heavy Indu stry, PCRA, Laboratories (ARAI, ICAT and VRDE), SIAM, 
TERI and manufacturers. 
 
 1st meeting of this technical committee was held on 31 st July, 2014.  In the 
meeting, small core committee was constituted for the development of technical 
parameters for the l abelling programme.  Two meetings of the core committee were 
held on 5 th March, 2015 and 16 th May, 2015 where technical parameters were 
discussed and proposal for technical committee was developed. 
 
 Now, 2nd technical committee meeting is planned for Augu st, 2015, where these 
technical parameters will be discussed with all the members of technical committee.  
Based on the recommendations of technical committee, Bureau of Energy Efficiency will 
send proposal to Ministry of Power for the launch of labelling programme for passenger 
cars. 
 
Recommendation No.12 
Road Engineering and Mass Transport Systems 
 The Committee note that one of the objectives of the Auto Fuel Vision and Policy 
2025 is to bring down emission reduction by making improvement in the quality of auto 
fuel as well as by upgradation for refineries by substantial improvement of automobile 
technologies. 
 While noting that the Policy has important objectives, the Committee would like to 
highlight some issues which need to be factored in by all Minis tries concerned to 
enhance the benefits of the Policy.  The Committee would also like to point out that 
application of road engineering in design and condition of road gradient, etc. can play 

 
 
very significant role in improving the fuel efficiency as well a s emission levels of motor 
vehicles and can also reduce vehicle operation costs. 
 The Committee are also concerned with the growing use of personal vehicles, 
particularly automobiles for travel and transportation purposes in many parts of the 
country, especially in metropolitan cities which indicates the failure of public transport to 
cater to the needs of common man.  This could also be partly attributed to inadequacy 
of public transport, lack of comfort, proper connectivity, etc.  The Committee believe that 
a planned mass public transport system can bring a lot of benefits like lower pollution 
levels, decongestion of roads, less consumption of fossil fuels, lower accidents, etc.  
Hence, the Committee feel that the Government should seriously review the urb an 
transportation systems and adopt a holistic approach for ensuring last mile connectivity 
so that there will be enthusiasm and willingness among general public to use public 
transport systems.  There will be additional incentive to use mass public transp ort 
systems as these are cheaper than personal vehicles. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
should bring these issues to the notice of Ministries concerned like the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and Ministry of Urban Development to take appropriate 
measures and action with regard to road engineering and mass public transport 
systems in the country so as to derive maximum benefits from the Auto Fuel Vision and 
Policy 2025. 
Reply 
 The issues raised by the Committee are noted for follow-up with other concerned 
Ministries. 
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated 07-08-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
-NIL-  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 2: 
Setting up of Inter-Ministerial Mechanism at the Highest Level 
 The Committee observe that implementation of Auto Fuel Vision and Policy, 
2025 requires concerted efforts on the part of several stake holders i.e. Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Ministr y of Urban Development, 
Automobile Industry and State Governments.  In this regard, the Committee have been 
informed that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORT&H) has constituted 
Standing Committee on emissions under the Chairmanship of Joint Secre tary 
(Transport) which is an -inter-Ministerial Committee with the representatives from 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG), Ministry of Environment& Forests 
(MoEF), Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and Department of Heavy Industry 
(DHI) to d eal with various pollution reducing measures.  The Committee consider that 
the above Standing Committee on Emissions headed by JS (Transport) appears to be a 
low level Committee dealing only with the emission issue and as such it may not be 
effective in de aling with larger and complex issues on important aspects which require 
active involvement and coordination with other Ministries at the highest level. 
 The Committee feel that the implementation of Auto Fuel Policy requires 
multisectoral approach due to t he involvement of multiple agencies.  The Committee, 
therefore, expect the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to be proactive to play a 
leading role in coordinating the implementation of various measures initiated by different 
stakeholders.  Therefore, th e Committee recommend that being Nodal Ministry for Auto 
Fuel Vision and Policy 2025, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should work out 
modalities at the earliest for constituting an inter -ministerial committee comprising of 
Secretaries of the Minist ries concerned to deal with various policy issues relating to 
transport, environment and heavy industry sectors.  The Committee further, desire that 
a study may be conducted to assess the benefits that arise out of the implementation of 
Auto Fuel Vision an d Policy 2025 vis -à-vis the expenditure that would be incurred to 
implement the entire gamut of issues dealt in the policy. 
Reply 
 
On the suggestion of the Committee i.e. 
 
i. multi-sectoral approach for implementation of Auto Fuel Policy , 
ii. constitution of an inter-ministerial committee comprising of Secretaries of 
concerned Ministries to deal with various policy issues relating to transport, 
environment and heavy industry sectors, and Petroleum & Natural Gas 

 
 
iii. study to assess the benefits that arise out of the i mplementation of Auto Fuel 
Vision and Policy 2025 vis -à-vis the expenditure that would be incurred to 
implement the entire gamut of issues dealt in the policy 
   
  MOP&NG will firm up views and respond. There is also a need to carry out 
 Environmental impa ct, health impact and toxicology related periodic source 
apportionment studies in various cities and regions after implementation of BS IV norms 
in the entire country as recommended by the Expert Committee. 
 
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated 07-08-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 & 10 
Pollution under Check System: 
 The Committee note that one of the policy objectives of Auto Fuel Policy, 2003 
was reduction of pollution in in -use vehicles.  The Policy envisaged that the existing 
PUC system should be replaced and upgraded to a more reliable computerized system 
by 1 st April, 2005 for all categories of vehicles for ensuring better compliance, help to 
identify polluting vehicles and transfer data to a centralized location for further analysis 
and interpretation. 
 In this regard, the Committee have been informed that computerized PUC 
system for vehicles along with data collection are being undertaken by s ome states like 
Delhi, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh and in rest of the States, it has not taken off well 
so far.  The Committee have also learnt that the State Governments have been facing 
manpower and resource constraints for the maintenance of computeriz ed emission 
control checking systems. 
 In view of the above, the Committee would like to emphasize that an efficient 
mechanism for checking pollution from in -use vehicles is vital to bring down pollution 
levels due to vehicular emissions.  With the alarmin g rise of pollution levels becoming a 
major public health hazard in Indian cities, the Committee recommend that PUC centres 
should be set up in all the States of the country.  Further, centralized national data 
centre should also be established at the earl iest for collecting information from all PUC 
centres regarding polluting vehicles.  The Committee also desire that if required, a Plan 
Scheme may be formulated and specific funds may be allocated for the purpose.  In this 
regard, the Committee expect Ministry of P&NG to play proactive role to coordinate with 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the State Governments so as to ensure an 
ambient air quality in the country. 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Inspection and Maintenance System: 
 The Committee observe that robust vehicle inspection and certification system 
would enhance overall safety and emission performance of vehicles plying on the roads 
and also would ensure better fuel efficiency of vehicles.  The Committee observe that as 
per Auto Fuel Policy, 200 3 inspection and maintenance system was initially scheduled 
to be introduced in 11 major cities on an urgent basis and subsequently throughout the 
country.  Further, the Policy required Inspection and Maintenance (I&M) system for all 
categories of vehicles to be put in place by 1 st April, 2005 in National Capital Territory of 
Delhi, by 1 st April, 2006 in other 10 major cities and by 1 st April, 2010 in the entire 
country. 
 The Committee, however, have learnt that there has been an inordinate delay in 
setting up of I&M system in the country.  The Committee have been informed that 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MORTH) has sanctioned 10 model automated 
inspection and certification (I&C) centres one each in 10 States during the 11 th Five 
Year Plan on pilo t basis.  Further, the MORTH has decided to sanction 10 more I&C 
Centres during the 12 th Plan for which proposals are being sought from State 
Governments. 
 The Committee are constrained to note that one of the important objectives of 
Auto Fuel Policy like the Inspection and Maintenance system has not taken off at all.  
The Committee have learnt that proper maintenance of existing vehicles would 
contribute towards reduction of exhaust emission as well as improvement in fuel 
economy.  The Committee, therefore , recommend the MoP&NG to impress upon 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to set up I&C centres in all important cities and 
towns so as to facilitate for the successful implementation of Auto Fuel Policy. 
 The Committee also note that under the existing  provisions of Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988 mandatory checks are presently required for commercial vehicles only.  
Private vehicles are required to undergo fitness test after 15 years before the validity of 
registration certificate is renewed.  Further, the Co mmittee observe that Sundar 
Committee which was set up in 2009 by the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
to review Motor Vehicles Act has recommended for reduction of periodicity of inspection 
and certification of private vehicles from the existing 15 years, however, there is no such 
proposal as yet in this regard.  The Committee have also learnt that the report of Sundar 
Committee has been circulated to all States to elicit feedback for further coordination on 
this matter. 
 The Committee, therefore, expect the Central Government to prevail upon State 
Governments to provide feedback on Sundar Committee report at the earliest.  Further, 
in order to ensure strict fitness regime the Sundar Committee’s recommendation to 
reduce the periodicity of inspection and maintenance and certification of private vehicles 
from the existing 15 years must be accorded top priority.  

 
 
 While acknowledging the importance of Auto Fuel Policy document and its 
recommendation in regard to the mandatory operationalization of Inspe ction and 
Maintenance System by 1st April, 2010 in the entire country, the Committee observe that 
the MORTH has displayed lackadaisical attitude in implementing the same by 
sanctioning only 10 centres each in 11 th and 12th Five Year Plans respectively, the reby 
frittering away the objectives of the Policy.  The Committee, therefore, would expect 
MORTH to seriously review its role in initiating important measures to achieve the policy 
objectives of Auto Fuel Policy. 
Reply 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) has informed that the fitness tests of 
motor vehicles, being carried out presently are visual and subjective evaluation by the 
inspecting officer. In order to have an effective system for inspection and certification of 
motor vehicles from safety  and emission angles, MoRT&H decided to put in place a 
scheme for setting up suitably designed model automated Inspection and Maintenance 
(I&C)) centres for rigorous and objective inspection of in use motor vehicles.  
During 11th Plan, the Government sanct ioned 10 I&C Centre  to be set up, one each in 
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Himachal 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, U.P and Delhi. However, I&C Centre sanctioned to 
Himachal Pradesh could not take off because of not p roviding of suitable land by the 
State Government. I&C Centre Nasik (Maharashtra) has already been inaugurated and 
will be functional within a month. The equipments are being installed at five centres i.e 
Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan, Railmagra and Karnataka and it is expected that these 
centres will be operational in next two months. The work relating to remaining three 
centres is in progress and it is expected that these centres will be operational within this 
financial year.  
During 12th Five Year Plan, the Government has decided to set up 10 more I&C Centre 
one each in the states where I&C Centre was not sanctioned during 11th Five Year Plan. 
So far, MoRT&H has sanctioned four I&C Centre, one each in the States of West 
Bengal, Odisha, Chhatisgarh and Kerala.  
However, one centre in a State cannot cater to the requirement of used vehicle 
population. As such the States would need to replicate the model  centres in other parts 
of the States/UTs. MoRT&H has drafted a Road Transport & Safety Bill to enable 
construction of such Centres in the Private Sector garages, work -shops, ensuring 
compliance of standards by National and State Authorities.   
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated 14-08-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Vehicular Retirement Policy: 
 The Committee have learnt that under section 59 of the Motor Vehicles Act of 
1988, the Central Government is entrusted with powers to fix the age limit for retirement 
of the motor vehicles.  However, no age limit has been prescribed till date for retiremen t 
of motor vehicles by the Central Government given the socio economic conditions of the 
country.  The Committee observe that in the absence of retirement policy, it may not be 
possible to derive the intended benefits of air quality improvement.  Further, phasing out 
of old vehicles is an important requirement as the pollution levels from such vehicles is 
high in spite of using improved quality fuels.  The Committee feel that the formulation of 
vehicle retirement policy will certainly go a long way in ensur ing ambient air quality in 
the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to invoke the powers 
under Motor Vehicles Act of 1988 to fix an age limit for retirement of vehicles without 
any delay by taking into consideration various parameters  like mileage clock, emission 
levels, age of vehicles or other suitable criteria as may be decided by the Government. 
Reply 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) has informed that they are working 
along with Ministry of Heavy Industry in the matter of vehicular retirement policy.  
F.No.R-27011/2/2015-OR-I                                                          dated 14 -08-2015 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 9 December,  2015 
18 Agrahayana,1937 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI, 
                                             Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
  

 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2014-15) ON ‘NATIONAL AUTO FUEL POLICY’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 12) 
 
 8 
 Percentage to Total 66.66% 
 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s (NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. Nil) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 
 
0 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.  2, 9, 10 and 11)  
 
4 
 Percentage of Total 
 
33.33% 
 