25 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017-18) on Demands for Grants (2018-19)] 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2018/Shravana,1940 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
 
CP&NG NO.     
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017-18) on Demands for Grants (2018-19)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.08.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2018/Shravana,1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
21 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
53 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been  accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
54 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
63 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the seventeenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017 -18) 
held on 07.08.2018. 
66 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2017-18) on 
'Demands for Grants (2018-19)'. 
68 

4 
 
 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2017-18) 
 
Sl. No. Names of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi - Chairman 
2 Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3 Dr. Ravindra Babu Pandula 
4 Dr. P. K. Biju 
5 Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri V. Elumalai  
8 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
11 Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete  
12 Smt. Jayshreeben Patel  
13 Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
14 Shri Arvind Sawant 
15 Shri Raju Shetti 
16 Dr. Bhola Singh (Begusarai) 
17 Shri Ravneet Singh 
18 Shri Rajesh Verma 
19 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20 Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
21 Shri Santosh Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
23 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24 Smt. Ranee Narah 
25 Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
26 Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27 Shri Ahmed Patel 
28 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
29 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
30 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
31 Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri A.K. Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2 Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3 Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director   
  

5 
 
 
 
 (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twent y Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
'Demands for Grants (2018-19)'. 
2. The Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report were 
received on 03.07.2018. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2017 -18) considered 
and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.08.2018.  
4. An analysis of  the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observatio ns and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to t he 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
  August, 2018 
  Shravana, 1940 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (201 7-18) on "Demands for Grants (201 8-19) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas '', which was presented to Lok Sa bha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13.03.2018. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 03.07.2018 in 
respect of all the 22 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as per the following: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20 and 21 
(Total 15) 
      (Chapter- II) 
      
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- Reco. Nos. Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
          
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies o f the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 10, 12,  
16, 18 and 22 (Total 5)                
     (Chapter- IV) 
          
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 4 and 7 (Total 2) 
 (Chapter- V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have 
been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation 1 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY)  
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that one of the important budget announcements for 
2018-19 is to increase the coverage of the number of women beneficiaries 
under Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) scheme to 8 crore BPL 
households. The Committee further note that more than 3.38 crore LPG 
connections have already been released under this scheme so far. Presently, 
the beneficiaries are identified through the list prepared on the basis of Socio -
Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011. H owever, during all these seven 
years, several new households have come into being and significant number 
of new people have become eligible for availing connection under the 
scheme. The Ministry has informed that it proposes to expand the scheme 
covering all SC/ST households beneficiaries of Prime Minister Awas  Yojana, 
forest dwellers, Most Backward Classes (MBC), Tea &  ex-tea Garden tribes, 
etc having no LPG Connection to cover the more number of BPL households 
and it is in the process of bringing out the guidelines in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should finalise the 
guidelines at the earliest to expand the Scheme and also consider the 
inclusion of new households which have come into existence after 2011 so as 
to make the scheme more inclusive and successful". 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The Government has issued Revised Scheme Guidelines on 12 th March, 
2018 for providing free LPG connections to women belonging to the Below 
Poverty Line (BPL) households under „Pradhan Mantri  Ujjwala Yojana‟ 
(PMUY) for implementation by Oil Marketing Companies by including 
additional categories of BPL families in addition t o identification from SECC 
list. As the Government has added additional categories for identification of 
BPL families, most of the BPL families are expected to be covered  under the 
scheme".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee had  recommended that the Ministry should finalise the 
guidelines at the earliest to expand the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) 
Scheme and also consider the inclusion of new households which have come 
into existence after 2011 so as to make the scheme more inclusive and 
successful. The Committee had an objective to cover the maximum number of 
households under the scheme including the BPL households which have 
come into existen ce after the Socio Economic Caste Census of 2011.  The 

8 
 
 
 
Committee are happy to note that the Government has issued Revised Scheme 
Guidelines on 12 th March, 2018 for incorporating the additional categories in 
addition to identification from SECC list for identification of BPL families for 
providing free LPG connections to women under PMUY . The Committee 
however, find that the Ministry has not given any details about  the various 
categories included in the revised guidelines particularly about  the BPL 
households created after SECC 2011. The Committee, therefore, desire that  all 
the eligible BPL households  availing benefits under different schemes  in all 
the states should be included by the Ministry in the list of eligible category for 
availing LPG connection under the PMUY. 
Recommendation 2 
Allocation of funds to implement PMUY  
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the budget allocation for 2017 -18 (BE) was Rs. 
2500 crore towards expenditure on providing LPG connections to poor 
households under Pr adhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. However, the RE figures 
for 2017 -18 show that the expenditure has been reduced to 2251.81 crore 
and this expenditure has already been incurred by 31st December, 2017 
itself. The Ministry h as mentioned that due to overall ceiling conveyed by the 
Ministry of Finance for RE 2017 -18, the funds for the scheme ha ve been 
restricted to Rs. 2251.81 crore. The Committee are unhappy with such 
approach of the Ministry reducing the allocation for PMUY a t RE stage. The 
scheme is being implemented with specific targets providing LPG connections 
to women of BPL households. Due to non -availability of funds in the last 
quarter of the financial year 2017 -18, the pace of implementation of the 
scheme must have s uffered. The Committee take comfort from the allocation 
of Rs. 3200 crore for the year 2018 -19 BE. However, considering the target of 
5 crore connections set for PMUY during the current year 2018 -19, the 
Committee opine that more funds will be required for  achieving the targets 
and funds constraint will slow down of the pace of the implementation of the 
scheme in the middle of the year. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry of P&NG should ensure that there is no constraint of funds during 
the year 2018 -19 and should seek additional funds as soon as the funds 
allocated at BE 2018-19 is spent". 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Budget allocation under Pradhan Mantri  Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) for the year 
2018-19 is Rs. 3200 crore which is sufficient to release 2 crore LPG 
connections under the Scheme. If additional fund will be required, the same 
will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at RE stage". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 

9 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee had considered the allocation of Rs. 3200 crore for the 
year 2018 -19 BE  as insufficient for achieving the target of release of 5 crore 
connections under PMUY during the current year . The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry of P&NG should ensure that there is 
no constraint of funds and should seek additional funds as soon as the funds 
allocated at BE 2018 -19 are spent.  The Ministry has stated in their reply  that 
budget allocation of Rs. 3200 crore is sufficient to release  2 crore LPG 
connections under the Scheme  and if additional fund will be required, the 
same will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.  The Committee 
are not satisfied with such evasive reply of the Mini stry because it is crystal 
clear that the BE for  providing connections as per the target of the scheme is 
insufficient. The Committee, t herefore, reiterate their recommendation and 
accordingly, desire th at the Ministry should obtain the required fund without 
fail so that this scheme for poor and needy people does not face any shortage 
of funds in implementation at any stage and apprise the Committee 
accordingly. 
Recommendation 4 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the strategic caverns constructed by ISPRL for 
storage of crude oil in Mangalore is ready for storage. It has been informed 
that the ISPRL has signed a definitiv e agreement with ADNOC of UAE to 
store crude oil in one of the caverns in the Mangalore Strategic Petroleum 
Reserve facility and the first cargo is expected in May 2018. The Committee 
also note that ADNOC can sell the crude to only to Indian refiners. The crude 
will be replenished within a specific period as when it is sold. The government 
will have the right to the entire crude when it feels there is an emergency. The 
Committee note that the price of oil will be the official selling price plus freight 
and transportation cost on the date of purchase. The Committee would like 
the Ministry should negotiate with ADNOC for the acceptance of freight and 
transportation cost of the date on which the crude was brought to cavern for 
storage. The Committee appreciates  the steps taken by ISPRL / Ministry as 
this step will help the country to meet the strategic supply needs and also 
strengthen the relations between the two countries and recommend to explore 
more such initiatives for cooperation in the hydrocarbon sector with other 
countries also.  

10 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that under Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) 
project phase-I underground rock caverns for storage of 5.33 MMT of crude 
oil at three locations viz. Vishakhapatnam (1.33 MMT), Mangalore (1.50 MMT) 
and Pudur (2.5 MMT) have been created. For filling of crude oil in these SPR 
facilities, 4948 crore was approved. During BE 2017 -18 Rs. 2499 crore was 
allocated for procurement of crude oil which was revised to Rs. 1121.28 crore 
at RE stage in view of the ceiling im posed by the Ministry of Finance. 
However, in BE 2018 -19, an allocation of Rs. 700 crore has been made for 
this purpose giving the reference of BE ceiling. The Committee deplore such 
approach of the Ministry of P&NG in handling of this important project wh ere 
the Ministry was not able to convince the Ministry of Finance for providing the 
required funds for this project. The storage facilities of 2.5 MMT at Pudur has 
been mechanically completed in December 2017 and funds will be required 
for procurement of c rude to fill this cavern. The Committee, therefore, desire 
Ministry should convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate the desired funds 
for such strategically important project at RE 2018 -19 stage, so that this 
project does not suffer due to constraint o f fund required for strategic storage 
of oil in the caverns created in phase-I". 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"An Amended and Restated Agreement has already been signed between 
ISPRL, ADNOC and AMI India on 10th February, 2018. Clause no 4.6 (c) of 
the aforesaid agreement inter alia states that “any AMI India oil sold to ISPRL 
shall be sold at the AMI India Custody Cavern and at prevailing Government 
Selling prices, plus a month average premium with the heading „M iddle East‟ 
as published in the Platts spread vs. OSP (Official Selling Price) for the 
applicable loading month, plus cost of insurance, freight and handling costs.  
AMI India shall provide ISPRL with the evidence of cost of insurance, freight 
and handling.” 
As regards the allocation of funds for the storage facilities at Padur, it may 
kindly be noted that the mode of financing of the cost of crude oil for the entire 
Padur Cavern has not yet been decided. There is a proposal to explore PPP 
model.  Once the model of financing is finalized, the requirement of funds 
from Government of India for this purpose will be estimated. Accordingly, 
suitable changes for the same shall be incorporated in RE 2018-19". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. Considering the importance of strategic storage of crude oil in caverns, 
the Committee had desired that Ministry of PNG should convince the Ministry 
of Finance to allocate the desired funds for such strategically important 
project at RE 2018 -19 stage, so that this project does not suffer due to 
constraint of fund required for strategic storage of oil in the caverns created in 
phase-I. 

11 
 
 
 
 The Ministry has stated in their reply  that the mode of financing of the 
cost of crude oil for the entire Padur Cavern has not yet been decided. There is 
a proposal to explore PPP model.  Once the model of financi ng is finalized, the 
requirement of funds from Government of India for this purpose will be 
estimated. Accordingly, suitable changes for the same shall be incorporated in 
RE 2018-19. As the model of financing for Padur Cavern is yet to be finalized 
by the Ministry, the Committee would like that the same  is finalized without 
any delay so that the amount required at RE stage is also finalized and acted 
accordingly. The Committee may be informed once the same is decided upon. 
Recommendation 7 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT)  
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT) is to be set up by the Government as an Institute of national 
importance under an Act of Parliament. The mandate of RGIPT centre at 
Sibsagar, Assam is to set up a Centre to cater to requirements of blue collar 
technicians especially in upstream area to meet the current gap in skill set 
and the anticipated demand in view of future expansion plans. The Committee 
while appreciating the objectives of the RGIPT Centre at Assam, deplore at 
the inordinate delay in preparing Detailed Project Report and executing the 
same for setting up the institute. The Committee note that a part of th e 
campus has already been constructed by CPWD and therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to execute revised DPR within a time bound schedule and also 
allocate required funds to complete all the works for setting up of RGIPT 
Centre at Sibsagar, Assam and start f ull academic activities on its own 
campus.  
The Committee further note that another RGIPT centre at Bengaluru with the 
objective of creating an institution of excellence in the petroleum sector has 
been proposed and the Government of Karnataka has allotted  150 acres of 
land, free of cost at Kambalipura, Hoskote Taluk, Bengaluru for setting up of 
the Institute. The concept paper for setting of the Institute has been prepared 
and it is under process for being sent to Department of Expenditure for 
obtaining in principle approval for setting up of this Institute. The Committee 
further note that the Institute will become fully functional after commencement 
of the construction activities, once the project is approved and funds are made 
available to start the const ruction activity. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that all the works connected with RGIPT, Bangalore like seeking 
approvals from different agencies be expedited so that the institution becomes 
a reality". 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"In so far as RGIPT, Sivasagar, Assam is concerned, the revised DPR 
envisaging  the project cost of Rs.880.10 crore (Capital Expenditue – 

12 
 
 
 
Rs.396.32 crore + Corpus/Endowment Fund – Rs.483.78 crore) has been 
received.  The concept paper was sent to Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) for „in -principle‟ approval of the project. The Department of 
Expenditure have informed that the proposal is in the nature of creation of an 
autonomous body and not a scheme.  They have also infor med that „in -
principle‟ approval of the Department of Expenditure is required for initiating a 
new scheme.  Since the proposal is regarding creation of new body, proposal 
needs to be appraised by Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE) 
under the Chair manship of Secretary (Expenditure).  They have advised to 
send the proposal to the Department of Expenditure in the prescribed format 
of CEE. CEE note is being finalised in consultation with Finance Division of 
the Ministry. 
Temporary campus of RGIPT, Siva sagar, Assam has been set up. The 
academic session has started from academic year 2017 -18 with the following 
diploma courses:- 
 (i) Diploma in Petroleum Engineering 
 (ii)  Diploma in Chemical Engineering 
 (iii)  Diploma in Pipeline Engineering. 
 
30 students in each diploma course have taken admission.  Currently, the 
students are studying in a temporary campus at Sibsagar Commerce College 
(a Govt. College) till such time the facilities are created at the Institute‟s own 
site. 
 
In so far as Energy Institute, Bengaluru is concerned, it may be stated that the 
concept paper was sent to Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 
for „in-principle‟ approval of the project.  The Department of Expenditure have 
informed that the proposal is in the nature of creation of an autonomous body 
and not a scheme.  They have also informed that „in -principle‟ approval of the 
Department of Expenditure is required for initiating a new scheme.  Since the 
proposal is regarding creation of new body, proposal needs to be appraised 
by Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE) under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Expenditure). They have advised to send the proposal to the 
Department of Expenditure in the prescribed format of CEE. CEE note is 
being finalised in consultation with Finance Division of the Ministry. 
Location for temporary campus is being finalized.  It has been proposed to 
conduct the following courses commencing from academic year 2018-19:-  
 (i) M.Tech. in Energy Science  and Technology; 
 (ii)  M.Tech. in Power and Energy Systems Engineering; and 
 (iii)  M.Tech. in Renewable and Alternate Energy". 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee had recommended that all the works connected with 
RGIPT, Sibsagar and Energy Institute, Bengaluru  particularly seeking 

13 
 
 
 
approvals from different agencies be expedited so that the institution s 
becomes a reality. 
 The Ministry has stated in their reply  that, since the proposal s are  
regarding creation of new  autonomous bodies, these need  to be appraised by 
Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE) under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Expenditure). They have been advised to send the proposal s to the 
Department of Expenditure in the prescribed format of CEE. Notes for  CEE are 
being finalised in consultation with Finance Division of the Ministry.  The 
Committee would like to  emphasise that delay in establishing important 
institutions should not be due to procedural issues and the Minis try should 
expedite the CEE note s at the earliest and the Committee be informed about 
the progress made in this regard. 
Recommendation 10 
 
Reduction in Import Dependence  
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that with the Prime Minister in his address during Urja  
Sangam 2015 had called for reduction in import dependence on crude oil by 
10 percent by 2021 -22. The Committee have been informed that a five 
pronged strategy for achieving this or towards the road map for reduction of 
import of crude oil dependence. An Integrated Monitoring and Advisory 
Council (IMAC) has been constituted under the chairmanship of Hon'ble 
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas and consisting of senior officials from 
other Ministry / Departments to impleme nt the strategy. The Committee had 
held a meeting on 19.07.2017 and decided to expand the IMAC. The report 
prepared by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on road map to reduce 
import dependency has been circulated to the existing and potential new 
members of IMAC for their review/suggestions and their respective action 
plan of the road map. The Committee would like to point out that it is almost 
three years since the Prime Minister had made this call and less progress is 
seen on the ground. The Committee  want the Ministry to take all steps to 
achieve this national objective and it should be viewed as an achievable 
target and surpass the percentage of import dependence of crude oil by the 
targeted date. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry has r estricted 
this exercise within the Ministry and have not involved other concerned 
Ministries/Agencies in achieving this objective. The Committee would also like 
to point out that lack of mention of harnessing gas hydrates and of shale gas 
as an energy resource in the strategy are some of the imminent gaps that can 
be seen in the road map prepared by the Ministry. The Committee would 
therefore expect the Ministry to aggressively explore these energy sources 
also to achieve the above objective. The Committee are of the view that more 
work needs to be done towards implementation and would recommend more 

14 
 
 
 
effective and quick policy decisions on the ground towards achieving this 
goal". 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The roadmap to achieve the target to reduce the dependency on import in 
energy from oil and gas by 10% by 2021 -22 envisages multi-pronged strategy 
spanning across many sectors in general, given backward and forward 
linkages and energy consuming sectors in part icular. Keeping in view the 
need to work in a collaborative manner with various Central Government 
Ministries, an Integrated Monitoring and Advisory Council (IMAC) has been 
constituted, under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of Petroleum and 
Natural Ga s, consisting of senior officials including those from other 
Ministries/Departments and since broad based, to include energy consuming 
Ministries, to implement the strategy. 
During the meeting, MoP&NG highlighted major policy initiatives taken in the 
recent past to enhance domestic production of oil and gas. Inter -alia, this 
included initiatives like resource re -assessment, National Data Repository 
(NDR), Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP), Hydrocarbon Exploration 
Licensing Policy (HELP), Discovered Small  Fields Policy, tapping 
unconventional sources such as Coal Bed Methane (CBM) and Shale Gas 
besides enhancing production of bio -diesel and increased use of PNG and 
LPG. The representatives of member Ministries, inter -alia, explained policies, 
schemes and project initiatives taken by them towards augmenting the supply 
of energy, energy saving and demand substitution / reduction through 
alternate modes. 
Shale gas resource exploration is at a nascent stage in India. With a view to 
impart some momentum to the untapped potential of shale gas/oil resource as 
part of the energy basket,  Government notified the Shale gas and Oil 
exploration policy on 14thOctober 2013 for National Oil Companies 
(NOC). The policy mandated ONGC and OIL to carry out exploration in  a 
phase-wise manner in nomination mining lease (ML) areas of ONGC and OIL. 
The first phase of shale gas assessment studies were completed in April 
2017. ONGC identified 50 blocks in 4 basins viz; Assam, Krishna Godavari, 
Cauvery and Cambay basins.  So far, ONGC has drilled 22 wells in 18 blocks 
of these basins. OIL has drilled 1 well in Jaisalmer basin.   With the 
implementation of HELP/OALP on 10th March 2016, a single license for 
exploration and exploitation of not only conventional hydrocarbons but also 
non-conventional hydrocarbon resources like Shale Gas, Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM), etc. would be required.   
As regards Gas Hydrates, the National Gas Hydrates Programme (NGHP -02) 
commenced on 3rd March 2015 for data acquisition operations in Krishna 
Godavari and Mahanadi deep offshore areas and was completed on 28th July 
2015. During NGHP Expedition 02,  42 wells were completed. Two Gas 
Hydrate sand reservoirs were identified for pilot production testing. Efforts are 
being made to harness these resources in techno economically feasible way. 
The Advisory Committee set up under the chairmanship of Director General, 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and comprising of five 
International experts from USA and Japan held meetings in December 2016 

15 
 
 
 
and in April 2018 to review the data generated from NGHP -Expedition-02 and 
deliberate on the results of studies completed so far on reservoir 
characterization and production modelling and possibilities/way forward.   
In order to harness Coal Bed Methane (CBM) potential in the country, 
permission of extraction of CBM to Coal India Limited (CIL) & its subsidiaries 
in coal mines area has been granted. Further to expedite the exploration and 
exploitation of CBM, enhance the availability of natural gas and reduce the 
gap in demand a nd supply of natural gas. Coal India  Limited (CIL) and its 
subsidiaries need not apply for grant of license/lease under the PNG Rules, 
1959 for extraction of Coal Bed Methane (CBM) under their Coal Bearing 
Areas".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. Referring to the call of Hon'ble Prime Minister in his address during Urja 
Sangam 2015 for reduction in import dependence on cru de oil by 10 percent 
by 2021-22, the Committee had observed that even after a lapse of three years , 
very less progress wa s seen on the ground  in that direction.  The Committee 
had, therefore, desired that the Ministry must take all steps to achieve this 
national objective. The Committee ha d also viewed that more work need ed to 
be done towards implementation  by the Ministry  and had accordingly, 
recommended for more effective and quick policy decisions on the ground 
towards achieving that goal. 
 In its action taken reply, the Ministry has submitted the same reply  
informing that keeping in view the need to work in a collaborative manner with 
various Central Government Ministries, an Integrated Monitoring and Advisory 
Council (IMAC) has been constituted under the Chairmanship of the Minister of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and it comprises  senior officials from other energy 
consuming Ministries /Departments for implementing the strategy.  Further, it 
has been stated that the action has been taken by the Ministry to augment the 
supply of energy through Shale Gas, Gas Hydrates and Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) for energy saving and demand substitution  or for reduction of 
dependence on imports through alternate modes. 
 The Committee  do not find any  concrete action taken on the part of 
MoPNG showing the existence of any effective coordination  mechanism 

16 
 
 
 
among different Ministries and clear cut strategy with action plans and 
stipulated timelines to achieve the target of reduction in import dependence by 
10 per cent by 2022.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation 
that more effective and prompt policy decisions are required to be taken on 
the ground  to implement the strategy  towards achieving this goal  in 
coordination with other energy consuming ministries. 
Recommendation 12 
Exploration and Production of Oil and Gas 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the crude oil production has stagnated for the last 
several years which is a matter of serious concern. The government has 
taken some policy initiatives to improve the Hydrocarbon sector namely 
bringing out HELP, for early monetization of CBM, Discovered small fields 
policy, gas pricing reforms and reforms initiatives to enhance  domestic 
production etc,. The C ommittee note that th e projections for crude oil 
production in the years to come show a marginal increase from 37.34MMT to 
38.34MMT in 2021 -22. However, in Natural gas production, it is expected to 
increase from 35BCM in 2017 -18 to 71.92 BCM in 2021 -22. This is based on 
the production from gas discovery by ONGC.  The Committee also note that 
DGH as part of production enhancement policy, one of the option is to enter 
Production Enhancement Contract (PEC) between oil field services 
companies and NOC‟s/Pvt.& JV companies. The Committee, while welcoming 
the policy initiatives taken by Ministry/DGH to improve production of crude oil 
and natural gas within the country, would like to recommend that all the 
activities should be regularly monitored so that the desired output is obtained.  
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry/ DGH should enter 
Production Enhancement Contracts (PEC) with companies which have 
expertise in the E&P sector and can bring value to the Indian upstream PSU 
companies.  
The Committee also note that many IOR/ EOR schemes have been 
undertaken by ONGC and OIL for improving the production in their fields. 
These need to be closely monitored and the expenditure incurred on such 
schemes should commensurate with the increase in production. The 
Committee have noted that DGH has prepared a draft policy framework which 
was hosted online in January, 2018 for seeking comments/ feedback of E&P 
operators/ stakeholders is currently under examination. The Committee 
recommend that that Ministry/DGH should finalise and issue the IOR / EOR 
Policy without delay and also closely monitor the progress made in these 
schemes to achieve desired results". 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"The ONGC in its Board Meeting held on 30 th November, 2017 approved the 
Model to engage private companies for the purpose of enhancing production 
through infusion of New Technology, best -in class International Business and 

17 
 
 
 
Process management practices etc. ONGC has initiated the process to award 
two fields under the Service Model. The OIL has also floated the Expression 
of Interest (EoI) for Service Contract in respect of 4 field . A Policy Framework 
on Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery (IOR) is under 
consideration".  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry/ DGH should enter 
Production Enhancement Contracts (PEC) with companies which have 
expertise in the E&P sector which can bring value to Indian upstream PSU 
companies to enhance domestic production . The Committee had also 
recommended that that Min istry/DGH should finalise and issue the IOR / EOR 
Policy without any delay and also closely monitor the progress made in these 
schemes to achieve desired results. 
 The Ministry in its reply has informed  that ONGC has initiated the 
process to award two fiel ds under the Service Model  approved in Board 
meeting held on 30 th November, 2017 . The OIL have  also floated the 
Expression of Interest (EoI) for Service Contract in respect of 4 field s. A Policy 
Framework on Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery (IOR) 
is under consideration.  
 The Committee are not satisfied  with the progress made by ONGC and 
OIL to enhance production through infusion of new t echnology and process 
management techniques by awarding fields under service model  and taking a  
note that the Ministry/DGH has not finalised and issued to the IOR/EOR policy 
till date even after the draft policy framework was  prepared in January, 201 8 
for seeking comments/feedback  of E &P operators/stakeholders.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like to  reiterate their recommendation and would 
urge the Ministry/DGH to finalise the policy framework on IOR/EOR  and enter 
more Production Enhancement contracts with companies which have 
expertise in E&P sector  without any further delay in the larger interests of the 
country's energy security.  
 

18 
 
 
 
Recommendation 16 
Mode of appointment in Directorate/offices under the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas  
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the Ministry has many offices under its 
administrative control like DGH, PPAC, OISD, OIDB, PCRA, CHT etc. Each of 
these agencies are performing various technical, regulatory, data collection 
etc. and helps with inputs for p olicy making by the Ministry. The Committee 
note that the mode of recruitment in most of these organizations particularly 
like DGH, OISD, PCRA, CHT and PPAC are all on deputation mode. While 
the Committee understand that expertise of oil industry is requir ed for 
technical functions like in DGH, the Committee find that functions of OISD, 
PCRA and CHT are in domain areas where personnel from outside the oil 
companies can also be employed. The Committee are of the opinion that 
there is a conflict of interest w hen persons from oil and Gas PSUs are 
appointed on deputation basis to work in these organization where they have 
to assess, inspect, investigate etc. the very same PSUs to which they belong. 
The Committee view this as an highly undesirable situation with possible 
conflict of interest. While this practice could have been acceptable during the 
early days of these organizations to start them functioning, the same practice 
can no longer be continued with even after several years of their existence 
just because  it suits the Ministry and the PSUs to escape from their 
responsibilities and shortcomings. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should thoroughly review the Recruitment rules in these organizations 
and Oil PSUs through an independent agency an d identify the posts in 
agencies which are to be filled by personnel from other organizations so that 
these institutions would get fresh blood and thinking and can meet up to the 
responsibilities and expectations placed on it". 
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"Review of functioning of various Bodies including Autonomous Bodies under 
MOPNG is periodically undertaken with the Administrative Division‟s Joint 
Secretaries in the context of defining the status of these bodies a nd Rules & 
Regulations of their operation, as per GFRs and Expenditure Management 
Commission recommendations. NITI Aayog has also been monitoring the 
same.  D iscussions have concerned  bodies like PCRA, CHT, SFPL, PPAC 
and OISD under MOPNG  and the possibility of creating umbrella bodies with 
common cadre such that personnel for these bodies may be separately 
recruited. 
During these reviews, discussions were also held on number of employees 
and recruitment on deputation from Oil Marketing Co mpanies. Divisional 
Heads were of the view that since these Bodies are engaged in niche 
activities, there is a need for personnel in these bodies to be well versed with 
nuances of Oil & Gas Sector in India. This view was found acceptable as most 
of the Bod ies/Organisations are functioning as technical arms of divisions in 
MOPNG. 

19 
 
 
 
However, bas ed on the concerns raised by the committee, MOPNG would 
examine the issue, afresh.  
Presently, the number of employees in various bodies under MOPNG are as 
under:- 
DGH:- 
At present total strength of officers/ Advisors/Consultants/ Associates  at DGH 
is 195. 
DGH  Strength Nos. % 
ONGC 114 58.46% 
OIL 26 13.33% 
GAIL 3 1.54% 
HPCL 2 1.03% 
IOCL 2 1.03% 
BPCL 1 0.51% 
GSPC 14 7.18% 
Advisors 5 2.56% 
Consultants/ Associates 28 14.36% 
  195 100.00% 
   
 
OIDB:-  
Recruitment in OIDB is done as per the provisions of OIDB Employees 
(Recruitment) Regulations and all employees are regular appointees. Total 
sanctioned strength of OIDB is 32 whereas at present No. of employees in 
place are 20.  Out of 20 there are 2 Central Govt. employees on deputation.  
 
 
CHT:-  
Currently, the total strength of CHT (including ED, CHT) is 19.  ED, CHT is 
appointed by MoPNG.  However, 13 officers (9 technical and 4 HR/Finance) 
on deputation from Oil PSUs and 5 retired PSU Technical Experts, who are 
engaged as Advisors. There is no direct recruitment.  Selection of officers on 
deputation from oil PSUs is based on interviews of the candidates from the list 
of recommended/willing personnel by PSUs. 
SFPL:- 
 Lone post of Executive Director being operated by SFPL is recruited through 
press advertisement with required qualification/experience etc. once in every 
4-5 years as decided in Governing Council of SFP L.  A committee set up by 
Governing Council of SFPL selects the candidate. 
Group No. of Posts Employees in place 
A 8 6 
B 14 10 
C 9 4 
D 1 - 
Total 32 20 

20 
 
 
 
OISD:-  
Total strength of OISD is 39 ( 37 officers and 2 staff).  As per decision taken 
by Safety Council Resolution dated 10 th January, 1986, the safety Directorate 
will be manned by experts from the oil industry, who will be appointed on 
tenure basis. 
PPAC:- 
PPAC has a sanctioned strength of 43 employees.  At present there are 34 
employees, all on deputation from oil and Gas companies for a fix tenure 
basis except the DG who is fro m the Govt. of India.  The sanctioned strength 
is as per the gazette notification of 2002. 
Table depicting No. Of Employees  on deputation  from PSU‟s in various 
Bodies under MoPNG:- 
Name of bodies Group A Group B Group C Group Consultant/ 
advisors 
Total 
DGH 111 30 55 -  - 196 
OIDB 6 10 4  - 20 
CHT 13  - - - 5 18 
SFPL 1 - - - - 1 
PPAC  1  6 23 13 - 43 
OISD  37  - 2 - - 39 
PCRA 77 - - - - 77 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
25. The Committee  while noting the fact that  recruitment in organisation s 
like DGH, OISD, PCRA, CHT and PPAC  has been on  deputation basis and 
therefore, opined that there wa s bound to be a  conflict of interest when 
persons from oil PSUs are appointed on deputation basis to work in 
organizations like DGH, OISD, PCRA, CHT and PPAC to assess, inspect  and 
investigate their own parent oil  PSUs where they come from . The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the Ministry should thoroughly review 
recruitment rules in these organizations and oil PSUs through an independent 
agency and identify the posts in agencies which are to be filled up by 
personnel from other organizations so that these inst itutions would get fresh 
blood and thinking  to discharge responsibilities in  an impartial and fair  
manner.   
 While describing the procedure being followed by the Ministry to review 
the functioning of various bodies including autonomous bodies under MoPNG, 

21 
 
 
 
it has been stated by the Ministry that NITI Aayog has also been monitoring the 
same and  discussions with bodies concerned such as  PCRA, CHT, SFPL, 
PPAC and OISD under M oPNG and the possibility of creating umbrella bod y 
with common cadre so that personnel  for these bodies may separately be 
recruited. 
 The Committee are also aware that  these b odies are engaged in niche 
activities and there is a need for personnel in these bodies to be well versed 
with nuances of o il & gas sector in the country  but the concern of the 
Committee regarding conflict of interest are also genuine and require 
attention. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire 
the Ministry, as agreed, to examine the issue afresh and review the recruitment 
rules for these organisations through an independent agency to form a 
separate cadre in which personnel for these institutions/bodies are recruited 
separately so that they can meet up to the responsibilities and expectations 
placed on it without any conflict of interest. Further, the Committee are of the 
opinion that efforts should be made to recruit persons from open market on 
the roles of these organizations/bodies at the entry level and training may be 
given in various oil PSUs so that over a period of time  they will be ready to 
man senior positions. 
Recommendation 18 
Oil Major  
26. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that among the main activities of GAIL is transportation 
of gas through its pipelines and also marketing of the gas for consumers who 
needs natural gas. The Committee also note that in the policy issued by the 
government in 2006, it was envisaged that in the long run with maturity of gas 
markets, the authorized entities will have transportation of natural gas as their 
sole business activity and will not have interest in gas marketing or City Gas 
Distribution Network. In line with the pron ounced policy, the Committee 
observe that GAIL cannot have both transportation of natural gas and gas 
marketing which is conflict of interest. The Committee have been informed 
that PNGRB has been asked to look into this issue and to resolve this conflict 
of interest of GAIL. Considering the push being given for natural gas in the 
energy mix and for CGD Networks, the Committee recommend that the 
PNGRB should study the issue thoroughly to split GAIL to resolve conflict of 
interest and the Ministry should then  take an considered decision on the 
matter.  

22 
 
 
 
The Committee also note that the Government had announced its intention of 
creating of oil Major in the budget announcements of the year 2017 -18. In 
pursuance of this, ONGC had completed its acquisition of HPCL during 2017-
18. The Committee a note that some of the oil PSUs like IOCL and BPCL 
have shown interest in acquiring GAIL. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should encourage Oil PSU companies to take 
prudent and commercial decisions in all such matters". 
27. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"In year 1984, GAIL was established for transportation, processing and 
marketing of natural gas and for establishing and managing gas pipelines and 
related installations.  At present, GAIL has developed about 11,000 Km long 
gas pipeline network and is also developing about 3,500 Km long pipelines 
projects in the country. 
 
In terms of this policy and the provisions of the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act, 2006, all authorized entities including GAIL 
have to provide mandatory open access to its gas pipeline infrastructure on 
common carrier principle at non -discriminatory basis, at transportation rates 
determined by PNGRB. In the year 2006, the Government iss ued the Policy 
for Development of Natural Gas Pipelines and City or Local Natural Gas 
Distribution Networks. 
 
As per above policy framework, the following two key aspects pertaining to 
unbundling was noted-  
 
a. Market maturity is critical for initiation regulatory intervention for unbundling; 
and 
 
b. “Right of first use” of pipeline entities shall cease to exist post unbundling.  
 
In the long run and with the maturing of gas markets, it is envisaged in the 
policy that the authorized entities will have transportation of natural gas as 
their sole business activity and will not have any business interest in the gas 
marketing or city or  local gas distribution networks. Government is examining 
the matter and will take appropriate action accordingly.  
The strategic sale of Government of India‟s total paid up equity shareholding 
of 51.11% in HPCL to ONGC for a total sale consideration of Rs .36,915 
crores has been completed on 31.01.2018". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
28. The Committee had observed  that GAIL could not  have both 
transportation of natural gas and marketing of gas being a matter of conflict of 
interests and accordingly, had recommended that the PNGRB should study 
the issue thoroughly to split GAIL to resolve conflict of interest and that the 
Ministry should take a considered decision in the matter. The Committee had 

23 
 
 
 
also noted that some of the oil PSUs like IOCL and BPCL have shown interest 
in acquiring GAIL  and had therefore, recommend ed that Ministry should 
encourage oil PSU s to take prudent and commercial decisions in all such 
matters.   
 In its action taken reply , the Ministry ha s replied that in the long run 
and with the maturing of gas markets, it is envisaged in the policy that the 
authorized entities will have transporta tion of natural gas as their sole 
business activity and will not have any business interest in the gas marketing 
or city or local gas distribution networks. Government is examining the 
matter and will take appropriate action accordingly.  However, from the 
Ministry's reply it is  not clear whether PNGRB has given its view to the 
Government or not on this issue.  Moreover, the Committee would also like to 
point out that the Mi nistry has also not responded on the issue of  interest 
shown by  oil PSUs like IOCL and BPCL in the acquisition of GAIL. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate  their recommendation and desire that  the 
Ministry should expedite and decide the matter of conflict of interest of GAIL 
based on the views of PNGRB and also respond to the interest of oil PSUs in 
acquisition of  GAIL. The views and decision of the Ministry should be 
submitted to the Committee at the earliest. 
Recommendation 22 
Litigations by oil PSUs  
29. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that huge amounts of expenditure are 
being incurred by oil PSUs to fight different legal cases in various courts of 
law over disputes arising from production sharing agreements, retail outlet 
dealerships, LPG distributorships and transport ation and marketing issues. 
The Committee have learnt that upstream oil companies like ONGC and Oil 
India Ltd. have spent Rs. 31.71 crore and Rs. 8.98 crore respectively during 
the last four years. Further, oil marketing companies like IOCL and BPCL 
have i ncurred expenses to the tune of Rs. 27.2 crore and Rs. 16.07 crore 
respectively during the last four years. Gas Authority of India Ltd. has incurred 
an amount of Rs. 20.92 crore during the last three years in respect various 
legal disputes. 
In view of the above, the Committee feel that it may not be financially prudent 
on the part of oil PSUs to incur such huge costs on litigations in courts. 
Instead, the Committee desire that oil PSUs may better take recourse to 
mutually agreed arbitration or out of the court settlement process for amicable 
solutions. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to create 

24 
 
 
 
an internal mechanism to settle various pending disputes through out of the 
court settlement/arbitration process for saving huge amou nts of public 
expenditure". 
30. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
"All Oil and Gas PSU‟s have taken measures to have mutually agreed 
arbitration or “Out of Court” Settlement process to tackle litigations. Major 
steps taken by them are as below:- 
 
1. IOCL 
 Settlement of Disputes through mutually agreed Arbitration and Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Mechanism. 
 Out of Court Settlement Process – Amicable Settlement of Disputes through 
Conciliation. 
 
2. BPCL 
 Inclusion of Arbitration clause  in dealership/distributorship/E&P 
contracts/agreements. 
 
3. HPCL 
 Inclusion of Arbitration clause in the Agreements. 
 
4. GAIL 
 Preventive Dispute Resolution Mechanism (PDRM)” to facilitate decision 
making at an appropriate time with a collaborative approach through 
SAMADHAN Committee.  
 Settlement Advisory Committee  (SAC) to effectively resolve various 
commercial dispute in time bound and most effective manner.  
 Introduced Arbitrator‟s fees schedule by linking payment of fees directly to the 
actual milestones achieved which encourages the Arbitrators to speed up the 
whole process of Arbitration.  
 A panel of advocate is maintained un der GAIL‟s approved and notified fees 
structure.  
 
5. ONGC 
 A conciliation mechanism under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
called Outside Expert Conciliation (OEC) to resolve the disputes between the 
parties within the terms and conditions of the contract. For this panel of 
experts is maintained. 
 A Detailed Guideline on Arbitration including procedure to be followed which 
is a part of Contracts signed by ONGC with other party. 
 
6. OVL 
 Dispute Resolution Mechanism by a well -known institutional arbitration 
dispute centre like ICC and LCIA. 
 
7. OIL 
 Outside Expert Committee to settle disputes amicably. 
 Availability of Arbitration Clause in all the commercial contracts. 
 Disputes with other PSUs settled under the mechanism of Permanent 
Machinery of Arbitration (PMA) established by DPE. 
 

25 
 
 
 
8. EIL 
 Provision of Arbitration as well as Conciliation through Outside Expert 
Committee (OEC) incorporated in the contracts. 
 
9. MRPL 
 Implemented Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR) Mechanism to settle internal 
disputes arising out of Contracts, if any". 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
31. In view of huge financial costs and inordinate delays due to long drawn 
out litigations in various courts of law , the Committee had suggested that oil 
PSUs might better take recourse to mutually agreed arbitration or out of the 
court settlement process for amicable solutions  and had recommended the 
Government to create an internal mechanism to settle various pending 
disputes through out of court settlement/arbitration process for saving huge 
amounts of public expenditure. 
 The Ministry in its action taken r eply, has stated that all oil and gas 
PSUs have taken measures to have mutually agreed arbitrations or out of 
court s ettlement process to deal with  litigations and accordingly, have 
mentioned various steps taken  by them  such as  Implemented Alternate 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) Mechanism, Outside Expert Committee, Ou tside 
Expert Conciliation (OEC) and Out of Court Settlement Process etc. 
 
 The Committee , however, are not satisfied with the reply as the 
measures/steps listed out by the Ministry have already been existing in oil 
PSUs. Even then , the number of litigations have been increasing and  huge 
expenditure is being incurred by them. The Committee , therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and desire that some more specific measures should be 
taken by the PSUs by creating an internal mechanism to settle various pending 
disputes through out o f the court settlement/arbitration process for saving 
huge amounts of public expenditure by oil PSUs. 
 
----- 
 

26 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation 1 
 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY)  
The Committee note that one of the important budget announcements for 2018 -19 is 
to increase the coverage of the number of women beneficiaries under Pradhan 
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) scheme to 8 crore BPL households. The Committee 
further note that more th an 3.38 crore LPG connections have already been released 
under this scheme so far. Presently, the beneficiaries are identified through the list 
prepared on the basis of Socio -Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011. However, 
during all these seven years, several  new households have come into being and 
significant number of new people have become eligible for availing connection under 
the scheme. The Ministry has informed that it proposes to expand the scheme 
covering all SC/ST households beneficiaries of Prime Mi nister Awas Yojana, forest 
dwellers, Most Backward Classes (MBC), Tea &  ex-tea Garden tribes, etc having no 
LPG Connection to cover the more number of BPL households and it is in the 
process of bringing out the guidelines in this regard. The Committee, the refore, 
recommend that the Ministry should finalise the guidelines at the earliest to expand 
the Scheme and also consider the inclusion of new households which have come 
into existence after 2011 so as to make the scheme more inclusive and successful. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government has issued Revised Scheme Guidelines on 12 th March, 2018 for 
providing free LPG connections to women belonging to the Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) households under „Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana‟ (PMUY) for implementation 
by Oil Marketing Companies by including additional categories of BPL families in 
addition t o identification from SECC list. As the Government has added additional 
categories for identification of BPL families, most of the BPL families are expected to 
be covered under the scheme.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 2 
Allocation of funds to implement PMUY  
The Committee note that the budget allocation for 2017 -18 (BE) was Rs. 2500 crore 
towards expenditure on providing LPG connections to poor households under Prime 
Minister UjjwalaYojana. However, the RE figures for 2017 -18 show that the 
expenditure has been  reduced to 2251.81 crore and this expenditure has already 
been incurred by 31st December, 2017 itself. The Ministry has mentioned that due to 
overall ceiling conveyed by the Ministry of Finance for RE 2017 -18, the funds for the 
scheme has been restricted to Rs. 2251.81 crore. The Committee are unhappy with 

27 
 
 
 
such approach of the Ministry reducing the allocation for PMUY at RE stage. The 
scheme is being implemented with specific targets providing LPG connections to 
women of BPL households. Due to non -availability of funds in the last quarter of the 
Financial Year 2017 -18, the pace of implementation of the scheme must have 
suffered. The Committee take comfort from the allocation of Rs. 3200 crore for the 
year 2018 -19 BE. However, considering the target of 5 cro re connections set for 
PMUY during the current year 2018 -19, the Committee opine that more funds will be 
required for achieving the targets and funds constraint will slow down of the pace of 
the implementation of the scheme in the middle of the year. The C ommittee 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of P&NG should ensure that there is no 
constraint of funds during the year 2018 -19 and should seek additional funds as 
soon as the funds allocated at BE 2018-19 is spent. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Budget allocation under Pradhan Mantri UjjwalaYojana (PMUY) for the year 2018 -19 
is Rs. 3200 crore which is sufficient to release 2 crore LPG connections under the 
Scheme. If additional fund will be required, the same will be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 3 
Cash Incentive for Kerosene Distribution Reforms and DBTK 
The Committee note that the Ministry has been following a two pronged strategy for 
implementing DBTK for Kerosene. One is to encourage states to join DBTK scheme 
by either opting for Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) or taking voluntary cuts in their 
annual PDS Kerosene allocation and get financial benefits or to opt for both.  
The Committee note that Jharkhand is the first state in the country to implement 
DBTK in all the districts of the state. The states of Haryana, Punjab and Andhra 
Pradesh have become kerosene free. Further, the UTs of Delhi, Chandigarh, Daman 
& Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Puducherry have also become kerosene free. 
Against the BE of Rs. 150 crore in 2017 -18, an amount of 34.25 crore has been 
spent for 2017 -18. The main reason for under ut ilisation of the budget during 2017 -
18 was that the quarterly utilisation certificate has not been received from Jharkhand 
Government from the month of August, 2017. The Committee note that an amount of 
Rs. 96 crore has been allocated for the year 2018 -19 under BE and would 
recommend the Ministry to monitor the utilisation of funds and follow up with the 
State Governments concerned.  
The Committee note that some of the states are taking voluntary cuts in the annual 
PDS Kerosene and cash incentives have been  provided to them. The Committee 
note that an amount of Rs. 254 crore have been provided in BE 2018 - 19 for this 
purpose under cash incentive for kerosene distribution. The Committee appreciate 
the initiative of the Ministry to stop leakages in PDS Kerosen e but point out that in 
some of the states which have taken voluntary cuts, the citizens suffer due to non 

28 
 
 
 
availability of kerosene which not only serve for their cooking needs but also for 
illumination purposes particularly in villages and hilly areas. Th erefore, the 
Committee would like to emphasis that while pushing for this reform, the Ministry 
should ensure that because of these measures, the common man is not affected as 
kerosene is not freely available in all parts of the country particularly in vill ages and 
remote areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
consider parameters like availability of electricity, availability of LPG and also 
availability of kerosene freely in open market before allowing the states to accept 
voluntary cuts to join the scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Cash Incentive for Kerosene Distribution Reforms and DBTK 
The Government of India (Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas) makes  allocation 
of Public Distribution System (PDS) Kerosene to States/UTs on q uarterly basis for 
cooking and lighting purposes only as per Kerosene (Restriction on Use and 
Fixation of Ceiling Price)   Order, 1993. Further distribution of PDS Kerosene within 
the States/UTs under PDS network to various categories of ration card 
holders/consumers including the consumers of rural/tribal areas is made by the 
concerned State/UT.   The scale and criteria of distribution are also decided by 
respective State/UT. 
 
PDS Kerosene allocation of States/UTs have been rationalized since 2010 -11, by 
taking into account the factors such as increase in domestic LPG/PNG connections,  
increase in electricity coverage, non-lifting of PDS Kerosene quota by the concerned 
States/UTs etc.  These rationalizations are also in line with the recommendation of 
Ministry of finance, Department of Expenditure‟s Public Finance (Central -I) Division‟s 
O.M. dated 01.09.2017, inter -alia, stating that the allocation of PDS Kerosene to the 
States should be brought down gradually through monthly cuts, and distribution of 
PDS Kerosene should be targeted to the really need beneficiaries.  
Marketing of Non -PDS SKO through existing SKO dealer network/parties 
authorized by State Governments 
OMCs have taken the following steps to make Non -PDS SKO available through their 
SKO dealer network: 
A. Marketing of non -PDS SKO (white Kerosene) in Small packages : A 
notification was placed in 4 national Newspapers on 7th & 8th February, 2016 
inviting Expression of Interest from parties interested in marketing packaged 
non-PDS SKO.  13 offers were received on all India basis in response to this 
notification out of which 4  parties declared that they are ready with packaging 
facilities. Industry issued LOI to these 4 parties who have given their consent 
to package and market Non -PDS SKO.  Two parties  namely M/s Venus 
Petrochemicals (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai and M/s IFP Petro Products (P) 
Ltd. Ghaziabad have uplifted product of 264 KL and 46 KL respectively.   
B. Marketing of non -PDS SKO through Parallel marketers : Consequent to 
amendment of Kerosene Con trol Order vide gazette notification dated 
19.01.2015, revised procedure for sale of Non-PDS SKO to parallel marketers 
was hosted on OMC portals effective 15.04.2015 to generate awareness.  
Parallel marketers were permitted to pack and sell Non -PDS SKO in small 

29 
 
 
 
volumes.  It is reported that since demand of small packs is limited, most of 
the quantity uplifted is being sold in bulk.  
C. Marketing of Non-PDS SKO through existing SKO dealer network/parties 
authorized  by State Governments: 
i. Consequent to amendment  of Kerosene Control Order vide gazette 
notification dated 19.01.2015, procedure for sale of Non -PDS SKO by 
existing SKO dealers was advised to field offices by OMCs for 
implementation.  
ii. During January 2016, SLCs were advised to write to the concerned 
State Governments for nominating/authorizing dealers for marketing 
Non-PDS SKO.  In response, some State governments have permitted 
existing SKO dealers/private entities/government bodies to market 
Non-PDS SKO.  
iii. Further, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  vide letter dated 
15.07.2016 has advised State Govt./UTs to take suitable steps for 
allowing marketing of Non -PDS Kerosene in consonance with the 
amended Kerosene Control Order.  During the period April to March, 
2018, Dealers/parties marketing Non -PDS SKO have uplifted 1578 KL 
in various States/UTs.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 5 
Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga Yojana (PMUGY)  
The Committee note that the Prime Minister Urja Ganga Yojana is of total length of 
2655 KM with the cost of Rs. 12940 crore. 78 per cent of the work has been 
completed in Section 1 which is of 753 Km length and it is expected to be completed 
by December 2018 and Section 2 and 3 is planned to be completed progressive ly 
from December, 2018 to December, 2020. The Committee note that there have been 
some issues relating to land acquisition particularly in the State of Bihar which has 
been taken up with the State Government and the issue is being resolved in close 
coordination with all parties concerned. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should ensure that the project does not suffer any delay on account of ROU issues 
and achieve the completion by December, 2018. The Committee also desire that the 
Budget grant of 2 018-19 fixed at Rs. 1674 crore should be fully utilized and if 
needed, more funds should be made available at RE stage to complete this project. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government has taken a decision to provide a capital grant of Rs.5176 crore 
(i.e. 40% of the estimated capital cost of Rs.12,940 Crore) to GAIL for development 
of a 2655 Km long Jagdishpur -Haldia/Bokaro-Dhamra Gas Pipeline (JHBDPL) 
project. As per the CCEA approval Rs.1200 crore has been earmarked for F.Y. 
2017-18. GAIL vide letter dated  28.08.2017 had informed that due to some 
constraints faced by GAIL, the fund would not be utilized and requested this Ministry 
for allocation/revision of fund of Rs.435 Crore for F.Y. 2017 -18 as RE. Further, this 
Ministry vide communication dated 22.01.2018 has informed scheme wise ceiling for 
FY 2017-18 wherein funds in this project has been revised to Rs.400 Crore for F.Y. 
2017-18 as RE and Rs.1674 Crore for F.Y. 2018 -19 as BE. Till date Rs.450 Crore 
has been released to GAIL during F.Y.2016 -17 and Rs. 400 Crore during F.Y. 2017 -

30 
 
 
 
18. Ministry may review the ceiling amount of Rs. 1674 crores in RE FY 2018 -19 if 
needed and more funds would be made available to complete this project. 
Gas supply to Phulpur -Varanasi section of Mainline (JHBDPL) and CGD Varanasi  
has commissioned on 12.04.2018 with the support of the Ministry and efforts of all 
stakeholders. There are work disruption issues by  naxalites in Gaya and 
Aurangabad D istricts of Bihar and very old land records of Land Possession 
Certificate (LPC) in Biha r. However, affidavits from landowners are being taken for 
disbursement of compensation in lieu of LPC if same are not available with them. 
Work is under progress accordingly. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 6 
National Seismic Programme  
The Committee note that National Seismic Programme was launched to generate 2D 
Seismic Survey for initiating E&P activities in all the sedimentary basins of India. This 
survey work being carried out  by ONGC and OIL is proposed to be completed by 
2019-20. The total funds for this project is estimated to be Rs. 2932.99 crore. During 
the year 2016 -17, a total of 5671.26 LKM 2D Seismic Survey was conducted on a 
cost of Rs. 266.94 crore. During 2017 -18, an estimated expenditure of Rs. 1287. 26 
crore will be spent. In the budget allocation Rs. 1300 crore has been allocated under 
BE 2018 -19 and estimated cost for 2018 -19 is Rs. 1272.79 crore. The re -
imbursement of expenditure incurred by Oil PSUs towards thi s programme will be 
Rs. 300 crore in 2017 -18 and remaining amount will be reimbursed in the 
consequent financial years. The Committee note that the National Seismic 
Programme is an important exercise in the Indian Hydrocarbon Programme and 
recommend that t he Ministry / DGH should fully utilize the allocated funds and the 
reimbursement of expenditure incurred by ONGC & OIL should be done fully without 
undue delay and the Programme should be completed without any time and cost 
overruns. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During the Financial Year 2017 -18, a payment of Rs.9.73 Crore has been made to 
ONGC for reimbursement of cost incurred in carrying out seismic survey under 
National Seismic Programme (NSP).  A budgetary allocation of Rs.1300 crore has 
been made in BE 201 8-19 for the project.  ONGC and OIL are continuously working 
on the project. 21806.70 LKM data acquisition has been completed till March, 2018 
under NSP. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 8 
Indian Institute of Petroleum Energy/Petroleum University  
The Committee observe that an Indian Institute of Petroleum Energy is to be 
established at Visakhapatnam in accordance with the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014 with an objective to meet the quantitative and qualitative 

31 
 
 
 
gap in the supply of skilled manpower in the petroleum sector and promote research 
activities. The Committee are, however, constrained to note that though the IIPE Act, 
2017 has recently been passed by the Parliament and de claring IIPE as an 
Institution of national importance, the Ministry has not come out with any time -bound 
schedule for construction and commissioning of the Institute on its own campus at 
Visakhapatnam. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that the institute 
is temporarily being run on the campus of Andhra University and its academic 
activities are being hand held by IIT, Kharagpur and other logistics are being handled 
by HPCL. The Committee have also been further informed that some aggrieved 
farmers have resorted to legal recourse in the allocation of some portion of their land 
for the institute and the issue has not been resolved till date.  
The Committee while decrying at the inordinate delay in setting up of IIPE project, 
desire that the Minis try must accord top priority to the project on war footing level 
and accordingly, engage proactively with the State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
for finding an amicable solution with regard to the handing over of the land and also 
must prepare a clear road  map comprising definite annual budgetary outlays and 
specific deadlines for the construction and commissioning of the Institute on its own 
campus at Visakhapatnam at the earliest for fulfilling an important commitment made 
by the Central Government at the time of bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh state. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government of Andhra Pradesh issued a GO on 9.11.2017 alienating land 
measuring 201.82 acres at Vangali Village, Sabbavaram Mandal, Visakhapatnam 
District for the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) free of cost.  However, 
the land is yet to be physically handed over to IIPE owing to legal issue from the 
farmers of the village which is sub -judice in the Hon‟ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh.   
 
The construction activities of IIPE have not started since the land is yet to be handed 
over by the Government of Andhra Pradesh to IIPE. 
 
It is envisaged that the project will be  completed, once the physical possession of 
the allocated land is handed over to the IIPE.  An amount of Rs.32 crore has been 
allocated for IIPE in the Budget for the year 2018 -19.  Requests for allocation of 
more funds will be sent to Finance in Supplementary Demands as per requirements 
once the construction work is started. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 9 
Prices of Petrol and Diesel  
The Committee note that after the dismantling of administrative price mechanism, 
prices of Petrol and Diesel are being revised on a daily basis by the Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs). The actual prices of last 15 days is considered before fixing the 
prices for the day. The advantages with this system is that the prices are averaged 
out. The earlier methodology of fortnightly revision was causing supply related issues 
with the refineries due to predictability of the price revision and distributors could 
order accordingly which caused loss to refineries. With this daily revision in the 

32 
 
 
 
prices of diesel and petroleum, the losses to both to the distributor and refineries and 
the consumers are largely removed.  
The Committee note with concern that, even though the  OMCs announce daily 
revision of prices for petrol and diesel, the implementation of the same is not 
effective particularly when the Retail Outlets are not passing on the reduction in 
prices to consumers whereas, the increases are passed on immediately to the them. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry/OMCs should seriously look 
into the issue and devise a suitable mechanism so that every price revision is 
passed on to consumers without delay. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry/OMCs should also launch an awareness campaign about the pricing 
methodology being followed by the Oil Marketing Companies and educate the public 
regarding benefits of the system. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Prices of Petrol and Diesel have been made market -determined effective 26.06.2010 
and 19.10.2014 respectively. Since then, the Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) namely, Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Limited and Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited take appropriate decision on 
pricing of Petrol and Diesel in line with international product prices and other market 
conditions. The Public Sector OMCs increase and decrease the prices accordingly. 
 Public Sector OMCs h ave implemented daily revision of retail selling price of Petrol 
and Diesel in the entire country effective 16 th June, 2017. Daily price revisions of 
Petrol and Diesel make the retail prices more reflective of the current market 
conditions, minimizing the volatility in the RSP of Petrol and Diesel. Further, it leads 
to increased transparency in the system and enables smoother flow of products from 
refinery/depots to Retail Outlets.  Public Sector OMCs have decreased the Retail 
Selling Price of Petrol & Dies el 100 times  & 86 times respectively since 
implementation of  Daily revision of RSP of Petrol & Diesel.  Decrease in price has 
been passed on to the consumers. 
The Public Sector OMCs have informed that they have established appropriate 
mechanism to commun icate the prices of the Petrol and Diesel on a daily basis 
through various communication medium such as: 
 i.         Daily updates on their websites, 
ii.         Update through Mobile Application, 
iii.        SMS/IVRS, 
iv.        Display at Retail Outlets 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 11 
Goods and Service Tax (GST)  
The Committee note that GST has been rolled out in the country from 1st July, 2017. 
Five petroleum products namely crude oil, natural gas, petroleum, diesel and 
aviation turbine fuels although included under the GST Constitutional Amendment 
Act are presently outside this scope of levy of GST, till such time they are notified on 
the recommendations of GST Council. The Committee note that the Petroleum PSU 

33 
 
 
 
companies are at a disadvantage due to the fact that all their inputs are subject to 
GST and most of their outputs are not subject to GST causing loss of revenues.  
The Committee would like that items like natural gas and aviation turbine fuel may be 
considered for inclusion under GST at the earliest after assessing their impact of 
revenues on State Governme nts. The Committee would desire the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas can work in close coordination with Ministry of Finance 
so that the states can be taken into confidence for inclusion of the petroleum 
products under GST. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) has been implemented w.e.f 1.7.2017. Five 
petroleum sector items viz., Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Petrol, Diesel and Aviation 
Turbine Fuel (ATF ), although included under the GST Constitutional Amendment 
Act, are presently, outsid e the scope of levy of GST, till such time they are notified, 
based on the recommendation of the GST Council.  
The concerns of oil and gas industry have been flagged by Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas to Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Civil Aviation has also taken up with 
Ministry of Finance to include Aviation Turbine Fuel in the ambit of GST regime with 
full input tax credit Thus while, petroleum products are included under GST, the date 
on which GST shall be levied on such goods shall be as per the  decision of the GST 
Council, which has representation of Ministers-in-charge of Finance or Taxation of all 
States and Union Territories with Legislature. The Goods and Services Tax Council 
shall also make recommendations to the Union and the States on the  rates for the 
five „excluded‟ petroleum sector items. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 13 
City Gas Distribution (CGD) Network  
The Committee note that the Prime Minister gave a call during Urja Sangam in 2015 
that Piped Natural Gas consumers under the City Gas Distribution Network should 
be increased to one crore by another four years. During the last three years, the 
number of PNG domestic connections have increased from 28.69 lakh in 2014-15 to 
41.17 lakh till January, 2018. The Committee are neither satisfied with the progress 
made so far in this direction nor with the proposed plans to achieve the targets in the 
next few year as still close to 60 lakh connections have to be given in the next one 
year to achieve the targets. The Committee would also like to point out that as the 
increase in PNG connections will make more LPG connections available for 
redistribution. Ministry may look to this aspect and plan their activity accordingl y. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry/PNGRB should work closely and 
coordinate effectively with CGD networks in new Geographical Areas (GAs) which 
are to be awarded to develop City Gas Networks at a faster pace in coming years so 
as to achieve the targets. 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government has established Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) under the PNGRB Act, 2006 in the year 2007 which is the authority 
to grant authorization for the development of Pipelines and City Gas  Distribution 
(CGD) network in Geographical Areas (GAs). PNGRB authorizes entities to develop 
City or Local Natural Gas Distribution Network as per PNGRB Act, 2006 and the 
Regulations notified thereunder. PNGRB identifies the GAs for the  development of 
CGD network depending on the natural gas pipeline connectivity/natural gas 
availability and techno -commercial feasibility. The list of PNGRB authorized GAs is 
at Annexure-I and it has webhosted a list of 86 GAs consisting of 174 districts in the 
country for 9 th Round CGD bidding (Annexure -II). Remaining districts are proposed 
to be covered in subsequent rounds of bidding based on the availability of Natural 
Gas, Natural gas pipeline connectivity and techno -commercial feasibility. GAIL and 
other OMCs have been assigned a target to connect 10 lakh new Households with 
PNG supplies through its subsidiary/Joint Venture CGD companies in their 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 2018-19.  
 
Government has taken following steps in order to strengthen the Piped Natural Gas  
(PNG) network across the country: 
i. Domestic gas, which is cheaper than imported gas,  has been allocated to 
meet the entire requirement of PNG (Domestic) and Compressed Natural Gas 
(CNG) (Transport) segments of City Gas Distribution (CGD) sector and it has  
been kept under no cut category. 
ii. Public Utility Status granted to CGD Projects by Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. 
iii. Ministry of Defence has issued guidelines for use of PNG in its residential 
areas / unit lines 
iv. Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) has issued guidelines to Public 
Sector Enterprises (PSEs) to have the provisions of PNG in their respective 
residential complexes. 
v. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has issued advisory to State 
Governments  on following aspects, (a) to standardize the Road 
Restoration/permission charges along with time bound permission in 
accordance with the local conditions; (b) earmarking of land plot for 
development of CNG Stations at the planning stage of town/city and same 
should be specified in the revised Mas ter Plan; and (c ) relevant modification 
in building by -laws for providing gas pipeline infrastructure in residential & 
commercial buildings at architectural design stage. 
vi. Further, MoHUA has directed to Central Public Works Department (CPWD) & 
National Bui lding Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) to have the 
provisions of PNG in all Government Residential complexes. 
 

35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


36 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
List of Cities covered with CGD network  
Sr. 
No. State 
Nos 
of 
GA 
Geographical Area CGD Entity  
1 
Andhra 
Pradesh 5 
Vijayawada Bhagyanagar Gas Ltd                             
2 Kakinada  Bhagyanagar Gas Ltd                             
3 East Godawari JV of APGDC & HPCL  
4 West Godawari JV of APGDC & HPCL  
5 Krishna Megha Engineering 
6 Assam 1 Upper Assam Assam Gas Company Limited 
7 Bihar 1 Patna GAIL 
8 Delhi 1 Delhi  Indraprastha Gas Limited                         
9 
Goa 2 
North Goa  Consortium of GAIL Gas and BPCL 
10 South Goa IOCL-Adani JV                               
11 
Gujarat 22 
Surat -Bharuch-
Anklashwer Gujarat Gas Ltd             
12 Bhavnagar Gujarat Gas Ltd             
13 Hazira Gujarat Gas Ltd             
14 Jamnagar Gujarat Gas Ltd             
15 Nadiad Gujarat Gas Ltd             
16 Navsari Gujarat Gas Ltd             
17 Rajkot  Gujarat Gas Ltd             
18 Surendernagar Gujarat Gas Ltd             
19 Valsad Gujarat Gas Ltd             
20 Gandhinagar  Gujarat Gas Ltd             
21 
Anand(excluding 
CGMSL area-including 
Khambhat) 
Gujarat Gas Ltd             
22 Panchmahal (including 
Halol) Gujarat Gas Ltd             
23 Kutch (West) Gujarat Gas Ltd             
24 Amerali Gujarat Gas Ltd             

37 
 
 
 
25 DahejVagraTaluka Gujarat Gas Ltd             
26 Dahod District  Gujarat Gas Ltd             
27 Ahmedabad city  Adani Gas Ltd. 
28 Gandhinagar-
Mehsana-Sabarkantha Sabarmati Gas Ltd                                       
29 Patan Sabarmati Gas Ltd                                       
30 Vadodara  Vadodara Gas Ltd(VGL)                               
31 Anand Charotar Gas  
32 Banaskantha IRM Energy Pvt Ltd 
33 
Haryana 8 
Rewari Indraprastha Gas Limited                         
34 Sonipat GAIL Gas                                      
35 Faridabad* Indraprastha Gas Limited 
36 Gurgaon* Indraprastha Gas Limited 
37 Panipat IOCL-Adani JV                               
38 Yamunanagar  BPCL 
39 Karnal IGL 
40 Ambala&Kurukshetra Consortium of HPCL and OIL 
41 
Jharkhand 2 
Ranchi GAIL 
42 East Singhbhoom GAIL 
43 
Karnataka 4 
Bengaluru GAIL Gas                                      
44 Dharwad  IOCL-Adani JV                               
45 Tumkur Megha Engineering 
46 Belgaum  Megha Engineering 
47 Kerala 1 Ernakulam IOCL-Adani JV                               
48 
Madhya 
Pradesh 4 
Dewas GAIL Gas                                      
49 Indore (including 
Ujjain)  Avantika Gas Ltd                               
50 Gwalior  Avantika Gas Ltd                               
51 
  
Dhar PerigonInfratechPvt Ltd 
52 
&53 Maharashtra 9 
Mumbai, Greater 
Mumbai,  Thane City 
&Adjoining Contiguous 
area  
Mahanagar Gas Limited                          

38 
 
 
 
54 Raigarh Mahanagar Gas Limited                          
55 Thane district 
excluding existing GA  Gujarat Gas Ltd             
56 Pune   Maharashtra Natural Gas Ltd                              
57 Pune District excluding 
MNGL area Mahesh Resources 
58 Ratnagiri Unison EnviroPvt. Limited 
59 Solapur  IMC Pvt Ltd. 
60 Kolhapur Consortium of HPCL & OIL 
61 
Odisha 2 
Cuttack GAIL 
62 Khorda GAIL 
63 
Punjab 5 
Jalandhar Jay Madhok Energy Pvt Ltd 
64 Amritsar GSPL 
65 Bhatinda GSPL 
66 Rupnagar BPCL 
67 Fatehgarh Sahib  IRM Energy Pvt Ltd 
68 Puduchery 1 Yanam KEI-ROSS 
69 Rajasthan 1 Kota  GAIL Gas                                      
70 Telangana 1 Hyderabad  Bhagyanagar Gas Ltd                             
71 Tripura 1 AGARTALA Tirpua Natural Gas Company Ltd                                                                   
72 UT 1 Dadra & Nagar Haveli Gujarat Gas Ltd             
73 UT 1 Chandigarh  IOCL-Adani JV                               
74 UT 1 Daman IOCL-Adani JV                               
75 
Uttar 
Pradesh 17 
Saharanpur  BPCL 
76 GautamBudh Nagar Indraprastha Gas Limited                         
77 Ghaziabad  Indraprastha Gas Limited                         
78 Firozabad (TTZ) GAIL Gas                                      
79 Meerut GAIL Gas                                      
80 Khurja Adani Gas Ltd. 
81 Lucknow  Green Gas Ltd                           

39 
 
 
 
82 Agra  Green Gas Ltd                           
83 Kanpur  Central UP Gas Ltd                                    
84 Bareilly  Central UP Gas Ltd                                    
85 Jhansi  Central UP Gas Ltd                                    
86 Moradabad  Siti Energy Limited  
87 Mathura Sanwariya Gas                               
88 Allahabad  IOCL-Adani JV                               
89 Baghpat Essel infra 
90 Bulandshahr IOCL-Adani JV                               
91 Varanasi GAIL 
92 
Uttarakhand 2 
Udham Singh Nagar IOCL-Adani JV                               
93 Haridwar Haridwar Natural Gas Private Limited. 
(Consortium of GAIL Gas and BPCL) 
94 West Bengal 1 Kolkatta & adjoinging 
area 
Greater Calcutta Gas Supply 
Corporation Ltd. (GCGSCL)  
Note  * - Matter sub-judice. At present Adani Gas Limited and Haryana City Gas are 
operating CGD network in Faridabad & Gurgaon respectively.  
  

40 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
List of Geographical Areas for 9th Round CGD Bidding 
SN. State / UT Geographical Areas District Name 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam & 
Vizianagarm Districts 
Srikakulam 
Visakhapatnam 
Vizianagaram 
2 
 
Assam 
Cachar, Hailakandi & Karimganj 
Districts 
Cachar 
Hailakandi 
Karimganj 
3 Kamrup & Kamrup Metropolitan 
(Guwahati) Districts 
Kamrup 
Kamrup Metropolitan 
(Guwahati) 
4 
Bihar 
Aurangabad, Kaimur & Rohtas Districts 
Aurangabad 
Kairnur 
Rohtas 
5 Begusarai District Begusarai 
6 Gaya & Nalanda Districts 
Gaya 
Nalanda 
7 
Daman and 
Din (UT) Diu & Gir Somnath Districts 
Diu 
Gujarat GirSomnath 
8 
Gujarat 
Sundernagar District (Except areas 
already authorized) Sundernagar-Part 
9 Barwala & Ranpur Talukas Botad-Part District 
10 Dangas & Navsari-Part Dist (Except 
areas already authorized) Dangs (Ahwa) 
11 Junagadh District Junagadh 
12 Mahisagar & Kheda Districts (Except 
areas already authorized) Mahisagar&Kheda 
13 Narmada (Rajpipla) District Narmada (Rajpipla) 
14 Porbandar District Porbandar 

41 
 
 
 
15 
Haryana & 
Himanchal 
Pradesh 
Panchkula -Part District, Shimla, Solan 
& Sirmaur Districts (Except areas 
already authorized) 
Panchkula -Part District 
Solan -Part District 
Sirmaur (Sirmour) 
Shimla 
16 
Haryana 
Bhiwani, Charkhi Dadri & Mahendragarh 
Districts 
Bhiwani 
CharkhiDadri 
Mahendragarh 
17 Hisar District Hisar 
18 Jhajjar District Jhajjar 
19 Jind & Sonepat Districts (Except areas 
already authorized) 
Jind 
Sonepat -Part District 
20 Nuh (Mewat) & Palwal Districts 
Nuh (Mewat) 
Palwal 
21 Himachal 
Pradesh Bilaspur, Hamirpur & Una Districts 
Bilaspur 
Hamirpur 
Una 
22 
 
Jharkhand 
Bokaro, Hazaribagh & Ramgarh 
Districts 
Bokaro 
Hazaribag 
Ramgarh 
23 Giridih & Dhanbad Districts 
Giridih 
Dhanbad 
24 
Karnataka 
Chitradurga & Devangere Districts 
Chitradurga 
Davangere 
25 Udupi District Udupi 
26 Balliari & Gadag Districts 
Balliari  (Bellary) 
Gadag 
27 Bidar District Bidar 
28 Dakshina Kannada (Mangaluru) Districts Dakshina Kannada 
(Mangaluru) 
29 Ramanagara District Ramanagara 

42 
 
 
 
30  
Kerala 
Kozhikode & wayanad Districts 
Kozhikode 
Wayanad 
31 Malappuram Districts Malappuram 
32 
Kerala & 
Puducherry 
Kannur, Kasargod & Mahe Districts 
Kannur 
(UT) Kasaragod 
 
Mahe (U.T. of Puduchery) 
3 3 Kerala Palakkad & Thrissur Districts 
Palakkad 
Thrissur 
34 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal & Rajgarh Districts 
Bhopal 
Rajgarh 
35 Guna District Guna 
36 Rewa District Rewa 
37 Satna & Shahdol Districts 
Satna 
Shahdol 
38 
Maharashtra 
Ahmednagar & Aurangabad Districts 
Ahmednagar 
Aurangabad 
39 Dhule & Nashik Districts 
Dhule 
Nashik 
40 Latur & Osmanabad Districts 
Latur 
Osmanabad 
41 Sangli & Satara Districts 
Sangli 
Satara 
42 Sindhudurg District Sindhudurg 
43 
Odisha 
Angul (Talcher) & Dhekanal Districts 
Angul (Talcher) 
Dhenkanal 
44 Sundergarh & Jharsuguda Districts 
Sundargarh 
Jharsuguda 
45 Balasore, Bhadrak & Mayurbhanj 
Districts 
Balasore 
Bhadrak 

43 
 
 
 
Mayurbhanj 
46 Bargarh, Deogarh (Debagarh) & 
Sambalpur Districts 
Bargarh 
Deogarh (Debagarh) 
Sambalpur 
47 Ganjam, Nayagarh & Puri Districts 
Ganjam 
Nayagarh 
Puri 
48 Jagatsinghpur & Kendrapara Districts 
Jagatsinghapur 
Kendrapara 
49 Jajpur & Kendujhar (Keonjhar) Districts 
Jajpur 
Kendujhar (Keonjhar) 
50 
Puducherry 
(UT) & Tamil 
Nadu 
Karaikal & Nagapattinam Districts 
Karaikal 
Nagapattinam 
51 Puducherry 
(UT) Puducherry (Pondicherry ) District Puducherry (Pondicherry) 
52 
 
Punjab 
Patiala, Sangrur & SAS Nagar (Except 
areas already authorized) Districts 
Patiala 
Sangrur 
Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar 
(Mohali) -Part District 
53 Barnala, Ludhiana & Moga Districts 
Barnala 
Ludhiana -Part District 
Moga 
54 
Jalandhar (Except areas already 
authorized), Kapurthala & SBS Nagar 
Districts 
Jalandhar -Part District 
Kapurthala 
Navvanshahr (Shahid 
Bhagat Singh Nagar) 
55 
 
Rajasthan 
Barmer, Jaisalmer & Jodhpur Districts 
Barmer 
Jaisalmer 
Jodhpur 
56 Alwar (Other than Bhiwadi) & Jaipur 
Districts 
Alvar -Part District 
Jaipur 

44 
 
 
 
57 Baran, Kota & Chittorgarh ( Only 
Rawatbhata Taluka) Districts 
Baran 
Kota -Part District 
Rawatbhata (Chittorgarh) -
Part District 
58 Bilwara & Bundi Districts 
Bhilwara 
Bundi 
59 Chittorgarh (Other than Rawatbhata) & 
Udaipur Districts 
Chittorgarh except 
Rawatbhata 
Udaipur 
60 Dholpur District Dholpur 
61 
Tamil Nadu 
Kanchipuram District Kanchipurant 
62 Chennai &Tiruvallur Districts 
Chennai 
Tiruvallur 
63 Coimbatore District Coimbatore 
64 Cuddalore, Nagapatinam & Tiruvarur 
Districts 
Cuddalore 
Nagapattinam 
Tiruvarur 
(Thiruvarur) 
65 Ramanathapuram District Ramanathapuram 
66 Salem District Salem 
67 Tiruppur District Tiruppur 
68 
Telangana 
Bhadradri, Kothagudem & Khammam 
Districts 
Bhadradri 
Rothagudem 
Khammam 
69 Jagtial, Peddapalle, Karimnagar & 
Rajanna Sircilla Districts 
Jagtial 
Peddapalli 
Karimnagar 
RajannaSircilla 
70 
Jangaon,JayashankarBoopalpallv. 
Mahbubabad, Warangal Urban & 
Warangal Rural Districts 
Jangaon 
Jayashankar 
Bhoopalpally 

45 
 
 
 
Mahabubabad 
Warangal (Rural) 
Warangal (Urban) 
71 Medak, Siddipet & Sangareddy Districts 
Medak 
Siddipet 
Sangareddy 
72 Medchal Rangareddy & Vikarabad 
Districts 
Medchal 
Rangareddy 
Vikarabad 
73 Nalgonda, Suryapet & Yadadri 
Bhuvanagiri Districts 
Nalgonda 
Suryapet 
Yadadri Bhuvanagiri 
74  
Tripura 
Gomati District Gomati 
75 West Tripura (Except areas already 
authorized) District West Tripura -Part District 
76 
Uttar Pradesh 
Aligarh, Bulandshahr (Except areas 
already authorized) & Hathras Districts 
Aligarh 
Bulandshahr -Part District 
Hathras 
77 
Allahabad-(Except areas already 
authorized), Bhadohi & Kausambi 
Districts 
Allahabad -Part District 
Bhadohi 
Kaushambi 
78 Amethi (Chatrapati Sahuji Mahraj 
Nagar), Pratapgarh & Rai Bareli Districts 
Amethi (Chatrapati Sahuji 
Mahraj Nagar) 
Pratapgarh 
RaeBareli 
79 Auraiya. Ramabainagar & Etawah 
Districts 
Auraiya 
Kanpur Dehat (Ramabai 
Nagar) 
Etawah 
80 Faizabad & Sultanpur Districts 
Faizabad 
Sultanpur 

46 
 
 
 
81 Gorakhpur, SantKabir Nagar & 
Kushinagar 
Gorakhpur 
SantKabir Nagar 
Kushinagar 
(Padrauna) 
82 
Meerut -(Except areas already 
authorized). Muzaffarnagar & Shamali 
Districts 
Meerut -Part District 
Muzaffarnagar 
Shamali (Prabuddh Nagar) 
83 Moradabad -(Except areas already 
authorized) District Moradabad -Part District 
84 Unnao -(Except areas already 
authorized) Unnao -Part District 
85 Uttarakhand Dehradun District Dehradun 
86 West Bengal Burdwan (Bardhaman) District East & West Burdwan 
(Bardhaman) 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 14 
Ethanol Blended Petrol  
The Committee note that Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme is being implemented 
by the Ministry/OMCs. The Committee further, note that during the year 2015 -16, the 
actual quantity procured by the OMC‟s was 111 crore litres achieving 3.5 per cent 
blending. However, during 2016-17, the total procurement was only 66.5 crore litres 
achieving the blending of 2.07 per cent. The lower procurement has been attributed 
to drought situation in sugar cane producing states like Karnataka and Maharashtra. 
During the year 2017-18 the tenders have been issued for 313 crore litres of Ethanol 
and so far 3.28 crore litre have been procured. The Committee have been informed 
that the OMCs are likely to procure close to 140 crore litres and so this year the 
procurement is likely to  be higher compared to last year. The Committee has also 
been informed that all the issues related to EBP Programme including pricing have 
been resolved.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should make all efforts to intensify the 
procurement of Ethanol for EBP programme and achieve increasing blending 
percentage which also help in diversifying energy sources. The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry/OMCs should seriously look at establishing Second 
Generation Ethanol Plants so as to diversify its sources for availability of Ethanol and 
also to improve the blending percentage in the country. 
 

47 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to improve the availability of ethanol, the Government in December, 2014 
introduced the administered price mechanism for p rocurement of ethanol by OMCs.   
On 1.11.2017, the Government enhanced the ex -mill price of ethanol for the ethanol 
supply year 2017 -18 at Rs.40.85/per litre. Additionally, GST and transportation 
charges are being paid by OMCs. 
 
For the ongoing ethanol supp ly year 2017 -18, OMCs have allocated 158.75 crore 
litres of ethanol which is the highest ever quantity in one single supply year.   
 
Further, Oil PSUs have planned to setup 12 Second Generation (2G) Ethanol Bio -
refineries in 11 States of the country.   On 0 7.12.2016, OMCs have entered into 6 
MOUs with Technology providers (5 MOUs) and State Govt. (1 MOU) for setting up 
2G Ethanol plants at 5 locations namely Dahej (Gujarat), Panipat (Haryana), Bargarh 
(Odisha), Bina (Madhya Pradesh) and Bathinda (Punjab). HP CL has laid foundation 
stone for 1st 2G Ethanol Bio-refinery at Bathinda (Punjab) on 25.12.2016. 
 
Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) for some 2G ethanol biorefineries has been 
prepared by Oil PSUs. One of the Oil PSU viz. Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL), 
has obtained Environmental Clearance for setting up its  plant in Numaligarh (Assam) 
on 06.11.2017, and agreement to set up Joint Venture with M/s Chempolis, a Finland 
based company, has been signed. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 15 
Refinery in Rajasthan  
The Committee note that in order to meet the continuously rising demand of fuel 
products like petrol and diesel in the country, the refining industry has drawn plans 
for enhancing cr ude processing capacity. The refining capacity of the country as on 
date is 247.6 MMTPA and many green field refinery projects and expansion of 
existing refineries are also planned. The Committee note that MOP&NG has granted 
its approval for setting up the  Rajasthan Refinery project at Pachpadra in Barmer 
district of Rajasthan with the Revised Cost Estimate of Rs. 43,129 crore (at February 
2017 prices). The Committee note that the works have started and it is likely to be 
commissioned by 2022. The Committee  recommend that Ministry / PSU should 
monitor these expansion of existing and Greenfield refinery projects including the 
refinery in Rajasthan so that they are completed within the estimated time and cost. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Regular meetings are taken by the Ministry and concerned PSUs to monitor existing 
and Greenfield Refinery projects including, the  Refinery in Rajasthan. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th  June, 2018 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
Recommendation 17 
International Cooperation in Petroleum Sector  
The Committee observe that oil and gas industry as one of the core sectors of the 
economy, plays an important role in the country's economic development. Presently, 
the country is dependent on imports for about 80 percent of its crude oil 
requirements and around 40 percent in case of natural gas. On the one hand 
domestic oil and natural gas production has been declining in the country for the last 
few years, on the other, energy needs of the economy are growing at a faster rate. 
Further, prevailing geo-political instability in the Gulf region and the volatility of global 
oil market will have a direct impact on country's energy basket. The Committee feel 
that India is emerging as one of the fastest growing economies in the world and in 
this context, excessive dependence on imports on one particular region may not be a 
good sign for the country's future energy security scenario.  
The Committee, therefore, feel that it has become imperative for the country to look 
beyond traditional oil exporting countries and scout for opportunities for oil and gas in 
various potential hydrocarbon regions in the world. Further, the Committee firmly 
believe that ever increasing domestic energy consumption requirements can be met 
only through diversified means of energy options. T he Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Government must become proactive to encourage national oil companies to 
pursue equity oil and gas opportunities overseas through consistent oil diplomacy 
and sustained international cooperation and engagement in pet roleum sector with 
foreign players at various bilateral and multilateral fora for ensuring overall energy 
security of the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has noted the recommendation of the Standing 
Committee. MoPNG has  been focusing to intensify our bilateral and multilateral 
engagements with hydrocarbon rich countries. In order to ensure the energy security 
of our country, Indian oil & gas PSUs are importing oil and gas on long / medium / 
spot basis from global markets.  
Considering the dependency on the Middle East region for India‟s Oil and Gas 
sourcing, there has been a conscious effort to diversify our sourcing options. For the 
first time, India imported crude oil from the US. Import of US crude by Indian 
companies started in Oct 2017.  Since Oct 2017, 4 PSUs have placed orders for 
11.85 million barrels (approx US$ 730 million at current market prices). The first 
crude consignment reached Paradip on 2 Oct 2017.  Indian companies have 
together contracted 8 MMTPA of LNG and ethane condensate from the US. The first 
long term LNG cargo from the US was loaded in GAIL‟s first own chartered ship i.e. 
“Meridian Spirit” and was received in India on 30th March, 2018.  
 
Further, in order to supplement domestic availability of cr ude oil and natural gas, 
MoPNG has been encouraging PSUs to acquire oil & gas assets abroad. Indian 
Public Sector Oil and Gas companies, till February, 2018, have acquired stake in 27 
countries including Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, C olombia, 
East Timor, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Libya, Mozambique, 
Myanmar, Namibia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Russia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria, 
United States of America, UAE, Venezuela, Vietnam and Yemen. Recently, an 
Indian consortium compris ing of OVL, IOCL and BPRL acquired 10% PI in the 

49 
 
 
 
producing Lower Zakhum offshore oil field in UAE and IOCL acquired 17% stake in 
Makhaizna oilfield in Oman. 
 
During the year 2017 -18, the share of equity oil and gas for Indian PSUs from 
overseas assets was approx. 25.18 MMTOE.  
Based on the specific business requirements, oil & gas PSUs enter into agreements 
(MoUs, other commercial / definitive agreement) with their foreign counterparts 
under intimation to MoPNG. Based on agreed interests MoPNG also enter into MoUs 
with partner countries for mutual benefit. The MoUs are renewed on a regular basis. 
India is also actively engaged in multilateral cooperation in the hydrocarbon sector 
with International agencies like OPEC, IEA, IEF (International Energy Forum), G ECF 
etc. India and OPEC have set up Institutional Dialogue since May 2015.  India has 
become Association Country of IEA in March 2017 and is working closely with IEF to 
further its energy diplomacy. India, hosted the 16th International Energy Forum 
Ministerial Meeting at New Delhi from 10 -12 April 2018. Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
inaugurated the event on 11thApril and External Affairs Minister delivered the 
valedictory address on 12th  April 2018.  The meeting saw participation from 53 
countries out of which 38 w ere at Ministerial level, over 17 International 
Organization, 10 represented at the level of Heads of these International 
Organizations, over 24 CEOs and total over 1345 delegates including 638 overseas 
delegates. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 19 
Bio Fuels Policy  
The Committee note that the Ministry of P&NG has been mandated the responsibility 
of to allocate 1(i) overall coordination concerning bio fuels preparing National Policy 
of Bio Fuels, marketing, distributions, retailing, supporting manufacturing, blending 
and setting up of National Bio Fuel Development Board etc. The Committee note that 
the Oil PSUs are establishing 12 second generation Ethanol Petrol Oil Refineries 
across 11 states at a cost of Rs. 10,000 crore to ensure the availability of Ethanol 
towards blending. The Committee also note that the government vide notification 
dated 29 June, 2017 has allowed direct sale of Bio Diesel for blending with high 
speed diesel to all  consumers. At present, per liter of Ethanol has been fixed at Rs. 
40.85 per liter which is roughly Rs. 10 more than the price of petrol . The cost of 
Ethanol from these second generation bio refineries is likely to be more than the 
Ethanol from molasses. The Committee have a view that the sugar cane juice should 
be utilised for production of Ethanol for blending whenever there is excess 
production of sugarcane in the country. The Ministry has stated that it is proposing 
this in the new Bio Fuel Policy whic h is being finalised. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should consult all stakeholders and finalise the new Bio 
Fuel Policy at the earliest so that the Ethanol Blending Programme and Bio Fuel 
Programme can be implemented successfully. 
 

50 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government has approved the National Policy on Biofuels – 2018. Same has 
been notified on 8.6.2018.  This policy is expected to give boost to the 
implementation of Biofuel Programme as it expands the scope of raw material for 
ethanol production. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 20 
CBM / NGHP / Shale Gas  
The Committee note that the Ministry/DGH has been trying to increase the 
production of crude oil and nat ural gas and many policy initiatives have been taken 
in the recent past particularly with regard to Coal Bed Methane (CBM). The 
production from CBM is likely to increase from 3.45 MMSCMD IN 2017 -18 TO 6.88 
MMSCMD in 2018 -19 and projected to reach 9.40 MMSC MD in 2021 -22. The 
Committee note that the CBM policy is bearing fruit and would like to await the actual 
production figures. The Committee would like to recommend that the Ministry / DGH 
should explore the possibility of CBM extraction obtaining new areas in coal mines.  
The Committee note that the country has rich gas hydrates reserves. NGHP -02 has 
discovered gas -hydrate-bearing sand reservoir system in the offshore Krishna 
Godavari basin. Simulation studies for identifying potential gas hydrate reservoir  are 
being conducted to establish the possible techniques / methodology to produce 
natural gas from gas hydrates. But the decision in respect of entering into the NGHP-
Expedition-03, has been delayed. Similarly, very less effort has been made to 
ascertain the potential of Shale gas, in the country during the last two years.  
The Committee, therefore, observe that almost no effort on the part of Ministry / DGH 
has been made to quickly harness these resources to meet the energy needs of the 
country. There is no mention of Gas Hydrates and shale gas in strategy to achieve 
reduction of import dependence by 2022. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry / DGH should focus their approach in harnessing these energy sources 
at the earliest and a mission mode approach needs to be adopted. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Requisite information is as under:- 
1. National Gas Hydrate Programme: 
NGHP-02 commenced on 3rd March 2015 for data acquisition operations in Krishna 
Godavari and Mahanadi deep offshore areas and was completed on 28th July 2015. 
During NGHP Expedition 02, 42 wells (25 wells for LWD/MWD & 17 wells for Coring 
and other studies) were completed. Two Gas Hydrate sand reservoirs were 
identified, which may be potential site(s) for pilot production testing . Efforts are being 
made to harness these resources in techno economically feasible way. 
 
An Advisory Committee under the chairmanship of Director General, Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), comprising of five International experts from USA 
and Jap an has  been constituted. The First meeting of Advisory Committee of 

51 
 
 
 
International experts held in December, 2016, reviewed the data generated from 
NGHP-Expedition-02. Advisory committee has suggested to develop R&D 
capabilities through domestic and interna tional (Japan, USA, etc.) partnerships with 
sustained support of industry and academic research institutions engaged in Gas 
Hydrate research and trained staff for the development of Gas Hydrates in India. 
Advisory committee opined that the objective of the  pilot production test should be 
understanding of process and not the commerciality. The results have been 
deliberated and approved by Steering committee of NGHP headed by Secretary, 
P&NG held in October 2017. 
 
The studies for the reservoir characterizatio n and production modelling are carried 
out by U. S. Department of Energy (USDOE/USGS) using the parameters calculated 
from the study of samples collected during NGHP -Expedition-02. The results of 
studies completed so far and possibilities/way forward of ve nturing into next 
expedition  was discussed in the 2nd meeting of Advisory committee  held in 
April, 2018. 
 
2.      Coal Bed Methane (CBM): 
 
Pursuant to CBM policy notification dated 11.04.2017, CBM production has ramped 
up to 2.23 MMSCMD (Feb. 2018) durin g FY 2017 -18 compared to previous year 
production. this production is from four  CBM blocks which includes incidental 
production from  CBM block Jharia which is operated by  ONGC and commercial 
production from 3 CBM blocks Raniganj South, Raniganj East, & Sohagpur West. 
 
The total CBM production is expected to be around 4.93 MMSCMD by the 
year 2018-19. 
 
Taking into cognizance of existing GGS facility and infrastructure, it is envisaged that 
production is likely to be increased from three blocks namely RG (E) , SP (W) and 
RG (S). Production projection from major producing blocks for next few years are 
given below:- 
 
All figures in MMSCMD 
 
 Sl. 
No. 
  
 Block  Operator 
  
Actual 
1016-16 
Actual 
2016-17 
Actual 
2017-18 
Projected 
FY 2018-19 
Projected 
FY 2019-20 
Projected 
FY2020-21 
1 Jharia ONGC 0.005 0.008 0.007 0.056 0.167 0.236 
2 Raniganj 
(North)   
  
ONGC 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
3 BK-CBM -
2001/1        
  
ONGC 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.156 
 
0.438 
 
0.723 
4 NK-CBM -
2001/1        
  
ONGC 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.000 
 
0.144 
 
0.211 
 
0.269 
5 Raniganj 
(South)       
  
GEECL 
 
0.418 
 
0.465 
 
0.563 
 
0.607 
 
0.740 
 
0.836 
6 RG(East -
CBM-2001/1 
  
EOL 
 
0.646 
 
1.056 
 
0.733 
 
1.507 
 
2.025 
 
2.449 
7 SP(West-
CBM-2001/1 
  
RIL 
 
0.004 
 
0.017 
 
0.931 
 
2.46 
 
2.663 
 
2.780 
  Total   1.07 1.546 2.234 4.93 6.24 7.29 
                                                                                                        
 

52 
 
 
 
3.      Shale Gas & Oil: 
  
To tap the unexplored Shale Gas and Oil potential in India, Government notified the  
Shale gas and Oil exploration policy on 14th October 2013 for National Oil 
Companies (NOC). The objective  of policy was to initiate and provide impetus to 
shale oil and gas exploration efforts. Under the  policy ONGC and OIL  were 
mandated to carry out exploration in three phases in their nomination ML areas. The 
first phase of Shale Gas Assessment Studies completed in April, 2017.   ONGC 
identified 50 blocks in 4 basins i.e. Assam, KG, Cauvery and Cambay basin. So far 
ONGC has drilled 22 wells in 18 blocks  of these basins.   OIL has drilled 1 well in 
Jaisalmer Basin.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Recommendation 21 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (I&EBR) of Oil PSUs 
The Committee note that the actual IEBR expenditure of all oil PSUs in general in 
E&P sector in the year 2016 -17 was 72,382.82 crore. In the year 2017 - 18, the BE 
figures were Rs. 52749.13 and RE figures were Rs. 53960.97. The BE for the E&P 
sector for the  current financial year 2018 -19 has been reduced to Rs. 48064.15 
crore. The Committee are concerned at such variation in figures of BE, RE and 
actuals in the last three years and this variation reflects poor planning on the part of 
oil PSUs. If sectoral allocations are analysed, it may be seen that there is substantial 
variation in allocations for 'Refinery and Marketing' sector and 'Petrochemicals' 
sector. The actual expenditure during 2016-17 in 'Refinery and Marketing' sector was 
Rs. 30,523.67 crore and at BE stage of 2017 -18 the allocation was increased to Rs. 
31796.82 crore at RE stage and the same was further increased to Rs. 35838.16 in 
BE 2018-19. In case of 'Petrochemicals' sector', Rs. 1445.80 crore were the actuals 
during 2016 -17 and the same was reduced to Rs. 1431.33 in BE 2017 -18 and 
Rs.2156.48 at RE stage and the actuals of the same was Rs. 2048.02 upto 
December, 2017. Further, the allocation during BE 2018 -19 in Petrochemicals sector 
has witnessed twofold increase at Rs. 3952.14.  
In case of i ndividual IEBR of oil PSUs, some variations have been found. In respect 
of various E&P activities of ONGC, Rs. 29,968 crore were allocated at BE 2017 -18 
and it was increased to 24% i.e. Rs. 37,218 crore at the RE stage. Further, the 
actual expenditure of O NGC upto December, 2017 was Rs. 26,498 crore and the 
same has been increased to Rs. 32,077 crore at BE 2018 -19. In the case of Oil India 
Limited Rs. 11381.89 crore was allocated at BE stage of 2016 -17 and the same was 
increased to 49% at RE stage of the sa me year i.e. Rs. 17012.73 crore and the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 11083.24 crore. Further, at BE stage of 2017 - 18 it was 
Rs. 9252.34 crore was allocated but the actual expenditure was only Rs. 7213.78 
crore. For the current financial year 2018 -19 in respect of Oil India Ltd. Rs. 4299.99 
crore was allocated at BE stage. In respect of BPCL the actual expenditure incurred 
for various activities upto December, 2017 was Rs. 4371.58 crore as against Rs. 
7100.64 crore at BE 2017 -18. The same for the current fina ncial year 2018-19 it has 
been increased to Rs. 7400.00 crore. In respect of EIL the allocation at BE stage of 
2017-18 was Rs. 218 crore and the same was revised to Rs. 171 crore at RE stage 
and the actual expenditure upto December, 2017 was Rs. 82 crore o nly. For the 

53 
 
 
 
current financial year 2018 -19, Rs. 233 crore was allocated reflecting variations 
during the last two years. 
The Committee are unhappy to find substantial variations in allocations and 
expenditure of IEBR of PSUs particularly in PSUs like GAIL  and ONGC and IOC 
where there is substantial variation in figures of BE and RE under the Exploration & 
Production sector. The Committee therefore, feel that these variations reflect poor 
planning and lack of fiscal discipline on the part of Maharatna PSUs.  The Committee 
would also like the Oil PSU to pursue cost efficiency measures and reduce 
administrative overheads in their activities as part of their overall financial 
management. The Committee accordingly, recommend that financial estimates of oil 
PSUs m ust be prepared with adequate care to avoid such wide variations. The 
Committee also desire that the activities proposed for a particular year in respect of 
PSUs for which funds have been allocated should normally be undertaken in the 
same financial year. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During year 2016 -17 the actual IEBR of Rs.104426.04 crore was utilized by the 
concerned oil and gas CPSEs against BE of Rs. Rs.87214.56 crore. During 2017-18, 
against BE (IEBR) Rs. 86027.28 crore and RE of Rs.87384.00 crore, oil and  gas 
CPSEs utilized Rs.128980.53 crore (provisional) till March, 2018. Sector -wise 
summary is as follows: 
 
Rs. In crore 
Sector 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Actual  BE RE Actual * BE 
Exploration and 
Production 
72383 52749  53961 57486** 48064 
Refinery and 
Marketing 
30524 31797 31202 68246*** 35838 
Petrochemicals 1446 1431 2156 3171 3952 
Engineering 74 50 65 78 1481 
Total 104427 86027 87384 128981 89335 
* = Provisional. 
** = Includes payment of Rs.7534.21 crore for acquisition of GSPC‟s stake in DDW Field 
*** = Includes payment of Rs.36915 crore for buying stakes in HPCL 
The main reasons for higher BE during 2018 -19 under petrochemicals is due to provision 
kept for fuel upgradation projects by IOCL and execution of propylene derivative 
petrochemical project  by BPCL. CPSE-wise actual expenditure during 2016-17, BE, RE and 
actual expenditure during 2017-18 and BE for 2018-19 is given over leaf: 
Internal and Extra Budgetary  Resources (I& EBR) - Actual for 2016-17, BE & RE for 2017 -18 and BE 
2018-19 
 
 
(As on 25.04.18) (Rs. in crore) 
Name of the 
CPSEs 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Actual Expdtr.  BE RE Actual Expdtr. * BE 
ONGC # 28006.41 29967.82 37217.76 72383.00 32077.12 

54 
 
 
 
 GAIL  1814.05 2053.00 3309.00 3612.63 4722.00 
HPCL 5757.26 7110.00 7110.00 7134.19 8425.00 
BPCL   16948.55 7100.64 7800.00 8161.14 7400.00 
IOCL 20736.93 20161.79 18848.75 20345.21 22862.34 
OIL $ 11083.24 9252.34 4262.74 8395.17 4299.99 
ONGC-Videsh 17616.99 7087.99 6393.00 6240.18 5886.00 
CPCL 1269.11 845.00 865.00 963.49 1010.00 
NRL (&) 503.35 1260.95 375.00 386.59 428.00 
MRPL 616.40 1137.75 1137.75 1281.31 744.00 
Balmer Lawrie  73.75 50.00 65.00 77.62 125.00 
EIL ^ 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1355.64 
Total 104426.04 86027.28 87384.00 128980.53 89335.09 
* = Provisional and includes expenditure on investment in JV/Subsidiaries 
 # = Includes payments for acquisition of GSPC's stake in DDW Field (Rs.7534.21 crore) and HPCL stake 
of Rs.36915 crore. Out of Rs.36915 crore towards HPCL stake acquisition, Rs.24876 crore is from 
domestic borrowings. 
$ = Out of total IEBR of Rs.9252.34 crore, total CAPEX (including JV/Subsidiaries) investment is 
Rs.4289.56 crore. The actual expenditure includes Rs.4755.41 crore on account of adjustments made for 
2016-17 (CAPEX, dividend) and equity  contribution on overseas subsidiaries for Russia and buyback of 
shares. 
*** = Rs.700 crore proposed for petrochemicals which was not accounted for in BE 2017 -18 due to an 
error has been incorporated in RE for 2017-18, taking its total IEBR to Rs.7800 crore. 
(&) = Against total IEBR of Rs.1260.95 crore, total CAPEX for 2017 -18 was Rs.375 crore against which 
Rs.386.59 crore utilised. 
^ = Included first time for IEBR review. 
 
Reasons for variations in BE & RE for 2017-18 and BE for 2018-19 as compared 
to actual expenditure during 2016 -17 for E&P, Refinery & Marketing and 
Petrochemicals sectors are given below:- 
 
Exploration & Production Sector: 
 
 The budget requirement of E&P Sector depends on the level of activities planned 
in various fields which is function of the prospectivity and availability of various 
resources. The cost structure varies from field to field depending upon the depth 
of the well, topography, whether on -land, shallow or deep water etc. Further 
various development schemes are approved from time to time having different 
approved cost. The actual expenditure and budget varies depending upon the 
timing of execution of such schemes. Hence the expenditure/budget  on year to 
year basis may not be consistent.  
 

55 
 
 
 
 Capex planned to spend in acquiring assts in overseas mostly in Joint ventures 
with other international partners depends upon the annual work plan as agreed 
by consortium/work commitments to host Government. As such CAPEX is a 
reflection of agreed annual work plan.  
 
 The work plan for different years is not the same over different years and 
undergoes changes depending on the „phase‟ of the project in its „lifecycle‟. i.e. 
from seismic exploration surveys to drilling to development/construction to 
production. Once a project commences production, the incremental yearly capex 
reduces significantly. Further capex in a project would occur only if there is any 
further expansion of the project. 
 
 Actual expenditure d uring 2016 -17 under E&P sector was higher (Rs.72382.82 
crore) against BE (Rs.60131.45 crore) due to acquisition of Russian assets by 
OIL, IOCL, BPCL and  OVL acquiring 26% stake in Vankorneft (A company 
holding interest in oil & gas field in Russia).  
 
Refining & Marketing Sector: 
 Under Refining and Marketing sector, some of the downstream sector CPSEs 
have provisions made in BE 2017 -18 and BE 2018 -19 for projects related to fuel 
quality upgradation (BS -IV &  BS-VI). Since BPCL executed a major project i.e. 
Integrated Refinery Expansion Project (IREP) at Kochi Refinery in 2016 -17, it 
utilised higher amount in 2016 -17  as compared to BE  allocated for 2018 -19.  
During 2017 -18, BPCL has utilized Rs.5883.08 crore  to implement refining and 
marketing projects/activities. However, IEBR/CAPEX is proposed based on 
ongoing projects and also expenditure in relation to new viable projects to be 
implemented.   
 
Petrochemicals Sector: 
 
 The main reason in variation under Pet rochemicals sector  was an amount of  
Rs.700 crore  proposed by BPCL not accounted for in BE 2017 -18,  due to an 
inadvertent error  in the Budget Document 2017 -18. The same was however, 
incorporated in RE for 2017 -18, taking the total IEBR of BPCL to Rs.780 0 crore 
and that for petrochemicals sector to Rs.2156.48 crore. IOCL has proposed BE 
for 2018 -19 as Rs.2122.14 crore against actual expenditure of Rs.798.10 crore 
for 2016 -17 and Rs.2417.65 crore in 2017 -18 worked out based on the project 
status and new opportunities in hand and also as and when they arise. The main 
reasons for higher BE during 2018 -19 under petrochemicals is due to the 
provision kept for fuel upgradation projects by IOCL and execution of propylene 
derivative petrochemical project  by BPCL.    
 
Reasons in variation in BE & RE for 2017 -18, BE for 2018 -19 as compared 
actual expenditure during 2016 -17 in respect of ONGC, OIL, BPCL, GAIL, IOCL 
& EIL: 
ONGC: 
In RE 2017 -18, the CAPEX is higher at Rs.37,218 crore as the same includes 
Rs.7,560 crore towards acquisition cost of 80% stake in DDW field from GSPC. The 
said transaction was not a part of BE 17 -18 CAPEX. Meanwhile on 31.01.2018, 
ONGC has also acquired controlling stake in HPCL for which Rs. 36,915 crore has 

56 
 
 
 
been paid to Govt. of India. Considering these two transactions, actual expenditure 
during 2017-18 is Rs. 74,133 crore. 
OIL: 
Actual CAPEX of OIL for 2016 -17 was Rs. 11,083.24 crore which included 
investment of Rs. 6,746.59 crore in new acquisitions in Russian assets. Excluding 
this investment in new acquisitions, the remaining normal actual CAPEX during 
2016-17 was Rs. 4,336.65 crore. IEBR (BE) for 2017 -18 was Rs. 9,252.34 crore 
which includes CAPEX of Rs 4289.56 crore. CAPEX was marginally revised to 
Rs.4,262.74 crore at 2017 -18 (RE) stage. As against the CAPEX of Rs. 4,262.74 
crore for 2017-18 (RE), the actual CAPEX till March, 2018 is Rs.3639.77 crore out of 
actual total IEBR of Rs.8395.17 crore. The CAPEX for 2018 -19 (BE) has been kept 
at Rs. 4,299.99 crore. As may be seen from the details above, there is not much 
significant variation between actual CAPEX (excluding investmen t in new 
acquisitions) for 2016-17 and  CAPEX  for 2017-18 (RE) and 2018-19 (BE). 
GAIL: 
Actual expenditure of GAILin 2016-17 was Rs. 1814.05  crore. During 2017-18, BE 
and RE is Rs.2053 crore and 3309.00 crore respectively. Against the BE & RE for 
2017-18, Rs. 3612.63 crore have been utilized upto March, 2018 which exclude 
Rs.400 crore of Govt. grant  as GBS for Jagdishpur -Haldia-Bokaro-Dhamra Pipeline 
(JHBDPL). Total CAPEX in BE 2017 -18 is Rs.3253 crore which includes Rs.1200 
crore as GBS  for JHBDPL project. However, GAIL received Rs.400 crore as Central 
Grant (GBS) against a BE of Rs.1200 crore and RE of Rs.435 crore, which is not 
included in actual expenditure (IEBR). BE for 2018-19 is proposed of Rs. 4722 crore 
which does not include GBS (BE)  of Rs.1674 crore. 
Reason for increase in CAPEX in Exploration & Production sector is mainly due to 
increase in capital outlay towards Pipelines such as Jagdishpur -Haldia-Bokaro-
Dhamra Pipeline (JHPL), Kochi -Koottanad-Bangalore-Mangalore Pipeline 
(KKBMPL), Vijaipur -Auraiya-Phulpur Pipeline, etc. Further, there is decrease in 
Capex in Petrochemicals sector  due to completion of Solar rooftop at Pata 
Petrochemical Plant during 2017-18 and decrease in Operational capex requirement 
in Petrochemical Plant. 
BPCL: 
Expenditure is higher in 2016 -17 under exploration and production sector due to 
major investment in Russian blocks. During 2017 -18, expenditure is in line with cash 
calls and new investments in Offshore, Abu Dhabi. 2018 -19 BE is in line with cash 
calls and progress of work envisaged.  
BPCL has executed major projects viz; Integrated Refinery Expansion Project (IREP) 
at Kochi Refinery with approved project cost of Rs.16504 crore in 2016 -17. The 
project was mechanically completed in March 2017 and expenditure  was Rs.3472 
crore  in 2016 -17 and around Rs.500 crore in 2017 -18. Also the BE 2018 -19 for 
Refining and Marketing is lower as currently major project is in progress under 
Petrochemical sector in Kochi. Other projects are scheduled for completion in 2019 -
20 onwards. BPCL is executing Propylene Derivative Petrochemical Project (PDPP) 
at Kochi Refinery.  The project is now at construction stage and equipment are being 

57 
 
 
 
received.  Based on the status of project, IEBR of Rs.1700 crore has been planned 
in 2018-19 which is higher than previous years.  
It may be relevant to reiterate that Rs.700 crore proposed for petrochemicals by 
BPCL could not be accounted for in BE 2017 -18 due to an inadvertent error  in the 
Budget Document 2017 -18. This has since been incorporat ed in RE for 2017 -18, 
taking total IEBR of BPCL to Rs.7800 crore.   
IOCL: 
Reasons for variations in BE & RE for 2017 -18 and BE for 2018 -19 as compared to 
actual expenditure during 2016 -17 for Exploration & Production, Refinery & 
Marketing and Petrochemicals sectors. The main reasons for variation;  
 Total BE 2017 -18 is in line with Actual 2016 -17. E&P Actual 2016 -17 is higher 
than BE 2017-18 mainly due to acquisition of Russian assets during 2016-17,  
 Total RE 2017-18 is less than BE 2017 -18 mainly due to no n materialization of 
overseas E&P asset acquisition. 
 Total BE 2018-19 is more than Actual 2016-17 mainly due to provisions kept for 
projects related to fuel quality upgradation. E&P BE 2018 -19 is less than Actual 
2016-17 as BE 2018-19 has been worked out b ased on the project status and 
opportunities in hand which is on a reduced scale as compared to BE/RE 2017-
18.  
However, IOCL is on the lookout for new opportunities and as & when they 
arise, CAPEX towards the same would be financed through internal resources. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th  June, 2018 
 
  

58 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

59 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation 10 
Reduction in Import Dependence  
The Committee note that with the Prime Minister in his address during Urja Sangam 
2015 had called for reduction in import dependence on crude oil by 10 percent by 
2021-22. The Committee have been informed that a five pronged strategy for 
achieving this or towards the road map for reduction of import of crude oil 
dependence. An Integrated Mon itoring and Advisory Council (IMAC) has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
and consisting of senior officials from other Ministry / Departments to implement the 
strategy. The Committee had held a meetin g on 19.07.2017 and decided to expand 
the IMAC. The report prepared by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on road 
map to reduce import dependency has been circulated to the existing and potential 
new members of IMAC for their review/suggestions and thei r respective action plan 
of the road map. The Committee would like to point out that it is almost three years 
since the Prime Minister had made this call and less progress is seen on the ground. 
The Committee want the Ministry to take all steps to achieve this national objective 
and it should be viewed as an achievable target and surpass the percentage of 
import dependence of crude oil by the targeted date. The Committee are of the view 
that the Ministry has restricted this exercise within the Ministry and have not involved 
other concerned Ministries/Agencies in achieving this objective. The Committee 
would also like to point out that lack of mention of harnessing gas hydrates and of 
shale gas as an energy resource in the strategy are some of the imminent ga ps that 
can be seen in the road map prepared by the Ministry. The Committee would 
therefore expect the Ministry to aggressively explore these energy sources also to 
achieve the above objective. The Committee are of the view that more work needs to 
be done towards implementation and would recommend more effective and quick 
policy decisions on the ground towards achieving this goal. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The roadmap to achieve the target to reduce the dependency on import in energy 
from oil and gas by 10% b y 2021 -22 envisages multi -pronged strategy spanning 
across many sectors in general, given backward and forward linkages and energy 
consuming sectors in particular. Keeping in view the need to work in a collaborative 
manner with various Central Government M inistries, an Integrated Monitoring and 
Advisory Council (IMAC) has been constituted, under the chairmanship of Hon'ble 
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, consisting of senior officials including those 
from other Ministries/Departments and since broad based, to include energy 
consuming Ministries, to implement the strategy. 
During the meeting, MoP&NG highlighted major policy initiatives taken in the recent 
past to enhance domestic production of oil and gas. Inter-alia, this included initiatives 
like res ource re -assessment, National Data Repository (NDR), Open Acreage 
Licensing Policy (OALP), Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP), 
Discovered Small Fields Policy, tapping unconventional sources such as Coal Bed 
Methane (CBM) and Shale Gas besides enhancing production of bio -diesel and 

60 
 
 
 
increased use of PNG and LPG. The representatives of member Ministries, inter -
alia, explained policies, schemes and project initiatives taken by them towards 
augmenting the supply of energy, energy saving and demand s ubstitution / reduction 
through alternate modes. 
Shale gas resource exploration is at a nascent stage in India. With a view to impart 
some momentum to the untapped potential of shale gas/oil resource as part of the 
energy basket,  Government notified the Sh ale gas and Oil exploration policy on 
14thOctober 2013 for National Oil Companies (NOC).  The policy mandated ONGC 
and OIL to carry out exploration in  a phase-wise manner in nomination mining lease 
(ML) areas of ONGC and OIL. The first phase of shale gas as sessment studies were 
completed in April 2017. ONGC identified 50 blocks in 4 basins viz; Assam, Krishna 
Godavari, Cauvery and Cambay basins.  So far, ONGC has drilled 22 wells in 18 
blocks of these basins. OIL has drilled 1 well in Jaisalmer basin.   With the 
implementation of HELP/OALP on 10th March 2016, a single license for exploration 
and exploitation of not only conventional hydrocarbons but also non -conventional 
hydrocarbon resources like Shale Gas, Coal Bed Methane (CBM), etc. would be 
required.   
As regards Gas Hydrates, the National Gas Hydrates Programme (NGHP -02) 
commenced on 3rd March 2015 for data acquisition operations in Krishna Godavari 
and Mahanadi deep offshore areas and was completed on 28th July 2015. During 
NGHP Expedition 02,  42 wells w ere completed. Two Gas Hydrate sand reservoirs 
were identified for pilot production testing. Efforts are being made to harness these 
resources in techno economically feasible way. 
The Advisory Committee set up under the chairmanship of Director General, 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and comprising of five International 
experts from USA and Japan held meetings in December 2016 and in April 2018 to 
review the data generated from NGHP-Expedition-02 and deliberate on the results of 
studies completed so far on reservoir characterization and production modelling and 
possibilities/way forward.   
In order to harness Coal Bed Methane (CBM) potential in the country, permission of 
extraction of CBM to Coal India Limited (CIL) & its subsidiaries in coal mine s area 
has been granted. Further to expedite the exploration and exploitation of CBM, 
enhance the availability of natural gas and reduce the gap in demand and supply of 
natural gas. Coal India  Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries need not apply for grant of  
license/lease under the PNG Rules, 1959 for extraction of Coal Bed Methane (CBM) 
under their Coal Bearing Areas.  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 12 
Exploration and Production of Oil and Gas 
The Committee note that the crude oil production has stagnated for the last several 
years which is a matter of serious concern. The government has taken some policy 

61 
 
 
 
initiatives to improve the Hydrocarbon sector namely bringing out HELP, for early 
monetization of CBM, Discovered small fields policy, gas pricing reforms and reforms 
initiatives to enhance domestic production etc,. The committee note that the 
projections for crude oil production in the years to come show a marginal increase 
from 37.34MMT to 38.34MMT in 2021 -22. However, in Natural gas production, it is 
expected to increase from 35BCM in 2017 -18 to 71.92 BCM in 2021 -22. This is 
based on the production from gas discovery by ONGC.  The Committee also note 
that DGH as part of production enhancement policy, one of the option is to enter 
Production Enhancement Contract (PEC) between oil field services companies and 
NOC‟s/Pvt.& JV companies. The Committee while we lcoming the policy initiatives 
taken by Ministry/DGH to improve production of crude oil and natural gas within the 
country, would like to recommend that all the activities should be regularly monitored 
so that the desired output is obtained. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry/ DGH should enter Production Enhancement Contracts (PEC) with 
companies which have expertise in the E&P sector and can bring value to the Indian 
upstream PSU companies.  
The Committee also note that many IOR / EOR schemes h ave been undertaken by 
ONGC and OIL for improving the production in their fields. These need to be closely 
monitored and the expenditure incurred on such schemes should commensurate 
with the increase in production. The Committee have noted that DGH has prepared a 
draft policy framework which was hosted online in January, 2018 for seeking 
comments/ feedback of E&P operators/ stakeholders is currently under examination. 
The Committee recommend that that Ministry/DGH should finalise and issue the IOR 
/ EOR Pol icy without delay and also closely monitor the progress made in these 
schemes to achieve desired results. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The ONGC in its Board Meeting held on 30th November, 2017 approved the Model to 
engage private companies for the purpose of en hancing production through infusion 
of New Technology, best-in class International Business and Process management 
practices etc. ONGC has initiated the process to award two fields under the Service 
Model. The OIL has also floated the Expression of Interes t (EoI) for Service Contract 
in respect of 4 fields. 
A Policy Frame work on Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery 
(IOR) is under consideration. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 16 
Mode of appointment in Directorate/offices under the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas  
The Committee note that the Ministry has many offices under its administrative 
control like DGH, PPAC, OISD, OIDB, PCRA, CHT etc. Each of these agencies are 

62 
 
 
 
performing various technical, regulatory, data collection etc. and helps with inputs for 
policy making by the Ministry. The Committee note that the mode of recruitment in 
most of these organizations particularly like DGH, OISD, PCRA, CHT and PPAC are 
all on deputation mode. While the Committee understand that expertise of oil 
industry is required for technical functions like in DGH, the Committee find that 
functions of OISD, PCRA and CHT ar e in domain areas where personnel from 
outside the oil companies can also be employed. The Committee are of the opinion 
that there is a conflict of interest when persons from oil and Gas PSUs are appointed 
on deputation basis to work in these organization where they have to assess, 
inspect, investigate etc. the very same PSUs to which they belong. The Committee 
view this as an highly undesirable situation with possible conflict of interest. While 
this practice could have been acceptable during the early day s of these 
organizations to start them functioning, the same practice can no longer be 
continued with even after several years of their existence just because it suits the 
Ministry and the PSUs to escape from their responsibilities and shortcomings. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should thoroughly review the 
Recruitment rules in these organizations and Oil PSUs through an independent 
agency and identify the posts in agencies which are to be filled by personnel from 
other organizations so t hat these institutions would get fresh blood and thinking and 
can meet up to the responsibilities and expectations placed on it. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Review of functioning of various Bodies including Autonomous Bodies under 
MOPNG is periodically undertaken with the Administrative Division‟s Joint 
Secretaries in the context of defining the status of these bodies and Rules & 
Regulations of their operation , as per GFRs and Expenditure Management 
Commission recommendations. NITI Aayog has also been monitoring the same.  
Discussions have concerned bodies like PCRA, CHT, SFPL, PPAC and OISD under 
MOPNG and the possibility of creating umbrella bodies with common cadre such that 
personnel for these bodies may be separately recruited. 
During these reviews, discussions were also held on number of employees and 
recruitment on deputation from Oil Marketing Companies . Divisional Heads were of 
the view that since these Bodies are engaged in niche activities, there is a need for 
personnel in these bodies to be well versed with nuances of Oil & Gas Sector in 
India. This view was found acceptable as most of the Bodies/Organisations are 
functioning as technical arms of divisions in MOPNG. 
However, basing on the concerns raised by the committee, MOPNG would examine 
the issue, afresh.  
Presently, the number of employees in various bodies under MOPNG are as under:- 
DGH:- 
 At present total strength of officers/ Advisors/Con sultants/ Associates  at DGH is 
195. 
DGH  Strength Nos. % 
ONGC 114 58.46% 
OIL 26 13.33% 

63 
 
 
 
GAIL 3 1.54% 
HPCL 2 1.03% 
IOCL 2 1.03% 
BPCL 1 0.51% 
GSPC 14 7.18% 
Advisors 5 2.56% 
Consultants/ Associates 28 14.36% 
  195 100.00% 
   
 
OIDB:-  
Recruitment in OIDB is done as per the provisions of OIDB Employees (Recruitment) 
Regulations and all employees are regular appointees. Total sanctioned strength of 
OIDB is 32 whereas at present No. of employees in place are 20.  Out of 20 there 
are 2 Central Govt. employees on deputation.  
 
 
CHT:-  
Currently, the total strength of CHT (including ED, CHT) is 19.  ED, CHT is appointed 
by MoPNG.  However, 13 officers (9 technical and 4 HR/Finance) on deputation from 
Oil PSUs and 5 retired PSU Technical Experts, who are engaged as Advisors. There 
is no direct recruitment. Selection of officers on deputation from oil PSUs is based on 
interviews of the candidates from the li st of recommended/willing personnel by 
PSUs. 
SFPL:- 
Lone post of Executive Director being operated by SFPL is recruited through press 
advertisement with required qualification/experience etc. once in every 4 -5 years as 
decided in Governing Council of SFPL.  A committee set up by Governing Council of 
SFPL selects the candidate. 
OISD:-  
Total strength of OISD is 39 ( 37 officers and 2 staff).  As per decision taken by 
Safety Council Resolution dated 10 th January, 1986, the safety Directorate will be 
manned by experts from the oil industry, who will be appointed on tenure basis. 
 
Group No. of Posts Employees in place 
A 8 6 
B 14 10 
C 9 4 
D 1 - 
Total 32 20 

64 
 
 
 
PPAC:- 
PPAC has a sanctioned strength of 43 employees.  At present there are 34 
employees, all on deputation from oil and Gas companies for a fix tenure basis 
except the DG who is from  the Govt. of India.  The sanctioned strength is as per the 
gazette notification of 2002. 
Table depicting No. Of Employees  on deputation  from PSU‟s in various Bodies 
under MoPNG:- 
Name of bodies Group A Group B Group C Group Consultant/ 
advisors 
Total 
DGH 111 30 55 -  - 196 
OIDB 6 10 4  - 20 
CHT 13  - - - 5 18 
SFPL 1 - - - - 1 
PPAC  1  6 23 13 - 43 
OISD  37  - 2 - - 39 
PCRA 77 - - - - 77 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated  29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 18 
Oil Major  
The Committee note that among the main activities of GAIL is transportation of gas 
through its pipelines and also marketing of the gas for consumers who needs natural 
gas. The Committee also note that in the policy issued by the government in 2006, it 
was envisaged that in the long run with maturity of gas markets, the authorized 
entities will have transportation of natural gas as their sole business activity and will 
not have int erest in gas marketing or City Gas Distribution Network. In line with the 
pronounced policy, the Committee observe that GAIL cannot have both 
transportation of natural gas and gas marketing which is conflict of interest. The 
Committee have been informed th at PNGRB has been asked to look into this issue 
and to resolve this conflict of interest of GAIL. Considering the push being given for 
natural gas in the energy mix and for CGD Networks, the Committee recommend 
that the PNGRB should study the issue thoroug hly to split GAIL to resolve conflict of 
interest and the Ministry should then take an considered decision on the matter.  
The Committee also note that the Government had announced its intention of 
creating of oil Major in the budget announcements of the year 2017-18. In pursuance 
of this, ONGC had completed its acquisition of HPCL during 2017 -18. The 
Committee a note that some of the oil PSUs like IOCL and BPCL have shown 
interest in acquiring GAIL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry 
should encourage Oil PSU companies to take prudent and commercial decisions in 
all such matters. 

65 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In year 1984, GAIL was established for transportation, processing and marketing of 
natural gas and for establishing and managing gas pipelines  and related 
installations.  At present, GAIL has developed about 11,000 Km long gas pipeline 
network and is also developing about 3,500 Km long pipelines projects in the 
country. 
 
In terms of this policy and the provisions of the Petroleum and Natural Gas  
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act, 2006, all authorized entities including GAIL have to 
provide mandatory open access to its gas pipeline infrastructure on common carrier 
principle at non -discriminatory basis, at transportation rates determined by PNGRB. 
In the year 2006, the Government issued the Policy for Development of Natural Gas 
Pipelines and City or Local Natural Gas Distribution Networks. 
 
As per above policy framework, the following two key aspects pertaining to 
unbundling was noted-  
 
c. Market maturity is critical for initiation regulatory intervention for unbundling; 
and 
d. “Right of first use” of pipeline entities shall cease to exist post unbundling.  
 
In the long run and with the maturing of gas markets, it is envisaged in the policy that 
the authorized entities will have transportation of natural gas as their sole business 
activity and will not have any business interest in the gas marketing or city or  local 
gas distribution networks. Government is examining the matter and will take 
appropriate action accordingly.  
The strategic sale of Government of India‟s total paid up equity shareholding of 
51.11% in HPCL to ONGC for a total sale consideration of Rs .36,915 crores has 
been completed on 31.01.2018. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th  June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation 22 
Litigations by oil PSUs  
The Committee are dismayed to note that huge amounts of expenditure are being 
incurred by oil PSUs to fight different legal cases in various courts of law over 
disputes arising from production sharing agreements, retail outlet dealerships, LPG 
distributorships and transportation and marketing issues. The Committee have learnt 
that upstream oil companies like ONGC and Oil India Ltd. have spent Rs. 31.71 
crore and Rs. 8.98 crore respectively during the last four years. Further, oil 
marketing companies like IOCL and BPCL have incurred expenses to the tune of Rs. 
27.2 crore and Rs. 16.07 crore respectively during the last four years. Gas Authority 
of India Ltd. has incurred an amount of Rs. 20.92 crore during the last three years in 
respect various legal disputes. 

66 
 
 
 
In view of the above, the Committee feel that it may not be financially prudent on the 
part of oil PSUs to incur such huge costs on litigations in courts. Instead, the 
Committee desire that oil PSUs may better take recourse to mutually agreed 
arbitration or  out of the court settlement process for amicable solutions. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to create an internal mechanism 
to settle various pending disputes through out of the court settlement/arbitration 
process for saving huge amounts of public expenditure. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
All Oil and Gas PSU‟s have taken measures to have mutually agreed arbitration or 
“Out of Court” Settlement process to tackle litigations. Major steps taken by them are 
as below:- 
 
10. IOCL 
 Settlement of Disputes through mutually agreed Arbitration and 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism. 
 Out of Court Settlement Process – Amicable Settlement of Disputes 
through Conciliation. 
 
11. BPCL 
 Inclusion of Arbitration clause in dealership/distributorship /E&P 
contracts/agreements. 
12. HPCL 
 Inclusion of Arbitration clause in the Agreements. 
 
13. GAIL 
 Preventive Dispute Resolution Mechanism (PDRM)” to facilitate 
decision making at an appropriate time with a collaborative approach  
through SAMADHAN Committee.  
 Settlement Advi sory Committee  (SAC) to effectively resolve various 
commercial dispute in time bound and most effective manner.  
 Introduced Arbitrator‟s fees schedule by linking payment of fees directly 
to the actual milestones achieved which encourages the Arbitrators to  
speed up the whole process of Arbitration.  
 A panel of advocate is maintained under GAIL‟s approved and notified 
fees structure.  
14. ONGC 
 A conciliation mechanism under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 called Outside Expert Conciliation (OEC) to resolve the disputes 
between the parties within the terms and conditions of the contract. For 
this panel of experts is maintained. 
 A Detailed Guideline on Arbitration including procedure to be followed 
which is a part of Contracts signed by ONGC with other party. 
15. OVL 
 Dispute Resolution Mechanism by a well -known institutional arbitration 
dispute centre like ICC and LCIA. 
16. OIL 
 Outside Expert Committee to settle disputes amicably. 
 Availability of Arbitration Clause in all the commercial contracts. 

67 
 
 
 
 Disputes with other PSUs settled under the mechanism of Permanent 
Machinery of Arbitration (PMA) established by DPE. 
17. EIL 
 Provision of Arbitration as well as Conciliation through Outside Expert 
Committee (OEC) incorporated in the contracts. 
18. MRPL 
 Implemented Alternate Di spute Resolution (ADR) Mechanism to settle 
internal disputes arising out of Contracts, if any. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I) 
  

68 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation 4 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) 
The Committee note that the strategic caverns constructed by ISPRL for storage of 
crude oil in Mangalore is ready for storage. It has been informed that the ISPRL has 
signed a definitive agreement with ADNOC of UAE to store crude oil in one of the 
caverns in the Mangalore Strategic Petroleum Reserve facility and the first cargo is 
expected in May 2018. The Committee also note that ADNOC can sell the crude to 
only to Indian refiners. The crude will be replenished within a specific period as when 
it is sold. The government will have the right to the entire crude when it feels there is 
an emer gency. The Committee note that the price of oil will be the official selling 
price plus freight and transportation cost on the date of purchase. The Committee 
would like the Ministry should negotiate with ADNOC for the acceptance of freight 
and transportat ion cost of the date on which the crude was brought to cavern for 
storage. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by ISPRL / Ministry as this step 
will help the country to meet the strategic supply needs and also strengthen the 
relations between the two countries and recommend to explore more such initiatives 
for cooperation in the hydrocarbon sector with other countries also.  
The Committee observe that under Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) project 
phase-I underground rock caverns for storage of 5.33  MMT of crude oil at three 
locations viz. Vishakhapatnam (1.33 MMT), Mangalore (1.50 MMT) and Pudur (2.5 
MMT) have been created. For filling of crude oil in these SPR facilities, 4948 crore 
was approved. During BE 2017 -18 Rs. 2499 crore was allocated for p rocurement of 
crude oil which was revised to Rs. 1121.28 crore at RE stage in view of the ceiling 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance. However, in BE 2018 -19, an allocation of Rs. 
700 crore has been made for this purpose giving the reference of BE ceiling. The 
Committee deplore such approach of the Ministry of P&NG in handling of this 
important project where the Ministry was not able to convince the Ministry of Finance 
for providing the required funds for this project. The storage facilities of 2.5 MMT at 
Pudur has been mechanically completed in December 2017 and funds will be 
required for procurement of crude to fill this cavern. The Committee, therefore, desire 
Ministry should convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate the desired funds for 
such strategic ally important project at RE 2018 -19 stage, so that this project does 
not suffer due to constraint of fund required for strategic storage of oil in the caverns 
created in phase-I. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
An Amended and Restated Agreement has already been s igned between ISPRL, 
ADNOC and AMI India on 10th February, 2018. Clause no 4.6 (c) of the aforesaid 
agreement inter alia states that “any AMI India oil sold to ISPRL shall be sold at the 
AMI India Custody Cavern and at prevailing Government Selling prices, plus a month 
average premium with the heading „Middle East‟ as published in the Platts spread vs. 
OSP (Official Selling Price) for the applicable loading month, plus cost of insurance, 
freight and handling costs.  AMI India shall provide ISPRL with the ev idence of cost 
of insurance, freight and handling.” 

69 
 
 
 
As regards the allocation of funds for the storage facilities at Padur, it may kindly be 
noted that the mode of financing of the cost of crude oil for the entire Padur Cavern 
has not yet been decided. The re is a proposal to explore PPP model.  Once the 
model of financing is finalized, the requirement of funds from Government of India for 
this purpose will be estimated. Accordingly, suitable changes for the same shall be 
incorporated in RE 2018-19. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation 7 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT)  
The Committee observe that Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT) is to be set up by the Government as an Institute of national importance 
under an Act of Parliament. The mandate of RGIPT centre at Sibsagar, Assam is to 
set up a Centre to c ater to requirements of blue collar technicians especially in 
upstream area to meet the current gap in skill set and the anticipated demand in 
view of future expansion plans. The Committee while appreciating the objectives of 
the RGIPT Centre at Assam, dep lore at the inordinate delay in preparing Detailed 
Project Report and executing the same for setting up the institute. The Committee 
note that a part of the campus has already been constructed by CPWD and 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to execute revise d DPR within a time bound 
schedule and also allocate required funds to complete all the works for setting up of 
RGIPT Centre at Sibsagar, Assam and start full academic activities on its own 
campus.  
The Committee further note that another RGIPT centre at B engaluru with the 
objective of creating an institution of excellence in the petroleum sector has been 
proposed and the Government of Karnataka has allotted 150 acres of land, free of 
cost at Kambalipura, Hoskote Taluk, Bengaluru for setting up of the Insti tute. The 
concept paper for setting of the Institute has been prepared and it is under process 
for being sent to Department of Expenditure for obtaining inprinciple approval for 
setting up of this Institute. The Committee further note that the Institute wi ll become 
fully functional after commencement of the construction activities, once the project is 
approved and funds are made available to start the construction activity. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that all the works connected with RGIPT, 
Bangalore like seeking approvals from different agencies be expedited so that the 
institution becomes a reality. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In so far as RGIPT, Sivasagar, Assam is concerned, the revised DPR envisaging  
the project cost of Rs.880.10 crore (Capital Expenditure – Rs.396.32 crore + 
Corpus/Endowment Fund – Rs.483.78 crore) has been received.  The concept paper 
was sent to Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for „in -principle‟ 
approval of the project. The Department of Expenditure have inform ed that the 
proposal is in the nature of creation of an autonomous body and not a scheme.  
They have also informed that „in-principle‟ approval of the Department of Expenditure 

70 
 
 
 
is required for initiating a new scheme.  Since the proposal is regarding creat ion of 
new body, proposal needs to be appraised by Committee of Establishment 
Expenditure (CEE) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure).  They have 
advised to send the proposal to the Department of Expenditure in the prescribed 
format of CEE. CEE  note is being finalised in consultation with Finance Division of 
the Ministry. 
Temporary campus of RGIPT, Sivasagar, Assam has been set up. The academic 
session has started from academic year 2017 -18 with the following diploma 
courses:- 
 (i) Diploma in Petroleum Engineering 
 (ii)  Diploma in Chemical Engineering 
 (iii)  Diploma in Pipeline Engineering. 
 
30 students in each diploma course have taken admission.  Currently, the students 
are studying in a temporary campus at Sibsagar Commerce College (a Govt. 
College) till such time the facilities are created at the Institute‟s own site. 
 
In so far as Energy Institute, Bengaluru is concerned, it may be stated that the 
concept paper was sent to Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for „in -
principle‟ approval of the project.  The Department of Expenditure have informed that 
the proposal is in the nature of creation of an autonomous body and not a scheme.  
They have also informed that „in-principle‟ approval of the Department of Expenditure 
is required f or initiating a new scheme.  Since the proposal is regarding creation of 
new body, proposal needs to be appraised by Committee of Establishment 
Expenditure (CEE) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure).  They have 
advised to send the proposal to the Department of Expenditure in the prescribed 
format of CEE.    CEE note is being finalised in consultation with Finance Division of 
the Ministry. 
Location for temporary campus is being finalized.  It has been proposed to conduct 
the following courses commencing from academic year 2018-19:-  
 (i) M.Tech. in Energy Science  and Technology; 
 (ii)  M.Tech. in Power and Energy Systems Engineering; and 
 (iii)  M.Tech. in Renewable and Alternate Energy. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M.No.G-38011/20/2018-Fin.I dated 29th June, 2018 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
  August, 2018 
  Shravana,1940 (Saka)     
                           PRALHAD JOSHI,                                             
Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

71 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2017-18) 
 
SEVENTEENTH SITTING 
(07.08.2018) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7 August, 2018 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', PHA, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Sh. Pralhad Joshi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Dr. P.K. Biju 
4. Shri Elumalai V. 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
7. Smt. Jayshreeben Patel 
8. Shri Arvind Sawant 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
10. Shri Laxmi Narayan Yadav 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
12. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
13. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
14. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
15. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
16. Shri A. Vijayakumar 
17. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Addl. Director  
4. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 

72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2018-19) of MoPNG' for consideration and adopted 
the same without modification.  
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the 
Report in both the Houses of Parliament.   
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

73 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD  REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  PETROLEUM 
AND NATURAL GAS (2017-18) ON ‘DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2018-19)'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 22 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 
15, 17, 19, 20 and 21) 
 
15 
 Percentage to Total 68.18% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
(Vide Recommendations No. NIL) 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of Total 0 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 10, 12, 16, 18 and 22) 
 
5 
 Percentage of Total 
 
22.72% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 4 and 7)  
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 
 
9.10% 
 
 
 
 