9 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2020-21) on the subject 'Review of Progress in 
Production of Non-Conventional Fuels with Specific Reference to Bio-Fuels'] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  December, 2021/  Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
 
CP&NG NO.     
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2020-21) on the subject 'Review of Progress in Production of Non-
Conventional Fuels with Specific Reference to Bio-Fuels'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……………………………..                        4 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                        5 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                      6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
14 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies …………………………………     
                    
22 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
24 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
28 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2021-22) held on 
20.12.2021. 
31 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2020-21) on  the subject 
'Review of Progress in Production of Non-Conventional 
Fuels with Specific Reference to Bio-Fuels'. 
33 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2021-22) 
 
Sl. No. Names of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
2 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
3 Shri Ramesh Chand Bind 
4 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
5 Shri Girish Chandra 
6 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Shri Santosh Kumar 
9 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
10 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
11 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
12 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
13 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
14 Shri Dilip Saikia  
15 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
16 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
17 Shri Lallu Singh 
18 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
19 Shri Ajay Tamta 
20 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
21 Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
23 Shri Ripun Bora 
24 Smt. Kanta Kardam  
25 Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
29 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
30 Shri A. Vijayakumar 
31 Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Additional Secretary 
2 Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Director  
3 Shri Mohan Arumala  - Under Secretary   
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Review of 
Progress in Production of Non-Conventional Fuels with Specific Reference to Bio-Fuels'. 
2. The Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 10.03.2021. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report were received on 11.11.2021. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2021-22) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 20.12.2021.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
20 December, 2021 
29 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI,                                             
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2020-21) on the subject 'Review of Progress in Production of Non-Conventional 
Fuels with Specific Reference to Bio-Fuels' which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2021.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 11.11.2021 in 
respect of all the 17 recommendations/observations contained in the report. These have 
been categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government:- 
Reco. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 14, 15 and 16  (Total-8)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:- Reco. No. 6 and 8 (Total-2) 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 5, 7, 11 and 13 (Total-4) 
 
(Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                       
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No.  2, 12 and 17 (Total-3) 
                                                                                                         (Chapter- V)   
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter-V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  
 

7 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Procurement and Pricing of Bio fuels 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that OMCs have released a 5-year ethanol procurement 
EOI on 12.08.2020 for procurement of ethanol for the ESYs 2020-21 to ESY 
2024-25. OMCs jointly invite ethanol offers through a public Expression of Interest 
(EoI) on an annual basis. These offers are invited periodically in 4 to 5 cycles 
during an Ethanol Supply Year (ESY) (1st December of the year to 30th November 
of the next year) to procure ethanol from indigenous sources. BPCL is the overall 
coordinator for all the three OMCs. MoPNG is carrying out regular reviews with 
OMCs to monitor the progress of EBP Programme and to resolve any issues with 
the ethanol suppliers.  
 
 The prices of ethanol during an ESY, produced from all sugarcane based 
feedstock, is approved by the Government after recommendations of a 
Committee of Joint Secretaries from the Department of Food & Public 
Distribution, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Expenditure and Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. The various factors which are taken into consideration 
are the projections on availability of sugarcane, molasses & sugar during the 
year, the FRP of sugarcane, the MSP of sugar, cost of raw material & cost of 
conversion which includes cost of utilities, pollution control measures, interest and 
depreciation etc. The price of ethanol produced from Damaged Food Grains 
(DFG) is fixed by OMCs. In addition, GST and transportation charges are paid 
extra to the suppliers.  
 
Regarding Bio-Diesel, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have floated an 
Expression of Interest (EoI) for procurement of Biodiesel produced from UCO 
across 200 locations in the country.  Till 01.07.2020, 30 EoIs have been received 
by the OMCs for setting up 49 Biodiesel plants with a capacity of 1015 MT/day. 
Under the scheme, OMCs will pay biodiesel producers ₹51 per litre in the first 
year, ₹52.7 per litre in the second, and ₹54.5 per litre in the third year (excluding 
transportation and GST).  
 
 Similarly, the Committee note that the marketing of all the CBG produced through 
such plants will be through OMC network. The Committee note that the ethanol 
suppliers have to supply ethanol at a particular location of a minimum quantity 
and also of the quality norms prescribed. This makes ethanol producers of small 
quantity unable to supply under this programme. The Committee also expect the 
OMCs to take care of safety aspects during transportation and storage of ethanol.   
  
The Committee recommend that the Procurement and pricing of Ethanol, Bio 
diesel and Compressed Bio Gas should be periodically reviewed so that the 
planned quantity may be procured and the targeted blending and production of 
Bio fuels are achieved. The Committee also desire that Ministry and OMCs 
should devise mechanism to procure small quantities of ethanol from interested 
small suppliers and also from stand alone distilleries which produce ethanol from 

8 
 
 
 
sugarcane juice so as to maximize availability of ethanol under this programme 
for blending purpose”.  
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
 “Public Sector OMCs are taking care of safety aspects during transportation and 
storage of ethanol blended petrol by adhering to all norms/regulations including 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) and Petroleum and Explosive Safety 
Organisation (PESO) norms/regulations. 
 
Ethanol is purchased by OMCs through tendering process wherein bids are 
received from suppliers who are interested in supplying ethanol in quantities of 
10KL and above. The Sugarcane (Control Order) by DFPD allows production of 
ethanol directly from sugarcane juice, sugar, sugar syrup in case of sugar 
factories only”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee in its report had recommended that the procurement and 
pricing of ethanol, bio-diesel and CBG should be periodically reviewed so that the 
planned quantity would be procured and the targeted blending and production of 
biofuels could be achieved. Further, the Committee had desired the Ministry of 
P&NG/OMCs to devise a mechanism to procure small quantities of ethanol from 
interested small suppliers and also from stand alone distilleries for producing 
ethanol from sugarcane juice in order to maximize availability of ethanol for 
blending purpose. 
In this regard, the Ministry in its reply has stated that ethanol is purchased 
by OMCs through tendering process from interested suppliers to supply ethanol in 
quantities of 10 KL and above. Further, it has been stated that the sugarcane 
(Control Order) by DFPD allows production of ethanol directly from sugarcane 
juice, sugar, sugar syrup in case of sugar factories only. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as the Ministry 
have chosen to remain silent on a very vital recommendation of the Committee 
that procurement/pricing of ethanol, bio-diesel and CBG should be periodically 
reviewed so that the planned quantity may be procured and the targeted blending 
and production of biofuels could be achieved. While reiterating their 
recommendation, desire that specific reply on these matter be submitted to the 
committee and that MoPNG should impress upon OMCs and DFPD to permit 

9 
 
 
 
interested small scale suppliers to supply ethanol in quantities less than 10 KL by 
ensuring strict compliance of quality norms for the same. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
GST 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that  the Ethanol manufacturers use molasses as the key 
raw material for manufacturing of ethanol which  is subjected to higher rate of 
GST @28% as against ethanol supplied to OMC's for blending which attract 
GST @5%. GST paid on procurement of molasses is available as Input Tax 
Credit (ITC) to ethanol manufacturers. However, they are not able to utilize the 
full ITC of GST paid due to lower rate of tax on ethanol supplied to OMCs for 
blending. GST provisions allow refund of such unutilized ITC. The inverted duty 
structure leads to working capital blockage for ethanol manufacturers. 
 
 The Committee feel that the problems of Ethanol manufacturers is legitimate 
and early refund of unutilized ITC help them to get improve their financial 
position  which incentivize them  to produce ethanol. Therefore the Committee 
recommend that the MoPNG and DFPD may represent the matter to GST 
Council for early refund and review”.  
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“The issue of taking up the matter of early refund of unutilized ITC to ethanol 
manufacturers with GST Council is noted”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee in its report, while concurring with the concerns of ethanol 
manufacturers being subjected to higher rate of GST @28% for procuring the 
required raw material molasses as against the finished product ethanol being 
supplied to OMCs attracting 5% GST, had recommended that the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution to represent the matter before the GST Council for 
review of the policy in order to settle the refund of Input Tax Credit (ITC) to 
ethanol manufacturers at the earliest. 
In this regard, the Ministry of P&NG in its reply stated that the issue of 
taking up of early refund of unutilized ITC to ethanol manufacturers with GST 
Council has been noted. While taking cognizance of the evasive and non-serious 
reply of the Ministry, the Committee note that it has been more than nine months 

10 
 
 
 
since the report on the subject was presented and no action has been initiated till 
date. The Committee, therefore, take a serious view of the non-chalant stance of 
the Ministry and reiterate its recommendation and exhort the Ministry of P&NG to 
coordinate with DFPD proactively so that the legitimate concerns of ethanol 
manufacturers would be represented before the GST Council and unutilized ITC 
would be paid to the same at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Bio Diesel  
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that while petrol is blended with ethanol and production of 
ethanol from sugar mills for blending purpose has picked up, the Bio diesel policy 
has not kept pace with EBP programme and has been a non starter. So far 
OMC's have procured 10.56 cr litres of Bio diesel for blending with HSD during 
the period April 2019- March 2020. Presently, the bio diesel produced in the 
country primarily from imported palm stearin oil. In order to phase-out palm 
stearin and as a measure towards import substitution, it has been decided to 
promote domestically available used cooking oil (UCO) as the feedstock.  
 The Committee are disappointed that the Bio diesel has not been accorded the 
importance it deserved as diesel is the most consumed fuel and used mostly by in 
public transport and commercial vehicles. This makes that higher biodiesel 
blending will have a greater impact on reduction of crude oil imports. The 
Committee further desire that MoPNG should seriously identify sources of feed 
stock for production of bio diesel and take concrete steps in this direction. 
It is proposed that UCO can be collected from Bulk Consumers such as hotels, 
restaurants, canteens, etc. for conversion. Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have 
floated an Expression of Interest (EoI) for procurement of Biodiesel produced from 
UCO across 200 locations in the country. Till 01.07.2020, 30 EoIs have been 
received by the OMCs for setting up 49 Biodiesel plants with a capacity of 1015 
MT/day. Under the scheme, OMCs will pay biodiesel producers ₹51 per litre in the 
first year, ₹52.7 per litre in the second, and ₹54.5 per litre in the third year 
(excluding transportation and GST). Therefore, the Committee would like to 
recommend that MoPNG should undertake a massive awareness programme in 
the initial locations and simultaneously monitor the UCO program closely and try to 
improve the bio diesel production in a significant way which may help the country 
to reduce its import dependence”.  
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“OMCs are regularly floating Expression of Interest (EoI) for procurement of 
Biodiesel made from Used Cooking Oil (UCO). EOI status as on 15.5.21- EOI 
received for 58 plants capacity of 1140 MT/D. 

11 
 
 
 
To give wide publicity to this EoI, the following activities have been undertaken by 
the OMCs: 
a)   Seven road shows have been conducted by the OMCs. 
b)   The EoI has also been advertised the form of a Jingle over many Radio 
Channels across the country. 
c)    The EoI has also been prominently broadcasted on social media such as 
Facebook, Web sites of the OMCs, twitter, etc. 
The primary aim of the road shows, broadcast on social media and the radio 
jingles is to attract more entrepreneurs to set up Biodiesel manufacturing plants 
from UCO so as to increase the procurement of biodiesel. 
2.      Further All States and UTs have been requested to form State Level 
Committees to look into the various aspects of procurement of UCO for 
production of biodiesel”. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee in its report while taking note of the picking up of the 
ethanol blending with petrol, had observed that the blending of bio-diesel has 
been a non-starter till date. They had also noted that Oil Marketing Companies 
have floated expression of interest for procurement of bio-diesel produced from 
Used Cooking Oil (UCO) across 200 locations in the country and accordingly, had 
recommended the Ministry to undertake a massive awareness programme in 
those locations and monitor the same to improve bio-diesel production in a 
significant way to reduce the country’s dependence on import of crude oil. 
 In this regard, the Ministry in its reply while enumerating various activities 
undertaken by OMCs has stated that States and UTs have been requested to form 
State Level Committees to look into various aspects of procurement of UCO for 
production of bio-diesel. 
The Committee, while not being satisfied with the reply of the Ministry, are 
concerned to note that the Government has not made much progress on the 
ground since the Committee made their recommendation. The written reply 
reflects that the Ministry has not been proactive in its approach. Instead, the 
Ministry seems to have left the issue to State Governments/Union Territories for 
procurement of UCO for production of bio-diesel.  The Committee are unhappy to 
note that no updated information has been furnished on Expressions of Interest 

12 
 
 
 
(EoI) received for 58 plants with a capacity of 1140 MT/D as on 15.05.2021 and also 
about the status of remaining plants in 200 locations. 
In view of the above, the Committee, while exhorting the MoPNG not to be 
complacent with the progress made on Ethanol Blended Petrol, take a considered 
view that the speedy implementation of bio-diesel policy will be in the larger 
interests of the country’s energy security. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry/OMCs to accord priority by proactively taking up the 
issue with various State Governments/UTs at regular intervals and initiate 
massive awareness programmes so that available Used Cooking Oil from bulk 
consumers for large scale commercial production of bio-diesel in the country 
could be implemented.  
Recommendation No. 13 
2G Ethanol Plants  
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that ethanol blended petrol is one of the main and important 
objective in the national policy of bio-fuel and it is estimated that around thousand 
crore litre of ethanol may be required by the year 2030 to achieve 20% blending 
of ethanol with petrol. The current availability in the country is around 180 crore 
litre per year and it is expected that all other sources like sugar juice and food 
grains production may also supplement availability of ethanol in blending purpose. 
These are all ethanol produce from 1G method. However, in order to increase the 
availability of ethanol across the country the Ministry proposes to set up 2G plants 
at twelve locations in the country which use non edible oil seeds, non agriculture 
residue such as straw, cotton stalks, carn cobs, saw dust etc,. With an objective 
to augment ethanol supply, the Government has allowed procurement of ethanol 
produced from other non food stocks like cellulosic and lignocelluloses materials.   
The Committee note that in furtherance of this decision the oil PSUs have 
planned to establish twelve 2G ethanol bio refineries in 11 states in the country 
with over all capacity of 1100 kile litre per day with a over all investment of Rs. 
14000 crores. Out of this the projects at Panipat (Haryana) by IOCL, Bhatinda 
(Punjab) by HPCL, Bargarh (Odisha) by BPCL and Numaligarh (Assam) by NRL 
are in advance stage of progress. 
 The Committee are of the view that the continuous availability of ethanol by 1G or 
2G methods at affordable cost is important for sustainable and successful 
implementation of the EBP programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should periodically monitor the progress of the establishment of 
2G ethanol bio refineries in the country and they should be completed within 
schedule time and cost. Furthermore, the Committee also emphasise that the 
Ministry should focus on technology for development of 2nd Generation and other 
advance biofuels utilising domestic feedstocks so as to address the cost factor in 
sustainability and commercial production of Ethanol plants”.  

13 
 
 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“Oil PSUs have planned to set up 2G ethanol bio refineries in different parts of the 
country with overall investment of Rs 8,000 crore & production of 550 KLPD”. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Comments of the Committee  
16. The Committee in its report had observed that around 1000 crore litre of 
ethanol would be required to achieve 20% blending of ethanol with petrol as 
against the availability of 180 crore litre per annum. They had also noted about the 
proposal of the Ministry to set up 2G ethanol bio refinery plants at 12 locations in 
the country by using non edible oil seeds, non agricultural residue like straw, 
cotton stalks, corn cobs and raw dust etc. and only four such bio refinery 2G 
plants had been at advanced stage.  
 The Committee in its report had recommended the Ministry to periodically 
monitor the progress in setting up of 2G ethanol plants and had also emphasized 
upon ensuring the continuous availability of ethanol at affordable cost for 
sustainable implementation of the EBP programme.    
The Ministry in its reply has stated that oil PSUs have planned to set up 2G 
ethanol bio refineries in different parts of the country with an overall investment 
of Rs 8,000 crore and production of 550 KLPD. 
 In this regard, the Committee express displeasure at the short and terse 
reply of the Ministry as it is silent on status of setting up of 2G ethanol plants and 
also on the ‘cost factor’ for commercial production of 2G ethanol at bio refinery 
plants. The Committee, therefore, view seriously the lackadaisical attitude of the 
Ministry in addressing the issue, expect it to focus on cost-effectiveness of 
ethanol produced by 2G bio refineries so as to ensure long term availability of 
ethanol blended petrol through various feed stocks. While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee desire to be kept abreast of specific measures 
taken by them in this regard.    
----- 
 
  

14 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Implementation of National Policy on Bio-Fuels 
The Committee note that one of the important mandates of Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas is to strengthen energy security of the country. At present the country is 
importing more than 80% of the crude oil and the Government has announced its 
intention to reduce import dependency. The Green house Gas emissions along with 
environmental pollution have brought focus for alternative fuels that have superior 
environment benefit that are economically competitive. The Committee note that this has 
laid to an important role for biofuels and the Government notified the National Policy on 
Bio-Fuels 2018 on 08.06.2018. This policy aims to increase uses of bio-fuel in the 
energy and transportation sectors thereby substituting fossils fuels and contributing to 
National Energy Security, climate change mitigation, apart from growing new 
employment opportunities in a sustainable way. Bio fuels include Bio-ethanol, bio-diesel, 
Compressed Bio Gas, bio-jet fuel and any other advanced Bio fuels.  
In the National Policy of Biofuels, 2018 many new additional raw materials for 1G 
ethanol production have been included like Sugarcane Juice, Sugar containing materials 
like Sugar Beet, Starch containing materials like Corn, Cassava, Damaged food grains 
like wheat, broken rice, Rotten Potatoes which are going to increase availability of 1G 
ethanol. Used Cooking Oil (UCO) is being promoted for Biodiesel production. Govt has 
also announced Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) 
scheme for marketing Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) produced from waste. The various 
sources of biofuels that are being developed as part of the alternate fuels programme in 
the country are lignocellulosic biomass, non-food crops, industrial waste & residue 
streams, MSW, plastics & industrial waste, food waste etc. 
The Committee note that the Government is committed to utilize these with the aim to 
reduce our dependence on import of crude oil, achieve foreign exchange savings, 
provide better remuneration for the farmers with a view to double their income, address 
growing environment issues owing to use of fossil fuels and burning of biomass/ waste, 
address challenges of waste management/agri-residues management in line with 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and promote “Make in India” campaign. 
The policy has proposed an indicative target of 20% blending of ethanol in petrol and 5% 
blending of bio-diesel in diesel is proposed by 2030. Some of the steps taken for 
achieving are increasing domestic supplies of ethanol and biodiesel, setting up of 2G 
bio-refinery, development of new feed stocks for bio-fuels, development of new 
technologies for conversion to bio-fuels and creating suitable environment for bio-fuels 
and its integration with main fuels. 
The Committee would expect the MoPNG being the nodal Ministry to implement the 
policy to effectively fix milestones for production and blending of bio-fuels with fossil 
fuels for the next few years. Considering the multiple objectives set out to be achieved 
through the National Policy on Bio Fuels, the Committee recommend that it should be 
reviewed periodically to address policy issues and hurdles that may arise and ensure 

15 
 
 
 
that the National Policy on Bio-Fuels is implemented in letter and spirit so as to enhance 
the energy security of the country and reduce import dependency of fossil fuels. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The report of the Expert Committee on "Roadmap for Ethanol Blending in India 2020-
25", published in June, 2021 provides for production and blending of ethanol with petrol 
for the next few years. Moreover, the National Policy on Biofuels-2018 (NPB-2018) 
provides indicative target of blending 5% biodiesel in diesel by 2030. The Working 
Group on Biofuels and National Biofuel Coordination Committee (NBCC) formed under 
the NPB-2018, conducts periodical reviews to address policy issues and hurdles that 
may arise. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Advancement of Ethanol Blending Targets 
The Committee note that the Ministry has planned to achieve a target of 10% blending of 
ethanol with Petrol by 2022 and 20% ethanol by 2030. The quantity of Ethanol supplied 
for blending which was 38 cr litres in 2013-14 at a blending level of 1.5 % has now 
reached a supply of 188 cr litres in 2018-19 at a blending level of 5 %. The overall 
quantity has shown almost increase of 5 times over the last five years. 
The Committee note that the availability of ethanol is currently around 188 crore liter per 
year. However, for achieving the 20% blending by 2025, the requirement of ethanol is 
likely to be in the range of 900 crore litres. The Committee note that at present the 
production of ethanol for blending with petrol is being done from sugarcane juice / sugar 
syrup, B heavy molasses, C heavy molasses and damaged food grains. The 
Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD) has also allowed the diverting 60L 
MT of excess sugar for the production of ethanol. 
The concerned Ministries are discussing ways to increase the production of Ethanol in 
the country based on foodgrains in addition to sugarcane. The ethanol from grain based 
distilleries was around 15.94 cr litres during 2019-20. The Committee have been 
informed that by the year 2025, the total of 900 cr litres of ethanol for 20 % blending 
target will be met by sugar to the extent of 550 cr litres and remaining 350 cr litres to be 
met by grain based distilleries. 
The Committee note that as per the original plan, the indicative target was to achieve 10 
percent by 2022 and 20 percent by 2030. However, the Committee have been apprised 
that there has been a good momentum over the years in procurement of ethanol and 
with the planned efforts of the concerned Ministries, it will be possible to achieve the 20 
percent ethanol blending with petrol target by 2025 and therefore recommend that 
MoPNG should pre-pone this accordingly. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government has advanced the target of blending 20% ethanol in petrol and accordingly, 
MoP&NG has released a Notification dated 02nd June, 2021, wherein, Oil Marketing 

16 
 
 
 
Companies (OMCs) shall sell ethanol blended petrol with percentage of ethanol up to 
20% as per BIS Specifications in the whole of India and Union Territories. This will come 
into effect from 01st April, 2023. 
  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Diversity of feedstocks for Production of Ethanol 
The Committee note that major quantity of ethanol production for blending purpose is 
coming from sugar industry. However the requirement of ethanol for achieving the 
targeted blending levels will not be fully met by the sugar industry as the quantity of 
ethanol produced is inadequate. Hence the DFPD has plans to allow the damaged food 
grains from FCI godowns for production of ethanol through grain based distilleries. This 
step may augment availability of ethanol but it may be not possible to reach the target in 
a sustainable way in the years to come. Hence the excess rice stocks in FCI godowns 
after meeting the food security requirements can come in handy for production of 
ethanol. The Committee therefore recommend that the MoPNG and DFPD should work 
closely about the quantity of rice that can be allowed for ethanol production without 
comprising food security so as to achieve the ethanol blending targets. 
The Committee also note that the sugarcane is a water intensive crop and it is saddled 
with environmental issues and not sustainable in the long run and that ethanol produced 
from rice is of meagre quantity. Further, the Committee have been informed that that the 
ethanol used for blending purposes across the world over will be around 10,000 crore 
litres annually out of which more than 60 percent use maize as feedstock for production 
of ethanol. But in India, the ethanol production is mainly from sugarcane. The need for 
increasing maize cultivation in the country for ethanol needs to be seriously pursued and 
farmers may be educated and awareness programs may be conducted. The Committee 
are of the opinion that MoPNG may study the policies successfully followed in the 
countries which adopted bio fuels from feedstocks other than sugarcane and suitably 
adopt them in India. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should take up with 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers welfare on this issue and proper ground work 
involving States and Platforms like ATMA for this purpose. 
The Committee note that production of ethanol from maize and other foodgrains 
including cereals etc. will help ethanol blending throughout the country as against the 
present scenario wherein ethanol production capacities are mostly located in sugar 
producing states. This will reduce transportation costs and prices of maize will increase 
boosting the farmers income. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the NBCC 
should diversify the feedstocks for ethanol production from maize and other foodgrains 
and motivate the farmers to increase cultivation and production such feed stocks in the 
country over a period of time to ensure that the ethanol blended petrol programme is 
sustained in the long run. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government has allowed ethanol production from surplus rice available with Food 
Corporation of India (FCI). Government has also fixed the price of surplus FCI rice to be 
issued to ethanol producers in 2020 & again in 2021 at concessional rate of Rs.2,000 

17 
 
 
 
per quintal. The release of surplus rice with FCI is to be monitored by Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution taking into consideration food security. 
Government has allowed ethanol production from damaged food grains, maize and 
surplus rice with FCI, thereby enhancing the scope of raw material for ethanol 
production in the country. This is also aimed at reducing the dependence of ethanol 
production on sugar sector alone and to ensure that the EBP Programme is sustained in 
the long run. For better management Government has amended the provisions of IDR 
Act thereby bringing ethanol under its ambit which enables free movement of denatured 
ethanol. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Implementation of Industrial (Development and Regulation) (IDR) Act 
The Committee note that the Government of India had amended Industrial Development 
and Regulation Act (IDR) vide notification No. 27 dated 14 May 2016. As per 
amendment, the State Governments can legislate, control and / or levy taxes on duties 
on liquor meant for human consumption while the denatured ethanol which is not meant 
for human consumption, will be controlled only by Central Government. The Committee 
note that 13 States have already implemented IDR Act Amendment and some States 
including Rajasthan, West Bengal, Orissa, UP, Kerala, Telengana, Jharkhand, Delhi 
have not implemented the IDR Act. 
The hurdles due to non implementation of IDR Amendments act are that licenses are 
required for inter state movement and storage of ethanol, cess/import duties/excise 
duties, etc are levied on ethanol and approvals, permissions are required which make 
the entire exercise highly bureaucratic and procedural causing avoidable delays. The 
States which are deficient in ethanol production should help the OMC's to sell ethanol 
blended petrol in the states by removing hurdles and procedural requirements and also 
by reducing taxes/duties and incentivise this programme so that the programme is 
implemented throughout the country. 
Therefore, The Committee recommend that NBCC should take up the matter with 
remaining State Governments for implementing the amended IDR Act so that the 
denatured ethanol which is not meant for human consumption can be utilized for 
blending purposed with petrol. Further, the Ministry should also take up with the States 
to reduce procedural delays by state agencies and adopt measures for ease of 
business. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
NBCC, under the Chairmanship of Minister, Petroleum and Natural Gas review the 
progress of Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme. MoP&NG is also regularly taking up the 
matter of implementation of amended provisions of IDR Act, 1951 with the State 
Governments. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 

18 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Reduction in cost of Biofuels 
The Committee note that the bio-fuel production cost can be reduced by improvising the 
fermentation and distillation efficiencies and converting waste to resource in the sugar 
industries where in particular the utilization of spent wash in molasses waste distilleries 
for producing value added products can help in reducing the cost of production. 
Therefore, The Committee recommend that MoPNG/DFPD may take up this issue in 
NBCC and invest in such projects so as to reduce the cost of production of ethanol and 
improve recovery rate or revenue generated from sugarcane and molasses by means of 
producing value added products. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As per Allocation of Business Rules, DFPD is the nodal Department for setting up 
ethanol/alcohol distilleries in the country and is regularly monitoring the setting up of 
ethanol distillation capacities in the country. NBCC review the progress under the EBP 
Programme covering all aspects pertaining to supply & demand of ethanol while 
deciding, as the price of ethanol, DFPD recommend the value generated from by 
products & this is accounted in the ex-mill price of ethanol by MoPNG. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
CBG under SATAT 
The Committee note that Government has announced Sustainable Alternative Towards 
Viable Transportation Scheme (SATAT) for marketing Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) 
produced from waste. They further note that agriculture waste/residue, municipal solid 
waste, cattle dunk, sewage treatment plants wastes etc. have potential to be used in the 
production of bio-gas. CBG has more than 90% of methane content and can be utilized 
as an environment friendly fuel. The conversion of waste/bio-mass into compressed bio-
gas has multiple benefits like reduction of green house gas, emission of reduction in 
burning of agriculture residue, reduction in environment pollution, reduction of natural 
gas import, employment generation, remunerative income to farmer etc. The SATAT 
scheme launched on 1.10.2018 envisages establishing all 5000 CBG plants with a total 
production capacity of 15 Million MT per annum by 2023. OMCs along with GAIL and 
IGL have invited expression of interest to procure CBG from potential CBG plants 
entrepreneurs. The CBG plans will also produce bio-manure as a bio-product which can 
be utilised in the farm sector and this has been included as bio manure under Fertilizer 
Control Order 1985. The Committee note that Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
has extended central financial assistance to CBG projects while banks provide soft loan 
to CBG projects. 
The Committee note that production of CBG will boost availability of more affordable 
transport fuel, reduce pollution, will create employment and value in the rural economy 
as well as assist in achieving climate change goal of the country as per the Paris 
agreement 2015. The Committee, are of the view that establishment of CBG plants is a 
key component which will help the country to achieve multiple objectives along with 
increasing self reliance on domestic and alternative source for fuel and energy needs 

19 
 
 
 
and they, therefore recommend that the establishment of 5000 CBG plants by 2023 
should be taken up in mission mode and dedicated working group may also be set up to 
take necessary decisions and effectively monitor so that these plants are established on 
the ground. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
(a)  This Ministry is actively engaged with all the stake holders viz. Central Ministries / 
Departments, State Governments, Technology providers and Financial institutions to 
create enabling ecosystem for development of CBG sector. 
(b)  For effective implementation of SATAT scheme the Ministry is coordinating with the 
CPSEs who have a dedicated team to attend to this scheme. Further, State Level 
Coordination Committee has been constituted in Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. 
  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
R&D in Bio Fuels  
The Committee note that in order to successfully implement the bio-fuel policy there is 
need to have production of ethanol, bio-diesel, bio-gas etc. in a uninterrupted way for 
long years. As of now the programme is linked with a sugar industry for ethanol 
production and recently it has also taken up of ethanol production from food grains. In 
order to ensure uninterrupted supply of ethanol there has to be assurance of commercial 
production. In the National policy on bio-fuel many additional raw materials for ethanol 
production has been included for 1G ethanol production. Similarly with an objective to 
augment ethanol supply, the Government allowed production of ethanol from other non 
feed stocks like cellulosic and lignocellulosic materials including petro chemical route. 
The Committee note that the DBT IOC R&D Centre has developed an indigenous 
technology for conversion of cellulosic and lignocellulosic bio-mass to 2G ethanol at 250 
kg/day in a pilot plant commissioned with technical assistance from National renewable 
energy laboratory, US Department of Energy Lab & global leader in 2G ethanol projects. 
The Committee further note that DBT IOC centre has developed cost effective high titer 
and high performance enzyme technology for bio-mass pre-treatment. IOCL has 
planned on site production of indigenous enzyme in the demo plant at Panipat and 
based upon success of the demo plant, commercial plant for production of enzyme could 
be set up. 
The Committee also note that DBT IOC centre at Indian Oil has developed a Novel third 
generation bio-fuel technology to convert CO2 in to Acetic acid and convert them into 
lipids which will be further separated for high value product and bio-diesel fuel which will 
make the process economically feasible. A pilot facility has been put up by DBT IOC 
centre at Faridabad. Further the biomethanation technology developed to utilise diverse 
range of waste as feed stocks to produce higher bio-gas yields having high methane 
content. Similarly, IOC has developed a novel process to convert Co2 into fuel 
molecules like methanol, butanol, ethanol, etc,. The Committee desire that MoPNG / 
DAC&FW / DFPD should strive for international cooperation to establish scientific and 
technical cooperation for better quality of Bio-Fuels, diversified feedstock, improving 
storage and longevity of blended fuel, etc. 

20 
 
 
 
The Committee appreciate the R&D efforts of MoPNG and IOC in collaboration in the 
areas of biofuels. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should closely monitor 
the progress of the R&D projects and critically peer review them so that cost effective 
and commercially viable technologies are developed so as to provide to sustainability to 
the national policy on bio fuel in the long run and reduce the country's dependency on 
import of crude oil. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
•        IOCL R&D Centre has developed a two-stage anaerobic digestion process along 
with proprietary inoculums for the conversion of various types of organic wastes to 
valuable biogas energy. 
•        Biogas can be purified for its application as Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) for 
transport applications and power generation. Plant by-product can be used as organic 
manure 
•        The technology benefits the environment by reduction of Green House Gas 
(GHG), pathogen control and odor reduction besides creating additional avenues for 
employment generation and revenue for farmers. 
•        DBT-IOC Centre has developed an indigenous technology complete with in-house 
enzyme for conversion of Lignocellulosic biomass to 2G ethanol at 250 kg/day pilot plant 
scale. 
•        Optimized pre-treatment process to minimize the cost of chemical w.r.t similar 
technologies. 
•        IOCL is actively working to engage and develop international co-operation to 
establish scientific and technical co-operation especially in the field of 3G Ethanol. 
  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Waste to Energy 
The Committee note that Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is implementing a 
Waste to Energy programme and this program is eligible for Central Finance Assistance 
(CFA). Under the Programme, Energy from Urban, Industrial, Agricultural Wastes/ 
Residues and Municipal Solid Waste for recovery of energy through Waste to Energy 
projects in the form of Biogas, Bio CNG, Power, Syngas/Producer gas. This will be used 
for meeting various applications such as fuel for vehicles, industries for captive energy 
needs, cooking etc besides generating bio-fertilizers. 
The Committee note that, under this scheme, 62 proposals were received for seeking 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) out of which sanction to 16 Waste to Energy projects 
with cumulative installed capacity of 15.12 MWeq projects have been issued as on 
31.01.2021. 14 projects having total installed capacity of 80 MWeq are under 
consideration for grant of CFA amounting to Rs 269 Cr. These projects are currently at 
various stages of implementation. The Committee further note that Under the 
Programme, financial assistance of Rs 4.0 Crore per 4800Kg/day for Bio CNG 

21 
 
 
 
generation (including setting of Biogas plant) in the form of back-ended capital subsidy is 
provided to CBG projects developers. 
The Committee also note that Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is 
implementing a GOBHAR Dhan scheme which aims to positively impact village 
cleanliness and generate wealth and energy from cattle and organic waste. The scheme 
also aims at creating new rural livelihood opportunities and enhancing income for 
farmers and other rural people. 
The Committee appreciate the various initiatives taken by different Ministries in the 
sphere of their Mandate which will help to achieve the multiple objectives of 
management of waste, enhancing farmers income by sale of the waste generated in 
farming activities and also producing gas or energy locally which can be used to meet 
the demands of the local community. The Committee consider these projects as very 
important as this will help in meeting energy needs in a decentralized manner and 
enhance the energy security component as well and will develop large stakeholders to 
benefits from these projects. The Committee therefore, recommend that MOPNG 
/MNRE/DWSD should include all these programme in the periodical review by the NBCC 
so that any implementation issues may be ironed out and the projects can be extended / 
modified so as to benefit the country and the beneficiaries in a holistic way. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted.  Further, all the stakeholders including MoPNG (in respect of SATAT initiative) 
DDWS (in respect of cattle dung based & agricultural residue-based biogas / CBG 
plants) and MNRE (in respect of CFA for biogas plants) are coordinating for effective 
implementation of their schemes. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Interest subvention scheme for sugar based distilleries for capacity expansion 
The Committee note that till the year 2014-15, ethanol distillation capacity of molasses 
based distilleries was only 215 cr litres and in the past 6 years, the capacity of molasses 
based distilleries have been doubled and are currently at 426 cr litre. They further note 
that with a view to achieve blending targets, concerted efforts to further double the 
ethanol distillation capacities of molasses based distilleries in the country by 2024 is 
under way. Under the ethanol interest subvention scheme, 238 projects for a loan 
amount of Rs. 16000 crore have been approved by DFPD. Government will be bearing 
interest subvention @ 6% maximum per annum for 5 years against the loans availed 
from banks by entrepreneurs. The Committee note that this will help in enhancement 
and augmentation of ethanol production capacity to a large extent. 
The Committee further note that to expedite sanction of loan under the scheme, a 
tripartite agreement (TPA) between sugar mills, OMC's and the banks through an 
escrow account has been evolved to provide loans even to sugar mills having weak 
balance sheets. The capacity expansion programme for ethanol production is a key 
component of the biofuel programme and any hurdles/delay in getting permission / 
clearances / approvals etc. may be sorted out with concerned agencies at fairly senior 
levels so that the interest subvention scheme progresses as per schedule. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that expansion of molasses based distilleries for production 
of ethanol should be monitored periodically by NBCC as it is critically important for 
achieving success in the blending targets during the upcoming years. 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As per Allocation of Business Rules, DFPD is the nodal Department for setting up 
ethanol/alcohol distilleries in the country and is regularly monitoring the setting up of 
ethanol distillation capacities in the country. NBCC review the progress under the EBP 
Programme covering all aspects pertaining to supply & demand of ethanol. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Conversion of single feed to dual feed distilleries 
The Committee note that the availability of ethanol is critically important for the success 
of the Ethanol blended petrol programme in the country. The ethanol availability has 
been increasing over the years due to various policy interventions taken by the 
concerned Departments. There is a need for capacity expansion/ creation of molasses 
as well as grain based distilleries to convert single feed distilleries to dual feed distilleries 
and in installing molecular sieve dehydration in existing distilleries. The cost for setting 
up grain based distilleries as assessed by National Sugar Institute, Kanpur is about Rs. 

23 
 
 
 
1.45 crore to create 1 kilo litre per day (KLPD). An approximate investment of around 
Rs. 40120 crore would be needed to reach 20 percent blending target. 
The Committee also note that setting up of new distilleries/expansion of existing 
distilleries will generate employment as lakhs of workers would be employed in these 
distilleries and ancillary activities. By this proposal, farmers and their dependents will be 
benefitted as in case of many domestic manufacturing companies, by the setting up of 
new distilleries will have significant employment generation potential. 
Therefore, The Committee recommend that the MoPNG through the NBCC should 
monitor the progress of setting up of new distilleries/expansion of existing distilleries 
from single feed to dual feed and take corrective action wherever required so that the 
multiple objectives of increase in ethanol production capacity, enabling the achievement 
of the targets set for blending, benefiting the farmers and also generation employment. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As per Allocation of Business Rules, DFPD is the nodal Department for setting up 
ethanol/alcohol distilleries in the country and is regularly monitoring the setting up of 
ethanol distillation capacities in the country. NBCC review the progress under the EBP 
Programme covering all aspects pertaining to supply & demand of ethanol. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

24 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Procurement and Pricing of Bio fuels 
 
The Committee note that OMCs have released a 5-year ethanol procurement EOI on 
12.08.2020 for procurement of ethanol for the ESYs 2020-21 to ESY 2024-25. OMCs 
jointly invite ethanol offers through a public Expression of Interest (EoI) on an annual 
basis. These offers are invited periodically in 4 to 5 cycles during an Ethanol Supply 
Year (ESY) (1st December of the year to 30th November of the next year) to procure 
ethanol from indigenous sources. BPCL is the overall coordinator for all the three OMCs. 
MoPNG is carrying out regular reviews with OMCs to monitor the progress of EBP 
Programme and to resolve any issues with the ethanol suppliers.  
 
The prices of ethanol during an ESY, produced from all sugarcane based feedstock, is 
approved by the Government after recommendations of a Committee of Joint 
Secretaries from the Department of Food & Public Distribution, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Department of Expenditure and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. The various factors 
which are taken into consideration are the projections on availability of sugarcane, 
molasses & sugar during the year, the FRP of sugarcane, the MSP of sugar, cost of raw 
material & cost of conversion which includes cost of utilities, pollution control measures, 
interest and depreciation etc. The price of ethanol produced from Damaged Food Grains 
(DFG) is fixed by OMCs. In addition, GST and transportation charges are paid extra to 
the suppliers.  
 
Regarding Bio-Diesel, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have floated an Expression of 
Interest (EoI) for procurement of Biodiesel produced from UCO across 200 locations in 
the country.  Till 01.07.2020, 30 EoIs have been received by the OMCs for setting up 49 
Biodiesel plants with a capacity of 1015 MT/day. Under the scheme, OMCs will pay 
biodiesel producers ₹51 per litre in the first year, ₹52.7 per litre in the second, and ₹54.5 
per litre in the third year (excluding transportation and GST).  
 
Similarly, the Committee note that the marketing of all the CBG produced through such 
plants will be through OMC network. The Committee note that the ethanol suppliers 
have to supply ethanol at a particular location of a minimum quantity and also of the 
quality norms prescribed. This makes ethanol producers of small quantity unable to 
supply under this programme. The Committee also expect the OMCs to take care of 
safety aspects during transportation and storage of ethanol.   
 
The Committee recommend that the Procurement and pricing of Ethanol, Bio diesel and 
Compressed Bio Gas should be periodically reviewed so that the planned quantity may 
be procured and the targeted blending and production of Bio fuels are achieved. The 
Committee also desire that Ministry and OMCs should devise mechanism to procure 
small quantities of ethanol from interested small suppliers and also from stand alone 
distilleries which produce ethanol from sugarcane juice so as to maximize availability of 
ethanol under this programme for blending purpose.  
 

25 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Public Sector OMCs are taking care of safety aspects during transportation and storage 
of ethanol blended petrol by adhering to all norms/regulations including Oil Industry 
Safety Directorate (OISD) and Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO) 
norms/regulations. 
 
Ethanol is purchased by OMCs through tendering process wherein bids are received 
from suppliers who are interested in supplying ethanol in quantities of 10KL and above. 
The Sugarcane (Control Order) by DFPD allows production of ethanol directly from 
sugarcane juice, sugar, sugar syrup in case of sugar factories only. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
GST 
The Committee note that  the Ethanol manufacturers use molasses as the key raw 
material for manufacturing of ethanol which  is subjected to higher rate of GST @28% 
as against ethanol supplied to OMC's for blending which attract GST @5%. GST paid 
on procurement of molasses is available as Input Tax Credit (ITC) to ethanol 
manufacturers. However, they are not able to utilize the full ITC of GST paid due to 
lower rate of tax on ethanol supplied to OMCs for blending. GST provisions allow 
refund of such unutilized ITC. The inverted duty structure leads to working capital 
blockage for ethanol manufacturers. 
 
The Committee feel that the problems of Ethanol manufacturers is legitimate and early 
refund of unutilized ITC help them to get improve their financial position  which 
incentivize them  to produce ethanol. Therefore the Committee recommend that the 
MoPNG and DFPD may represent the matter to GST Council for early refund and 
review.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The issue of taking up the matter of early refund of unutilized ITC to ethanol 
manufacturers with GST Council is noted. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Bio Diesel  
The Committee note that while petrol is blended with ethanol and production of ethanol 
from sugar mills for blending purpose has picked up, the Bio diesel policy has not kept 
pace with EBP programme and has been a non starter. So far OMC's have procured 
10.56 cr litres of Bio diesel for blending with HSD during the period April 2019- March 

26 
 
 
 
2020. Presently, the bio diesel produced in the country primarily from imported palm 
stearin oil.  In order to phase-out palm stearin and as a measure towards import 
substitution, it has been decided to promote domestically available used cooking oil 
(UCO) as the feedstock.  
The Committee are disappointed that the Bio diesel has not been accorded the 
importance it deserved as diesel is the most consumed fuel and used mostly by in public 
transport and commercial vehicles. This makes that higher biodiesel blending will have a 
greater impact on reduction of crude oil imports. The Committee further desire that 
MOPNG should seriously identify sources of feed stock for production of bio diesel and 
take concrete steps in this direction. 
It is proposed that UCO can be collected from Bulk Consumers such as hotels, 
restaurants, canteens, etc. for conversion. Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have 
floated an Expression of Interest (EoI) for procurement of Biodiesel produced from UCO 
across 200 locations in the country. Till 01.07.2020, 30 EoIs have been received by the 
OMCs for setting up 49 Biodiesel plants with a capacity of 1015 MT/day. Under the 
scheme, OMCs will pay biodiesel producers ₹51 per litre in the first year, ₹52.7 per litre in 
the second, and ₹54.5 per litre in the third year (excluding transportation and GST). 
Therefore, the Committee would like to recommend that MoPNG should undertake a 
massive awareness programme in the initial locations and simultaneously monitor the 
UCO program closely and try to improve the bio diesel production in a significant way 
which may help the country to reduce its import dependence.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
OMCs are regularly floating Expression of Interest (EoI) for procurement of Biodiesel 
made from Used Cooking Oil (UCO). EOI status as on 15.5.21- EOI received for 58 
plants capacity of 1140 MT/D. 
To give wide publicity to this EoI, the following activities have been undertaken by the 
OMCs: 
a)   Seven road shows have been conducted by the OMCs. 
b)   The EoI has also been advertised the form of a Jingle over many Radio Channels 
across the country. 
c)    The EoI has also been prominently broadcasted on social media such as Facebook, 
Web sites of the OMCs, twitter, etc. 
The primary aim of the road shows, broadcast on social media and the radio jingles is to 
attract more entrepreneurs to set up Biodiesel manufacturing plants from UCO so as to 
increase the procurement of biodiesel. 
2.      Further All States and UTs have been requested to form State Level Committees 
to look into the various aspects of procurement of UCO for production of biodiesel. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 

27 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
2G Ethanol Plants  
The Committee note that ethanol blended petrol is one of the main and important 
objective in the national policy of bio-fuel and it is estimated that around thousand crore 
litre of ethanol may be required by the year 2030 to achieve 20% blending of ethanol 
with petrol. The current availability in the country is around 180 crore litre per year and it 
is expected that all other sources like sugar juice and food grains production may also 
supplement availability of ethanol in blending purpose. These are all ethanol produce 
from 1G method. However, in order to increase the availability of ethanol across the 
country the Ministry proposes to set up 2G plants at twelve locations in the country 
which use non edible oil seeds, non agriculture residue such as straw, cotton stalks, 
carn cobs, saw dust etc,. With an objective to augment ethanol supply, the Government 
has allowed procurement of ethanol produced from other non food stocks like cellulosic 
and lignocelluloses materials.   The Committee note that in furtherance of this decision 
the oil PSUs have planned to establish twelve 2G ethanol bio refineries in 11 states in 
the country with over all capacity of 1100 kile litre per day with a over all investment of 
Rs. 14000 crores. Out of this the projects at Panipat (Haryana) by IOCL, Bhatinda 
(Punjab) by HPCL, Bargarh (Odisha) by BPCL and Numaligarh (Assam) by NRL are in 
advance stage of progress. 
The Committee are of the view that the continuous availability of ethanol by 1G or 2G 
methods at affordable cost is important for sustainable and successful implementation of 
the EBP programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
periodically monitor the progress of the establishment of 2G ethanol bio refineries in the 
country and they should be completed within schedule time and cost. Further more, the 
Committee also emphasise that the Ministry should focus on technology for 
development of 2nd Generation and other advance biofuels utilising domestic 
feedstocks so as to address the cost factor in sustainability and commercial production 
of Ethanol plants”.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Oil PSUs have planned to set up 2G ethanol bio refineries in different parts of the 
country with overall investment of Rs 8,000 crore & production of 550 KLPD. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 2 
National Bio-Fuel Coordination Committee  
The Committee note that in order to implement the National Policy On Bio Fuels, a 
National Bio-fuel Coordination Committee (NBCC) has been set up with representatives 
of 14 Ministries and Departments to meet periodically to provide overall coordination, 
effective end-to-end implementation and monitoring of biofuel programmes in the 
country. The Committee note that the policy on biofuel envisages role of various 
Ministries and Departments to make it successful and appreciate that NBCC has been 
constituted which is headed by the Minister, Petroleum and Natural Gas to oversee all 
the policies. The Committee note that the policy on bio-fuel also envisages the 
promotion of compressed bio-gas through SATAT initiative of the Ministry of P&NG. 
Further, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is implementing a Waste to Energy 
programme under which recovery of energy in the form of bio-gas from urban industrial 
and agriculture waste/residue such as MSW, vegetable and food market waste, 
slaughter house waste, industrial effluence for meeting certain niche energy demands of 
urban industrial and commercial sector in the country. In this programme, the role of 
Ministry of Urban Development and municipal authorities in states will be the key stake 
holders. in addition, the Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD), Department 
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmer Welfare (DAC&FW), Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairing (DAHD) and Ministry of Environment and Forest and Climate 
Change are all part of the NBCC. Further the Committee note that Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation is implementing a GOBHARDhan scheme which aims to 
positively impact village cleanliness and generate wealth and energy from cattle and 
organic waste. The scheme also aims at creating new rural livelihood opportunities and 
enhancing income for farmers and other rural people. The Committee also note that the 
Department of Financial Services under Ministry of Finance has extended interest 
subvention scheme for expansion of distilleries for ethanol production and also given 
priority sector lending status for CBG projects under SATAT scheme. 
However the Committee note that both Department of Financial Services (DFS) and 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) are not part of the NBCC where 
as these are two Departments which are very vital in terms of providing inputs /organic 
waste and financing of CBG projects. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend 
that in these two Ministries may also be made part of National Bio-fuel Coordination 
Committee (NBCC) so that overall coordination and collective effort from all 
stakeholders will be more effective in implementation of National Policy On Bio Fuels. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 NBCC in its meetings has been requesting participation of relevant Ministries / 
Departments as per the set agenda items. MoP&NG is in the process of amending the 
NPB-2018 and will look into the aspect of including recommended Departments in 
NBCC. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 

29 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Environment Category Status for Bio Fuel Projects 
The Committee note that one of the problems being faced in the implementation of bio 
fuel policy is getting approvals for ethanol distilleries and CBG plants. MoP&NG has 
requested MoEF&CC to remove the condition of Certification by MoP&NG that the 
proposal is for the purpose of blending bioethanol with petrol. However, MoEF&CC has 
extended the validity of the notification till February, 2021 including the aforesaid 
deterrent condition. It may be noted that special dispensation is available only for those 
project proponent which submit MoP&NG certificate as mentioned in the aforesaid 
notification along with the Environmental Clearance (EC) application. Accordingly, 
MoEF&CC is granting the EC as per its normal procedure and is not providing benefit of 
notification to the project proponents yet. 
The Committee have been informed that even in zero discharge case from CBG plant, 
the Environment Ministry has kept the category as "orange". If the same can be moved 
to "white category", it can help in faster approvals and the plants can be brought into 
production earlier. The Committee recommend that MoPNG through NBCC mechanism 
should take up this issue and pursue CPCB to give white category status to the CBG 
projects. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
(a)  MoPNG has taken up the matter with Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)   and 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). In this    regard IOCL 
has made a presentation to CPCB wherein CPCB has asked to inform about bio gas 
slurry utilization plan. 
(b)  This Ministry has coordinated with Department of Agriculture Cooperation  and 
Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) to include Digested Bio Gas Slurry (DBGS) produced from 
CBG projects under Fertilizer Control Order 1985 (FCO). DAC&FW has approved 
inclusion of DBGS under FCO and likely to be notified soon which will facilitate its 
application and marketing. This will   enable CBG plants in achieving Zero discharge. 
(c)  After notification of DBGS under FCO this Ministry will take up the matter with 
CPCB. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
BIO-ATF 
The Committee note that one of the bio-fuel under the national policy on bio fuel being 
implemented is Bio-ATF. The aviation sector which plays pivotal role in the economy has 
shown phenomenal growth in the recent years. It also contribute to green house gas 
emission hence need for cleaner aviation fuel as gained significance. Though India is 
not a signatory CORSIA (Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International 
Aviation) at present it may have to participate mandatorily in the second phase from 
2024. Therefore, there is a need to build infrastructure for bio-jet fuel. 

30 
 
 
 
The Committee also note that there is a proposal to set up a demonstration scale 
bio-ATF plant in one of the refineries. They are apprised that once the fuel is developed 
successfully it may be used in Indian Air force which is looking to reduce its import 
requirements of aviation fuel. Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should 
quickly finalise the demonstration scale bio-ATF plant at one of the refineries and also 
further support R&D activities for development of this fuel so that the Indian aviation 
sector and the Indian Airforce can use this bio-ATF in larger scale at an early date. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
To give impetus to the Bio-Jet Fuel (Bio-ATF) program in the country two committees 
were formed on 02.08.2019 by MoP&NG. 
2.       Based on the report of the Committees and further discussions in the matter, 
MRPL has been asked to setup a Bio-ATF manufacturing facility integrated with MRPL 
Refinery. 
3.       Recently, there have been new developments in the field of ATF like Carbon 
Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation(CORSIA), flights being flown 
by Indian Air Force on Bio-ATF blended ATF, need for reducing emissions, fuel 
efficiency, etc. To address the new developments this Ministry has formed a Committee 
on 16/06/2021 to look into all the aspects of the Bio-ATF program in the country 
including raw materials production, technology, demand, future requirements, CORSIA, 
BIS Standards, affect on engine performance, blending percentages etc. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M No.P-13039(18)/2/2020-CC (E-38408) Dated. 02nd August, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
   February, 2022 
   Magha,1943 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                                             Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                   
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
SIXTH SITTING 
(20.12.2021) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 20 December, 2021 from 1630 hrs. to 
1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha  
3.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
4.  Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6.  Shri Santosh Kumar 
7.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
8.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
9.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
10.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
11.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
12.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
13.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
14.  Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
15. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
16. Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
17. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 

32 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration draft Action Taken Report on 
the subject 'Review of Progress in Production of Non-Conventional Fuels with Specific 
Reference to Bio-Fuels' and adopted the same without modifications.  
 
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

33 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2020-21) ON THE SUBJECT “REVIEW OF PROGRESS IN PRODUCTION OF NON-
CONVENTIONAL FUELS WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO BIO-FUELS”. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 17 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 14, 15 and 16)  
08 
 Percentage to Total 47% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 6 and 8) 
 
02 
 Percentage of Total 11.75% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 5, 7, 11 and 13) 
 
04 
 Percentage of Total 
 
23.50% 
 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 12 and 17)  
 
03 
 Percentage of Total 
 
17.75% 
 
 
 
 
 
 