1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022 -23) on the subject 
‘Safety and Security of oil installations of public sector 
oil companies with specific reference to western 
offshore mishap during cyclone Tauktae’] 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
14 December, 2022 /25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 


2 
 
CP&NG NO.     
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2022-23) on the subject ‘Safety and Security of oil 
installations of public sector  oil companies with specific 
reference to western offshore mishap during cyclone 
Tauktae’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2022  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
14 December, 2022 /25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report 
………………………………………………….                       
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………       
                   
22 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
…………………………………     
                    
38 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
39 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
46 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the  4th sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) held on 30.11.2022. 
49 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations  contained in the Thirteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022 -23) on the subject 
‘Safety and Security of oil installations of public sector oil 
companies with specific reference to western offshore 
mishap during cyclone Tauktae’. 
50 

4 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM 
& NATURAL GAS (2022-23) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 Shri H. Ram Prakash Director 
3 Shri Gurpreet Singh Committee Officer 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on Petro leum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee , to submit the Report on their behalf , present this 
Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Commi ttee on the 
subject ‘Safety and Security of oil installations of public sector oil companies with 
specific reference to western offshore mishap during cyclone Tauktae’. 
 
2. The Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was pres ented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 06.04.2022.  The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report were received on 29.09.2022. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2022-23) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 30.11.2022.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 December, 2022 
25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
 the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
 Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
 Petroleum and Natural Gas (20 21-22) on the subject 'Safety and Security of Oil 
 Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with Specific Reference to Western 
 Offshore Mishap during Cyclone Tauktae'  of the  Ministry of Petroleum and 
 Natural Gas, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 06.04.2022.  
2.  Action Tak en Notes have been received from the Ministry on 29.09.2022 in 
respect of all the 16 recommendations/observations contained in the report. 
These have been categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Governm ent:- 
Reco. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15 and 16 (Total-09) 
            (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:- Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: - Reco. Nos. 2, 3, 5 and 11 (Total-
04) 
(Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                        
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 10, 12 and 14 (Total-03) 
                                                                                                             
(Chapter- V)   
3. The Commi ttee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
 Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
 Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
 have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V), should be 
 furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of  their recommendations.  
 

7 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 Need for periodic review of Safety Measures in Petroleum Sector 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Indian Petroleum Sector has presence in 
upstream, midstream and downstream sector including onshore and offshore 
fields in the exploration and production sector, about twenty three refineries, 
several Gas processing plants, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) terminals, retail 
outlets, LPG agencies and godowns and more than 45,000 kms of pipelines 
transporting crude oil, petroleum products and gas spread across the length and 
breadth of the country. The Committee a lso note that several Acts and Rules 
govern the safety of oil and gas inflations and similarly several authorities under 
different Ministries of Central Government and state level authorities too enforce 
laws coming under their purview like fire department , lift and elevators inspectors 
etc. 
 
The Committee note that the Oil and Natural Gas Industry handles highly 
inflammable hydro -carbons and processes them under high temperature and 
pressure. Any accident in Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry can cause ser ious 
outcomes like loss of lives, disruption of activities and huge destruction of 
economic value and also damage the local environment. Hence, the Committee 
observe that Safety in petroleum sector is of utmost importance. 
 
The Committee note that many acc idents happened in the Oil and Gas sector in 
the last several years including cyclone Tauktae, in May 2021, where Barge P -
305 broke and sank in which 86 lives were lost, in 2020 there was a oilwell 
blowout of Oil India Limited in Baghjan, Assam and GAIL pi peline blast at Andhra 
Pradesh in 2014 and Jaipur incident of IOCL in 2009, etc. are some of the 
serious incidents in the Petroleum Industry in the country. 
 
The Committee had examined the events leading to and handling of Cyclone 
Tauktae and its aftermath  by ONGC in which 86 people had lost their lives. The 
Committee had noted with concern that there has been several gaps in 
legislation, lack of enforcement of the existing regulations and also lack of 
accountability among the various authorities. Consideri ng that the Ministry of 
PNG is encouraging private investments in the petroleum sector and several 
private companies have entered into the field in the Exploration and Production 
space and in the City Gas Distribution (CGD) network, LNG terminals, etc., th e 
Committee opine that the Ministry and PSUs and safety regulatory agencies 
should be pro -active and review the safety measures in place from time to time 
and identify deficiencies and not wait for any disaster to happen to review the 
safety measures. 
 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should undertake a comprehensive 
review of the safety requirements for the entire oil and gas industry and the 
responses required in any eventuality by the companies concerned. The 
Committee would expect the Ministry to take into account the latest technology 
developments and incorporating the same for surveillance and response 
management and also look into the gaps in laws and also accountability of 

8 
 
various organizations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Mini stry 
should constitute a Working Group Comprising of industry professionals, legal 
experts, academics, etc. to look into the whole gamut of safety framework and 
suggest necessary changes for petroleum sector in the country. 
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“A working group comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, shipping, 
academics, etc. has been formed to review safety system followed by oil and gas 
industry and responses required in any emergency situation b y the companies 
considering the latest technological developments. It will also identify gaps in 
extant laws including enforcement and accountability. The  Working Group will 
submit its report by 31.12.2022”. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7.  The Committee  in their original report had recommended that the 
Ministry should undertake a comprehensive review of the safety 
requirements for  the entire oil and gas industry an d the responses 
required in any eventuality by the companies concerned.   Further, it had 
also  recommended that the Ministry should constitute a Working Group 
Comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, academics, etc. to look 
into the whole gamut  of safety framework and suggest necessary changes 
for petroleum sector in the country. 
   The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that a  working group 
 comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, shipping, academics, 
 etc. has been form ed to review safety system followed by oil and gas 
 industry and responses required in any emergency situation by the 
 companies considering the latest technological developments.  It will also 
 identify gaps in extant laws including enforcement and account ability. 
 The Working Group is expected to submit its report by 31.12.2022. 
The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry has constituted 
a working group comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, 
shipping, academics, etc. to review safet y system followed by oil and gas 
industry.  However, at the same time the Committee would like to 
emphasise upon the Ministry to ensure that the Report being prepared by 
the Working Group is submitted as per stipulated date and is implemented 

9 
 
immediately f or compliance.  The Committee desire that the Report of 
Working Group may also be shared with them.  
Recommendation No. 2 
 Fixing of accountability in ONGC 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that ONGC had received first weather  advisories and 
bulletins about the Cyclone Tauktae from its forecasting agency M/s. Skymet on 
12th and 14th of May 2021. The officials of ONGC had conveyed these advisories 
to their contractors in the offshore over radio communication and advised them to 
move to safe locations in view of the cyclone. The Committee were informed that 
ONGC e -mailed weather advisory from Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre 
(MRCC) to all the offshore contractors and rigs and a Control Room had started 
on 13 th May. All rig owne rs were asked to go on cyclone survival mode on 15 th 
May, 2021. 
 
The Committee note that the Executive Committee (EC) which is highest body in 
ONGC activated Corporate Disaster Management Plan in its special meeting on 
16th May for rescue operations. The C ommittee were also informed that ONGC 
had informed Marine Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) and head of Offshore 
Defense Advisory Group (ODAG) as per regional contingency plan and further 
immediately diverted all its Multi Support Vessels (MSVs/OSVs) prese nt in the 
field towards the barge and informed the Indian Navy, which directed INS Kochi 
reaching P -305 location at 15:30 hours but could not undertake any immediate 
rescue measures due to inclement weather. The Barge P -305 which is a non 
propelled Barge type was particularly vulnerable and needed a tug handling boat 
for its movement to a safer location. In the morning of May 17, 2021, the Barge 
P-305 reported that it had lost all anchors and hit the wellhead platform HC. 
 
The Committee are not convinced of  the reply of the ONGC and its failure to 
mange and its preparedness to face Cyclone Tauktae and its aftermath. The 
Committee note that ONGC had information about the cyclone as early as 12 th of 
May and the actual cyclone had hit on 16 th night/17th morning. The Committee 
are of the opinion that having been present in the western offshore for last 
several decades ONGC had the experience of handling several cyclones in the 
past and the argument that cyclone has changed its direction does not hold much 
ground as ONGC should have factored that change of direction in the path of 
cyclone and should have prepared a contingency plan to handle it. This clearly 
exposes the serious lack of systems, processes and response management 
system of ONGC. 
 
The Committee further note that no senior official of ONGC at the corporate level 
had taken charge of the situation to guide the teams at Western Offshore. The 
Committee view this seriously as accountability goes on with authority and would 
like to recommend to the Ministry t hat it should conduct thorough investigation 
about the responsibility of ONGC officials at various levels in this incident and 
take strict action against all those who are found negligent of duty”. 
 

10 
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“ONGC has a  established system of weather forecasting and dissemination. All 
the weather warnings and advisories were timely disseminated to all the 
Installations/Rigs/Vessels/Barges. ONGC  encountered phenomenon of abrupt 
shifting of cyclone path  by about 100 NM  associated with highest recorded wind 
speed. Based on the analysis of sequence of events that occurred post issuance 
of initial cyclone warning, ONGC took necessary measures.   
  
On 13.05.2021, all the barges in the field were instructed t o move to safe 
location, in view of the impending cyclone. All the barges took action based on 
weather advisories and returned to/were on their way to sheltered waters except 
for one barge i.e . Papaa-305. While taking stock of the situation on 16 th May 
2021, EC (Executive Committee) of ONGC, which is the highest decision making 
body of ONGC, activated the CDMP (Corporate Disaster Management Plan) and 
advised Asset Manager - Mumbai High Asset (as senior most Asset Manager of 
offshore Assets) to take action to  ensure safety of all personnel working in 
offshore.  
  
Corporate Emergency Control Room (CECR) at Delhi was promptly activated for 
taking regular situation reports from the Emergency Control Room at Mumbai. 
The Corporate Disaster Management Group (CDMG) c omprising of CMD and 
functional Directors kept taking regular updates of the situation and providing the 
necessary support and guidance to the team of Western Offshore. ONGC’s 
system and processes for handling of cyclonic situation are in place. After this  
incident, Emergency Response Plans and Regional Contingency Plan have been 
further strengthened to handle such unprecedented emergencies. 
  
ONGC had placed its five officers  under suspension after incidence of Cyclone 
Tauktae. Three of these executives we re of the level of E -9 i.e . Executive 
Director which is the highest level below Board. One executive was of E -7 level 
(Chief General Manager) and one of E -6 level (General Manager). However, 
after inquiry all have been reinstated”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10.  The Committee in their  original  report  while noting  that no senior 
official of ONGC at the corporate level had taken charge of the situation to 
guide the teams at Western Offshore  had  recommended the Ministry  to 
conduct thorough investigation about the responsibility of ONGC officials 
at various levels in this incident and take strict action against all those who 
are found guilty of negligent of duty .  The Ministry in its reply has stated 

11 
 
that ONGC had placed its five officers  under suspension after incidence of 
Cyclone Tauktae and after inquiry all have been reinstated. 
In this regard,  t he Committee are not satisfied with the rep ly of the 
Ministry ke eping in view the fact that the  Ministry has relied fully on the 
explanation furnished by the ONGC and has taken no action at their own 
end for conducting independent enquiry into fixing accountability for 
lapses on part of ONGC officials including the Boa rd level.  The Committee 
are of the view that had a senior official of ONGC at the corporate level 
taken cha rge of the situation, the response and consequential damage 
caused by the cyclone Tauktae could have been mitigated considerably. 
 The Committee are  of the view that the accountability should be 
vested in the top rung executives of ONGC for the cyclone Tauktae 
incident.  T he Committee, therefore, reiterate the ir earlier recommendation 
and desire the Ministry to conduct a thorough investigation in an impartial 
manner to fix  the responsibility of ONGC officials at various levels in this 
incident particularly at senior hierarchy and to identify all those who are  
found negligent of duty which led to loss of so many human lives so that it 
sets as deterrenc e for future incident . The Ministry may also share the 
investigation report as well as the reasons for which the Officers were 
reinstated . The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
Recommendation No. 3 
 Weather Forecasting Services 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that ONGC has been present in Western Offshore area for 
more than 5 decades engaged in exploration and production work. ONGC had 
awarded the contract for providing offshore weather forecast on a day to day 
basis to M/s Skymet Pvt. Ltd. through open tendering process in 2010. The 
Committee note that M/s Skymet renders weather forecasting services and 
provides location specific weather forecast three times a day for areas specific to 
ONGC operations on Western and Eastern Offshore. M/s Skymet takes as input 
the satellite pictures of Indian Meteorological Department for weather forecasting 
model and it also runs weather research and forecast model in collaboration with 
National Centre for Educati on Technology, USA. ONGC has also informed the 
Committee that M/s Skymet had issued advisories both in the east and west 

12 
 
coast in India ever since they have been engages by ONGC and so far no 
deviation have been observed about their predictions. 
 
The Commi ttee note that the Indian Meteorological Department under the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences is the government agency in the country in all matters 
relating to meteorology and allied subjects. IMD is the nodal agency to provide 
weather forecasting and cyclone warnings in Bay of Bengal (BoB) and Arabian 
Sea (AS) region for the country and also the regional centre to provide advisories 
under global Maritime Distress Safety Systems. The Committee have also noted 
that until 2010 ONGC was being provided weather fore cast and warnings by IMD 
three times a day regularly for Mumbai, Godavari/Krishna, Cauvery basins and 
other fields and special weather forecast at the time of formation of 
depression/cyclone in the sea around the clock. However, the services of IMD 
are not directly catered to ONGC since 2010. 
 
However, the Committee are not convinced about the arguments put forth by 
ONGC in engaging Skymet for its weather forecasting system and field specific 
locations forecast or bulletins and area unclear for the reasons behind ONGC’s 
decision to go for global tendering process to select the service provider which 
eliminated IMD from participation being a government agency. The Committee 
also been informed that globally the national agencies are having a major role in 
weather forecasting as it has larger impact on the population of the country. The 
Committee deplore the decision of ONGC to stop receiving weather advisories 
and forecast from IMD since 2010 and select M/s Skymet through a global 
tender. It is very unfortunate  that while IMD has claimed that its forecast about 
Cyclone Tautkae was very much as per the path of cyclone whereas ONGC had 
claimed that the final direction and wind speeds/ wave heights experienced 
advisories received by from M/s Skymet were not as per the prediction. The 
Committee observe that the eye of the cyclone tautkae passed through the 
ONGC’s installations whereas the early forecast was far away from them. Being 
a premier organization, ONGC should also collect global inputs on weather 
forecasts o n a regular basis so that it has a forewarning and time to plan for 
events like cyclones or storms in its area of operations. The Committee conclude 
that the decision of ONGC to engage a private company to give weather 
forecasting services since 2010 was a  poor decision and recommend that 
Ministry should enquire into the reasons being selection of M/s Skymet for its 
weather forecasting services”. 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“ONGC had a contract with IMD for providing  weather forecast for ONGC on 
Nomination basis till 2013. IMD was not providing location specific weather 
forecast which was a requirement of ONGC. In order to get area specific weather 
forecast, ONGC decided to float the weather forecast tender for award of weather 
forecast contract for 3 years starting from April 2013. ONGC awarded the 
contract to M/s StormGeo, Dubai starting from April 2013. This 3 year contract 
was in force till 2016. 
 
Subsequently, ONGC awarded a new contract for Hiring of Services for  weather 
forecast for a period of 3 years (1st April 2016 to 31st March 2019) through 
International Competitive Bidding. Total 05 bidders participated in the tender.   

13 
 
IMD was also requested to participate in the tender. However, IMD did not 
participate in the tender.  
  
ONGC again awarded the contract for Hiring of Services for weather forecast for 
a period of 3 years (1st April 2019 to 31st March 2022) through ICB. Total 2 
bidders participated in the tender. Again IMD did not participate in this tender. 
M/s Skymet was selected after meeting the experience criteria clause of tender. 
  
Skymet has been providing weather services since 2008. List of major clients are 
as under:- 
  
SI 
No Sector Services Major Clients 
1 Insurance 
Weather Data, Weather Forecast, 
Weather based Crop Advisories, 
Crop health & yield estimation, 
Crop Loss Assessment (Primarily 
due to Rain & Hail) 
AIC, ICICI Lombard, HDFC Ergo, 
Bajaj Allianz, Reliance GIC, IFFO 
Tokio, United Insurance, Oriental 
Insurance, National Insurance, 
AON Hewitt, IRICS 
2 Energy 
Weather Data, Weather Forecast - 
For power generation and 
demand forecasting 
Adani Energy, CESC, Torrent 
Power, NDPL, PTC India, REC 
Power 
3 Media Weather Data, Weather Forecast 
ABP, Infinity Media, Jagati 
Publication, Jagaran Prakshan, TV 
Today, TV18, Zee News, Focus 
TV, HT Media, The Hindu, Times 
Internet 
4 
Govt. / 
Multilateral / 
Bilateral 
Agencies 
Weather Data, Weather Forecast, 
Gridded Weather Data, Weather 
Based Crop Advisories, 
World Bank, IFC, GIZ, USAID, 
Clinton Foundation, IRRI, Go vt of 
Maharashtra, MNCFC (Govt of 
India), TERI, Tata Trust, Shakti 
Sustainable Energy Foundation, 
PRADAN,  Jeevilka & Aajeevika 
5 Disaster 
Management 
Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast/Warnings 
Nagaland State Disaster 
Management Authority, Kerala 
State Disast er Management 
Authority,  Earth Networks, Sterlite, 
6 Oil & 
Gas/Marine 
Route Weather Forecast, Weather 
Warnings 
Cairn India, ONGC, Indian Oil, 
RGPPL, Reliance Naval, Adani 
Welspun, Petronet LNG Ltd. 
7 E-Commerce 
Weather Data, Weather driven 
demand foreca sting, Delivery 
Scheduling/Management 
Amazon & Emami. 
  
It is seen that M/s Skymet has been providing weather forecasts to premier 
company like Cairn India, Indian Oil, Reliance Naval, Adani Welspun, Petronet 
LNG Ltd etc in addition to ONGC. It  indicates weather forecast of M/s Skymet is 
accepted in the market.  
 
In addition to above, an MoU has been signed on 22nd March 2022 between, 
DGH, IMD, INCOIS, DG Shipping, Indian Coast Guard and OISD regarding 

14 
 
developing a specialized integrated weather forecastin g toll for specific 
requirement of Offshore Exploration and Production operators in India. As per 
MOU, IMD and INCOIS have to provide Cyclone Forecast for Offshore E&P 
operational area”.  
 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13.  The Committee  in their original r eport had recommended to the 
Ministry to enquire into the reasons behind  selection of M/s Skymet for its 
weather forecasting services .  The Ministry in its reply h ave stated that  
ONGC awarded the contract for Hiring of Services for weather forecast for 
a period of 3 years (1 st April 2019 to 31 st March 2022) through International 
Competitive Bidding ( ICB).  M/s Skymet was selected after meeting the 
experience criteria clause of tender.   It has been further stated in the reply 
that  an MoU has been signed on 22 nd March 2022 between, DGH, IMD, 
INCOIS, DG Shipping, Indian Coast Guard and OISD regarding developing a 
specialized integrated weather  forecasting toll for spe cific requirement of 
Offshore Exploration and Production operators in India and to provide 
Cyclone Forecast for Offshore E&P operational area.  
 In this regard, the Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry regarding selection  of M/s Skym et for  award of contract  for area 
specific weather forecast through International Competitive bidding as  
only two bidders participated in the tender and M/s Skymet was selected on 
the basis of experience criteria clause of the tender.  Being a Governmen t 
Department, IMD would not participate in the tendering process should 
have been in the knowledge of ONGC.  In such a scenario, the ONGC 
should have ensured that International Competitive Bidding gets wider 
participation of global players and it should en gaged Indian Meteorogical 
Department also parallel provide weather forecasting.  The Committee are 
surprised that IMD which provides weather forecasting services for the 
entire country and is also the nodal agency in the region, ONGC was ready 
to forego it s services which raise serious question.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry to enquire  into 
the reasons behind selection of M/s Skymet for its weather forecasting 
services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 Vacancies in Senior Levels in ONGC 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:   
    “The Committee note that board level posts of Chairman and Managing Director 
(CMD) fell vacant with effect from 01.05.2021 and Director (offshore) with effect from 
01.05.2021. Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) conducted selection meeting for 
the post of CMD, ONGC on 04.06.2021 and did not recommended any candidate 
keeping in view the strategic importance and vision for the company and its future. 
The Committee note that intervi ew for Director has been conducted names have 
been recommended because it is selected by PESB. When a post starts 
becoming vacant, they start the process long before that, but PESB. When a post 
starts becoming vacant, they start the process long before that, but PESB takes it 
forward. For the post of Director (offshore), the incumbent has been 
recommended by PESB and appointment will be  made after approval of 
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC). The recommendation has been 
made for this and now he w ill be appointed after vigilance clearance etc. 
Similarly, the Committee were informed that interview was also conducted for 
CMD, ONGC. But PESB has decided that its search should be wide, and there is 
a system to form a search committee due to which it is taking a little more time. 
The Committee note that ONGC being the country’s largest and important 
domestic crude oil production company should be managed well as long term 
policies and programmes determine the success and outcome of the company 
and its pe rformance. ONGC has large budgets and carry out many important 
projects in the oil and gas sector. While the Committee appreciate the need for 
carrying out wider search for the post of CMD, ONGC, the delay in the 
procedures to select a person cause avoidab le indecisiveness in the decision 
making of the organization. The Committee note that resorting to temporary 
appointment to the post of CMD with senior officials holding the posts will not 
provide sufficient  authority to perform the functions in full zeal and enthusiasm. 
The Committee feel the absence of regular CMD in ONGC could also be a factor 
in handling the Cyclone Tauktae incident in an non -serious manner. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should attach utmost seriousness 
to the filling up of vacancies in oil PSUs in general and particularly ONGC in this 
case take advance action to complete the exercise well before the incumbent 
completes the tenure”. 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The appointments  to the post of Board Level Director of CPSEs are made in 
accordance with the guidelines /timelines dated 31.03.2011 /31.07.2014 of 
DoP&T. As per above mentioned guidelines, the Job Description for the post is 
finalized by Public Enterprise Selection Board  (PESB) in consultation with the 
administrative Ministry. Thereafter, PESB advertises the vacancy, holds interview 
and recommends suitable candidate for the post. The recommendation is sent to 

16 
 
the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) with the approv al of Minister. 
The appointment to the post is made after the approval of the ACC. 
So far as filling up the vacancy of Chairman & Managing Director, ONGC is 
concerned, it is mentioned that the interview for the post was held by PESB on 
04.06.2021. However,  it did not select any candidate but recommended that a 
Search Cum Selection Committee (SCSC) be constituted, which will recommend 
the selection of the candidate for this post. The SCSC has been constituted with 
the approval of the ACC. The interview for s election of CMD,  ONGC has been 
held on 27.08.2022”. 
 
  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16.  The Committee in their original report had recommended  that the 
Ministry should attach utmost seriousness to the filling up of vacancies in 
oil PSUs  in general and particularly ONGC in this case  and take advance 
action to complete the exercise well before the incumbent completes the 
tenure.   
The Ministry in its action taken repl y has stated that t he 
appointments to the post of Board Level Director of CPSEs are made in 
accordance with the guideli nes /timelines dated 31.03.2011 /31.07.2014 of 
DoP&T.  So far as fil ling up the vacancy of Chairman & Managing Director, 
ONGC is concerned, it is mentioned that the interview for the post was held 
by Public Enterprises Selection Board  (PESB) on 04.06.2021.  However, it 
did not select any candidate but recommended that a Search Cum 
Selection Committee (SCSC) be constituted, which will recomme nd the 
selection of the candidate for this post.  The SCSC has been constituted 
with the approval of the ACC. The interview for selection of CMD, ONGC 
has been held on 27.08.2022.  
In this regard, the Committee express their displeasure over 
inordinate delay by PESB in appointment for the post of  CMD, ONGC.  The 
reply of the Ministry is silent on the steps taken to fill other vacancies at 
senior level in ONGC and there has been no reference as to whether the 
Ministry persuaded PESB in expediting the select ion process for filling 
various senior level posts in ONGC.  The Committee feel that appointing 

17 
 
CMD on temporary basis or additional charge basis is not desirable way of 
manning important organisations like ONGC and reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to coordinate with other authorities at the highest level to 
complete the selection process within a stipulated time frame.  
Recommendation No. 5 
 
  Need for Legislations for Offshore Vessels 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:  
     “The Committee note that Shipping is an international industry and one of the most 
diverse industries of the world and regulations needs to be consistent across all 
jurisdiction for seamless movement of trade with the shipping industry being responsible 
for the carriage and transportation of most of the world trade. Under the auspices of the 
International Maritime Organization (IMO), International Conventions have been agreed 
which set out uniform requirements in order to facilitate the acceptance of a ship 
registered in  one country in the waters and ports of another and in the general 
furtherance of safety at sea and the protection of the environment. 
The Committee further note that all vessels, including the ones operating on the 
Coast of India or Indian Oil Fields need  to have valid applicable certificates to 
ensure compliance with the respective Convention requirements. Flag State of 
the vessel or its Recognized Organization (RO), issues Certificate(s) once 
compliance with the applicable Convention requirements are ver ified. Thereafter, 
it is the responsibility of the Owner, Master and Crew to ensure that conditions in 
which certificate(s) are not changed and that the vessel remains in seaworthiness 
condition. 
 
The Committee note that in the case of non -propelled vessels (example Barges), 
they are registered under a very old legislation enacted during the British -era i.e., 
Coasting vessels Act, 1838. It may be noted that, this act contains provision for 
registration only and does not empower the Maritime Administration t o provide 
rules and regulations for the safety, security and pollution prevention aspects 
therein. The Committee were surprised that Barge P -305 which accommodates 
300 persons need only registration and Indian maritime Authorities has no rules 
and regulations for ensuring its safety aspects. The Committee are shocked and 
very disappointed that such gaps in legislation and powers to provide rules and 
regulations have been continuing for a long time of more than four decades while 
ONGC have been engaging Contractors for E&P activities. 
 
It is unfortunate that such an incident involving Barge P -305 has revealed such 
gaps in laws and exposed the loopholes governing these sector for so long. The 
Committee have been assured by Ministry of Shipping that the Coastin g Vessels 
Act, 1838 would be repealed and Registration, Safety, security and marine 

18 
 
pollution issues relating to non -self propelled vessels will be brought under 
Merchant Shipping Act by making amendments. The Ministry of P&NG may 
review other aspects of upstream sectors and identify and such gaps that may be 
need to be plugged by legislation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas should coordinate and give necessary 
inputs to ensure that the legislations and rules a nd regulations may be brought 
out by the Ministry of Shipping”. 
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“As per Ministry of Ports, Shipping and waterways:  
1.  Coasting Vessels Act, 1838, is proposed to be repealed by way of a new 
legislation, i.e. Coastal Shipping Bill. The said Bill includes provisions to regulate 
the engagement of all vessels, including non -propelled vessels in coasting trade 
and amend the existing provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 to include 
the registration of non-propelled vessels as well. 
 
2.  To regulate the safety, security and pollution prevention aspects of all 
vessels, including non -propelled vessels, a new legislation has been drafted, i.e. 
the Merchant Shipping Bill. This Bill intends to  repeal the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958. 
3.  Further, the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill has been drafted to 
decriminalize minor offenses and to provide for certain important matters. By way 
of certain amendments to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The  said Bill also 
repeals the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 in whole and proposes to allow the 
registration and licensing of all vessels, including non -propelled vessels under 
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. Further, it obliges all vessels registered under 
the provisions of the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 to be re -registered under the 
provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 within a period of one year from 
the date of coming into force of the relevant provision. Further, the Bill empowers 
the Central Govt.  to prescribe safety, security, manning and pollution prevention 
requirements, and such types of certificates and documents, as may be 
considered appropriate depending on the type, size, nature and area of operation 
of a ship, including non-mechanically propelled ship”. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19.  The Committee in their original report while taking note of loopholes 
in the  existing laws governing the operatio n of offshore had recommended 
the Ministry to coordinate and give necessary inputs to ensure that the 
legislations and Rules/ regulations may be brought out by the Ministry of 
Shipping.  

19 
 
The Ministry in its reply has stated that the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill has been drafted to decriminalize minor offen ces and to 
provide for certain important matters.  Further, the said Bill also repeals the 
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 in whole and proposes to allow the registration 
and licensing of all vessels, inc luding non -propelled vessels under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  
However, the Committee note that the reply has no reference to the 
efforts being made by the Ministry of P&NG for expediting the passage of 
proposed reforms to enhance the offshore safety .  Moreover, the Ministry 
has not furnished any response to Committee’s recommendation regarding 
identifying legal gaps in other aspects of upstream sector that may be 
needed to be plugged by legislation.  It has been more than a year since the 
incident took place and till now there is no noticeable action made towards 
culmination of legal procedures for ushering in requisite reforms.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
that Ministry should study international legisl ations particularly pertaining 
to maritime and offshore operations  including ONGC Videsh’s (OVL)  
expertise in operating overseas fields in coordination with  Ministry of 
Shipping to get them incorporated in draft Merchant Shipping Amendment 
Bill and to ge t new legislations passed within a well stipulated time frame.  
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
Recommendation No. 11 
  Safety Council 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:   
     
“The Committee note that Governmen t of India set up a “Safety Council” at the 
Apex in January, 1986 under the administrative control of MoP&NG as a special 
self-regulatory industry agency for safety matters & procedures in respect of 
Hydrocarbon sector. Safety Council is headed by Secreta ry of MoP&NG as 
Chairman & includes members comprising Additional Secretary, Joint 
Secretaries, Chief Executives of all Public Sector Undertakings, at least two 
Chief Executives from Private J JV Companies on rotational basis, Statutory 
bodies such as Chief Controller of Explosives, Director General of Mines Safety, 
Adviser (Fire), Secretary, Central Electricity Board and Director General of 
Factory Advice service and Labour. Safety Council is assisted by Executive 
Director, OISD who also acts as the member  secretary of Safety council. The 

20 
 
Safety Council is completely packed with representatives of Government and 
PSUs and there is no representation of Industry Experts or independent Safety 
Professionals in this body. 
The Committee note that to review the Saf ety performance of the Industry, the 
Safety Council meets at least once in a year and Western Offshore mishap of 
ONGC was a part of presentation for the 38 th Safety Council meeting under the 
heading "Major Incident". The Committee have been informed that s ince a High-
Level Committee (HLC) was constituted by the Ministry to inquire into the 
sequence of events leading to the stranding of ONGC vessels in the cyclone 
"Tauktae" and the initial proceeding of the HLC was going on, the incident was 
only briefly discussed and not recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Safety Council has not extensively 
deliberated on such an event regarding the Barge P -305 incident during Cyclone 
Tauktae and take necessary actions with all concerned agencies. The Committee 
view this as an unacceptable approach and would recommend that the Safety 
Council may be revamped and broad based by including more outside industry 
experts, academia, etc. and take steps to improve the levels of safety 
preparedness of the Petroleum Sector”. 
 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“During the 39 th Safety Council meeting held on 06.05.2022 at MoP&NG 
conference room, a detailed deliberation on cyclone Tauktae and Baghjan blow 
out including the recommendations given by respective High-Level Committee(s), 
compliance status as of meeting date and road map for ensuring compliance at 
organisational & concerned Ministerial level carried out. The meeting was chaired 
by Chairman Safety Cou ncil & Secretary PNG and attended by nominated 
members (CEO’s) of the oil & gas industry. Revamping of Safety Council was 
also one of the point of the meeting and OISD is in the process to submit draft list 
of revised members to MoP&NG to modify the same t hrough Resolution/ 
Notification”.   
 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22.  The Committee in their original report while observing that the Safety 
Council is completely packed with representatives of Government and 
PSUs and there is no representation of Industry Experts or independent 
Safety Professionals in this body  had recommended that the Safety 
Council may be revamped and broad based by including more outside 
industry experts, academia, etc. and take steps to improve the levels of 
safety preparedness of the Petroleum .  Besides , the Committee had also 
expressed  their displeasure that the Safety Council had not extensively 

21 
 
deliberated on such an event regarding the Bar ge P -305 incident during 
Cyclone Tauktae  and taken necessary action with all concerned agencies.  
The Ministry in its reply has stated that  during the 39 th Safety 
Council meeting held on 06.05.2022, a detailed deliberation on cyclone 
Tauktae and Baghjan blow out including the recommendations given by 
respective High-Level Committee(s), compliance status as on meeting date 
and road map for ensuring compliance at organisational & concerned 
Ministerial level  has been carried out.  Further it has been stated that 
revamping of Safety Council was also one of the point s of the meeting and 
OISD is in the process to submit draft list of revised members to MoP&NG 
to modify the same through Resolution/ Notification.  
In this regard, t he Committee are not satisfied wi th the reply 
furnished by the Ministry as it has been more than a year after the incident 
and revamping of the Safety Council is still under process as on date.  The 
Committee deplore inordinate delay in such matters and would like 
Ministry/OISD should expe dite the action. T he Committee , therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation and  desire the process  for revamping the 
Safety Council to make it more inclusive should be completed at the 
earliest. The Committee may also  be apprised about the compliance status 
with regard to recommendations given by the High -Level Commit tee 
constituted by the Ministry. 

22 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Need for periodic review of Safety Measures in Petroleum Sector 
 
            The Committee note that the Indian Petroleum Sector has presence in 
upstream, midstream and downstream sector including onshore and offshore fields in 
the exploration and production sector, about twenty three refineries, several Gas 
processing plants, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) terminals, retail outlets, LPG agencies 
and godowns and more than 45,000 kms of pipelines transporting crude oil, petroleum 
products and gas spread across the length and breadth of the country. The Committee 
also note that several Acts and Rules govern the safety of oil and gas inflations and 
similarly several authorities under different Ministries of Central Government and state 
level authorities too enforce laws coming under their purview like fire department , lift 
and elevators inspectors etc. 
 
            The Committee note that the Oil and Natural Gas Industry handles highly 
inflammable hydro-carbons and processes them under high temperature and pressure. 
Any accident in Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry c an cause serious outcomes like 
loss of lives, disruption of activities and huge destruction of economic value and also 
damage the local environment. Hence, the Committee observe that Safety in petroleum 
sector is of utmost importance. 
 
            The Committee note that many accidents happened in the Oil and Gas sector in 
the last several years including cyclone Tau ktae, in May 2021, where Barge P -305 
broke and sank in which 86 lives were lost, in 2020 there was a oilwell blowout of Oil 
India Limited in Ba ghjan, Assam and GAIL pipeline blast at Andhra Pradesh in 2014 
and Jaipur incident of IOCL in 2009, etc. are some of the serious incidents in the 
Petroleum Industry in the country. 
 
            The Committee had examined the events leading to and handling of Cyclone 
Tauktae and its aftermath by ONGC in which 86 people had lost their lives. The 
Committee had noted with concern that there has been several gaps in legislation, lack 
of enforcement of the existing regulations and also lack of accountability amon g the 
various authorities. Considering that the Ministry of PNG is encouraging private 
investments in the petroleum sector and several private companies have entered into 
the field in the Exploration and Production space and in the City Gas Distribution (C GD) 
network, LNG terminals, etc., the Committee opine that the Ministry and PSUs and 
safety regulatory agencies should be pro -active and review the safety measures in 
place from time to time and identify deficiencies and not wait for any disaster to happen  
to review the safety measures. 
 
            The Committee desire that the Ministry should undertake a comprehensive 
review of the safety requirements for the entire oil and gas industry and the responses 
required in any eventuality by the companies concer ned. The Committee would expect 
the Ministry to take into account the latest technology developments and incorporating 

23 
 
the same for surveillance and response management and also look into the gaps in 
laws and also accountability of various organizations. T he committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should constitute a Working Group Comprising of industry 
professionals, legal experts, academics, etc. to look into the whole gamut of safety 
framework and suggest necessary changes for petroleum sector in the country. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A working group comprising of industry professionals, legal experts,  shipping, 
academics, etc. has been formed to review safety system followed by oil and gas 
industry and responses required in any emergency situa tion by the companies 
considering the latest technological developments. It will also identify gaps in extant 
laws including enforcement and accountability. The  Working Group will submit   its 
report  by 31.12.2022. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of the Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
Vacancies in Senior Levels in ONGC 
 
            The Committee note that board level posts of Chairman an d Managing Director 
(CMD) fell vacant with effect from 01.05.2021 and Director (offshore) with effect from 
01.05.2021. Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) conducted selection meeting for 
the post of CMD, ONGC on 04.06.2021 and did not recommended any  candidate 
keeping in view the strategic importance and vision for the company and its future. 
 
The Committee note that interview for Director has been conducted names have 
been recommended because it is selected by PESB. When a post starts becoming 
vacant, they start the process long before that, but PESB. When a post starts becoming 
vacant, they start the process long before that, but PESB takes it forward. For the post 
of Director (offshore), the incumbent has been recommended by PESB and 
appointment wil l be   made after approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
(ACC). The recommendation has been made for this and now he will be appointed after 
vigilance clearance etc. Similarly, the Committee were informed that interview was also 
conducted for CMD, ONGC. But PESB has decided that its search should be wide, and 
there is a system to form a search committee due to which it is taking a little more time. 
 
            The Committee note that ONGC being the country’s largest and important 
domestic crude o il production company should be managed well as long term policies 
and programmes determine the success and outcome of the company and its 
performance. ONGC has large budgets and carry out many important projects in the oil 
and gas sector. While the Commit tee appreciate the need for carrying out wider search 
for the post of CMD, ONGC, the delay in the procedures to select a person cause 
avoidable indecisiveness in the decision making of the organization. The Committee 

24 
 
note that resorting to temporary appoin tment to the post of CMD with senior officials 
holding the posts will not provide sufficient   authority to perform the functions in full zeal 
and enthusiasm. The Committee feel the absence of regular CMD in ONGC could also 
be a factor in handling the Cyclo ne Tauktae incident in an non -serious manner. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should attach utmost seriousness to the 
filling up of vacancies in oil PSUs in general and particularly ONGC in this case take 
advance action to complete the ex ercise well before the incumbent completes the 
tenure. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The appointments to the post of Board Level Director of CPSEs are made in 
accordance with the guidelines /timelines dated 31.03.2011 /31.07.2014 of DoP&T. As 
per above mentio ned guidelines, the Job Description for the post is finalized by Public 
Enterprise Selection Board (PESB) in consultation with the administrative Ministry. 
Thereafter, PESB advertises the vacancy, holds interview and recommends suitable 
candidate for the p ost. The recommendation is sent to the Appointments Committee of 
the Cabinet (ACC) with the approval of Minister. The appointment to the post is made 
after the approval of the ACC. 
 
     So far as filling up the vacancy of Chairman & Managing Director, ONG C is 
concerned, it is mentioned that the interview for the post was held by PESB on 
04.06.2021. However, it did not select any candidate but recommended that a Search 
Cum Selection Committee (SCSC) be constituted, which will recommend the selection 
of the candidate for this post. The SCSC has been constituted with the approval of the 
ACC. The interview for selection of CMD, ONGC has been held on 27.08.2022. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022  
    
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of the Chapter-I) 
       
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
Need for Collaboration between IMD and ONGC in Weather Forecasting 
 
The Committee note that Major oil installations in the country are located over 
Bombay High Region covering east central & adjoining northeast Arabian Sea (AS) 
along & off Maharashtra & Gujarat coast and another over the Bay of Bengal (BoB) in 
Krishna-Godavari basin along & off Andhra Pradesh coast. The safety and security of 
oil installations of public sector oil companies depends on many factors including the 
atmospheric and oceanic conditions over the region. India and the North Indian Ocean 
(NIO) experience various types of severe weather including tropical cyclones (TCs), 
depressions, low pressure systems, heavy rainfall, strong winds, rough seas, strong 
shelf slope current, high waves, astronomical tides and swells affecting the on shore 
and offs shore operations. 
  
The committee note that the IMD is principal government nodal agency t o 
provide weather forecasting and cyclone warnings for the country as well as the BoB 

25 
 
and AS region. IMD also provides sea area bulletins for the ships playing in high seas 
areas beyond 75 km off the coastline, coastal weather bulletin for the sea area upt o 75 
km off coastline, port warnings along the coast of India and the Fleet forecast for Indian 
Navy. 
IMD has informed the Committee that the forecasts and warnings issued by it are 
very essential for Oil and Natural Gas Corporation {ONGC) operations, it g ave weather 
forecast 3 times per day regularly for  Mumbai High, Godavari Krishna  Cauvery basins 
and other fields, special weather forecast at the time of formation of depression/cyclone 
in the sea round the clock, special weather forecast during monsoon period to give safe 
passage to the ONGC vessels/rigs in emergency, Monthly consolidated report of 
weather forecast every month and statistical information as required for planning 
ONGC operations until 2010. The Committee further note that in 2010, ONGC deci ded 
to go for global tendering process to select the service provider. IMD being a 
Government agency could not participate in the tendering process and M/s Skymet was 
selected and thereafter the services of IMD were not catered to ONGC. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that ONGC should immediately restore its 
earlier practice of taking weather bulletins and advisories and also take location specific 
forecast for its installations from IMD. The Committee further desire that ONGC may 
also invest on weather monitor instruments in its installations and platforms and 
integrate with IMID and INCOIS to improve the accuracy of predictions and develop a 
decision support system to provide actionable disaster managements instructions for 
the Indian offshore industry.  ONGC should collaborate with IMD to share past data 
collected by them to develop the impact based forecasting for onshore/offshore 
operations as also for risk analysis. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
An MoU has been signed on 22nd March 2022 between, DGH, IMD, INCOIS, DG 
Shipping, Indian Coast Guard and OISD regarding developing a specialized integrated 
weather forecasting toll for specific requirement of Offshore Exploration and Production 
operators in India. As per MOU, IMD and INCOIS have to provide Cyclone Forecast for 
Offshore E&P operational area. As per which IMD & INCOIS have to provide two types 
of cyclone forecasts: 
  
(1) Cyclone forecast for the General Public, Shipping Industry, Fishermen etc., which 
covers the whole of the Arabian Sea, North Indian Ocean Area and the Bay of Bengal. 
Some specified coordinates / areas, representing major Ports and shipping routes, 
areas of Major E&P Operations etc. are given special focus in this forecast. 
  
(2) Location -Specific Cyclone forecasts for specific E&P oper ations’ areas to each 
operator. 
  
All the major ONGC’s operational areas (such as Mumbai High, B&S, NH, Tapti, Ratna, 
KG etc.) are covered in this and the forecast formats cover all the requisite weather and 
oceanographic parameters. Additionally, INCOIS &  IMD has to provide Location -
Specific forecasts to each operator in the specified format as per the requirement of the 
latter. The formats for both these forecasts are the same, covering all the requisite 
weather and oceanographic parameters. 
  

26 
 
ONGC has be en receiving the warning bulletins issued by IMD regularly, especially 
during the period of cyclones in the North Indian Ocean. 
  
The discussions on the augmentation of weather forecasting capabilities are in process. 
A team of IMD, INCOIS and DGH recently  visited ONGC offshore installations in the 
Western Offshore where they examined the various installed weather observation 
systems. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
Need for Single Safety Agency for Petroleum Sector 
 
The Committee note that OISD has been designated as the agency for 
overseeing safety in entire oil and gas sector and with its core competency is in a 
position to give undivided attention to safety in en tire oil and gas sector in the country. 
OISD is manned by a group of technical experts in the area of design, operation, 
maintenance, inspection, safety, environment, etc., drawn from the Oil & Gas industry. 
The Committee note that OISD has been notified a s competent authority to exercise 
the powers and functions as stipulated in the Petroleum and Natural Gas {Safety in 
Offshore Operations) Rules 2008. The said Rule 2008 is meant for regulation of safety 
in offshore facilities engaged in exploration and exp loitation of petroleum & natural gas 
and matters connected therewith. As an offshore safety regulator, OISD has been 
earring out audits' of various E&P installations for checking compliance to the rules and 
accident investigation apart from development of industry specific standards and 
guidelines. 
  
The Committee note that facilities, as defined in the said Rule 2008, but does 
not include supply and support vessels or ships that transport petroleum in bulk and 
hence accommodation barges and vessels do not fail under the category of offshore 
facilities and thereby do not fall under the OISD purview under Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (Safety in Offshore Operations) Rules 2008. This function comes under 
Directorate General of Shipping which is the statutory autho rity under Merchant 
Shipping Act 1958 and other relevant acts. The Committee further note that the Oil and 
Gas sector is being regulated by many agencies like DGWIS, PESO, OISD, PNGRB, 
DGS, Fire Departments and Lifts Departments from State Governments, etc ., for 
different activities in the petroleum sector. Since many agencies are performing 
focused and limited role in enforcing the rules and regulations under the law mandated 
to them, a holistic approach is missing for the sector. 
  
The Committee vide its recommendation No. 3, in its Report No. 12 (15" Lok 
Sabha) on Safety of Oil installations and recommendation No. 10, in its Report No. 24 
(16 Lok Sabha) on Safety, Security and Environmental Aspects in Petroleum Sector 
had recommended formation of single a gency to enforce safety related rules and 
regulations in the petroleum sector. However, the Ministry has shown great reluctance 
in Implementing this recommendation much to the perils of the sector. The Committee 
find that the High Level Committee (HLC) con stituted by the Government of India to 
enquire into the sequence of events leading to stranding of vessels and accident after 

27 
 
the Cyclone Tauktae has also concluded that the Government consider setting up a 
single statutory empowered and equipped regulator  for exercising effective oversight 
on safety aspects of all onshore and offshore oil fields. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry of P&NG to create a statutory body for enforcing safety 
related rules and regulations for the petroleum sector in the country. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A working group comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, shipping, 
academics, etc. has been formed to review safety system followed by oil and gas 
industry and responses required in any emergency situ ation by the companies 
considering the latest technological developments. The Working Group will also 
recommend way forward to establish single safety regulator for petroleum sector. The   
Working Group will submit  its report  by 31.12.2022. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
Relief Measures and Compensation Package 
 
The Committee view that the relief. and compensation for the victims and 
survivors is very important an d there should not be any reluctance to do the needful. 
The Committee desire that the relief and compensation should be liberal as the 
accident could have been averted and lives saved if the barge could have been moved 
to safer location in the wake of the cyclone warnings. 
The Committee note that M/s AFCONS had engaged Barge P -305 for 
accommodation purposes of its workmen. A total of 274 people were on board on 
Barge P-305 and Tug boat Varaprada. 86 people have lost their lives and remaining 
were survivors in this incident. 
  
The Committee note that ONGC were extended logistics support {including air 
ticket), boarding and lodging in Hotel to families at Mumbai. A special team of ONGC 
Officials was deputed at the Hospital where postmortem was carried out for smooth 
coordination between the affected families. A nodal officer was assigned from ONGC 
for families of each BNV (Brave Nature Victim), who was responsible for facilitating 
logistics, boarding & lodging, counseling, interaction with police authorities, 
transportation of mortal remains to respective home station and any other local 
support. 
The Committee note that ONGC, on humanitarian grounds, has disbursed a relief 
and rehabilitation amount of Rs 2 lakh each to the nominees/ next kin of the deceased 
and missing person's family and Rs 1 lakh each to the 188 survivors. Similarly, all 188 
survivors have been paid an amount of Rs. 1.0 Lakh each Compensation by M/s 
Afcons. An Immediate relief of Rs 5 Lakh to each of the 66 BNV families has been paid 
by MIs Afcons. 
  
The Committee note that full payment for 1st academic year completed 
Mechanism for uninterrupted and assured payments in the long run (for upcoming 

28 
 
years) is under exploration and shall be soon finalized by Ms/ Afcons. The Committee 
further note tha t Scheme for financial Support for education of the 77 children of BNVs 
up to graduation (3 & 4 year courses) implemented. A total amount of Rs. 9.67 Lacs for 
the academic years 2021-2022 released to eligible beneficiaries. 
  
The Committee note that as per  the agreement reached between Indian ship 
owners and trade unions ship owners are liable to pay compensation to families   
amounting to 110 months wages with a minimum of Rs. 22 lakh for non -officers and Rs. 
34 lakh for officers in the crew of Varaprada in  case of death. Similarly, varying 
compensation has to be paid by M/s Afcons for 66 BNVs onboard P -305. The 
Committee recommend that compensation package should be finalized at the earliest to 
BNVs and the Ministry should establish an institutional mechani sm consisting of 
representatives of Ministry of P&NG, ONGC and the contractors to ensure that all the 
victims and surviours shall get the compensation package as finalised. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A co mmittee consisting of Director ( Exploration), MoPNG and Director 
(Offshore), ONGC and one member from contractor (M/s AFCONS/other contractors) 
has been constituted to ensure that each victim and survivor shall get the compensation 
package from their Employer. 
The latest status of compensation provided by LSTK Contractor/ONGC is as under: 
  
(1) Compensation by ONGC (Total Rs. 360 lakhs): 
 86 Brave Nature’s Victims (BNVs) i.e. 75 of P -305 and 11 of M/s Varaparada: 
Relief and rehabilitation amount of Rs 2 lakhs on humanitarian grounds 
 188 survivors [186 of P -305 and 2 of M/s Varaprada]: Relief and rehabilitation 
amount of Rs 1 lakh each on humanitarian grounds. 
(2) Compensation by M/s Afcons (Total 66 BNVs):  
 All 188 survivors: Rs 1.0 Lakh 
 66 BNV families: An immediate relief of Rs 5 Lakh to each BNVs (part of E x-
Gratia). 
a. Through Workmen Compensation (WC) & ex-gratia by M/s Afcons (Total 
eligible - 34) 
 A total amount of Rs. 4.70 Crore has been deposited with Labour court under 
Employees Compensation for 34 employees by M/s Afcons. Out of which Rs 
3.78 Cr. has been paid out to 26 BNVs by WC Commissioner.  
 Details of the same is as per following table:  
 Bodies of Balance 5 BNVs are missing.   WC and Ex -gratia compensation for 5 
missing persons of Sinai yet to be done due to non -availability of Death 
certificates.  
  

29 
 
Sl.No Employee 
Compensation 
Status  Remarks  
1 19 BNVs (MAHWS 
/Mathews: 13 Nos. + 06 
Nos.: Aarkay)  Employee 
Compensation before 
Labour Court/ Employees 
Compensation, Thane 
Amount paid: Rs 
4.08 Crore to 17 
BNVs as per as 
per court order. 
BNVs 02 nos. have filed 
separate compensation case at 
Kerala. 
2. 13 BNVs (Sinai 
Maritime): 
Employee 
Compensation before 
Labour Court/ 
Employees 
Compensation, Thane 
=13 Nos. 
a. 08 Nos. are 
covered under 
Employees 
Compensation 
b. 5 BNVs are 
missing. Way 
forward is being 
decided. 
Amount paid to 
07 BNVs 
amounting to 
Rs.1.08 Crore. 
  
a. Payment to remaining 01 
BNVs. 
b. Way forward is being 
decided for 5 missing 
BNVs 
3. 2 BNVs of M/s Aarvi  
Covered under 
Employees Compensation 
at Labour Court/ 
Employee Commissioner 
Bandra Court. 
Amount paid  to 
2 BNV: Rs 27 
lakhs 
  
Total 34 BNVs Total amount 
paid: Rs 3.78 
Crore for 26 
BNVs 
a. Pending for 
payment:01 BNVs 
b. 5 BNVs missing 
  
  
 Ex-gratia payment by M/s Afcons for BNVs covered under Employee 
Compensation (34 BNVs): Total ex-gratia payment has been done to 26 BNVs by 
M/s Afcons (Rs 5.38 Crore) 
 Rs. 4.08 Crore to 17 BNVs of M/s Mathews 
 Rs. 1.67 Crore to 7 BNVs of M/s Sinai 
 Documentation (i.e. Legal Heir Certificate, Family dispute, marital dispute etc.) is 
in process for compensation for both WC and ex-gratia for other BNVs. 

30 
 
b. Through ESIC Pay  & ex-gratia by M/s Afcons (Total Eligible – 25 of M/s 
Mathews) 
  
ESIC Pension  ESIC, HQ, Delhi Ex-gratia by 
M/s.Afcons  
Remarks 
12 BNVs have 
been approved 
by ESIC. Monthly 
payment of 
ranging from Rs 
3348/- to 23188/- 
has started for 12 
BNVs. 
  
13 BNVs: Request 
has been 
forwarded to ESIC, 
HQ, Delhi for 
approval of ESIC. 
It is learnt that, it 
has been rejected 
ESIC Office, New 
Delhi. 
  
Ex-gratia amount 
of 3.65 Crore is 
paid to 20 BNVs 
families by M/s 
Afcons. 
  
Documentation (i.e. 
Legal Heir Certificate, 
family dispute, marital 
dispute etc.) is in 
process for release of 
ex-gratia pay out for 
other BNVs. 
  
  
  
c. Insurance Policies & ex-gratia by M/s Afcons (5- Afcons, 1-Bousted and 1-
Fugro) 
  
Insurance Policies  Ex-gratia by M/s.Afcons  Remarks 
05 Nos. of BNVs of 
AFCONS, approximate 
amount of Rs. 0.92 Cr. 
have been paid through 
Term Life Policy 
Ex-gratia amount of Rs. 
0.88 Cr. Paid to 2 BNV 
families of M/s Afcons.  
  
  
         ---------- 
02 nos of BNVs of M/s 
Afcons, GPA (Group 
Personnel Accident) of 
Rs. 0.22 Cr. have also 
been paid. 
Ex-gratia amount of Rs. 
0.27 Cr is paid to one BNV 
family of Fugro and ex -
gratia for 1 BNV family of 
Bousted is pending due to 
family dispute between 
Daughter in law and Father 
in law. 
For release of payment 
towards ex -gratia & 
GPA amount for 
balance BNV families of 
M/s Afcons, documents 
are awaited/family 
denied. 
  
(3) Marine Crew of P-305 i.e. M/s PAPAA Shipping (Total 5 BNVs):  
  
Compensation                        Remarks 
Compensation pa id to all five 
families by P&I Club (Ship 
Owners Mutual) through Phoenix 
Legal  
  
Families of 3 BNVs got Rs. 1,08,64,236/ - 
each, 1 BNV got Rs. 77,60,084/ - and 1 BNV 
got Rs 93,12,160/ - (Total Rs. 4.967 Crore 
paid). 
  
 
 
 
 

31 
 
(4) Employee Compensation to EIL (1),  IRS (1) & CEIL (2)  by respective Employer 
  
Employer                         Status/Remarks 
EIL (Consultant) (Late Mr. 
Aanant Carpenter) Compensation under GPAI (Group Personal 
Accident Insurance) –deposited (appx. 1.03 
Cr.). Gratuity, Salary & Leave settlement, 
EDLI, Compensation under Welfare society 
and PF have been deposited. Pension under 
Defined Contribution Superannuation Pension 
Scheme processed. 
IRS (Third Party Inspection 
Agency) (Late Mr. Sachindra 
Prasad) 
Compensation Amount of Rs. 10 lacs has been 
paid by IRS. 
CEIL compensation (Certification 
Agency). 
Late Mr. Arjun M. T: Compensation given is     
Rs.25,53,050 inclusive of Insurance Claim. 
Provident Fund & EDLI (Employees Deposit 
Linked Insurance) scheme amount as 
applicable, to be paid b y EPFO office directly 
to dependent. 
Shri. Saurav Jain: He is still missing. At 
present, M/s CEIL is giving the adhoc amount 
Rs. 50,000/- per month to his family.  
  
(5) Marine Crew of Varaprada (Total 11 BNVs ): Paid by M/s Varaprada 
 As per the agreement  reached between Indian ship owners and trade unions, 
ship owners are liable to pay compensation to families of amounting to 110 
months wages with a minimum of INR 22 Lakh for Non -officers and INR 34 Lakh 
for Officers, in case of death   
 Out of 11 BNVs. 
5 BNVs                        6 BNVs 
Families of 5 have 
been paid fully (Rs. 
22 lakh each) by 
vessel owner and P&I 
compensation both.  
  
Families of 6  BNVs have been paid partially 
1. BNV family got Rs. 26,31,375/ -, balance payment of 
Rs. 8,68,625 to be disbursed by the vessel owners. 
2. BNV family got Rs. 30,31,375/ -, balance payment of 
Rs. 10,34,775 to be disbursed by the vessel owners. 
3. BNV family got Rs. 15,31,375 – for balance 
payment of Rs. 6,68,625, agreement sign is 
awaited. 
4. BNV family got Rs. 14,31,375 – for balance 
payment of Rs. 7,68,625, the case is under 
litigation. 

32 
 
5. BNV family got Rs. 17,31,375 – for balance 
payment of Rs. 4,68,625, for balance payment legal 
heir certificate is awaited. 
6. BNV family got Rs. 9,31,375 – for balance payment 
of Rs. 25,68,625 (case is under litigation). 
  
(6) Educational Assistance for children of BNVs by M/s Afcons:  
  
1. Full payment for 1st academic year completed. Mechanism for uninterrupted and 
assured payments in the long run (for upcoming years) is under exploration an d 
shall be soon finalized. 
2. Scheme for financial Support for education of the 77 children of BNVs up to 
graduation (3 & 4 year courses) implemented. A total amount of INR 9.67 Lacs for 
the academic year 2021-2022 released to eligible beneficiaries. 
  
(7) Payment (Relief Fund) released to 52 BNVs by the Office of the Collector & 
District Magistrate, Mumbai the amount as under:- 
  
52 BNVs  
(Every BNV family 
Rs.7,00,000/- 
State Disaster 
Relief Fund : 
Rs.4,00,000/- 
Prime Minister's 
National Relief Fund: 
Rs.2,00,000/- 
Chief Minister 
Relief Fund: 
Rs.1,00,000/- 
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
Safety and Inspection of Vessels 
 
The Committee note that ONGC has well -defined systems and procedure to 
ensure that the deployed vessel meets all the stipulated criteria for sea worthiness of 
the vessel. All vessels deployed in ONGC projects comply with provision of Life Saving 
Appliances/ Fire Fighting Appliance (L.SAIFFA)as pe r International Convention for the 
Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), (1974) Regulations. 
  
The Committee note hat Offshore Construction projects are executed by 
appointing LSTK (Lump sum turn key) contractor on EPC ({engineering procurement 
and construction) basis. Chartering of barges and Employment of technical 
experts/marine engineers onboard (o execute the project are done by LSTK contractor. 
To ensure compliance of the terms of contract, ONGC engages Third party Certification 
Agency (TPCA) and Third Party  Inspection agency (TPI) who are deployed onboard 
barges/vessels as per project requirement. The Barges / Vessels for offshore projects 
are deployed during the well -defined fair weather conditions. Barges/Vessels for 
offshore projects comply and meet with (i) Class certificates by classification agencies 
(ii} ISPS code (International Ship and Port facilities Security) (iii} MARPOL, (v) SOLAS 

33 
 
(iv} General Trading License (GTL)/Specified Period License (SPL) (v) Flag 
Requirement. 
  
The Committee note that ONG C rely on domain experts i.e., Master Mariner as 
well as Deck Officer who are engaged through Third party inspection agency (TPI) for 
carrying out Marine side inspection/ monitoring of barges/ vessels chartered. For all 
vessels deployed at offshore locatio ns, a joint safety audit is conducted by team which 
includes representatives of ONGC, ONGC's Certification Agency Safety Officer, 
ONGC's Third Party Inspection Agency Master Mariner, and Contractor representative. 
ONGC has hired a Third Party Inspection Ag ency (TPI) M/s ABSIV (American Bureau 
of Shipping Industrial Verification) for safety inspection of vessels. All vessels are 
inspected at the time of hiring to ensure compliance of all statutory requirements as well 
as technical specifications. A vessel is cleared for operation only if found seaworthy and 
all machinery/equipment are in operational condition. In case of any deficiency, the 
vessel is put under downtime till rectification of defects. 
  
The Committee note that engages third party inspection age ncies for carring out 
inspections for vessels and deploys safety officers from certification agencies. While 
this may fulfill the procedural requirements of rules and guidelines governing these 
activities, this dilutes the accountability and responsibility  expected from the regular 
officials of ONGC. By engaging third party agencies for inspection and certification 
activities, ONGC has tried to save itself from owning direct responsibility for any 
deficiencies and lapses in such matters. 
  
The Committee not e that these barges and vessels are very important in its 
exploration and production activities of ONGC and desire it to develop its own team of   
officials to be deployed in these vessels and barges as it has more than four decades of 
expertise in handling  offshore exploration and production activities. The Committee 
would expect that the Ministry and ONGC should view the inspection and certification 
processes more seriously and should strengthen its mechanism to certify these vessels 
before deployment and ensure the responsibility and accountability of its own officials 
rather than shift the onus on third party agencies engaged for these purposes. 
  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry/ONGC should review its 
standard operating manuals and its in ternal control mechanism and ensure 
responsibility of its officials also in the inspection and certification process. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The recommendation of the committee is noted for compliance. A two member 
committee has already been constitute d by the Ministry to look into reforms required in 
the terms/conditions/specifications for hiring and procurement of offshore vessels so 
that they are aligned with the international standard and safety norms. 
Safety and inspection of vessels are not covere d in Petroleum & Natural Gas (Safety in 
Offshore Operations) Rules, 2008. Post Tauktae incident, a Marine Cell with 
experienced marine professionals has been created in ONGC. Pre -deployment 
inspection of all vessels, including the vessels deployed for LSTK  jobs, are carried out 
under supervision of Marine Cell. Requirement of Life Saving Appliances / Fire Fighting 
Appliance (LSA/FFA) are checked and verified as per statutory requirements. 
Certifications of vessels are also checked thoroughly and vessels are  cleared for 
deployment only if they are seaworthy and comply with all statutory requirements.  

34 
 
Marine Cell has developed various checklists on basis of which inspection of Marine 
vessels are carried out. Marine Cell carries out the day to day inspections by teams 
consisting of ONGC marine personnel and TP inspectors engaged exclusively for this 
purpose having required Marine qualifications (Domain expertise). Verification 
inspections are also being done to maintain same standard as pre-deployment.  
ONGC Marine Operation Manual has been reviewed by a committee constituted for the 
purpose and is being vetted by M/s DNV, the consultant for Safety Management 
Assessment project. The manual is reviewed from time to time. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
 
Action against Third Party Agencies 
 
The Committee note that on perusal of recommendations of the High Level 
Committee (HLC) constituted by Government of India to inquire i nto the sequence of 
events leading to cyclone Tauktae has brought out that none of 36 life rafts provided 
on the P-305 could be used, either due to the manufacturing quality or with respect to 
the age or the servicing of life rafts or both these aspects to gether as required by 
SOLAS and L.SA Code. HLC have further noted that no immersion suits were 
provided on Barge P-305. 
  
The Committee further note that P -305 was having Flag state exemptions from 
having life boat and immersion suits which if available would have saved the precious 
lives. The Committee therefore stress that a mechanism may be developed wherein 
these exemptions could be reviewed by Indian authorities and the companies engage 
them which are crucial in meeting such unforeseen events. 
  
The Committee note that life saving safety equipments could have avoided such 
large number of BNV in cyclone Tauktae. Even though the larger responsibility for 
ensuring such compliance lies with the LSTK contractor, ONGC which had engaged 
third party inspection agency for carrying out such activities can not absolve 
completely. The Committee therefore, recommend that Ministry/ONGC should take' 
action against the third party inspection and certification agencies who certified the life 
-rafts of P -305. The Committe e further desire that regular servicing of life saving 
appliances be may be CCTV recorded and records of the same be duly maintained. 
   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
All lifesaving appliances on board ship/vessel are kept and serviced as per the 
requirement in International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea(SOLAS) and the Port 
State Administration. In case of Papaa -305, servicing and Inspection of Life raft were 
carried out by M/s Singh Hindustan Marine Pvt. Ltd., DG Shipping approved service 
station for L ife Saving Appliances (LSA)/ FFA. Based on the valid life raft service 
reports, clearance was given. 
  

35 
 
For fixed platforms, inspection of life -rafts is carried out at OEM authorized service 
stations as per SOLAS and LSA code. The provision of video recordi ng of servicing 
activity of life -rafts has now been included in upcoming tenders.   In the existing 
contracts, contractors are following DG shipping guidelines and maintaining video 
records.   
  
The regular servicing of life saving appliances will be CCTV recorded and records of the 
same will be maintained. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 15 
 
Security of Oil Installations at ONGC 
 
The Committee note that ONGC, an upstr eam Oil Company, operates both in 
Onshore and Offshore fields. The Committee further note that all these installations of 
ONGC are periodically security audited by IB/MHA as per the laid down norms. 
Besides, every two years, Internal Audits of these installations is carried out by a Team 
of Senior ONGC Security Officers. 
The Committee note that sensitization programme and security awareness 
workshops are organized by eminent domain experts for the benefit of ONGC officials 
at Work Centres during Security Aw areness Week, annually. Offshore Security 
Coordination Committee (OSCC} Meetings deliberates on Security issues and 
formulates mitigation plans for Offshore Installations / Work Centers keeping in view 
the inputs regarding threat and locational Vulnerability State wise. 
  
The Committee note that Security for on -shore installations is provided by the 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel who guard the installations and 
undertake necessary patrolling. Remote surveillance systems are also used for  
monitoring security of sensitive installations. All Installations are protected by boundary 
wall in compliance with the MHA guidelines. Ground/Aerial patrolling along 
Hydrocarbon pipelines and once a year company officials undertake a line walk as per 
the provisions stipulated in OISD standards. 
For security of offshore installations, Vessel and Air Traffic Management System 
(VATMS) is being used to continuously monitor any unauthorized vessel approaching 
/operating in the offshore, besides regular air & s ea surveillance by the Navy/ Coast 
Guard. 500 Meters Zone around the offshore installations is designated as the safety 
zone, primarily to control movement of vessels around the installation to avoid collision. 
  
The Committee note that Security of oil ins tallations both onshore and offshore 
are of vital importance as these are national assets and any violations of security 
protocols should be viewed seriously. ONGC may keep abreast with latest 
technologies like Drone, Robots, remote sensing, etc. and try t o use them in their 
security systems to ensure proper surveillance and monitoring of its assets. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry/ONGC should give utmost importance to 

36 
 
security aspects and keep in coordination with the concerned authorities both a t state 
and centre and ensure that security is maintained at high levels in its installations. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Installations of ONGC are periodically audited on the Security Parameters by the 
Industrial Security Inspection Team (ISIT) of IB/M HA and the recommendations made 
by them are complied with, in a time bound manner. An Action Taken Report on the 
same is also submitted to IB/MHA on six -monthly basis. In order to enhance the 
physical security standards of its Installations and to capitali ze on the technological 
advancements, ONGC has implemented Enterprise Wide Access Control System 
(EACS) in its installations thorough M/s BEL. EACS is a unique project of its kind, in 
view of the scale and geographies, and encompasses the security and surv eillance 
functions.  
  
Similarly, a tech -intensive project, namely, Comprehensive Security Solution (CSS) for 
the Offshore Installations of ONGC was approved by the ONGC Management for 
implementation through M/s BEL. CSS is under various stages of executio n. Further, to 
contain/regulate movement of Drones over ONGC Installations and in compliance with 
Drone Rules 2021, ONGC Installations numbering 225 in Onshore and 255 in Offshore 
have been marked as ‘Red Zone’ in the Digisky Application of the Ministry of  Civil 
Aviation. 
  
It is mentioned that the Technological Advancements w.r.t. Drone, Robots as well as 
Remote Sensing and its utility for Security functions in ONGC are being 
analysed/studied in -house, and in consultation with concerned external security 
agencies/domain experts/vendors. ONGC is  also participating in various National Level 
seminars/conferences and events to update   knowledge w.r.t. this technology. The 
recommendation of the Committee is noted and ONGC shall   consider as and when the 
technology in the above fields gets matured and is able to fulfill the comprehensive 
requirement of the industry as a whole. Besides, during security meetings of various 
fora it is being brought out that Drones themselves pose a grave threat to Oil and Gas 
Installations as witnessed in the case of coordinated drone attacks on the Saudi Aramco 
facilities in 2019 and 2021. ONGC also intend to study the Security apparatus which 
have been put in place after these attacks to bring   security apparatus to the cutting 
edge level. In this backdrop, the possibility of installation of Counter -Drone/Anti-Drone 
system in ONGC facilities before considering Drone Operations in Security and 
Surveillance has been suggested by various stakeholders. ONGC is   looking at ways to 
get this technology placed at the earliest. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 16 
 
Cyber Security of Installations 
 
The Committee note that ONGC has adopted an Information security policy which 
is in line with the cyber security policy of Government of India. Besides, it also complies 
with the International Information Security Standards viz, IS0 27001. For maintaining 

37 
 
the global best practices in Information Security domain, ON GC has implemented 
Information Security Management System (ISMS) at its major data centres and for its 
sustenance, periodic internal and external ISO 27001 audits are carried out. For 
monitoring, the organization wide Information Security alerts, ONGC have  implemented 
Information Security Operation Centre (ISOC). 
The Committee note that ONGC receives real time threat intelligence/alerts from 
the government agencies such as Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In), Intelligence Bureau (18), National  Critical Information Infrastructure 
Protection Centre (NCIIPC) etc. Further the threat feeds from CERT -In has been 
integrated to ISOC by automating the feeds using the Trusted Automated Exchange of 
Intelligence Information (TAXII) standard, thereby improving the threat response time. 
  
The Committee note that for employee awareness in Information Security domain, 
ONGC conducts variety of activities throughout the year viz. organising Information 
Security awareness talk by external domain experts, conduct o f mock drills on phishing 
attack, issuance of advisories on Information Security, publishing e -Newsletter etc. The 
Committee note that the cyber attacks has increased in the recent times and has 
become one of the methods of disrupting economic activities of a country. 
  
The Committee also note with satisfaction that no major cyber violation has been 
reported in ONGC so far, but would desire that ONGC should keep its vigil on this issue 
and should not become complacent on past record. The Committee desire t hat the 
assets of ONGC are national assets as well as strategic one, it should take the lead in 
developing cyber security measures by sponsoring/developing the information 
technology resources in which our country is having good talent and human skills. Th e 
Committee recommend that Ministry/ONGC should coordinate with the concerned 
agencies on cyber security regularly and take all steps required to avert any cyber 
attacks in its installations. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC keeps coordinating with the  different concerned agencies and interacts with the 
nodal agency CERT-In of GoI regularly on issues related to cyber security.  
  
ONGC has shared its Internet Gateway traffic and Security Logs of perimeter devices 
with National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCC C). ONGC has also integrated with the 
GoI initiative of "Cyber Suraksha Kendra” for Malware & Botnet protection. The alerts & 
advisories received by the agencies are attended immediately with necessary corrective 
actions to avert any security breach.  
  
Further, ONGC strictly ensures adherence to its Information Security Policies by 
regularly getting done the internal and external audit  for its Data Centres, so as to avoid 
complacency. Regular interactions are done with expert agencies / subject matter 
experts / information security technology providers, to stay abreast with the latest 
trends. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOV ERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
- NIL - 

39 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Fixing of accountability in ONGC 
 
            The Committee note that ONGC had received first weather advisories and 
bulletins about the Cyclone Tauktae from its forecasting agency M/s. Skymet on 12 th 
and 14 th of May 2021. The officials of ONGC had conveyed these advisories to their 
contractors in the offshore over radio communication and advised them to move to safe 
locations in view of the cyclone. The committee were informed that ONGC e -mailed 
weather advisory from Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) to all the offshore 
contractors and rigs and a Control Room had started on 13 th May. All rig owners were 
asked to go on cyclone survival mode on 15th May, 2021. 
 
            The Committee note that the Executive Committee (EC) which is highest body in 
ONGC activated Corporate Disaster Management Plan in its special meeting on 16 th 
May for rescue operations. The Committee were also informed that ONGC had 
informed Marine Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) and head of Offshore Defense 
Advisory Group (ODAG) as per regional contingency plan a nd further immediately 
diverted all its Multi Support Vessels (MSVs/OSVs) present in the field towards the 
barge and informed the Indian Navy, which directed INS Kochi reaching P -305 location 
at 15:30 hours but could not undertake any immediate rescue meas ures due to 
inclement weather. The Barge P -305 which is a non propelled Barge type was 
particularly vulnerable and needed a tug handling boat for its movement to a safer 
location. In the morning of May 17, 2021, the Barge P -305 reported that it had lost al l 
anchors and hit the wellhead platform HC. 
 
            The Committee are not convinced of the reply of the ONGC and its failure to 
mange and its preparedness to face Cyclone Tauktae and its aftermath. The Committee 
note that ONGC had information about th e cyclone as early as 12 th of May and the 
actual cyclone had hit on 16 th night/17th morning. The Committee are of the opinion that 
having been present in the western offshore for last several decades ONGC had the 
experience of handling several cyclones in the past and the argument that cyclone has 
changed its direction does not hold much ground as ONGC should have factored that 
change of direction in the path of cyclone and should have prepared a contingency plan 
to handle it. This clearly exposes the serio us lack of systems, processes and response 
management system of ONGC. 
 
            The Committee further note that no senior official of ONGC at the corporate 
level had taken charge of the situation to guide the teams at Western Offshore. The 
Committee view this seriously as accountability goes on with authority and would like to 
recommend to the Ministry that it should conduct thorough investigation about the 
responsibility of ONGC officials at various levels in this incident and take strict action 
against all those who are found negligent of duty. 

40 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC has a   established system of weather forecasting and dissemination. All 
the weather warnings and advisories were timely disseminated to all the 
Installations/Rigs/Vessels/Barges. ONG C  encountered phenomenon of abrupt shifting 
of cyclone path by about 100 NM   associated with highest recorded wind speed. Based 
on the analysis of sequence of events that occurred post issuance of initial cyclone 
warning, ONGC took  necessary measures.   
  
On 13.05.2021, all the barges in the field were instructed to   move to safe 
location, in view of the impending cyclone. All the barges took action based on weather 
advisories and returned to/were on their way to sheltered waters except for one barge 
i.e Papaa-305. While taking stock of the situation on 16 th May 2021, EC (Executive 
Committee) of ONGC, which is the highest decision making body of ONGC, activated 
the CDMP (Corporate Disaster Management Plan) and advised Asset Manager - 
Mumbai High Asset (as senior most Asset Manager of offshore Assets) to take action to 
ensure safety of all personnel working in offshore.  
  
Corporate Emergency Control Room (CECR) at Delhi was promptly activated for 
taking regular situation reports from the Emergency Control Ro om at Mumbai. The 
Corporate Disaster Management Group (CDMG) comprising of CMD and functional 
Directors kept taking regular updates of the situation and providing the necessary 
support and guidance to the team of Western Offshore. ONGC’s system and process es 
for handling of cyclonic situation are in place. After this incident, Emergency Response 
Plans and Regional Contingency Plan have been further strengthened to handle such 
unprecedented emergencies. 
  
ONGC had placed its five officers   under suspension a fter incidence of Cyclone 
Tauktae.  Three of these executives were of the level of E -9 i.e Executive Director 
which is the highest level below Board. One executive was of E -7 level (Chief General 
Manager) and one of E-6 level (General Manager). However, after inquiry all have been 
reinstated. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
Weather Forecasting Services 
 
            The Committee note that ONGC has been present in Western Offshore area for 
more than 5 decades engaged in exploration and production work. ONGC had awarded 
the contract for providing offshore weather forecast on a day to day basis to M/s Skymet 
Pvt. Ltd. through open tendering process in 2010. The Committee note that M/s Skymet 
renders weather forecasting services and provides location specific weather forecast 
three times a day for areas specific to ONGC operations on Western and Eastern 
Offshore. M/s Skymet takes as input the satellite pictures of Indian Meteorological 

41 
 
Department for weather forecasting model and it also runs weather research and 
forecast model in collaboration with National Centre for Education Technology, USA. 
ONGC has also informed the Committee that M/s Skymet had issued advisories both in 
the east and west coast in India ever since they have been engages by ONGC and so 
far no deviation have been observed about their predictions. 
 
            The Committee note that the  Indian Meteorological Department under the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences is the government agency in the country in all matters 
relating to meteorology and allied subjects. IMD is the nodal agency to provide weather 
forecasting and cyclone warnings in Bay of  Bengal (BoB) and Arabian Sea (AS) region 
for the country and also the regional centre to provide advisories under global Maritime 
Distress Safety Systems. The Committee have also noted that until 2010 ONGC was 
being provided weather forecast and warnings by IMD three times a day regularly for 
Mumbai, Godavari/Krishna, Cauvery basins and other fields and special weather 
forecast at the time of formation of depression/cyclone in the sea around the clock. 
However, the services of IMD are not directly catered to ONGC since 2010. 
 
            However, the Committee are not convinced about the arguments put forth by 
ONGC in engaging Skymet for its weather forecasting system and field specific 
locations forecast or bulletins and area unclear for the reasons behind  ONGC’s decision 
to go for global tendering process to select the service provider which eliminated IMD 
from participation being a government agency. The Committee also been informed that 
globally the national agencies are having a major role in weather fo recasting as it has 
larger impact on the population of the country. The Committee deplore the decision of 
ONGC to stop receiving weather advisories and forecast from IMD since 2010 and 
select M/s Skymet through a global tender. It is very unfortunate that while IMD has 
claimed that its forecast about Cyclone Tautkae was very much as per the path of 
cyclone whereas ONGC had claimed that the final direction and wind speeds/ wave 
heights experienced advisories received by from M/s Skymet were not as per the 
prediction. The Committee observe that the eye of the cyclone tautkae passed through 
the ONGC’s installations whereas the early forecast was far away from them. Being a 
premier organization, ONGC should also collect global inputs on weather forecasts on a 
regular basis so that it has a forewarning and time to plan for events like cyclones or 
storms in its area of operations. The Committee conclude that the decision of ONGC to 
engage a private company to give weather forecasting services since 2010 was a poor 
decision and recommend that Ministry should enquire into the reasons being selection 
of M/s Skymet for its weather forecasting services. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC had a contract with IMD for providing weather forecast for ONGC on 
Nomination basis till  2013. IMD was not providing location specific weather forecast 
which was a requirement of ONGC. In order to get area specific weather forecast, 
ONGC decided to float the weather forecast tender for award of weather forecast 
contract for 3 years starting f rom April 2013. ONGC awarded the contract to M/s 
StormGeo, Dubai starting from April 2013. This 3 year contract was in force till 2016. 
  
Subsequently, ONGC awarded a new contract for Hiring of Services for weather 
forecast for a period of 3 years (1st April 2016 to 31st March 2019) through International 

42 
 
Competitive Bidding. Total 05 bidders participated in the tender.   IMD was also 
requested to participate in the tender. However, IMD did not participate in the tender.  
  
ONGC again awarded the contract for  Hiring of Services for weather forecast for 
a period of 3 years (1st April 2019 to 31st March 2022) through ICB. Total 2 bidders 
participated in the tender. Again IMD did not participate in this tender. M/s Skymet was 
selected after meeting the experience criteria clause of tender. 
  
Skymet has been providing weather services since 2008. List of major clients are 
as under; 
 SI 
No Sector Services Major Clients 
1 Insurance 
Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast, Weather based 
Crop Advisories, Crop 
health & yield estimation, 
Crop Loss Assessment 
(Primarily due to Rain & 
Hail) 
AIC, ICICI Lombard, HDFC 
Ergo, Bajaj Allianz, Reliance 
GIC, IFFO Tokio, United 
Insurance, Oriental 
Insurance, National 
Insurance, AON Hewitt, 
IRICS 
2 Energy 
Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast- For power 
generation and demand 
forecasting 
Adani Energy, CESC, 
Torrent Power, NDPL, PTC 
India, REC Power 
3 Media Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast 
ABP, Infinity Media, Jagati 
Publication, Jagaran 
Prakshan, TV Today, TV18, 
Zee News, Focus TV, HT 
Media, The Hindu, Times 
Internet 
4 Govt/Multilateral/Bilateral 
Agencies 
Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast, Gridded Weather 
Data, Weather Based Crop 
Advisories, 
World Bank, IFC, GIZ, 
USAID, Clinton Foundation, 
IRRI, Govt of Maharashtra, 
MNCFC (Govt of India), 
TERI, Tata Trust, Shakti 
Sustainable Energy 
Foundation, PRADAN,  
Jeevilka & Aajeevika 
5 Disaster Management Weather Data, Weather 
Forecast/Warnings 
Nagaland State Disaster 
Management Authority, 
Kerala State Disaster 
Management Authority, 
 Earth Networks, Sterlite, 
6 Oil & Gas/Marine Route Weather Forecast, 
Weather Warnings 
Cairn India, ONGC, Indian 
Oil, RGPPL, Reliance 
Naval, Adani Welspun, 
Petronet LNG Ltd. 
7 E-Commerce 
Weather Data, Weather 
driven demand forecasting, 
Delivery 
Scheduling/Management 
Amazon & Emami. 

43 
 
  
It is seen that M/s Skymet has been providing weather forecasts to premier company 
like Cairn India, Indian Oil, Reliance Naval, Adani Welspun, Petronet LNG Ltd etc in 
addition to ONGC. It   indicates weather forecast of M/s Skymet is accepted in the 
market.  
In addition to above, an MoU has been signed on 22nd March 2022 between, DGH, 
IMD, INCOIS, DG Shipping, Indian Coast Guard and OISD regarding developing a 
specialized integrated weather forecasting toll for specific requirement of Offshore 
Exploration and Production operators in India. As per MOU, IMD and INCOIS have to 
provide Cyclone Forecast for Offshore E&P operational area. 
  
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
Need for Legislations for Offshore Vessels 
 
            The Committee note that Shipping is an international industry and one of the 
most diverse industries of the world and regulations ne eds to be consistent across all 
jurisdiction for seamless movement of trade with the shipping industry being responsible 
for the carriage and transportation of most of the world trade. Under the auspices of the 
International Maritime Organization (IMO), In ternational Conventions have been agreed 
which set out uniform requirements in order to facilitate the acceptance of a ship 
registered in one country in the waters and ports of another and in the general 
furtherance of safety at sea and the protection of the environment. 
 
            The Committee further note that all vessels, including the ones operating on the 
Coast of India or Indian Oil Fields need to have valid applicable certificates to ensure 
compliance with the respective Convention requirements. F lag State of the vessel or its 
Recognized Organization (RO), issues Certificate(s) once compliance with the 
applicable Convention requirements are verified. Thereafter, it is the responsibility of the 
Owner, Master and Crew to ensure that conditions in whi ch certificate(s) are not 
changed and that the vessel remains in seaworthiness condition. 
 
            The Committee note that in the case of non -propelled vessels (example 
Barges), they are registered under a very old legislation enacted during the Britis h-era 
i.e, Coasting vessels Act, 1838. It may be noted that, this act contains provision for 
registration only and does not empower the Maritime Administration to provide rules and 
regulations for the safety, security and pollution prevention aspects there in. The 
Committee were surprised that Barge P -305 which accommodates 300 persons need 
only registration and Indian maritime Authorities has no rules and regulations for 
ensuring its safety aspects. The Committee are shocked and very disappointed that 
such gaps in legislation and powers to provide rules and regulations have been 
continuing for a long time of more than four decades while ONGC have been engaging 
Contractors for E&P activities. 

44 
 
            It is unfortunate that such an incident involving Barge  P-305 has revealed such 
gaps in laws and exposed the loopholes governing these sector for so long. The 
Committee have been assured by Ministry of Shipping that the Coasting Vessels Act, 
1838 would be repealed and Registration, Safety, security and marine pollution issues 
relating to non -self propelled vessels will be brought under Merchant Shipping Act by 
making amendments. The Ministry of P&NG may review other aspects of upstream 
sectors and identify and such gaps that may be need to be plugged by legisla tion. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas should 
coordinate and give necessary inputs to ensure that the legislations and rules and 
regulations may be brought out by the Ministry of Shipping. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per  Ministry of Ports, Shipping and waterways :  
 
1. Coasting Vessels Act, 1838, is proposed to be repealed by way of a new legislation, 
i.e. Coastal Shipping Bill. The said Bill includes provisions to regulate the engagement 
of all vessels, incl uding non-propelled vessels in coasting trade and amend the existing 
provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 to include the registration of  non-
propelled vessels as well. 
2. To regulate the safety, security and pollution prevention aspects of all ves sels, 
including non-propelled vessels, a new legislation has been drafted, i.e. the Merchant 
Shipping Bill. This Bill intends to repeal the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
 
3. Further, the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill has been drafted to decriminalize 
minor offenses and to provide for certain important matters. By way of certain 
amendments to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The said Bill also repeals the 
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 in whole and proposes to allow the registration and 
licensing of all vess els, including non -propelled vessels under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958. Further, it obliges all vessels registered under the provisions of the Coasting 
Vessels Act, 1838 to be re -registered under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 within a period of one year from the date of coming into force of the relevant 
provision. Further, the Bill empowers the Central Govt. to prescribe safety, security, 
manning and pollution prevention requirements, and such types of certificates and 
documents, as may be considered appropriate depending on the type, size, nature and 
area of operation of a ship, including non-mechanically propelled ship. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of the Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
 
Safety Council 
 
The Committee note that Government of India set up a “Safety Council” at the 
Apex in January, 1986 under the administrative control of MoP&NG as a special self --
regulatory industry agency for safety matters & procedures in respect of Hydrocarbon 

45 
 
sector. Safety Council is headed by Secretary of MoP&NG as Chairman & includes 
members comprising Additional Secretary, Joint Secretaries, Chief Executives of all 
Public Sector Undertakings, at least two Chief Executives from Private J JV Companies 
on rotational basis, Statutory bodies such as Chief Controller of Explosives, Director 
General of Mines Safety, Adviser (Fire), Secretary, Central Electricity Board and 
Director General of Factory Advice service and Labour. Safety Council is assisted by 
Executive Director, OISD who also acts as the member secretary of Safety council. The 
Safety Council is completely packed with representatives of Government and PSUs 
and there is no representation of Industry Experts or independent Safety Professionals 
in this body. 
The Committee note that to review the Safety performance of the Industry, the 
Safety Council meets at least once in a year and Western Offshore mishap of ONGC 
was a part of presentation for the 38th Safety Council meeting under the heading "Major 
Incident". The Committee have been informed that since a High -Level Committee 
(HLC) was constituted by the Ministry to inquire into the sequence of events leading to 
the stranding of ONGC vessels in the cyclone "Tauktae" and the initial proceeding of 
the HLC was going on, the incident was only briefly discussed and not recorded in the 
minutes of the meeting. 
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Safety Council has not exten sively 
deliberated on such an event regarding the Barge P -305 incident during Cyclone 
Tauktae and take necessary actions with all concerned agencies. The Committee view 
this as an unacceptable approach and would recommend that the Safety Council may 
be revamped and broad based by including more outside industry experts, academia, 
etc. and take steps to improve the levels of safety preparedness of the Petroleum 
Sector. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
During the 39 th Safety Council meeting held on 06.05.2022 at Mo P&NG 
conference room, a detailed deliberation on cyclone Tauktae and Baghjan blow out 
including the recommendations given by respective High -Level Committee(s), 
compliance status as of meeting date and road map for ensuring compliance at 
organisational & c oncerned Ministerial level carried out. The meeting was chaired by 
Chairman Safety Council & Secretary PNG and attended by nominated members 
(CEO’s) of the oil & gas industry. Revamping of Safety Council was also one of the 
point of the meeting and OISD is  in the process to submit draft list of revised members 
to MoP&NG to modify the same through Resolution/ Notification.   
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of the Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 10 
 
Replacement of Old Cranes in Offshore Installations 
 
The Committee note that ONGC uses a variety of equipments like cranes, 
pumps, rotating equipments etc. in its installations for carrying out Exploration and 
Production activities. These equipments are required to be maintained in good 
working condition to ensure safety and uninterrupt ed work. The Committee note that 
there are 314 cranes installed on Process and Wellhead platform~ of Western 
Offshore of ONGC. Out of these 224 cranes are more than 10 years old and only 36 
are less than 5 years old. The Committee further note that as per existing equipment 
replacement policy, crane replacement period is prescribed as 20 years & beyond and 
the design life of crane is 25 years. The Committee is surprised to observe that an 
amount of Rs. 207.61 crore was incurred in last 5 years on spares, se rvices and 
revamping of cranes with vintage above 10 years in western offshore region. Noting 
further, ONGC spent an amount of Rs. 7.609 crore (approx.) annually for maintenance 
of 20 owned cranes for offshore drilling operations, during the last three years. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that there should be a review of the existing 
guidelines for all the equipment specially cranes that are in use at offshore and 
installations and an attempt should be made to reduce the maintenance cost whereby 
new cran es can be employed which are more effective and require less service and 
repair. The Committee further recommend that all the existing cranes which have run 
their life should immediately be disposed of to avoid any safety issue. 
  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A High level committee was constituted in ONGC to review the existing 
Equipment Replacement Policy. The Committee studied the Revamp/ Replacement 
policy followed by E&P operators of International repute viz. BP PLC & Exxon Mobil 
PLC and noted that their e quipment replacement policy is largely condition based.   The 
Committee reviewed the existing Policy of ONGC and suggested some changes which 
were approved by the Executive Committee (EC) of ONGC. 
Actions are being taken by ONGC for Revamping of Cranes as p er the approved 
Equipment Replacement policy. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 12 
 
Implementation of High Level Committee (HLC) Report 
 
The Committee note that Direc torate General of Shipping is the statutory 
authority under Merchant Shipping Act 1958 and other relevant acts. As regard to the 
statutory investigation into the incident involving Barge P-305 during Cyclone Tauktae it 
is being conducted by Directorate Gen eral of Shipping as per the provisions of Section 
359 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958. 
The Committee have been further informed that measures have been taken by 
ONGC Iike creation of a Marine Cell at Mumbai headed by Master Mariner with the 
responsibility of Marine safety of all vessels operated for ONGC, a renowned 
•international safety consultant has been hired for carrying out assessment of Safety 
Management system in ONGC, to facilitate Single point Authority for Vessel Information 
and Management (VIM ) in offshore, a Task Force has been constituted by ONGC to 
review required technical specifications of each type of Barges/vessels, Uniform 
Guidelines have been promulgated for issuing Risk based advisories during adverse 
weather conditions, Emergency Res ponse Plans for Offshore Rigs and Installations 
have been revised to address such extreme cyclone conditions. Further, the Committee 
have been informed by ONGC that Regional Contingency Plan has been revised in 
consultation with Regional Coordination Commi ttee comprising of Indian Navy, Air 
force, and Coast Guard. 
  
The Committee note that the ONGC have appointed an Internal Enquiry 
Committee to identify deficiencies in the incident during Cyclone Tauktae and it has 
made its recommendations and many of them have been implemented. The Committee 
note that some of the recommendations include reviewing of procedure, systems, 
Manuals and guidelines etc. followed by ONGC in its various activities which may take 
some time to implement. 
  
The Committee further note that additionally, MoP&NG had constituted a three 
member High Level Committee (HLC) to inquire into the sequence of events leading to 
the stranding of ONGC vessels in the cyclone Tauktae led by Director General of 
Shipping with DG -DGH and JS -MoD as other m embers and has associated ED -OISD 
with the HLC on the request of DG Shipping. 
The Committee have been informed that the report submitted by High Level 
Committee is under review and consideration of the Ministry for necessary action as 
recommendations perta in to multiple Ministries. The Committee recommend that 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should constitute an inter -ministerial group 
Officials and regularly monitor the progress of the implementation of the 
recommendations made by the HLC in a time b ound manner. Action taken in this 
regard may be apprised to the Committee in three months. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A copy of High Level Committee report has been forwarded to seven Ministries 
/Departments and also to ONGC/OISD/DGH for taking necessary acti on within three 
months. The action taken on the recommendations of High Level Committee (HLC) are 
under compilation. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 

48 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 14 
 
Need for Strict Verification of Documents 
 
The Committee note that on perusal of the HCL findings that out of 261 person's 
Survival Training Certificates, only 192 could be verified from the e -governance system 
of the DGS, DGS approved MTIs and the other institutes. Furth er, after a detailed 
scrutiny of the person's certificates it is seen that 112 person's certificates are found 
genuine and 80 person's certificates are found not authentic. Thus, it is seen that 
58.33% person's certificates are only found genuine and 41.66 % certificates are not 
authentic. The Committee feel that these are serious observations and well trained 
personnel could have reduced the number of BNVs during cyclone Tauktae. Further, 
the emphasis needs to shift away from completing procedural formaliti es to ensuring 
that the regulations are followed in letter and spirit so that loss of lives can be 
minimized in any such occurrence in future. 
 The Committee further desire that a procedure and regular schedule for 
carrying out drills be developed by all v essels and barges operating at Indian Offshore 
facilities. The Committee feel that had all the people on P -305 had genuine certificates, 
the response would have been more prompt and people would have been able to 
operate life saving appliances effectively.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ONGC needs to overhaul its internal approval mechanism in ensuring that the 
certificates submitted are properly checked by them. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ONGC has a system of issuing NED (Non -Employee Duty) passe s for any 
person going to offshore oilfield. Training certificates and documents of marine crew are 
checked by respective user section before forwarding to Security for issue of NED 
passes. Marine Cell also verifies certificates on random basis to check au thenticity of 
same. Certificates of seafarers are accepted only if they are issued by DG Shipping 
approved Training Institutes. The recommendation of the committee is noted to make 
the internal approval mechanism more robust. 
  
Regular drills are carried o ut on vessels and records are checked during 
inspection of vessels. Annual drill plan is made at each vessel to carry out the required 
drills. Records of the drills conducted are maintained. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No. EXPL-12031/1/2022-EXPL-II-PNG, dated 29.09.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 December, 2022 
25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,                                                  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

49 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
FOURTH SITTING 
(30.11.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 30 Novemb er, 2022 from 1200 hrs. to 1245 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3.  Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4.  Shri Girish Chandra 
5.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
6.  Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
7.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
8.  Shri Vinod Sonkar 
9.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
10. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
11. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
12. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the d raft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Safety 
and Security of oil installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with specific reference to 
western offshore mishap during Cyclone Tauktae”.  
3. The Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report same with slight modifications in 
recommendations made at serial numbers 2 and 5. 
The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the reports in both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
4. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
XXX: Matter not related to the subject.  

50 
 
                                                                                                                        Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2022 -23) ON THE SUBJECT ‘SAFETY AND SE CURITY OF OIL 
INSTALLATIONS OF PUBLIC SECTOR OIL COMPANIES WITH SPECIFIC 
REFERENCE TO WESTERN OFFSHORE MISHAP DURING CYCLONE TAUKTAE’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 16 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15 and 16)  
9 
 Percentage to Total 56.25% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
 
00 
 Percentage of Total 00 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 2, 3, 5 and 11) 
 
04 
 Percentage of Total 25.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. 10, 12 and 14)  
03 
 Percentage of Total 18.75% 
 
 
 