5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject ‘Review 
of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’] 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  …….August, 2025/…….Shravan, 1947 (Saka) 
 


CP&NG NO.     
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024 - 25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject ‘Review 
of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2025 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  ……..August, 2025/……Shravan, 1947 (Saka)  
  


 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                      01 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………      
                   
15 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
28 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
34 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
38 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2024-25) 
held on 07.08.2025. 
39 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24)  
on the subject ‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude 
Oil’. 
41 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2024-25) 
Sl. No.                                           Names of Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare  –  Chairperson 
 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24 Shri Chandrakant Handore 
25 Shri Manoj Kumar Jha 
26 Shri Mithlesh Kumar   
27 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
28 Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar Joint Secretary 
2 
 
 
Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on the subject ‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’. 
2. The Twenty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & 
Natural Gas was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
20.12.2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report were received on 
18.03.2024. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2024-25) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.08.2025.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in 
Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 07  August, 2025 
 16 Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
                      Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                        Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the                          
Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject ‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’, which 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2023.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 18.03.2024 in respect 
of all the 15 recommendations/observations contained in the report. These have been 
categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 14 (Total - 7) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- 3, 10, 11, 12 and 15 (Total – 5) 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos.  2, 8 
and 13 (Total - 3) 
(Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                       
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Nil 
                                                                                                         (Chapter- V)   
3. The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry have accepted 07 
recommendations out of 15 recommendations of this Committee.  The Committee 
expect the Ministry to monitor the implementation of the same.  The Committee also 
desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in Chapter - I of this Report should be furnished expeditiously.  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
REVIEW OF POLICY ON IMPORT OF CRUDE OIL 
  
5. The Committee in their report had recommended as under:  
As per IEA's India Energy Outlook 2021, Energy use on a per capita basis is well 
under half the global average, and there are widespread differences in energy use and the 
quality of service across states and between rural and urban areas. Further, it states 
India's oil demand will rise by almost 4 million barrels per day (mb/d) to reach 8.7 (mb/d) in 
2040, the largest increase of any country. 
  
The Committee note that an expanding economy, population, urbanisation and 
industrialisation mean that India sees the largest increase in energy demand of any 
country, across all scenarios by 2040. Further, Indian PSU refineries have expanded their 
capacity to meet the increasing demand for auto fuel and also to meet the demand for 
other petroleum products like ATF, naptha, etc. 
  
The Committee note that import of crude by Oil PSUs during 2021-22 was 120.5 
MMT out of total imports of 212.38 MMT and during the year 2022-23, the imports by oil 
PSUs totalled about 141.2 MMT. The Committee further note that the domestic production 
of crude oil was 30.49 MMT and 29.69 MMT during the years 2021-22 and 2022-23 
respectively. Out of this, contribution of the PSUs accounted for 23.11 MMT and 22.44 
MMT respectively. This shows that hardly, the domestic production is less than 15 per cent 
of the demand and more than 85 per cent of crude oil is imported. The Committee further 
note that under the Administered Pricing mechanism (APM), the Import of crude oil was 
fully canalized through the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) on behalf of all Oil PSUs 
and controlled by the Empowered Standing Committee (ESC) of the Government of India. 
The Union Cabinet dismantled the APM mechanism w.e.f. 01 .04.2002 and since then 
each Oil PSU is procuring crude on its own. However, the crude oil import arrangements 
were finalized through ESC (Empowered Standing Committee) of each company wherein 
representative of Government of India was a member. Since April 2016, the Cabinet 
approved and empowered the Public Sector Oil Companies to evolve their own policies for 
import of crude oil, consistent with CVC guidelines and get them approved by the 
respective Boards. This is expected to increase the operational and commercial flexibility 
of the oil companies and help them in adoption of effective procurement practices for 
import of crude oil.  
  
Hence, each PSU, refinery has its own optimized procedure for procurement, 
transportation, and processing of crude oil, including contract signings and payments to 
suppliers and ship owners. The Committee note that at present the PSU refineries import 
crude oil through (i) Annual term contracts and (ii) Spot contracts. 
  
The Committee observe that the import policy of PSUs for crude oil has undergone 
gradual changes in the last two decades and from a fully controlled regime to full 
autonomy to each company to plan and purchase the type of crude required for their 
operational requirements. This will hopefully give rise to quick decision making and 
improve the gross refining margins of the refineries thereby contributing to better financial 
performance of the Oil PSUs. The Committee, however, hope that even though the 
Government has given full operational autonomy to the PSUs, the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas would monitor the procurement plan and execution of contracts by the 

3 
 
 
 
PSUs by periodic audits to check the effectiveness of the current policy. The Committee 
therefore recommend to the Ministry that the Import policy of crude oil should be monitored 
periodically and necessary changes may be advised based on the shortcomings noticed in 
the policy. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 6. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
The procurement of crude oil by public sector oil refineries is under ongoing review 
through periodic audits including Government, Statutory and internal audits which are 
conducted in accordance to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Currently there is 
no provision for special audit at Ministry level. However, MOP&NG will continue to carry 
out the overarching review of the functioning of each of the PSU under its administrative 
control which inter-alia include the procurement of crude oil. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
7. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the Ministry  
may monitor the procurement plan and execution of contracts by the PSUs by 
periodic audits to check the effectiveness of the current policy and that the import 
policy of crude oil should be monitored periodically and necessary changes be 
advised based on the shortcomings noticed in the policy. In this regard, the 
Ministry have replied that the procurement of crude oil by public sector oil 
refineries is under ongoing review through periodic audits including Government, 
Statutory and internal audits which are conducted in accordance to the provisions 
of the Companies Act, 2013. They have also informed that currently there is no 
provision for special audit at Ministry level. 
 
 Nevertheless, the Ministry have assured that they will continue to carry out 
the overarching review of the functioning of each of the PSU under its 
administrative control which inter-alia include the procurement of crude oil also. 
The Committee, therefore, while accepting this reply of the Ministry, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that import policy of crude oil should be monitored 
periodically and necessary changes be advised based on the shortcomings as it 
would aid in safeguarding energy security, reduce economic vulnerabilities and 
adapt to global market and geopolitical changes.    
 
 

4 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
SPOT AND TERM CONTRACTS 
  
8. The Committee in their report had recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that crude oil imports are mainly done in two ways namely 
Term Contract and Spot Tenders. The oil PSUs normally resort to term contracts 
which are finalized on yearly basis. The primary reason for term contracts is to give 
energy security where the volumes are assured irrespective of the crisis situation. 
Most of the contracts are on financial year basis but some of them are also on 
calendar year basis.  
  
Spot purchases are resorted by oil PSUs to meet out the balance 
requirement which is not covered under term contract. This gives flexibility to crude 
oil purchases based on seasonal market demand. Also, spot purchases give the 
option of exploring various new grades for which term contracts are not available. 
The frequency of spot purchases depends on requirement of the company. It is 
generally expected that the spot tenders are likely to be available at cheaper price 
than term contracts. 
  
The purchases are done with National Oil Companies (NOCs) at Official 
selling Price (OSP) of the country from which it is imported. Wherever the quantities 
are not available from such countries, then PSU’s go to national oil companies who 
do not have OSP. The Committee note that during the year 2020-21, IOC had 62 
per cent term contract and 38 per cent spot contract. In 2021-22, the term contract 
was 63 percent and spot was 37 per cent. During the 2022-23, it is seen that the 
term contract was 68 per cent and the spot contract was 32 per cent for IOCL. In 
purchases of BPCL, it is seen that the term contracts was 56.7 per cent (2020-21), 
60 per cent (2021-22) and 49 per cent (2022-23). The remaining quantity was 
purchased through spot tenders. The Committee observe that the purchases 
between term and spot is approximately 2/3rd and 1/3rd for IOCL and 60:40 for 
BPCL. The Committee observe that the overall spot purchases which was around 
27.58 per cent in 2017-18 has increased to 35.13 per cent in 2022-23. The 
Committee acknowledge that oil PSUs have autonomy to decide their purchases of 
crude oil and are the best judges to decide on the type of purchase for crude oil 
from international markets.  
  
However, keeping in view the significant increase in percentage of spot 
tenders in the last few years, the Committee would like to caution the oil PSUs to 
plan their crude purchases, so that the average cost of purchases in spot tenders 
should be at a lower cost than term contracts. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should conduct a study/audit to see whether the purchases in spot tenders 
are actually resulted in cheaper cost”. 
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
“In formulating the crude oil import strategy, Public Sector Oil companies 
meticulously consider factors such as techno-economic elements, supply security, 

5 
 
 
 
international political and trade relations, availability in the spot market, 
geographical diversity of supply sources, maintaining a balance between term and 
spot procurement, ensuring refinery flexibility, and anticipating increased crude oil 
demand due to upcoming processing capacity expansions. 
  
Furthermore, the dynamic nature of the spot market, influenced by market 
forces and geopolitical dynamics, underscores the need for a nuanced approach. 
 Assessing gains or losses isn't solely contingent on crude oil prices but also on 
factors like shifts in product demand, refinery shutdown schedules, refinery 
configurations, and product crack spread.  
  
The ratio between spot and term procurement for the year is determined by 
Oil Companies’ Annual Crude Oil Procurement Plan, aligned with the all-
encompassing objective of value generation within the overall operations and is 
duly endorsed by the board in accordance with MoP&NG guidelines since April 
2016. 
  
While term contracts ensure supply security, spot contracts offer operational 
flexibility, with pricing for both tethered to prevailing market rates. Spot procurement 
becomes necessary when desired grades or quantities aren't available through term 
contracts or to accommodate fluctuations in demand, unforeseen outages, or shifts 
in the crude oil mix”. 
  
  
Comments of the Committee  
10. The Committee in their original report had noted that Oil PSUs normally resort 
to term contracts to give energy security where the volumes are assured 
irrespective of crisis situation.  Spot purchases are resorted to by the Oil PSUs to 
meet out the balance requirement which is not covered under term contract.  The 
Committee further noted that Spot purchases are resorted to by the Oil PSUs to 
meet out the balance requirement which is not covered under term contract. This 
gives flexibility to crude oil purchases based on seasonal market demand. Also, 
spot purchases give the option of exploring various new grades for which term 
contracts are not available. The frequency of spot purchases depends on 
requirement of the company. It is generally expected that the spot tenders are likely 
to be available at cheaper price than term contracts.  Keeping in view the significant 
increase in percentage of spot tenders in the last few years, the Committee had 
cautioned the oil PSUs to plan their crude purchases, in such a way that the average 
cost of purchases in spot tenders should be at a lower cost than term contracts.  As 
such, the Committee recommended the Ministry to conduct a study/audit to see 
whether the spot tender purchases have actually resulted in cheaper costs. 

6 
 
 
 
 The Ministry in their reply have stated that in formulating the crude oil import 
strategy, Public Sector Oil companies meticulously consider factors such as 
techno-economic elements, supply security, international political and trade 
relations, availability in the spot market, geographical diversity of supply sources, 
maintaining a balance between term and spot procurement, ensuring refinery 
flexibility, and anticipating increased crude oil demand due to upcoming processing 
capacity expansions.  It has further stated that while term contracts ensure supply 
security, spot contracts offer operational flexibility, with pricing for both tethered to 
prevailing market rates. Spot procurement becomes necessary when desired grades 
or quantities aren't available through term contracts or to accommodate 
fluctuations in demand, unforeseen outages, or shifts in the crude oil mix.      
 In their original Report, the Committee had acknowledged strategic need of 
the Oil PSUs to enter into spot contracts in order to fulfil their instant demands.  
However, the Committee had desired to know whether the rising trend of spot 
purchases in the Oil PSUs has also resulted in cost cutting.  As such the Committee 
had recommended the Ministry to conduct a study/audit to see whether the spot 
tender purchases have actually saved money over the years.   The reply of the 
Ministry is silent on it.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to conduct a study/audit to see whether the purchases in spot 
tenders have actually promoted to be cheaper.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the results. 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
NEED TO PROMOTE INDIAN RUPEE  
   
11. The Committee in their report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the bill for import of crude oil imports amount to about 25 
per cent of all merchandise imports of the country and impacts the trade deficit of 
the country. Accordingly, the Government of India envisaged to promote settlement 
of crude oil imports in Indian rupee to save precious foreign exchange of the 
country.  
  
            The Committee further note that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) introduced 
additional arrangement for invoicing, payment, and settlement of exports/imports in 
INR. Authorised Dealer (AD) banks in India have been permitted to open Rupee 
Vostro Accounts of correspondent bank/s of the partner trading country with an 
approval from the RBI with details of the arrangement. Indian importers undertaking 

7 
 
 
 
imports through this mechanism shall make payment in INR which shall be credited 
into the Special Vostro account of the correspondent bank of the partner country, 
against the invoices for the supply of goods or services from the overseas seller 
/supplier. Payments for crude oil can be made in INR, subject to the suppliers' 
complying with regulatory guidelines in this regard. Currently, Oil PSUs do not have 
an agreement with any crude oil supplier to make purchases in Indian currency for 
supply of crude oil.  
  
            The Committee, however, note that crude oil suppliers have expressed their 
concern on the repatriation of funds in the preferred currency and high transactional 
costs associated with conversion of funds along with exchange fluctuation risks. 
The Committee express concern over lack of momentum in settlement of crude oil 
import bills in Indian rupee and recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India for 
removing bottlenecks in settlement of crude oil import bills in Indian rupee and 
promote the same”. 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
“The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) vide Circular dated 11.07.2022 allowed invoicing 
and payments for international trade in Indian Rupee.  Ministry of Commerce in 
August 2022 took up the matter with OMCs to sensitize Crude Oil suppliers mainly 
Russian NOCs to accept Indian Rupee for import crude oil payment. VCs were 
arranged with Russian NOCs for explaining the whole scheme through presentation 
shared by RBI for settlement of trade in Indian Rupee however they have 
expressed their concern on limitation to repatriate the funds in their home currency 
from Special Rupee Vostro Account. Ministry of Finance (DFS) in Feb/ Mar'23 also 
asked to pursue with Oil Suppliers especially Russian NOCs to accept dues in 
Indian Rupee however feedback of supplier's reluctance to settle import bill in 
Indian Rupee was shared again. 
  
Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the Central Bank of UAE 
(CBUAE) signed MoU on 15th July 2023 in Abu Dhabi to Promote the Use of Local 
Currencies viz. the Indian rupee (INR) and the UAE Dirham (AED) for cross-border 
transactions. In assistance with RBI, Indian Oil successfully made 1st payment in 
Rupee for imported crude oil supplied by ADNOC on 14th August'23. The invoice for 
1 mn bbls of crude was paid in the ratio of 80:10:10 in USD, INR, AED to the Crude 
Oil supplier.  
  
Oil companies consistently engage with suppliers to negotiate crude oil 
settlements in Indian Rupees (INR). However, due to the imbalance in trade flows, 
where imports significantly outweigh exports, suppliers are hesitant to agree to 
settle crude oil bills in INR”. 
  
Comments of the Committee  
13. The Committee in their original report had noted that crude oil suppliers had 
expressed their concern on the repatriation of funds in the preferred currency and 
high transactional costs associated with conversion of funds along with exchange 
fluctuation risks. The Committee found lack of momentum in settlement of crude oil 

8 
 
 
 
import bills in Indian rupee and recommended the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India for 
removing bottlenecks in settlement of crude oil import bills in Indian rupee and 
promote the same.   
 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it does not 
describe the action taken by the Ministry in taking up the issue with the Ministry of 
Finance and Reserve Bank of India in response to the recommendation of the 
Committee to identify the bottlenecks in settlement of crude oil import bills in Indian 
rupee and devise an appropriate plan to make the scheme successful.  The 
Committee also note that the promotion of Indian rupee in settlement of crude oil 
bills is not a mere dream but it is a policy of the Government of India and it is 
incumbent on all the government agencies to make all out effort for successful 
implementation of the policy.  Accordingly, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take up the issue 
with the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India for removing bottlenecks in 
settlement of crude oil import bills in Indian rupee and promote the same   
Recommendation No. 13 
 
STRATEGIC STORAGE 
    
14. The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the country has created strategic storage caverns for 
storage of crude oil towards enhancing and ensuring energy security of the country. 
At present 5.33 MMT of capacity at three different locations, namely, 
Vishakhapatnam (1.33 MMT), Mangalore (1.5 MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT). The 
Committee note that the strategic storage will be a dynamic concept as the total 
demand of petroleum products like diesel, petrol and ATF, etc. keeps on changing 
more on the higher side as the economy grows. Therefore, the strategic storage 
capacity needs to be worked out with a future target in mind. 
  
            The Committee note that two additional strategic storage caverns one at 
Orissa and other at Rajasthan have been approved and work to be undertaken at 
these two storages. The total capacity of 5.33 MMT is around: 2.6 per cent of 
annual domestic demand of 204.7 MMT F.Y. 2021- 22. The Committee expect the 
Ministry to increase, the strategic storage capacity in the country at a quicker pace 
and with the faster execution. The Committee are of the view that the existing 
refinery projects and the recently commissioned refineries may be asked to set up 
strategic storage capacity with a smaller capacity like 2 to 3 days at 5 to 6 locations 
which can bring up 15 to 20 days additional capacity in a definite time frame. 
  

9 
 
 
 
While standalone strategic storage caverns at different locations also helps, 
capacities near the existing refinery may encourage the oil PSUs to establish and 
maintain them which also gives them secured supplies. The Ministry may provide 
funds for creation of storage caverns to oil PSUs through ISPRL, while the oil PSUs 
can store and maintain the caverns for their usage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to look at various options to increase the strategic storage 
capacity in the country with a future demand in 2040 and work progressively to 
achieve them”. 
  
15. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
“Under Phase I of Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) program, ISPRL built SPR 
facilities with a total capacity of 5.33 MMT at three locations viz. Visakhapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh (1.33 MMT), Mangalore, Karnataka (1.5 MMT) and Padur, 
Karnataka (2.5 MMT).  
  
All the three facilities i.e. Visakhapatnam, Mangalore & Padur were 
commissioned in June’2015, October’2016 and December’2018 respectively. All 
these three facilities were dedicated to the Nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 10th 
February’2019. 
  
Further, Cabinet approved development of Commercial cum Strategic 
reserves under Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT) on PPP mode 
along with dedicated SPM’s and associated pipelines during cabinet meeting held 
on 08th  July 2021.  
  
The land acquisition for Phase II at Padur is on advance stage.  Further, 
ISPRL is in the process of floating RFP for Padur so as to synchronize it with 
availability of encumbrance free land. 
  
Exploring possibility at other locations 
 
ISPRL has been evaluating, from time to time, the possibility of augmentation of 
storage capacities based on technical and commercial feasibility.   
  
HPCL is using ISPRL Cavern-B at Visakhapatnam for storage of crude oil. HPCL 
has also hired 300 TMT space in Cavern-A of ISPRL at Visakhapatnam”. 
  
Comments of the Committee  
16. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas to provide funds to Oil PSUs through ISPRL for creation 
of storage caverns near their refineries.  They had also recommended the Ministry 
to look at various options to increase the strategic storage capacity in the country 
with a future demand in 2040 and work progressively to achieve them.  The 
Committee had expected the Ministry to take early initiative in this regard and send 

10 
 
 
 
a comprehensive reply covering their efforts towards increasing the strategic 
storage capacity in the country.     
However, the Ministry have provided a routine action taken reply wherein they 
have stated that ISPRL has been evaluating, from time to time, the possibility of 
augmentation of storage capacities based on technical and commercial feasibility.  
Further, HPCL is using ISPRL Cavern-B at Visakhapatnam for storage of crude oil. 
HPCL has also hired 300 TMT space in Cavern-A of ISPRL at Visakhapatnam. 
 In view of the above, the Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to provide funds to Oil PSUs through 
ISPRL for creation of storage caverns near their refineries and also to look at 
various options to increase the strategic storage capacity in the country keeping 
projected demand of petroleum products in 2040 and work progressively to achieve 
them.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.    
Recommendation No. 14 
 
STRATEGY TO REDUCE IMPORT DEPENDENCE ON CRUDE OIL  
    
17. The Committee in their report had recommended as under:   
“The Committee note that the installed refining capacity in the country as on 
1.4.2022 is around 250 MMT out of which 100 MMT is in private sector. The 
domestic production of crude oil in the country is around 30 MMT and the country 
imports almost 220 MMT out of which 120 MMT is done by oil PSUs. The 
Committee further note that at present the import is closer to 87 per cent and unless 
major new discoveries of crude oil are made, the country will continue to depend on 
crude oil imports. With the economic growth planned for the next few years, the 
demand for petroleum products including auto fuel is likely to increase over the 
year. 
  
Government has set a target to raise the share of natural gas in energy mix 
to 15% by 2030. At present (in 2021), share of natural gas in primary energy mix is 
6.3%. To meet the increased requirement of hydrocarbon fuel:, major strategies 
adopted inter alia include: attracting investment in Exploration & Production to 
enhance domestic oil and gas production, shifting to gas based economy, 
technological upgradation to improve refinery processes, energy efficiency and 
productivity, accelerating bio-fuel economy, expanding overseas oil and gas 
portfolio, diversifying oil and gas supply sources, etc. Government has taken up 
development of National Gas Grid, City Gas Distribution Networks to cover major 
demand centers across the country to provide clean and green fuel. 
  

11 
 
 
 
The Committee note that the Government had prepared a road map to 
reduce the dependency on import in energy. The road map consist of five major 
steps including increasing domestic production, promotion of bio-fuel and 
renewable, promote energy efficiency and conservations methods, reduction 
through improvement in refinery process and demand substitution. The Committee 
further note that some of the steps mentioned in the road map had started showing 
result like bio-fuel and renewable energy. The Committee suggest that the refinery 
improvement process should be an ongoing programme and demand substitution 
can also be achieved in the near future by promotion of CNG and PNG for transport 
and domestic usage. 
  
            The Committee, however, would like to point out that the Ministry besides 
the measures taken on its domain should also promote green hydrogen, electric 
vehicles, renewable energy and bio-fuels. The Committee note that this exercise 
needs new policy initiatives involving several ministries and agencies. In addition, 
the Ministry should look at out of box suggestions like motivating people to use 
public transport, change in lifestyle habits, modification in work culture like work 
from home which reduce travel requirement, etc. are some of the issues which 
needs to be seriously looked at from a long term perspective. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should set up an interdisciplinary group of 
experts belonging to various fields to come up with comprehensive set up policy 
measures so that the demand for fossil fuel can be minimized”.  
18. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply:  
“MoP&NG has vide OM dated July 03, 2017 had constituted the inter-ministerial 
committee, Integrated Monitoring and Advisory Council (IMAC) to oversee the 
implementation of the roadmap to reduce import dependency. The IMAC chaired by 
Hon’ble Minister constituted six Working Groups for monitoring the progress on 
various initiatives, schemes, projects, and strategies taken under their respective 
domains with a view to augment supply of energy, savings in energy to achieving oil 
import reduction in coming years.  
 
The working groups prepared a roadmap to reduce the dependency on 
imports.  The strategy for achieving the goal of import reduction entailed: Increasing 
the production of domestic crude oil & natural gas; Promoting bio fuels & 
renewable; Energy conservation & energy efficiency; Improvement in refinery 
processes; and Demand substitution.  Based on the inputs provided by the working 
groups, a holistic report has been prepared on the roadmap to reduce the Import 
dependency in the short term up to 2025 and long term up to 2030.  
  
Following initiatives have been taken to reduce the import dependency: -  
  
1. Increasing Domestic Exploration and Production. 
 Increase the net geographical area under exploration from 2.5 lakh square 
kilometre (SKM) to 5 lakh SKM.   
 “No Go” areas in EEZ have been reduced by almost 99% due to which 10 
lakh SKM area is now free in EEZ for E&P Activity.   

12 
 
 
 
 The Government of India has opened 99% of the "No-Go" area of the 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for Hydrocarbon Exploration & 
Development.  
 Total operational area (active) under various licensing regimes is 3,27,456 
SKM which includes exploration and exploitation of unconventional 
hydrocarbons like Coal Bed Methane (CBM).  
 Other initiatives like renewal, replacement and addition of facilities and 
infrastructure. 
 Improved and enhanced oil recovery using suitable technologies, 
replacement and revival of sick and old wells.  
 To attract foreign investment in the E&P sector in India, the data on Indian 
sedimentary basins has been made available on National Data Repository 
(NDR) for open viewing and purchase by interested parties and a data centre 
has been opened in the campus of University of Houston for ease of data 
viewing by the International Oil Companies (IOCs).   
 Government has made transformational changes in Model Revenue Sharing 
Contract (MRSC) and terms of Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) to make them 
simpler and attractive to bidders.  
 Indian National Oil Companies (NOCs) (ONGC and OIL) have executed 
several agreements with International Oil Companies (IOCs) (ExxonMobil, 
Chevron, TotalEnergies) for collaboration in E & P activities and are also in 
discussions with BAPCO, JAPEX and Mitsui. 
  
2.  Biofuel Blending Programmes like Ethanol, Compressed Bio Gas 
(CBG), etc  
 The Global Biofuel alliance (GBA) was launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister 
Shri Narendra Modi on 9th September 2023 under India’s G20 Presidency. 
This alliance will be aimed at facilitating cooperation and intensifying the use 
of sustainable biofuels, including in the transportation sector. It will emphasis 
on strengthening markets, facilitating global biofuel trade, development of 
concrete policy lesson sharing and provision of technical support for national 
biofuels programme worldwide. It will help accelerate India’s existing biofuels 
programme such as PM-JIVAN Yojana, SATAT, and GOBARdhan scheme, 
thereby contributing to increased farmer’s income, creating jobs and overall 
development of the Indian ecosystem. 
 Ethanol blending in petrol has increased from 1.53% in 2013-14 to 12 % in 
ESY 2022-23. Ethanol procurement has been to the tune of 508.9 crore litres 
in ESY 2022-23. Total crude oil substitution achieved during 2014-2023 is 
142 lakh MT.   
 E20 was rolled out at 84 retail outlets in 11 States/UTs on 8th February 
2023, ahead its roll-out target of April 2023. The number of retail outlets 
retailing E20 is now more than 11000.   
 Promotion of second generation ethanol to supplement supply of ethanol 
through Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana. 
 Promotion and increase production of CBG through Sustainable Alternative 
Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) and other initiatives like 
blending in Natural Gas to substitute Natural Gas. 52 CBG plants with an 
installed capacity of approximately 300 MT per day have already been 
commissioned under SATAT. Sale of CBG has been initiated from more than 
130 Retail Outlets. During 2022-23, OGMCs have procured 11,227 Ton 

13 
 
 
 
CBG. Further, during April, 2023 to December, 2023 OGMCs have procured 
11421 Ton CBG. 
 In a major step towards enhancing use and adoption of CBG, the National 
Biofuels Coordination Committee (NBCC) has approved the introduction of 
phase wise mandatory blending of CBG in CNG (Transport) & PNG 
(Domestic) segments of CGD sector. The key objectives of the CBG 
Blending Obligation (CBO) are to stimulate demand for CBG in CGD sector, 
import substitution for Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), saving in Forex, 
promoting circular economy and to assist in achieving the target of net zero 
emission etc. CBO will be voluntary till FY 2024-2025 and mandatory 
blending obligation would start from FY 2025-26.  
  
3. Adoption of Alternate Energy Sources like LNG, Hydrogen, EV 
 The authorized entities at their Retail Outlets are required to install facilities 
for marketing at least one new generation alternate fuels like Compressed 
Natural Gas (CNG), Biofuels, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), Electric Vehicle 
charging points, etc.   
 As on 01.01.2024, 11326 EV charging station & 119 battery swapping 
stations have been installed. Recently, tender for procurement/installation of 
8,000 number EVs stations has been floated by OMCs.   
 The Green Hydrogen Mission announced by the Government to promote 
growth of green hydrogen. This inter-alia includes significant contribution of 
oil & gas companies through replacement of conventional hydrogen derived 
from Natural Gas with green hydrogen, use of Green Hydrogen for mobility 
etc”. 
  
  
Comments of the Committee  
19.  The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry for 
increasing exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas, Bio - 
Fuels blending programmes, adoption of alternate energy sources like LNG, 
Hydrogen, EV.  However, they would also like to highlight that the 
Government of India had launched Sustainable Alternative Towards 
Affordable Transportation (SATAT) initiatives in October, 2018 which 
envisages developing 5000 CBG plants with total production capacity 
equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24.  The Committee had 
subsequently examined the implementation of CBG (SATAT) in 2022-23 and 
found that only 40 CBG plants had been set up by then.  The Committee 
thereafter presented their Seventeenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
to both the Houses of Parliament of India on 21.12.2022.  The Report made a 
number of recommendations to the Ministries of Finance, New & Renewable 
Energy (MNRE), Agriculture, Chemical and Fertilizers, Urban Development 
and Skill Development. Consequently, various Ministries took plenty of 

14 
 
 
 
actions like extension of income tax exemption, inclusion of fermented 
organic  manure in organic manure category for providing subsidy, 
continuation of Central Financial Assistance to CBG plants, providing market 
development assistance to CBG plants for marketing of their fermented 
organic  manure, easing of conditions for granting loan by financial 
institutions, etc.  The Ministries and agencies of the Government made 
commendable efforts to create a viable ecosystem for development of CBG 
industry.  However, the Committee find that the growth of the CBG plants in 
the country is still very slow.  Accordingly, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should closely monitor the 
implementation of the SATAT initiative and remove bottlenecks, if any, 
affecting the development of CBG plants in the country.   
   
  
 
 
 
  

15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
REVIEW OF POLICY ON IMPORT OF CRUDE OIL 
  
As per IEA's India Energy Outlook 2021, Energy use on a per capita basis is well 
under half the global average, and there are widespread differences in energy use and the 
quality of service across states and between rural and urban areas. Further, it states 
India's oil demand will rise by almost 4 million barrels per day (mb/d) to reach 8.7 (mb/d) in 
2040, the largest increase of any country. 
  
The Committee note that an expanding economy, population, urbanisation and 
industrialisation mean that India sees the largest increase in energy demand of any 
country, across all scenarios by 2040. Further, Indian PSU refineries have expanded their 
capacity to meet the increasing demand for auto fuel and also to meet the demand for 
other petroleum products like ATF, naptha, etc. 
  
The Committee note that import of crude by Oil PSUs during 2021-22 was 120.5 
MMT out of total imports of 212.38 MMT and during the year 2022-23, the imports by oil 
PSUs totalled about 141.2 MMT. The Committee further note that the domestic production 
of crude oil was 30.49 MMT and 29.69 MMT during the years 2021-22 and 2022-23 
respectively. Out of this, contribution of the PSUs accounted for 23.11 MMT and 22.44 
MMT respectively. This shows that hardly, the domestic production is less than 15 per cent 
of the demand and more than 85 per cent of crude oil is imported. The Committee further 
note that under the Administered Pricing mechanism (APM), the Import of crude oil was 
fully canalized through the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) on behalf of all Oil PSUs 
and controlled by the Empowered Standing Committee (ESC) of the Government of India. 
The Union Cabinet dismantled the APM mechanism w.e.f. 01 .04.2002 and since then 
each Oil PSU is procuring crude on its own. However, the crude oil import arrangements 
were finalized through ESC (Empowered Standing Committee) of each company wherein 
representative of Government of India was a member. Since April 2016, the Cabinet 
approved and empowered the Public Sector Oil Companies to evolve their own policies for 
import of crude oil, consistent with CVC guidelines and get them approved by the 
respective Boards. This is expected to increase the operational and commercial flexibility 
of the oil companies and help them in adoption of effective procurement practices for 
import of crude oil.  
  
Hence, each PSU, refinery has its own optimized procedure for procurement, 
transportation, and processing of crude oil, including contract signings and payments to 
suppliers and ship owners. The Committee note that at present the PSU refineries import 
crude oil through (i) Annual term contracts and (ii) Spot contracts. 
  
The Committee observe that the import policy of PSUs for crude oil has undergone 
gradual changes in the last two decades and from a fully controlled regime to full 
autonomy to each company to plan and purchase the type of crude required for their 

16 
 
 
 
operational requirements. This will hopefully give rise to quick decision making and 
improve the gross refining margins of the refineries thereby contributing to better financial 
performance of the Oil PSUs. The Committee, however, hope that even though the 
Government has given full operational autonomy to the PSUs, the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas would monitor the procurement plan and execution of contracts by the 
PSUs by periodic audits to check the effectiveness of the current policy. The Committee 
therefore recommend to the Ministry that the Import policy of crude oil should be monitored 
periodically and necessary changes may be advised based on the shortcomings noticed in 
the policy. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The procurement of crude oil by public sector oil refineries is under ongoing review 
through periodic audits including Government, Statutory and internal audits which are 
conducted in accordance to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Currently there is 
no provision for special audit at Ministry level. However, MOP&NG will continue to carry 
out the overarching review of the functioning of each of the PSU under its administrative 
control which inter-alia include the procurement of crude oil.  
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
Refer Para 7 of the Chapter I of this Report  
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
ENLARGING THE INDIAN CRUDE BASKET 
  
            The Committee note that the Indian crude basket represents a derived basket 
comprising of Sour grade (Oman & Dubai average) and sweet grade (Brent Dated) of 
Crude oil processed (indigenous and imported) in Indian refineries during previous 
financial year. The same is presently calculated on the basis of a weightage of 75.62 per 
cent for thee of sour grades of crude oil (average of Oman & Dubai) and 24.38 per cent 
sweet grade of crude oil (Brent Dated). It is used as an indicator of the price of crude 
imports in India and Government of India watches the index while examining the domestic 
price issues. The Committee further note that since Middle East crude generally cost more 
due to levy of Asian premium by Middle East countries, the Indian crude basket is higher.  
  
            The Committee note that about 250 grades of crude oil are traded in world crude 
market. But, Indian refineries buy only about 50 grades of crude oil in a year. The 
purchase of crude by oil PSUs depend on parameters like refinery configuration, 
seasonable demand, price of crude, required product, operational exigencies, etc. The 
vintage refineries have constraints in processing different grades of crude while advanced 
refineries can process a variety of crude. Similarly, crudes having wax content and petro-
chemical derivations also influence the decision to go for purchase of certain types of 
crudes. 
  
            The Committee would exhort the oil PSUs to modernize their vintage refineries so 
as to improve their capabilities to process wide variety of crude oil. The Committee, 

17 
 
 
 
therefore, recommend to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas / Oil PSUs to diversify 
their imports of crude oil and explore the feasibility of buying more grades of crude oil with 
the objective of reducing the cost of Indian crude basket of the country. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
   
Regarding IOCL, with the exception of the Digboi refinery, specialized for Assam Crude 
processing, all IOCL refineries have undergone upgrades enabling them to handle a wide 
spectrum of crude oil grades. IOCL's basket encompasses 252 crude oil grades, including 
major varieties with significant export volumes in the global market. However, on an 
annual basis, the refineries typically process around 60-70 grades. The committee's 
recommendation to broaden the crude oil basket aligns with the corporation's strategic 
focus. Indian Oil places paramount importance on continually enhancing its capacity to 
process a diverse range of crude oils. Since 2016, Indian Oil has diversified its crude oil 
imports, sourcing from 27 countries. In this endeavour, Indian Oil has integrated 100 new 
crude oil grades into its basket and successfully procured 43 additional grades. The 
selection of grades hinges on various factors such as export volumes, corporate 
economics, logistics, energy security, geopolitical considerations, and product demand. 
  
The committee's report itself acknowledges in section 1.26 that "More than 150 different 
grades of crude oil are available in the global crude oil markets. However, grades exported 
by oil producers in large quantities and regularly are approximately 50 grades." The 
corporation remains committed to exploring new opportunities in the global oil markets. 
  
Furthermore, BPCL diligently explores options to diversify crude oil imports, considering 
factors such as value generation, domestic product requirements, and refinery 
configurations. To date, BPCL has successfully procured and processed crude oil from all 
continents in its refineries. Over time, BPCL has undertaken refinery modernization 
projects, such as the replacement of old CDUs with state-of-the-art CDU/VDU units at the 
Mumbai Refinery in November 2015. Additionally, the Integrated Refinery Expansion 
Project (IREP) at the Kochi Refinery was commissioned in 2016, enabling the processing 
of high-sulphur crudes. 
  
HPCL is currently upgrading its refining facilities by introducing a Residue Upgradation 
facility at Visakhapatnam, which will further diversify the crude oil basket and enable the 
processing of new crude oil grades. 
  
MRPL refinery at Mangalore is capable of processing a basket of 267 crude oil grades, 
indicating a modern and advanced configuration in terms of process units capable of 
handling a wide variety of crude oils. 
  
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
   
   
 
Recommendation No. 5 
  

18 
 
 
 
NEED FOR DIVERSIFICATION OF SOURCES OF CRUDE OIL 
  
            The Committee note that India is a fast growing economy and consequently the 
energy demand in the country is increasing rapidly. The country consumed 204.72 Million 
Metric Tons (MMT) of petroleum products in 2021-22 and 223.02 MMT in 2022-23.  As per 
International Energy Agency's World Energy Outlook 2022, the energy demand of the 
country is expected to grow at about 3 per cent per annum till 2040, compared to the 
global growth rate of 1 per cent. The Committee note that currently India is, 3rd largest 
consumer of Oil, 3rd largest LPG consumer, 3rd largest LNG consumer and 4th largest 
refiner of the world. 
  
            The Committee note that India is deficient in production of crude oil and natural gas 
and thereby has overwhelming dependence on their imports. The import dependency of 
the country in respect of crude oil, natural gas and LPG in FY 2021-22 were about 85 per 
cent, 48 per cent and 50 per cent respectively. In FY 2022-23, the dependency on 
imported crude oil increased further and reached 87.3 per cent.  
  
            The Committee note that over 60 per cent of the imports of crude oil of Oil PSUs 
come from countries situated in Persian Gulf region mainly from Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait 
and UAE. Further, about 85-90 per cent of LPG imports are sourced from Middle East 
countries situated around Persian Gulf.  
  
            The Committee note that majority of India's hydrocarbon imports are being sourced 
from the Middle East region wherein due to geo-political flashpoints, the supplies can face 
disruption. Even small skirmishes or conflicts in any region cast a cloud on the supply of 
crude oil and increase the price of crude oil significantly in the international market. In the 
recent past, the country witnessed supply disruptions and price volatility as a result of the 
Russia-Ukraine war. 
  
            The Committee further note that the Government of India has a stated policy of 
diversifying the sources of crude oil and gas imports of the country and it has also taken 
steps to achieve the same. As a result of efforts of the Government of India, the share of 
Middle East countries in the supply of crude oil to India had declined from 72 per cent in 
FY 2017-18 to 63 percent in FY 2020-21. Also, the share of Middle East countries declined 
marginally from 54 per cent in 2017-18 to 52 per cent in 2020-21. 
  
            The Committee view that over dependence of the country and Oil PSUs on any 
one region for crude oil and gas supplies can impact energy security of the country which 
entails getting uninterrupted supplies of crude oil and gas at reasonable prices to support 
the rapidly growing economy of the country. The Committee appreciate the positive steps 
taken by the Government of India so far to diversify the imports of crude oil and gas of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to take more concrete steps for the diversification of imports of crude oil and gas of 
the country by exploring new partners. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
   
Post February 2022, several steps have been taken to navigate the volatile energy market 
by securing best deals available. As a result, supplies from West Asia-GCC country has 

19 
 
 
 
come down to 34% from 38%, similarly, dependency on OPEC has also reduced to 61% 
from 71% for FY 2022-23.  
  
Major interventions undertaken are as under: - 
i. To reduce the spot purchases and secure the supplies, recently, OMCs have made 
term crude oil arrangements with Petrobras (Brazil) & Ecopetrol (Colombia). This is 
the first time that Indian companies had signed the term arrangement with Brazilian 
company (Petrobras) which is also non-OPEC nation. The term arrangement has 
been renewed till March 2024. Further, the term arrangement with Ecopetrol 
(Colombia) has re-established the old arrangements, which was not renewed after 
FY 2015-16. 
ii. India has diversified crude oil sources from 27 countries in 2006-2007 to 39 
countries in 2022-23.  
iii. We are exploring diversification of crude oil supplies from non-OPEC countries like 
Guyana, additional sources in Canada through spot market, and additional supplies 
from OPEC members like UAE, Nigeria, Iraq & Kazakhstan. 
iv. We have also imposed several measures like imposition of tax on export of fuels, 
windfall taxes on production, realignment of businesses to safeguard Indian 
consumers from global crude oil and gas price.  
  
Even though Middle east will continue to be the natural choice for arranging crude oil for 
India due to its geographical proximity resulting in lower freight rates compared to other 
regions, however, in order to reduce dependency on ME region, Indian Oil has entered 
term contract for Brazilian, Columbian crude oil grade. Even after lifting of US sanction on 
Venezuelan grades, Indian Oil secured one cargo of Venezuelan grade. Indian Oil is also 
having term contract for import of US and Canadian crude oil grades. 
  
Regarding LNG imports, GAIL has a well-diversified LNG portfolio of approximately 14 
Million Metric Tons per annum (MMTPA), strategically sourced from key regions such as 
the United States, the Middle East, Australia, and Russia. In addition to these, GAIL 
actively engages in securing spot cargoes from various countries worldwide through 
various suppliers, which includes traders/ portfolio players/producers. 
  
The extensive list of countries from which GAIL has successfully procured LNG cargoes so 
far includes Abu Dhabi, Algeria, Angola, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Cameroon, Egypt, 
Equatorial Guinea, France, Indonesia, Malaysia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, 
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russia, Spain, Trinidad & Tobago, Turkey, UAE, USA, and 
Yemen. This diversity ensures GAIL's commitment to maintain an independent and 
balanced LNG portfolio.  
  
Furthermore, GAIL in order to be strategically placed in the global LNG industry and to 
cater to the country’s energy demand has taken following steps:  
a. Expanded its presence in the United States by establishing GAIL Global (USA) Inc. 
("GGUI") in Houston, Texas. GGUI, a wholly-owned subsidiary, holds a 20% 
interest in Eagle Ford shale acreages, reinforcing GAIL's foothold in the American 
market. 
b.  GAIL has formed GAIL Global (USA) LNG LLC ("GGULL"), a wholly-owned 
subsidiary, aimed at securing a long-term (20 years) Terminal Service Agreement 
("TSA") with Cove Point LNG, LP ("CPLL").  
c. GAIL established GAIL Global Singapore Pte. Ltd (GGSPL), a wholly-owned 
subsidiary based in Singapore. GGSPL actively engages in LNG trading, 

20 
 
 
 
contributing to GAIL's position as a prominent player in the international LNG 
market.  
  
In light of the above strategic actions, GAIL has ensured GAIL’s LNG portfolio is not any 
region specific.  
  
Furthermore, Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) has a 7.5 MMTPA LNG supply agreement with 
RasGas, Qatar on long term basis for 25 years. PLL imports this volume of LNG on Free 
on Board (FOB) basis, from Ras Laffan, Qatar through its three long term-chartered LNG 
vessels namely Disha, Raahi and Aseem at Dahej Terminal. The supply under this 
agreement commenced in 2004 and has back-to-back sales arrangement - Gas Sales and 
Purchase Agreement (GSPA) of 7.50 MMTPA, with GAIL, IOCL and BPCL, in the RLNG 
offtake ratio of 60:30:10, respectively, with validity till April 2028. In 2009, PLL had entered 
into a 20-year long term supply agreement with Mobil Australia Resources Company Pty 
Ltd (MARC - a subsidiary of Exxon Mobil) wherein LNG is supplied by MARC from its 
global portfolio, primarily at Kochi terminal. The supply of 1.425 MMTPA under MARC 
contract commenced in 2016-17 and has back-to- back sales arrangements - Gas Sales 
and Purchase Agreement (GSPA), which were entered in 2010 with BPCL, IOCL and 
GAIL, in the RLNG offtake ratio of 40:30:30, respectively with validity till November 2035. 
In addition, P11 has long term regasification agreements with GAIL (India) Limited, Indian 
Oil Corporation Limited, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Gujarat State Petroleum 
Corporation Limited and Torrent Power Limited totaling to 8.25 MMTPA under which 
volumes are received from various sources across the globe. Further, PLL is undertaking 
the activities for expansion of regas capacity of Dahej LNG Terminal from 17.5 MMTPA to 
22.5 MMTPA and also setting up an LNG terminal at East Coast of India at Gopaipur, 
Odisha having an initial capacity of 4 MMTPA, with a future provision for expansion to 5 
MMTPA LNG.  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
   
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
  
OFFICIAL SELLING PRICE 
  
            The Committee note that the Official Selling Price (OSP) is the price of crude oil 
declared by National Oil Companies (NOCs) of oil producing countries, on monthly basis. 
Different OSPs are declared for different grades by NOCs. OSPs of crude oils vary based 
on quality of crude grade and prevailing market condition. The Committee further note that 
NOCs of oil producing countries declare monthly OSPs either as flat price or as 
premium/discount to the marker crude oil. Majority of crude oils produced in Asia and 
Africa are having OSPs. Generally, OSPs are declared one month in advance (e.g. for 
sale of crude oil in Mar. 2023, OSPs are made available in Feb. 2023). Further, OSPs of 
low sulphur crude grades are declared based on Dated Brent as marker crude, whereas 
OSPs of high Sulphur crude grades are declared based on Platts Dubai and/or Oman / 
DME Oman as marker crude.  
  
            The Committee further note that National Oil companies of oil exporting countries 
from Middle-East generally sell their crude through term contracts. Crude oil sales are 

21 
 
 
 
observed on region basis namely Asia, Europe, and US. Some other National Oil 
companies like ADNOC (Abu Dhabi) use their traded exchange price (IFAD Murban) to fix 
OSP for their crude oils. 
  
            The Committee note that the Official Selling Price decided by National Oil 
Companies in the Middle East needs better transparency. The oil PSUs along with other 
oil importing companies should try to impress upon the NOCs to fix OSPs based on certain 
formulae.  The Committee would also like to observe that the price of crude oil has no 
relation with the production cost, etc. Since, the commodity is a natural resource endowed 
upon some countries the pricing should be reasonable in order to ensure energy access at 
affordable prices to citizens across the world. Since the oil producing countries to a large 
extent are acting in a concerted way, the price of crude oil is largely producer determined 
rather than market driven. The Committee, therefore, would recommend the Ministry to 
coordinate with other oil importing countries and approach multi-lateral institutions to bring 
reforms in the pricing of crude oil so as to ensure energy availability at reasonable price to 
the global community. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Government of India has been actively engaged in energy diplomacy to safeguard the 
energy security of the country as well as raising voice for all oil consuming and countries of 
global south for responsible pricing and stabilizing the global oil market. 
  
India has been raising the issues faced by consuming countries such as high prices, high 
volatility, Asian Premium, etc. from time to time at various international forums and with 
major producers including at Gastech-2022 held in Milan, Italy; Abu Dhabi International 
Petroleum Exhibition and Conference-2022 & 2023 held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates; India Energy Week-2023 held in Bengaluru, India. 
  
India has also been engaging with major International Organizations working in the domain 
of Oil & Gas such as Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), 
International Energy Forum (IEF), International Energy Agency (IEA) etc. for advocating 
responsible pricing of Oil and Gas resources. Recently, Hon’ble Minister MoPNG Co-
chaired the 6th High Level Meeting of India-OPEC Energy Dialogue with Secretary 
General of OPEC, in Vienna. Indian side had emphasized on the need for ensuring 
availability, affordability & sustainability which are necessary in ensuring the stability of 
energy markets & India’s role as driver of both economic growth & energy demand. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has also been working very closely with Ministry of 
External Affairs and our Embassies abroad, to not only ensure energy security for the 
country, but to safeguard and promote the interests of our oil and gas PSUs abroad. The 
integration of energy diplomacy as part of India’s foreign policy is giving dividends to the 
country by ensuring energy security and by highlighting the importance of India as a 
destination for oil & gas investments in the entire value chain. 
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
  
Recommendation No. 7 

22 
 
 
 
  
ASIAN PREMIUM  
  
            The Committee note that the crude oil is purchased through Term Contracts and 
Spot Tenders and in the Term Contracts, the National Oil Companies, of Middle East 
declare their Official Selling Price over marker crude price for different regions, namely, 
Asia, Europe and USA. Over and above this Official Selling Price, extra cost called Asian 
premium is also levied on purchase of crude oil for Asian countries like India and others in 
the region. The Committee note that the levy of Asian premium is on account of lower 
transportation cost due to the proximity of our country to the Middle East from where the 
country imports a big share of its crude oil requirement. The Asian Premium impacts the 
gross refining margins of the companies. The Committee note that the geographical 
location of a country is given and hence a country should not be made to pay a higher cost 
for such non-commercial reasons. 
  
            The Committee note that a few countries in addition to India, also pay a higher cost 
in the form of Asian premium for crude oil which it feel is unreasonable and against any 
free market mechanism and normal business principles accepted in the market. Therefore, 
the Ministry /Oil PSUs should make effort to do away with the premium. If required, they 
should seek the support of similar countries which bear the burden of Asian premium and 
utilize various multilateral institutional fora to do away with such unreasonable charges. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry and oil PSUs along with other 
nations to take up the issue of discontinuing of Asian premium. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Middle East crude oil pricing mechanism is dominated by Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia’s 
pricing system is closely tracked by most exporters in the Middle East. The other large 
producers such as Kuwait, Iran, Iraq are generally seen by the market as followers in 
terms of direction and the magnitude of the changes. Saudi Arabia follows a formula price 
method for pricing its crude oil for three regions of the world. Asia, Europe, USA. The 
formula pricing method has two components: 
 
  
 Marker crude oil: Saudi adopts different marker grades for its different markets viz. 
US, Europe and Asia in order to take care of the different fundamentals prevailing in 
these different markets as follows:  
  
Region Marker Crude 
Asia DME Oman and Platts Dubai 
Average 
Europe Ice Brent 
US Argus Sour Crude Index (ASCI) 
  
 Differential to marker crude oil: Saudi declares a differential over and above the 
respective marker one month in advance of the loading of the crude. This 
differential so published takes into account the point of sale i.e. US, Europe or Asia 
(to adjust for the freight costs) and the “quality differential” between the Saudi crude 
and the marker crude.  
  

23 
 
 
 
Regional Pricing Difference 
 
The historical trends in the price of Saudi crude oil is given below: (US$/bbl) 
Asian Premium Calculation: Middle East Crudes ($/bbl.)   
  Saudi Arabia   
Month Arab Light Arab Medium Arab Heavy   
Difference Difference Difference   
  
Asia  
Vs Europe 
Asia  
Vs US 
Asia  
Vs Europe 
Asia  
Vs US 
Asia  
Vs Europe 
Asia  
Vs US   
2017 Avg 1.50 1.81 1.77 2.38 1.40 2.27   
2018 Avg 1.93 3.72 1.79 3.73 1.78 3.79   
2019 Avg 2.25 1.98 3.35 3.02 3.27 2.71   
2020 Avg 1.66 1.19 2.40 1.95 2.61 1.89   
2021 Avg 1.61 3.00 1.95 3.35 1.89 2.97   
2022 Avg 1.12 5.82 2.10 5.45 3.73 4.40   
2023 Avg 0.66 1.32 0.95 0.52 2.17 -1.11   
2024 (Till Jan’24) 2.44 2.26 2.69 0.81 4.64 0.21   
*The positive number indicates Asian prices are higher than other markets while negative 
number indicates Asian prices are lower compared to other markets.  
The higher price that Asia pays for crude oil exports from the Middle East relative to their 
counterparts in Europe and the US is referred to as the “Asian premium.”  
  
It is worth noting that no extra cost is being levied by the suppliers over and above the 
OSP for Asian buyers.  
  
The concept of the Asian Premium is consistently addressed during discussions with 
Saudi Aramco and other Middle Eastern suppliers. However, these suppliers have been 
hesitant to recognize the price differential between Asia, Europe, and the USA as an 
"Asian Premium." Instead, they view it as a reflection of regional market dynamics, offering 
discounts to other buyers to remain competitive in those markets. Consequently, they do 
not perceive the price variation for Asia as a premium, but rather as a strategic adjustment 
to maintain competitiveness. 
  
Efforts to address the challenges posed by the Asian Premium involve garnering support 
from similar countries experiencing the same issue. Utilizing various multilateral forums, 
initiatives have been undertaken at the ministry level to mitigate or eliminate this disparity, 
as detailed in response to recommendation number 6.  
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
IMPORT OF CRUDE OIL FROM RUSSIA 
  
            The Committee note that the country imports crude oil across the globe including 
Middle East, Africa, North America, South America, etc. During the F.Y. 2021-22 it is seen 
that the top six countries accounted for 80 per cent of the total crude imported by oil PSUs. 
The import from Russia was very low in FY2021-22. However, ever since the war between 

24 
 
 
 
Ukraine and Russia began and economic sanctions announced by UN/UK/EU/US with the 
price cap imposed on Russia, the country started importing more from Russia in order to 
diversify the crude basket. This has helped India to expand its basket of countries for 
sourcing crude oil and also helped in stabilizing the crude oil market in global markets. The 
country also needs to look at other options across various geo political locations so as to 
reduce its dependence on one particular region. The recent geo-political conflict in the 
Middle East has cast turmoil in the region and similar conflicts elsewhere also causes 
volatility in crude oil prices on the upper side. 
  
            The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry/oil PSUs to be alert and alive to 
emerging developments in the geo-political situation across the globe and tap newer 
sources of crude oil from different countries as a measure to diversify its purchases and 
also enhance and ensure energy security of the country. The Committee note that if India 
had not resorted to purchases from Russia, the oil market would have been highly volatile 
and oil prices would have flared up which would have been detrimental to many countries 
across the globe. The Committee appreciate the decision of the Government to purchase 
crude oil from Russia which not only resulted in stability in global market but also a 
cheaper crude and provided the economic impetus for many countries as they were 
reeling under economic issues related to Post Covid phase period. The Committee 
recommend that the Government of India should keep the energy security of the country in 
mind while taking decisions on import of crude oil. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Prior to Russia- Ukraine conflict, Russian crude oil was largely exported to Europe & 
China. The Russian-Ukraine conflict and the resulting sanctions on Russian crude oil has 
resulted in increased flows of Russian crude oil into India due to attractive discounts which 
are being offered for Russian Crude. This increased imports of Russian crude into India 
may not last forever and thus considering this PSU refineries are continuing with all its 
term contracts with other Suppliers/Regions for Firm and optional volumes to secure our 
refinery requirement in case of any volatile market situation. When finalizing the crude oil 
procurement plan for imports, careful consideration is given to various factors, including 
security of supplies, diversification of crude oil supply sources, and availability of different 
types of crude oils. This approach ensures both energy security and the procurement of 
crude oil at optimal value. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
STRATEGY TO REDUCE IMPORT DEPENDENCE OF CRUDE OIL  
  
            The Committee note that the installed refining capacity in the country as on 
1.4.2022 is around 250 MMT out of which 100 MMT is in private sector. The domestic 
production of crude oil in the country is around 30 MMT and the country imports almost 
220 MMT out of which 120 MMT is done by oil PSUs. The Committee further note that at 
present the import is closer to 87 per cent and unless major new discoveries of crude oil 
are made, the country will continue to depend on crude oil imports. With the economic 

25 
 
 
 
growth planned for the next few years, the demand for petroleum products including auto 
fuel is likely to increase over the year. 
  
            Government has set a target to raise the share of natural gas in energy mix to 15% 
by 2030. At present (in 2021), share of natural gas in primary energy mix is 6.3%. To meet 
the increased requirement of hydrocarbon fuel:, major strategies adopted inter alia include: 
attracting investment in Exploration & Production to enhance domestic oil and gas 
production, shifting to gas based economy, technological upgradation to improve refinery 
processes, energy efficiency and productivity, accelerating bio-fuel economy, expanding 
overseas oil and gas portfolio, diversifying oil and gas supply sources, etc. Government 
has taken up development of National Gas Grid, City Gas Distribution Networks to cover 
major demand centers across the country to provide clean and green fuel. 
  
            The Committee note that the Government had prepared a road map to reduce the 
dependency on import in energy. The road map consist of five major steps including 
increasing domestic production, promotion of bio-fuel and renewable, promote energy 
efficiency and conservations methods, reduction through improvement in refinery process 
and demand substitution. The Committee further note that some of the steps mentioned in 
the road map had started showing result like bio-fuel and renewable energy. The 
Committee suggest that the refinery improvement process should be an ongoing 
programme and demand substitution can also be achieved in the near future by promotion 
of CNG and PNG for transport and domestic usage. 
  
            The Committee, however, would like to point out that the Ministry besides the 
measures taken on its domain should also promote green hydrogen, electric vehicles, 
renewable energy and bio-fuels. The Committee note that this exercise needs new policy 
initiatives involving several ministries and agencies. In addition, the Ministry should look at 
out of box suggestions like motivating people to use public transport, change in lifestyle 
habits, modification in work culture like work from home which reduce travel requirement, 
etc. are some of the issues which needs to be seriously looked at from a long term 
perspective. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should set up an 
interdisciplinary group of experts belonging to various fields to come up with 
comprehensive set up policy measures so that the demand for fossil fuel can be 
minimized. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
MoP&NG has vide OM dated July 03, 2017 had constituted the inter-ministerial committee, 
Integrated Monitoring and Advisory Council (IMAC) to oversee the implementation of the 
roadmap to reduce import dependency. The IMAC chaired by Hon’ble Minister constituted 
six Working Groups for monitoring the progress on various initiatives, schemes, projects, 
and strategies taken under their respective domains with a view to augment supply of 
energy, savings in energy to achieving oil import reduction in coming years.  
 
The working groups prepared a roadmap to reduce the dependency on imports.  The 
strategy for achieving the goal of import reduction entailed: Increasing the production of 
domestic crude oil & natural gas; Promoting bio fuels & renewable; Energy conservation & 
energy efficiency; Improvement in refinery processes; and Demand substitution.  Based on 
the inputs provided by the working groups, a holistic report has been prepared on the 

26 
 
 
 
roadmap to reduce the Import dependency in the short term up to 2025 and long term up 
to 2030.  
  
Following initiatives has been taken to reduce the import dependency: -  
  
1. Increasing Domestic Exploration and Production. 
 Increase the net geographical area under exploration from 2.5 lakh square 
kilometre (SKM) to 5 lakh SKM.   
 “No Go” areas in EEZ have been reduced by almost 99% due to which 10 lakh SKM 
area is now free in EEZ for E&P Activity.   
 The Government of India has opened 99% of the "No-Go" area of the Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) for Hydrocarbon Exploration & Development.  
 Total operational area (active) under various licensing regimes is 3,27,456 SKM 
which includes exploration and exploitation of unconventional hydrocarbons like 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM).  
 Other initiatives like renewal, replacement and addition of facilities and 
infrastructure. 
 Improved and enhanced oil recovery using suitable technologies, replacement and 
revival of sick and old wells.  
 To attract foreign investment in the E&P sector in India, the data on Indian 
sedimentary basins has been made available on National Data Repository (NDR) 
for open viewing and purchase by interested parties and a data centre has been 
opened in the campus of University of Houston for ease of data viewing by the 
International Oil Companies (IOCs).   
 Government has made transformational changes in Model Revenue Sharing 
Contract (MRSC) and terms of Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) to make them simpler and 
attractive to bidders.  
 Indian National Oil Companies (NOCs) (ONGC and OIL) have executed several 
agreements with International Oil Companies (IOCs) (ExxonMobil, Chevron, 
TotalEnergies) for collaboration in E & P activities and are also in discussions with 
BAPCO, JAPEX and Mitsui. 
  
2. Biofuel Blending Programmes like Ethanol, Compressed Bio Gas (CBG), etc  
 The Global Biofuel alliance (GBA) was launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri 
Narendra Modi on 9th September 2023 under India’s G20 Presidency. This alliance 
will be aimed at facilitating cooperation and intensifying the use of sustainable 
biofuels, including in the transportation sector. It will emphasis on strengthening 
markets, facilitating global biofuel trade, development of concrete policy lesson 
sharing and provision of technical support for national biofuels programme 
worldwide. It will help accelerate India’s existing biofuels programme such as PM-
JIVAN Yojana, SATAT, and GOBARdhan scheme, thereby contributing to 
increased farmer’s income, creating jobs and overall development of the Indian 
ecosystem. 
 Ethanol blending in petrol has increased from 1.53% in 2013-14 to 12 % in ESY 
2022-23. Ethanol procurement has been to the tune of 508.9 crore litres in ESY 
2022-23. Total crude oil substitution achieved during 2014-2023 is 142 lakh MT.   
 E20 was rolled out at 84 retail outlets in 11 States/UTs on 8th February 2023, 
ahead its roll-out target of April 2023. The number of retail outlets retailing E20 is 
now more than 11000.   
 Promotion of second generation ethanol to supplement supply of ethanol through 
Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana. 

27 
 
 
 
 Promotion and increase production of CBG through Sustainable Alternative 
Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) and other initiatives like blending in 
Natural Gas to substitute Natural Gas. 52 CBG plants with an installed capacity of 
approximately 300 MT per day have already been commissioned under SATAT. 
Sale of CBG has been initiated from more than 130 Retail Outlets. During 2022-23, 
OGMCs have procured 11,227 Ton CBG. Further, during April, 2023 to December, 
2023 OGMCs have procured 11421 Ton CBG. 
 In a major step towards enhancing use and adoption of CBG, the National Biofuels 
Coordination Committee (NBCC) has approved the introduction of phase wise 
mandatory blending of CBG in CNG (Transport) & PNG (Domestic) segments of 
CGD sector. The key objectives of the CBG Blending Obligation (CBO) are to 
stimulate demand for CBG in CGD sector, import substitution for Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG), saving in Forex, promoting circular economy and to assist in achieving 
the target of net zero emission etc. CBO will be voluntary till FY 2024-2025 and 
mandatory blending obligation would start from FY 2025-26.  
  
3. Adoption of Alternate Energy Sources like LNG, Hydrogen, EV 
 The authorized entities at their Retail Outlets are required to install facilities for 
marketing at least one new generation alternate fuels like Compressed Natural Gas 
(CNG), Biofuels, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), Electric Vehicle charging points, etc.   
 As on 01.01.2024, 11326 EV charging station & 119 battery swapping stations have 
been installed. Recently, tender for procurement/installation of 8,000 number EVs 
stations has been floated by OMCs.   
 The Green Hydrogen Mission announced by the Government to promote growth of 
green hydrogen. This inter-alia includes significant contribution of oil & gas 
companies through replacement of conventional hydrogen derived from Natural 
Gas with green hydrogen, use of Green Hydrogen for mobility etc. 
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  

28 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
  
Recommendation No. 3  
  
NEED TO STRENGTHEN DECISION MAKING PROCEDURES IN OIL PSUS 
GOVERNING CRUDE OIL PURCHASES   
  
            The Committee note that since April 2006 the Government allowed oil PSUs to 
formulate policies for import of crude oil consistent with CVC guidelines and get them 
approved by the respective boards. This is in keeping with the principle of Minimum 
Government Maximum Governance and to increase operational and commercial flexibility 
and enable oil companies to adopt most effective procurement practices. 
  
            All the oil PSUs have created Empowered Standing Committee (ESC) for decision 
making mechanism in their companies for making crude oil purchases. However, the 
Committee note that there is no uniformity in the composition of the Empowered Standing 
Committee (ESC) of different PSUs. The Committee also observe that inclusion of Director 
(Human Resources) is a member of ESC of IOCL and HPCL whereas it is not so in the 
case of BPCL. Similarly, the Committee observed that the Head (International Trade 
Department) is the Member Convenor in IOCL and the Executive Director (International 
Trade and Risk Management) in BPCL find place in the ESC of their companies whereas 
the Crude Oil Procurement Committee (COPC) in HPCL does not have the ED 
(international Trade) as its Member. The Committee also find that the ESC only consists of 
officials of the respective companies and no outside official is found in the composition. 
The Committee desire that a representation of an official from other PSUs who have 
international trade experience of imports and exports of similar natural raw material could 
find a place in order to ensure transparency and credibility in the decision making.  
  
            The Committee desire that the Ministry should devise criteria for composition of 
ESCs in oil PSU keeping in mind the functions of the ESC and only members having 
experience and expertise in dealing with matters of crude oil purchases be included in 
ESCs. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas may ensure uniformity in ESCs of oil PSUs and consider including representatives 
from other non-oil PSUs who have international trade experience. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The current Empowered Standing Committee (ESC), responsible for approving crude oil 
procurement on a spot basis, consists of relevant Board members as decided by the 
Board of Directors of the respective PSU. The functional Directors involved possess deep 
expertise in the intricate dynamics of various refineries, the economics of different crude 
types, product demand, and related factors. 
  
It is crucial to acknowledge that global practices in crude oil procurement differ significantly 
from those observed in the purchase of other commodities. Buyers in this realm must 

29 
 
 
 
adhere closely to international norms in crude oil trading, a complexity that may be 
challenging for officials from non-oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to grasp fully. 
  
Furthermore, it is emphasized that each company operates as a separate listed entity, 
necessitating a careful examination of the inclusion of external members from a corporate 
governance standpoint in the day-to-day functioning of the company. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
  
TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL  
  
            The Committee note that the transportation cost for the crude oil is to be borne by 
the country which imports it and includes freight, insurance, shipping charges, leverages, 
etc. The Committee note that the transportation cost increases the landing cost of the 
crude oil into the country thereby contributing to the input cost. The country imports crude 
oil from very many different geographical locations including Europe, UK, USA, Middle 
East, etc. The Committee desire that the oil PSUs should explore newer and shorter 
routes which are different from the existing routes for transporting the crude from different 
locations in this regard, the Ministry and PSUs should do some serious study and come, 
out with possible options and discuss with the concerned countries. The purpose of 
alternative routes should be for reduction in time, lesser geo-political tensions in the route, 
safer passage and economical in cost, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry and oil PSUs should explore newer transportation routes for crude oil import for a 
safer, secured, efficient and economic cost. 
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Oil PSUs strive to optimize transportation costs by consolidating cargoes from various 
regions into Very Large Crude Carriers (VLCCs), thereby achieving savings in freight 
costs. Over the years, they have diversified their sources of crude imports from regions 
such as the Arab Gulf, West Africa, US Gulf, Southeast Asia, the Mediterranean, and 
others. Crude oil from these ports is transported through established shipping routes, 
always adhering to the shortest navigable distances. 
  
The transit routes adopted are: 
Middle East 
Gulf 
Gulf of Hormuz and onwards via Arabian Sea 
West Africa  Gulf of Guinea- Cape of Good Hope and via Indian Ocean 
Mediterranean  Suez Canal and via Arabian Sea 
Far East  Straits and via Indian Ocean/ Bay of Bengal 
US Gulf  Suez Canal and via Arabian Sea 
Russia South China Sea and via Indian Ocean/ Bay of Bengal for Eastern ports; 
Mediterranean, Suez Canal and via Arabian Sea for Baltic port loadings 
  

30 
 
 
 
In each of these cases, the routes adopted for transportation of Crude Oil are the shortest 
and, therefore, most economical routes which offers the benefit of time and cost efficiency 
and safe passage. However, in case of CFR/CIF/DES/DAP deliveries, the scope of 
delivered supplies rests with supplier. 
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
 
  
Recommendation No. 11 
  
NEED TO IMPROVE PORT INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
            The Committee note that good port infrastructure is a necessity for facilitating 
import of crude oil in the country. The Committee further note that turnaround time of crude 
oil tankers at Indian ports and jetties is generally higher in comparison to turnaround time 
at ports of developed countries. The higher turnaround time increases the cost of shipping 
charges and consequently impact the landing cost of crude oil. The Committee also note 
that Oil Companies face draft restrictions at Mumbai Port and are unable to berth fully 
laden VLCC. During monsoon season, SPM is not available at Mangalore Port., At Vizag 
Port, VLCC cannot berth at OSTT Jetty. Currently, dead freighted Suez Max with a max of 
100 TMT can berth at OSTT Jetty. Accordingly, the Committee recommend to the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take up the issue of infrastructural constraints at Indian 
ports and jetties including the constraints at Mumbai, Mangalore and Vizag ports with the 
Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways and impress upon them to take effective steps 
for improvement of port infrastructure pertaining to docking of crude oil tankers. The 
Committee also desire that MOPNG/ Oil PSUs should explore new locations around the 
sea coast of the country without the infrastructural constraints and as well study ports of 
other developed countries for their experience. 
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A Working Group had been formed to identify the constraints at various ports in 2021. 
Having identified the constraints, major as well a minor, the Working Group had interacted 
with each individual port where the possible solutions and timelines were discussed. The 
Report of the Industry Working Group was published in August 2021 and the Key 
Recommendations extensively covered matters related to Night Berthing of vessels, 
Priority Berthing, Dredging at Ports, Port Safety, Taxation Issues, improvements in 
procedures, Facility Standardization, Bunkering facilities, Dedicated port infrastructure for 
Oil sector etc. 
  
To cater the crude oil demands of IOCL refineries, IOCL has installed two (02) nos. of 
Single point Mooring (SPM) system at Vadinar in West Coast of India & three (03) nos. of 
SPM system at Paradip in East Coast of India to facilitate smooth unloading of crude oil 
tankers. 
  
At IOCL owned SPM system, there is no draft restriction and Crude oil tankers up to the 
category of Very Large Crude Carrier (VLCC) are berthed without any limitation. At 
Visakhapatnam Port, the OSTT Jetty has the draft to accommodate fully laden Suezmax 
vessels. However to enable this, the jetty infrastructure has to be upgraded for which the 

31 
 
 
 
contracts have been awarded by Vizag Port Trust and work is currently in progress. The 
current estimate is that the OSTT jetty would be available for fully laden Suezmax vessels 
by June 2024. This will ensure that dead-freighting of Suezmax vessels is avoided.  
 
 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
Recommendation No. 12 
 
NEED TO EXPAND CRUDE OIL PIPELINES  
  
            The Committee note that only 48.6 per cent of crude oil is moved in the country 
through pipelines. The Committee further note that transportation of crude oil through 
pipelines is cheaper in comparison to transportation through other modes. The same is 
clearly manifested in the case of Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL). The Numaligarh 
Refinery incurs higher transportation charges@ Rs 2/MT/Km due to transportation of crude 
oil through railway wagons which is substantially higher than average pipeline 
transportation cost of about Rs. 0.46/MT/Km.  
  
            The Committee note that there are five crude oil transportation pipeline projects 
that are underway in the country totaling 3750 km costing Rs.24,247 crores. The targeted 
completion dates ranges from June 2023 to January 2025. The Committee accordingly 
recommend to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/ Oil PSUs to ensure that on-
going pipeline projects are completed on time and to strengthen the crude oil pipeline 
network of Oil PSUs of the country and raise the share of pipeline transportation of crude 
oil. 
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Mostly Crude oil is received at the ports, and from there, the coastal refineries receive 
crude oil through offshore pipelines whereas inland refineries receive crude oil through 
cross country crude oil pipelines. Crude Oil Exploration and Production companies are 
regularly laying ‘filed pipeline’ of smaller lengths in its operational areas for collecting crude 
oil from producing wells to its processing stations. Mumbai High crude oil produced by 
ONGC from Offshore Mumbai region is received at Coastal Refineries via pipelines. 
Majority of the crude oil requirements of inland refineries is met only through pipelines and 
the new pipeline projects for capacity augmentation of Gujarat Refinery, Panipat Refinery, 
Numaligarh refinery and Barauni Refinery are undertaken by CPSEs to meet enhanced 
crude oil requirement.  
 
The status of various crude oil pipeline projects:-  
 30” Haldia-Barauni Crude Oil Pipeline - Already commissioned in Sep 2023 for 
Barauni Refinery expansion project. 
 Augmentation of Salaya Mathura Crude Oil Pipeline for J-18 Project- Under 
implementation and likely to be completed by May 2024 which is in line with Gujarat 
Refinery expansion project. 
 New Mundra Panipat Crude Oil Pipeline - Under implementation and likely to be 
completed by Dec 2024 which is in line with Panipat Refinery expansion project. 

32 
 
 
 
 Paradip-Numaligarh Crude Oil Pipeline Project (PNCPL):- Numaligarh Refinery 
Limited as a part of ‘Numaligarh Refinery Expansion project (NREP)’, is laying 1635 
KM of pipeline from Paradip in Odisha to Numaligarh in Assam for transporting 
imported crude oil .The estimated completion is by September 2025.  
 Mundra-Barmer Pipeline :- HPCL is also in the process of completion of 487 km 
long crude oil pipeline from Mundra to its upcoming refinery in Barmer, Rajasthan 
for receipt of imported crude oil. The project is expected to be commissioned by 
March-2025. 
  
To accelerate the progress of ongoing projects, thorough review and monitoring are 
conducted regularly by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG). This includes 
periodic meetings led by the Honorable Minister (PNG) and other senior officers of the 
Ministry. Additionally, on-site monitoring is emphasized, particularly for projects requiring 
immediate intervention. The Ministry actively supports Central Public Sector Enterprises 
(CPSEs) in resolving issues with state and central government authorities to expedite 
project advancement.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
 
  
Recommendation No. 15 
 
GAS PRICING FORMULA  
  
            The Committee note that the Government has notified the new domestic gas 
pricing guidelines in October, 2014 to strike a balance between producers and consumers. 
These guidelines envisaged determination of price on predefined parameters in a 
transparent way without government intervention. The Committee note that the 
government has a vision of moving towards a gas based economy and increasing the 
share of natural gas in the energy mix. It has taken a slew of measures in this direction. 
Also, in order to incentivize the domestic production of crude oil and natural gas, several 
policy frameworks and reforms have been put in place since August 2018. 
  
            The Committee observe that the domestic production of natural gas should be 
encouraged and incentivized in every possible way so that the share of natural gas in the 
energy mix goes up as targeted by the government. The Committee hope that the increase 
in natural gas usage may reduce our dependence on crude oil for the country and it may 
as lead to better bargaining position for the nation in the international market. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the MOPNG should review and consult 
stakeholders about the pricing related issues for natural gas and take suitable steps to 
produce more natural gas in the country. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Government of India, vide its order dated April 7, 2023, has modified the New Domestic 
Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014. As per the notification, the Gas Prices shall be 
determined as 10% of the Indian Crude Basket Price as defined by Petroleum Planning 
and Analysis Cell (PPAC) from time to time. The APM prices would be declared on 

33 
 
 
 
monthly basis by PPAC. For the gas produced by ONGC & OIL from their nomination 
fields, the APM price shall be subject to a floor and a ceiling. Gas produced from new well 
or well intervention in the nomination fields of ONGC & OIL, where APM prices are subject 
to floor and ceiling, would be allowed a premium of 20% on these APM prices.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
    
 
  

34 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
SPOT AND TERM CONTRACTS 
  
The Committee note that crude oil imports are mainly done in two ways namely 
Term Contract and Spot Tenders. The oil PSUs normally resort to term contracts which 
are finalized on yearly basis. The primary reason for term contracts is to give energy 
security where the volumes are assured irrespective of the crisis situation. Most of the 
contracts are on financial year basis but some of them are also on calendar year basis.  
  
Spot purchases are resorted by oil PSUs to meet out the balance requirement 
which is not covered under term contract. This gives flexibility to crude oil purchases 
based on seasonal market demand. Also, spot purchases give the option of exploring 
various new grades for which term contracts are not available. The frequency of spot 
purchases depends on requirement of the company. It is generally expected that the spot 
tenders are likely to be available at cheaper price than term contracts. 
  
The purchases are done with National Oil Companies of (NOCs) at Official selling 
Price (OSP) of the country from which it is imported. Wherever the quantities are not 
available from such countries, then PSU’s go to national oil companies who do not have 
OSP. The Committee note that during the year 2020-21, IOC had 62 per cent term 
contract and 38 per cent spot contract. In 2021-22, the term contract was 63 percent and 
spot was 37 per cent. During the 2022-23, it is seen that the term contract was 68 per cent 
and the spot contract was 32 per cent for IOCL. In purchases of BPCL, it is seen that the 
term contracts was 56.7 per cent (2020-21), 60 per cent (2021-22) and 49 per cent (2022-
23). The remaining quantity was purchased through spot tenders. The Committee observe 
that the purchases between term and spot is approximately 2/3rd and 1/3rd for IOCL and 
60:40 for BPCL. The Committee observe that the overall spot purchases which was 
around 27.58 per cent in 2017-18 has increased to 35.13 per cent in 2022-23. The 
Committee acknowledge that oil PSUs have autonomy to decide their purchases of crude 
oil and are the best judges to decide on the type of purchase for crude oil from 
international markets.  
  
However, keeping in view the significant increase in percentage of spot tenders in 
the last few years, the Committee would like to caution the oil PSUs to plan their crude 
purchases, so that the average cost of purchases in spot tenders should be at a lower cost 
than term contracts. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should conduct a 
study/audit to see whether the purchases in spot tenders are actually resulted in cheaper 
cost. 
   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
   

35 
 
 
 
In formulating the crude oil import strategy, Public Sector Oil companies meticulously 
consider factors such as techno-economic elements, supply security, international political 
and trade relations, availability in the spot market, geographical diversity of supply 
sources, maintaining a balance between term and spot procurement, ensuring refinery 
flexibility, and anticipating increased crude oil demand due to upcoming processing 
capacity expansions. 
  
Furthermore, the dynamic nature of the spot market, influenced by market forces and 
geopolitical dynamics, underscores the need for a nuanced approach.  Assessing gains or 
losses isn't solely contingent on crude oil prices but also on factors like shifts in product 
demand, refinery shutdown schedules, refinery configurations, and product crack spread.  
  
The ratio between spot and term procurement for the year is determined by Oil 
Companies’ Annual Crude Oil Procurement Plan, aligned with the all-encompassing 
objective of value generation within the overall operations and is duly endorsed by the 
board in accordance with MoP&NG guidelines since April 2016. 
  
While term contracts ensure supply security, spot contracts offer operational flexibility, with 
pricing for both tethered to prevailing market rates. Spot procurement becomes necessary 
when desired grades or quantities aren't available through term contracts or to 
accommodate fluctuations in demand, unforeseen outages, or shifts in the crude oil mix. 
  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
Recommendation No. 8 
NEED TO PROMOTE INDIAN RUPEE  
  
            The Committee note that the bill for import of crude oil imports amount to about 25 
per cent of all merchandise imports of the country and impacts the trade deficit of the 
country. Accordingly, the Government of India envisaged to promote settlement of crude 
oil imports in Indian rupee to save precious foreign exchange of the country.  
  
            The Committee further note that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) introduced additional 
arrangement for invoicing, payment, and settlement of exports/imports in INR. Authorised 
Dealer (AD) banks in India have been permitted to open Rupee Vostro Accounts of 
correspondent bank/s of the partner trading country with an approval from the RBI with 
details of the arrangement. Indian importers undertaking imports through this mechanism 
shall make payment in INR which shall be credited into the Special Vostro account of the 
correspondent bank of the partner country, against the invoices for the supply of goods or 
services from the overseas seller /supplier. Payments for crude oil can be made in INR, 
subject to the suppliers' complying with regulatory guidelines in this regard. Currently, Oil 
PSUs do not have an agreement with any crude oil supplier to make purchases in Indian 
currency for supply of crude oil.  
  
            The Committee, however, note that crude oil suppliers have expressed their 
concern on the repatriation of funds in the preferred currency and high transactional costs 
associated with conversion of funds along with exchange fluctuation risks. The Committee 
express concern over lack of momentum in settlement of crude oil import bills in Indian 
rupee and recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take up the issue with 

36 
 
 
 
the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India for removing bottlenecks in settlement 
of crude oil import bills in Indian rupee and promote the same. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) vide Circular dated 11.07.2022 allowed invoicing and 
payments for international trade in Indian Rupee.  Ministry of Commerce in August 2022 
took up the matter with OMCs to sensitize Crude Oil suppliers mainly Russian NOCs to 
accept Indian Rupee for import crude oil payment. VCs were arranged with Russian NOCs 
for explaining the whole scheme through presentation shared by RBI for settlement of 
trade in Indian Rupee however they have expressed their concern on limitation to 
repatriate the funds in their home currency from Special Rupee Vostro Account. Ministry of 
Finance (DFS) in Feb/ Mar'23 also asked to pursue with Oil Suppliers especially Russian 
NOCs to accept dues in Indian Rupee however feedback of supplier's reluctance to settle 
import bill in Indian Rupee was shared again. 
  
Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the Central Bank of UAE (CBUAE) 
signed MoU on 15th July 2023 in Abu Dhabi to Promote the Use of Local Currencies viz. 
the Indian rupee (INR) and the UAE Dirham (AED) for cross-border transactions. In 
assistance with RBI, Indian Oil successfully made 1st payment in Rupee for imported crude 
oil supplied by ADNOC on 14th August'23. The invoice for 1 mn bbls of crude was paid in 
the ratio of 80:10:10 in USD, INR, AED to the Crude Oil supplier.  
  
Oil companies consistently engage with suppliers to negotiate crude oil settlements in 
Indian Rupees (INR). However, due to the imbalance in trade flows, where imports 
significantly outweigh exports, suppliers are hesitant to agree to settle crude oil bills in 
INR. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
STRATEGIC STORAGE 
  
            The Committee note that the country has created strategic storage caverns for 
storage of crude oil towards enhancing and ensuring energy security of the country. At 
present 5.33 MMT of capacity at three different locations, namely, Vishakhapatnam (1.33 
MMT), Mangalore (1.5 MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT). The Committee note that the strategic 
storage will be a dynamic concept as the total demand of petroleum products like diesel, 
petrol and ATF, etc. keeps on changing more on the higher side as the economy grows. 
Therefore, the strategic storage capacity needs to be worked out with a future target in 
mind. 
  
            The Committee note that two additional strategic storage caverns one at Orissa 
and other at Rajasthan have been approved and work to be undertaken at these two 
storages. The total capacity of 5.33 MMT is around: 2.6 per cent of annual domestic 
demand of 204.7 MMT F.Y. 2021- 22. The Committee expect the Ministry to increase, the 
strategic storage capacity in the country at a quicker pace and with the faster execution. 

37 
 
 
 
The Committee are of the view that the existing refinery projects and the recently 
commissioned refineries may be asked to set up strategic storage capacity with a smaller 
capacity like 2 to 3 days at 5 to 6 locations which can bring up 15 to 20 days additional 
capacity in a definite time frame. 
  
            While standalone strategic storage caverns at different locations also helps, 
capacities near the existing refinery may encourage the oil PSUs to establish and maintain 
them which also gives them secured supplies. The Ministry may provide funds for creation 
of storage caverns to oil PSUs through ISPRL, while the oil PSUs can store and maintain 
the caverns for their usage. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to look at 
various options to increase the strategic storage capacity in the country with a future 
demand in 2040 and work progressively to achieve them. 
  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Under Phase I of Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) program, ISPRL built SPR facilities 
with a total capacity of 5.33 MMT at three locations viz. Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh 
(1.33 MMT), Mangalore, Karnataka (1.5 MMT) and Padur, Karnataka (2.5 MMT).  
  
All the three facilities i.e. Visakhapatnam, Mangalore & Padur were commissioned in 
June’2015, October’2016 and December’2018 respectively. All these three facilities were 
dedicated to the Nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 10th February’2019. 
  
Further, Cabinet approved development of Commercial cum Strategic reserves under 
Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT) on PPP mode along with dedicated 
SPM’s and associated pipelines during cabinet meeting held on 08th  July 2021.  
  
The land acquisition for Phase II at Padur is on advance stage.  Further, ISPRL is in the 
process of floating RFP for Padur so as to synchronize it with availability of encumbrance 
free land. 
  
Exploring possibility at other locations 
ISPRL has been evaluating, from time to time, the possibility of augmentation of storage 
capacities based on technical and commercial feasibility.   
  
HPCL is using ISPRL Cavern-B at Visakhapatnam for storage of crude oil. HPCL has also 
hired 300 TMT space in Cavern-A of ISPRL at Visakhapatnam. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No. P-12038(18)11/2022-Supply (E-44487) dated 18.03.2024 
  
  

38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
 
 
- Nil - 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 07  August, 2025 
 16 Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
                           Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                           Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
  
  

39 
 
 
 
Confidential 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee 
………. 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 07th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room Samanvay-2, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Benny Behanan 
3 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
4 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
5 
6 
Smt. Pratima Mondal  
Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
7 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
8 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
9 Dr. Amar Singh 
10 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
11 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
12 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
13 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14 
15 
16 
Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak     
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju  
 

40 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt 03 Action Taken Reports.  Thereafter, the Committee considered 
and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports with slight modifications: 
(i)XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
(ii) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
(iii) Draft Report on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the 23rd Report (17th LS) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2023-24) on the subject ‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’ 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Reports at 2 (i) xxxxxxxx 2 (ii) 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 (iii) was adopted with slight modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay the 
Reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report.  
  

41 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2023-24) ON THE SUBJECT ‘REVIEW OF POLICY ON IMPORT OF CRUDE OIL’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 14)  
07 
 Percentage of Total 47.00% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 3, 10, 11, 12 and 15) 
 
05 
 Percentage of Total 33.00% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 8, and 13) 
 
03 
 Percentage of Total  20.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)   
00 
 Percentage of Total  00.00% 
   
 