 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
EXAMINATION OF R&D ACTIVITIES OF OIL PSUS  
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


CP&NG NO.     
NINTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
EXAMINATION OF R&D ACTIVITIES OF OIL PSUS  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  
 
 


 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………... (iii) 
 
 INTRODUCTION ......…………………………………………… (iv) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 PART - I  
I EXPENDITURE IN R&D  1 
II MANPOWER IN R&D SECTOR  4 
III INFRASTRUCTURE IN R&D CENTRES  AND BENCHMARKING  4  
IV RESEARCH ARTICLES  10 
V MONITORING OF R&D PROJECTS  10 
VI R&D ACTIVITIES ON EOR/IOR  12 
VII R&D ON SHALE OIL AND GAS HYDRATES 13 
VIII R&D ON IMPROVING REFINING EFFICIENCY  15 
IX UMBRELLA RESEARCH ORGANISATION  15 
X USE OF INDUSTRY 4.0 IN R&D  17 
XI PROTECTION OF R&D DATA AND INFRASTRUCTURE  18 
XII COLLABORATION WITH ACADEMIA IN R&D  19 
XIII INVOLVEMENT OF START-UPS IN R&D  19 
XIV INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION IN R&D  22 
XV R&D FOR NET ZERO TARGETS  25 
XVI PATENTS AND MONETISATION OF R&D PRODUCTS  26 
XVII DEVELOPMENT OF BIO-FUELS AND FLEX-FUELS  29 
  
PART – II 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee  
 
 
31 
ANNEXURE  
ANNEXURE- I 
 
Details of 16 R&D Centres:  
APPENDIX  
APPENDIX I  Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee (2022-23) 
held on 28.02.2023.  
 
APPENDIX II Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee (2022-23) 
held on 19.05.2023.  
 
APPENDIX III Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2024-25) held 
on 09.12.2024. 
 
APPENDIX IV Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee (2024-25) 
held on 04.02.2025.  
 
APPENDIX V Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee (2024-25) 
held on 24.02.2025.  
 
APPENDIX VI Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee (2025-
26) held on 10.08.2026.  
 
 
 

  COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM 
 & NATURAL GAS (2022-23) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 

  COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM 
 & NATURAL GAS (2023-24) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM  
& NATURAL GAS (2024-25) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24 Shri Chandrakant Handore 
25 Shri Manoj Kumar Jha 
26 Shri Mithlesh Kumar   
27 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
28 Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare – Chairperson 
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Chandrakant Damodar Handore  
24 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha  
25 Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
26 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha  
27 Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
28 Shri Mayankkumar Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
1 
2 
Shri Harish Chandra Bist  
Shri Sujay Kumar 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
3 
 
 
Smt. Raji Manish  
 
Committee Officer 
 
 
  
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee, to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Ninth Report on the subject ‘Examination of R&D Activities of Oil PSUs’. 
 
2. The Committee took briefings by the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas/Oil PSUs in connection with examination of the subject at their sittings 
held on 28.02.2023 and 19.05.2023 and took oral evidence on 09.12.2024, 04.02.2025 
and 24.02.2025.    
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas on 10.08.2026.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Oil PSUs for placing their views before them and 
furnishing the information desired in connection with examination of the subject.     
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
10 August, 2026 
19 Sravana,1948 (Saka)     
                      Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                        Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
The country’s oil sector operates in a dynamic global environment marked by 
volatile energy markets, evolving regulations and rapid advances in technology. 
Research and Development (R&D) efforts by Oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
are key to promoting innovation, improving efficiency and ensuring the nation’s energy 
security.  
Over the years, Oil PSUs have set up modern R&D centres with advanced 
facilities and skilled professionals. The R&D ecosystem of Oil PSUs comprises a 
network of 16 R&D Centres and 5 regional laboratories across the country. Their 
research covers various areas such as refining techniques, petrochemicals, 
alternative fuels, renewable energy solutions, clean technologies and digital solutions, 
aiming to optimize operations and diversify the energy portfolio. The Centre for High 
Technology (CHT) serves as the dedicated technical arm of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas. The ‘Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) on Hydrocarbons’ under the 
Ministry of The Petroleum and Natural Gas evaluates and recommends R&D 
proposals for funding and implementation.  
Today, the energy sector in general and oil sector in particular, are facing multi-
faceted challenges such as limited crude oil availability, unstable global crude prices, 
strict quality and environmental rules and rapid changes in technology. In the present 
geopolitical environment, characterized by conflicts, sanctions, supply chain 
disruptions, trade uncertainties and heightened volatility in global energy markets, the 
importance of R&D has become even more pronounced. In this scenario, focussed 
and strategic R&D work by Oil PSUs are vital for development of indigenous 
technologies, cost-effective solutions and environment friendly processes that support 
both business growth and national energy objectives.  
I.  EXPENDITURE IN R&D  
 
1.1 The R&D expenditure by PSUs is primarily met through Internal Resources 
and generally there is no budgetary support from the Government for R&D activities 
is provided.  For selected projects such as for setting up Bioenergy demonstration 
plants, National Green Hydrogen Mission (NGHM), etc. support is provided by 
government agencies such as Centre for High Technology (CHT), PM JIVAN, Oil 
Industry Development Board (OIDB), Department of Science and Technology (DST), 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), MNRE, etc., For FY 2025-26, MRPL has 
received a grant-in-aid of Rs 6.7 Crore from OIDB for PET plastic waste 
depolymerisation pilot cum demo plant.  
 
 
1.2 The amount spent by Oil PSUs/CPSEs on R&D from F.Y 2021-22 to 2025-2026 
are as follows:                                                        
  

2 
 
 (Figures in Crore) 
Sl.No. CPSE FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 
1. ONGC 531.59 569.85 686.68 667.31 744.48 
2. IOCL 576.55  698.21 946.14 1067.03 717.13 
3. HPCL 363.67 319.22 352.50 463.25 579.41 
4. BPCL 219.82 168.60 189.97 220.99 295.84 
5. GAIL 243.70 180.71 250.20 375.53 262.67 
6. OIL 100.96 179.03 149.22 147.3 173.22 
7. EIL 28.55 30.10 29.12 26.79 23.25 
8. BLC 7.91 7.84 8.36 9.01 10.24 
9. MRPL 1.01 0.57 5.57 40.18 46.73 
10. NRL 2.73 2.09 11.97 27.69 38.14 
11. CPCL 7.15 9.72 10.72 12.73 17.84 
TOTAL 2083.64 2165.94 2640.45 3057.81 2908.95 
 
1.3 With regard to the query whether the expenditure of the Oil PSUs on R&D is adequate 
in view of the ambitious energy transition goals, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:  
 
      “The expenditure on R& D activities by the Oil and Gas PSUs is made 
available as per demand of the activities undertaken by them.   As such, no 
financial constraint is faced by Oil PSUs in meeting requirement of funds for R&D 
activities. The R&D expenditure by PSUs is effectively aligned with the needs 
and strategic goals of the organizations. Several R&D initiatives are taken to align 
with energy transition goals and to support clean energy solutions, enhance fuel 
efficiency, and develop sustainable alternatives in areas of biofuels, Green 
Hydrogen, carbon capture, wastes utilisation, petrochemicals and niche products 
etc. 
       While Major PSUs have established their own R&D centres, R&D projects 
are also taken up in collaborative mode with various Engineering Institutes, CSIR Laboratories. Centre of Excellence have also been established in collaboration with various research and academic institutes like IITB, IIT Guwahati, CSIR-NEIST, etc. IOCL is setting up a New R&D Campus with a 
Capex of Rs. 3200 crore. OIL is focusing on energy transitional goal through 
renewable and alternate energy efforts like Solar, Wind, Green Hydrogen, 
Geothermal sources, CBG etc. for which an estimated Rs 20,000 crore has been 
earmarked till 2030”. 

3 
 
1.4  When the Committee observed that the expenditure in R&D sector by Oil PSUs 
is less vis-à-vis their profits, the Ministry furnished the following written reply in 
response:  
     “While R&D expenditure may appear modest relative to profits, it is effectively 
aligned with the organization’s needs and strategic goals and to meet India’s 
evolving energy needs. This allocation is aligned with the Government’s directive 
to foster innovation and strengthen the technological base of the oil and gas 
sector.” “R&D expenditures is continuously increasing on a year-on-year basis 
as these companies ventures into new sunrise areas and aligns with India’s 
sustainability goals, including achieving net-zero emissions by 2046.” 
 
1.5 When the Committee desired to know about the combined as well as individual 
percentages of R&D expenditure by Oil PSUs during the year 2025-26, the Ministry 
furnished the following reply:  
“The expenditure on R&D activities by some of the major Oil and Gas PSUs 
in comparison to their profit for FY 2025-26 is as follows:  
 
Oil PSUs R&D Expenditure (in 
Cr.) 
PAT 
(in Cr.) 
R&D Expenditure as % 
of PAT 
ONGC 744.48 32894 2.26% 
OIL 173.22 4455.34 3.89% 
IOCL 717.13 43677.32 1.64% 
BPCL 295.84 23303 1.27% 
HPCL 579.41 17175.23 3% 
EIL 23.25 691.59 3.36% 
GAIL 262.67 6968 3.77% 
 2796 1,29,164.5 2.16% 
 
BLC, MRPL, NRL and CPCL have also spent 4.17%, 2.42%, 1.25% and 0.58 
% of their Profit After Tax (PAT) on R&D in 2025-26, respectively.  
1.6  With regard to the Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) 
in the petroleum sector during the year 2020–21 and the proportion it constituted of 
India’s total GERD amounting to Rs. 1,27,380.96 crore in 2020-21, the Ministry 
submitted the following written reply:   
“The Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) in the 
petroleum sector during the year 2020-21 are: 
India’s total GERD 1,27,380.96 Crore 
Oil and Gas CPSEs GERD 1634.45 Crore 
Ratio (%) 1.3 % 
 

4 
 
1.7 Regarding setting up a norm for all oil PSUs mandating to spend a minimum 
percentage of their turnover on R&D activities, the Ministry furnished the following 
reply:   
“There is no separate guideline from Government mandating spending a 
minimum percentage of their PBT on R&D activities. During the fiscal year 2023-
24, one of the key MoU parameters is to increase in Expenditure on 
R&D/Innovation Initiatives by 10% over the previous Financial Year with a 5% 
weightage. However, the ministry would explore the setting up of a norm for 
earmarked/ mandated minimum expenditure on R&D activities.” 
 
1.8 Explaining further on this MoU parameter to increase in Expenditure on 
R&D/Innovation Initiatives by 10% over the previous Financial Year with a 5% 
weightage, the Ministry submitted the following details:   
“During the fiscal year 2023-24, increase in Expenditure on 
R&D/Innovations initiatives by 10% over previous Financial Year was one of the 
MoU parameters for IOCL.” 
1.9 As regards the Committee’s query during the sitting held on 04.02.2025 on 
the R&D expenditure and R&D expenditure to GDP ratio in comparison to other 
countries, the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“The Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) in India 
has exhibited a consistent upward trajectory, from Rs. 60,196.75 crore in 2010-
11 to Rs. 1,27,380.96 crore in 2020-21. This substantial increase reflects a 
more than twofold growth over the specified timeframe, underscoring the 
nation’s commitment towards research and innovations. 
According to the UNESCO Science Report 2021, India’s global standing 
in GERD is noteworthy, constituting 3.1% of the World’s GERD. This recognition 
on the global stage signifies India’s growing significance in contributing to the 
collective pool of scientific and innovative endeavors. The escalating GERD 
figures and international acknowledgment underscore India’s dedication in 
advancing research across diverse domains, positioning itself as a key player 
in the global scientific landscape, India's R&D spending has historically hovered 
around 0.7% of GDP.” 
II. MANPOWER IN R&D SECTOR 
1.10 With regard to the measures taken by the Oil PSUs to secure the services of 
quality manpower for R&D, the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“Presently, induction at Oil PSU R&D Centres is done with candidates 
possessing desired qualifications as per specific requirements including post 
graduate and PhDs. The recruitment is made on Open (Paper Advertisements) 
and rigorous selection process. In addition to open recruitment, some recruits 
are carried out through campus placements from reputed institutes. Hiring of few 
experienced professionals for specific requirements in R&D on fixed term 
engagement basis is also done through advertisements to attract quality 
manpower. Salary, structured career growth, and performance incentives are 
offered in line with DPE guidelines to attract top talent.  

5 
 
The selected candidates undergo rigorous induction & training programs 
related to specific job role. Besides, as per need, manpower is also pooled from 
sister divisions. Furthermore, opportunity for continuous learning and skill 
development is provided by participating in regular training sessions, workshops, 
seminars, and conferences focused on emerging technologies such as green 
hydrogen, biofuels, and refining technologies etc. 
The executives posted in R&D are given extensive exposure of field 
activities in initial phase of their career to first understand the practical aspect of 
the E&P operations. Subsequently, they are given enriched exposure of R&D 
activities in the respective R&D institutes in the industry on regular basis. 
Executives who are found to have knack and acumen for delivering quality 
performance are retained for R&D jobs for quite a longer stint.” 
1.11 On being asked about the system in place to assess the quality of R&D manpower 
available in the market and recruitment of qualified R&D scientists from the 
market/private sector in the last three years, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:   
 “The recruitment of manpower for R&D Centre’s is done on a requirement basis 
and met in many ways, by fresh recruitment and from deputation of experience 
and qualified manpower from other sister divisions. The recruitment is done 
against a pre-defined eligibility criteria detailing the basic qualification, related 
experience and credentials required for the advertised post supported by 
interviews of candidates to assess the quality of manpower through scientific 
contributions in terms of technologies / catalysts / products developed, and by 
the patents filed and publications in high impact peer-reviewed journals. 
 The recruitment of R&D manpower in IOCL is currently synchronized to meet 
the demand for its upcoming new R&D campus in Faridabad.  
HPCL R&D has recruited 34 scientists in the last three years.  
BPCL in the last 3 years, recruited 7 candidates for R&D setup who joined in 
2024. OIL has recruited 04 persons for R&D discipline”. 
 
1.12 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for unproportionate 
manpower allocation in R&D sector vis-à-vis the total manpower, the Ministry furnished 
the following written reply:   
 “The allocation of manpower in the R&D sector is defined by the specialized 
nature of R&D activities, requiring focused teams of experts with advanced 
technical skills and domain knowledge.  
 Being commercial R&D Centres, the Organization structure, and vacancies in 
the R&D sector are periodically reviewed, and manpower recruited and adjusted 
based on evolving research priorities and business needs, ensuring that 
resources are optimally allocated to address critical challenges and opportunities 
and MoUs with various agencies.  Accordingly, the total manpower on R&D is 
being progressively strengthened.” 
 
1.13  Regarding the extant mechanism available for hiring of manpower on 
contractual basis or specialization basis to work on specific projects, the Ministry 
submitted the following written reply:   
 “Some of the manpower like Research associates & Project Assistants are 
employed on a contractual basis through a contractor providing qualified 

6 
 
manpower against specific project requirements on a fixed-term contract by 
IOCL, BPCL and EIL. Besides permanent staff, a few research fellows doing their 
Ph.Ds in specific areas are also engaged for specific periods as per requirement. 
For this purpose, Oil PSUs contact various premier academic and research 
institutes like CSIR, IITs, etc.  
 
However, HPCL R&D Centre hires Research Associates directly on basis of 
their specialisation. They are hired for fixed duration for carrying out specific 
research projects through open advertisement in newspaper/website. Selection 
is through computer-based tests (wherever applicable), Evaluation of CVs by 
SMEs, Personal Interview and Pre-Employment Medical Examination.” 
 
1.14 Upon a query about the terms and conditions of employment of the 
Scientists/Engineers and Technicians working in R&D Centres of Oil PSUs and 
whether such terms and conditions are sufficient to attract best talent, the Ministry 
submitted the following written reply:   
“The pay structure of Management Staff of Oil PSUs is in line with DPE norms 
on the matter. All Management staff are governed by the same. The pay and 
allowances applicable to non-Management staff of the Corporations are 
governed by the Long-Term Settlements (LTS) signed between Management and 
Unions. As on today, the present DPE terms and conditions, as well as LTS 
provisions (as applicable) are adequate to attract the best talent.” 
 
1.15 Detailing on manpower in R&D, the Ministry stated as follows during the oral 
evidence: [Ref.: Verbatim Proceeding, Sitting dated 24.02.2025, Page No. 5] 
“आरएंडडी मैन पावर आप देख सकते हɇ, इंͫडयन ऑयल का 457 है, बीपीसीएल 60 है, 
एचपीसीएल 140, ईएल 53 है, गेल 9 है, ओएनजीसी का 842 और रॉयल इंͫडया का 58 है। 
इसमɅ आप देख सकते हɇ ͩक कांĚेÈच ु अ ल मैन पावर क ु छ Ïयादा नहȣं हɇ। ǐरĐू ट ऑफ Ĥोसेस जो 
है, इɪस बेͧसकलȣ ओपन, कɇ पस ͧसलेÈशन से भी होता है और हम लोग ͪव£ापन करक े भी 
उÛहɅ लेते हɇ which has two/three levels. We have to conduct exams. There are 
two levels of interviews.  
We maintain reservation as per the government mandate and we also 
have few experienced professionals for specific requirement in R&D. Retention 
business, as you can see that we have well-defined career progression, long 
term and stable tenure posting, then mentorship development programs and 
recognition for our outstanding achievements and comprehensive induction 
and training programs are there by each PSU and sponsorship for advanced 
training programs.”  
 
1.16 Regarding attrition, the Ministry stated as follows during the oral evidence: 
[Ref.: Verbatim Proceeding, Sitting dated 24.02.2025, Page No. 29] 
“Fortunately, in our case, the total number of people employed in R&D activities 
across our major PSUs is nearly 2,000. Over the last five years, our attrition 
has been just about 100 to 110, which is a very low level. We also continue to 
hire new personnel, and attrition includes those retiring or seeking better 

7 
 
opportunities, so it is not a concerning issue. Now, is the number 2,000 
sufficient? More than the number or the budget, we should be dissatisfied if we 
are not achieving adequate outcomes. We are outcome-focused; we aim to 
produce something useful. While it is easy to generate papers and write reports, 
we prioritize outcomes and providing quality, as well as creating the right 
environment for our personnel to conduct cutting-edge work. This is why 
investment in infrastructure and R&D facilities is crucial. Acquiring numbers is 
the easy part; delivering results and providing a supportive environment is 
essential.  
At this point, we have no plans to extend the limit of CHT to upstream or 
downstream, as separate entities already exist for upstream, such as ONGC 
and OIL, which have full-fledged centres. There is currently no proposal to 
expand the limit of CHT.”  
 1.17 Expounding further on the legal status and terms and conditions of the service 
of research associates working in R&D Departments of Oil PSUs, the Ministry 
furnished the following written reply:   
“Research associates are employed on a contractual basis through a 
contractor providing qualified manpower against specific project requirements on 
a fixed-term contract of usually two years extendable for one additional year 
depending upon the requirement of specific project. However, HPCL R&D Centre 
hires research associates directly.  
The appointment of Research Associates is based on their educational 
qualification, research experience, and specific skills relevant to the project. 
Research associates are required to adhere with code of conduct, maintaining 
professionalism, integrity, and confidentiality regarding research data, results, 
and proprietary information of the organization. Adherence to statutory 
requirements applicable to the employment contract is ensured to protect the 
rights of the research associate.” 
 
1.18 The Committee also understand that Oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
participate in or host R&D talent conclaves to foster innovation, address the energy 
transition, and collaborate on challenges and opportunities in the oil and gas sector. 
These events are often organized by industry bodies like the Federation of Indian 
Petroleum Industry. 
 
III.  INFRASTRUCTURE IN R&D CENTRES AND BENCHMARKING 
1.19 When the Committee desired to know about the R&D Centres of Oil PSUs, the 
Ministry, furnished the following reply:   
“Each Oil PSU has its own R&D Center. The location of R&D Centers of 
Oil PSUs are as under. 
PSU LOCATION OF R&D CENTRES 
IOCL 
i. Existing R&D Centre is at Sector 13, Faridabad, Haryana.  
ii. New upcoming campus at IMT, Sector-67 in Faridabad, Haryana 
(consisting of new research centers for Alternative & Renewable 

8 
 
Energy, Corrosion Research, Nanotechnology and Synthetic Biology. 
Slated for stagewise commissioning starting from Q4 2023-24.) 
BPCL 
i. Corporate R&D Centre at Plot No. 2A, Udyog Kendra, Surajpur, Greater 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201306 (India) 
ii. Sewree R&D Centre at 13, Sewree Ford Rd, BPCL Complex, Sewree, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra 400015 (India)  
HPCL Hindustan Petroleum Green Research and Development Centre, 
(HPGRDC) at Tarabanahalli, Devanagundi, Bengaluru, Karnataka. 
EIL EIL R&D Centre 
Sector16, Gurgaon, Haryana. 
A complete List of the 16 R&D Centres and 05 Regional Labs established by 
Oil PSUs across the country are given at Annexure-I. 
1.20 With regard to the availability of facilities for research in pure sciences in the 
research centres of Oil PSUs, the Ministry furnished the following reply:   
 
“Being business R&Ds, the Oil PSU R&D Centres are primarily focused on the 
technology Push or Marketing Pull type of projects aligned to the short, medium, 
long term business objectives and overall government priorities around self-
reliance& import substitution.  The major research areas under R&D Centre 
interalia include Fuel & Additives, Alternative Energy – Bioenergy, Solar Energy, 
Hydrogen, Energy Storage etc., Refining Technology & Catalyst Research, 
Nanotechnology, Pipeline & Corrosion Research, Petrochemical & Polymers, 
Tribology and Applied Metallurgy, API technology, CCUS, Basin Analysis, 
petroleum System Modeling, Fundamental Geoscience Research, Exploration in 
Frontier & Foreign Basins, Non-seismic Prospecting, Well Logging and Reservoir 
Studies, Biostratigraphy, Geochronology, Remote sensing and Geochemical 
Analysis, Unconventional Hydrocarbon Research, new Energy and Sustainability 
Initiatives (CCUS, Geothermal Energy & Geological Hydrogen), etc.  As these 
Centre’s are working on technology and hardware development, analytical 
facilities for development of such technology and components based on pure 
sciences are broadly available.” 
1.21  As regards benchmark for gradation of research centres of Oil PSUs, the 
Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“At present, there is no mandated benchmark for grading Oil PSU research 
centers in India. However, several globally established factors are used by PSU 
research centres to map their performance. This includes the number of 
publications in journals, patents filed, demonstration of products and technologies 
etc.” 
1.22 With regard to the representation of R&D Department of Oil PSUs in their Board 
of Directors, the Ministry informed that “only IOCL’s R&D Department has 
representation on its Board of Directors.   
 
1.23 With regard to on-going construction of R&D Centres, their focus areas, cost 
outlay and timeline for completion, the Ministry submitted the following written 
information:   

9 
 
“IOC R&D is setting up 2nd R&D Campus in Faridabad close to the existing 
campus with an approved outlay of 3199 Cr. The project is almost 60% complete 
and commissioning of facilities will start in stages from FY 2025-26. The new 
Centre will also house research facilities for areas like renewable energy, 
nanotechnology, and material & corrosion science. The Centre will house many 
facilities like a gas pig test loop, solar based and biomass gasification to green 
hydrogen pilot plants. The center will also be equipped with 9 MW solar generation 
capacity taking care of internal requirements. 
HPCL R&D Centre is setting up Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Bitumen and 
Pavement Technology at a cost of about Rs. 70 crores. Expected time of 
completion is March 2026. 
BPCL R&D is currently augmenting infrastructure by constructing Biotech, 
Polymer and Process Scale up Labs at an estimated cost outlay of Rs. 15 Crore 
with timeline for completion July 2025. 
GAIL has envisioned a state-of-the-art research facility in NCR in an area 
of ~30 acres at an investment of Rs. 550–600 crores excluding cost of land and is 
slated for completion by the end of 2029 in a phased manner to ensure systematic 
development. The center will focus on developing cutting-edge technologies, 
processes, products, and solutions that enhance the efficiency, sustainability, and 
environmental responsibility in operations.  
A state-of-the-art R&D Centre is under construction by OIL at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 172 crore with expected completion date is April 2026, for Centralized 
Core Repository and advanced geological laboratory facilities in Guwahati, 
Assam, India, the first of its kind in South-East Asia. It is projected that this will 
entail the preservation of conventional cores, drill cutting samples, rack samples, 
laboratory analysis, digital imaging of core, core viewing, digital archival system, 
etc.” 
 
IV. RESEARCH ARTICLES 
1.24 When the Committee desired to know whether R&D Centres of Oil PSUs 
publish research articles in major science journals, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:   
“R&D Centres of Oil PSUs regularly submits research articles in major 
national and international science journals. Number of research articles 
published are as follows: 
Period  IOCL BPCL HPCL EIL TOTAL 
2022-25 127 71 144 21 363 
Indian Oil R&D Scientists are also featuring in top 2% database published 
by Stanford University, USA and Elsevier, BV for the last 2 years.” 
 

10 
 
1.25 When the Committee sought details about studies conducted by Oil PSUs for 
organizing their research activities, either through outside agency or by themselves, 
the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“CHT under the MoPNG is working with R&D Centres of oil PSUs through 
their Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) and other project-based 
engagements. Besides, Oil PSUs undertake internal assessment of their 
research portfolios to ensure that they are aligned to the short, medium and long 
terms business objectives. There is established system of regularly identifying 
various business risks at organizational levels and in-turn, the elements 
associated with R&D are assigned to the R&D Centres to further work upon.” 
 
V MONITORING  OF R&D PROJECTS  
1.26 When the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas closely monitors and review the activities and performance of R&D 
Departments of Oil PSUs and the monitoring mechanism in place for the same, the 
Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“Yes, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas closely monitors and 
reviews the activities and performance of R&D departments in Oil PSUs. In this 
line, annual MOUs are signed by Oil PSUs with MoPNG. CHT under aegis of 
MoPNG act as the nodal agency for coordination among R&D Departments of 
Oil PSUs for selection of specific research areas aligned to government priorities 
and to fund/ monitor/review the progress of working groups. CHT not only 
sponsors and facilitates R&D projects undertaken by Oil PSUs but it also 
leverages its strong network of prominent scientific institutions and industry 
professionals to provide valuable technical expertise to assess the progress of 
ongoing projects. For better synergy of research efforts among oil PSUs & to 
avoid overlapping in areas of national importance, a committee comprising of 
R&D heads of IOCL, HPCL, BPCL & EIL was formed by MoPNG with CHT as 
coordinator. The committee deliberated and suggested critical areas of national 
importance around which CHT is now constituting collaborative projects with 
O&G PSUs, academic institutions etc under various funding schemes and 
monitoring periodically.” 
1.27 With respect to the oversight mechanism in Oil PSUs for monitoring the 
activities of R&D Departments, the Ministry furnished the following written reply:   
“The details of the oversight mechanism in Oil PSUs for monitoring the 
activities of its R&D Centres are as follows: 
Oil PSUs have their internal arrangements on lines of Research Advisory 
Committees to help identify and monitor activities. 
 ✓ R&D Centres are required to submit the details of major projects, financial 
allocations of R&D projects, their progress, etc.  

11 
 
✓ R&D performance is normally evaluated based on established Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs), which may include patents filed, research 
publications, technology transfer and cost-effectiveness.  
✓ Regular internal audits are also conducted to ensure compliance with policies 
and regulations as well as to assess the efficiency of R&D operations.” 
 
1.28 As regards the mechanism for coordination among R&D Departments of Oil 
PSUs regarding selection of areas for research by them to avoid overlapping in 
research activities, the Ministry furnished the following reply:   
     “There are several mechanisms to ensure coordination among Oil PSUs to 
meet both the common objective aligned to government priorities as well as the 
individual specific business priorities of respective Oil PSUs. The details are as 
under:  
Centre for High Technology (CHT) is set up under aegis of MoPNG to 
act as the dedicated technology cell of the Ministry for Hydrocarbon Sector. It 
is also the nodal agency for coordination among R&D Departments of Oil PSUs 
for selection of specific research areas aligned to government priorities while 
making use industry academia-private partnership and also to 
fund/monitor/review the progress through Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) 
and regular meetings of working groups.  
Different regulatory boards, think tanks, industry associations, etc. such 
as Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB), Director General of Hydrocarbon 
(DGH), LPG Equipment Research Centre (LERC), Federation of Indian 
Petroleum Industry (FIPI), Centre of Excellence for Oil Gas & Energy 
(CoEOGE), etc. serve as platforms for effective and targeted collaboration 
among Oil PSUs focused on dedicated areas, enabling stakeholders to discuss 
and plan projects while facilitating information sharing and alignment towards 
common objectives.  
The coordination among the R&D departments of Oil PSUs is also 
achieved through Working Group associations (related to specific areas as 
bioenergy, hydrogen, carbon capture, Advanced Cell Chemistry Batteries, etc.) 
with active involvement of Ministry involving representatives from Oil PSUs, 
think tanks and subject matter experts.  
For better synergy of research efforts among oil PSUs & to avoid 
overlapping in areas of national importance, a committee comprising of R&D 
heads of IOCL, HPCL, BPCL & EIL was formed by MoPNG with CHT as 
coordinator. The committee deliberated and suggested critical areas of national 
importance around which CHT is now constituting collaborative projects with 
O&G PSUs, academic institutions etc. under various funding schemes and 
monitoring periodically.  
Committee of ONGC Institutes (COIN) is setup under the aegis of 
Director (Exploration) as convener COIN to maintain coordination and overview 
of activities of the 8 R&D institutes of ONGC.” 

12 
 
1.29 In this regard, the Ministry also stated as follows during the oral evidence: [Ref: 
Verbatim Proceedings, Sitting dated 04.02.2025 & Page No. 20-21] 
“There was an issue raised about coordination amongst various R&D activities. 
So, as we mentioned, we have an Advisory Council already under Dr. Kakodkar. 
We also interact very closely with the R&D member at the NITI Aayog. So, we 
keep coordinating all our efforts.  
     It is Scientific advisory council. In addition, at the Centre of Excellence which 
we have at IIT Mumbai, there also companies participate because they have 
funded it. So, two- or three-fold intention always there. First, we do not duplicate 
our efforts. Second, we focus our efforts into those things which the country 
needs and which companies will find it profitable to do.”    
VI. R&D ACTIVITIES ON EOR/IOR 
1.30  With regard to R&D activities towards Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR)/Improved 
Oil Recovery (IOR) methods, developing marginal oil fields and exploration in non-
traditional areas such as deepwater exploration and ultra deep-water exploration as a 
measure to reduce high import dependency, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:   
  “ONGC is implementing EOR technologies in its fields on pilot as well as 
commercial basis. Cyclic Steam Stimulation (CSS) is being implemented in a pilot 
project involving 14 wells in a Western Sector of ONGC. Cyclic Steam Stimulation 
(CSS) is a thermal Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) technique utilized to extract 
viscous oil efficiently by injecting steam at high temperatures. Microbial 
Enhanced Oil Recovery (MEOR) is another technique used to enhance the 
recovery of highly viscous oils by utilizing specific bacterial consortia, which help 
to reduce oil viscosity by breaking down higher hydrocarbons and generating bio-
surfactants. 
Exploration in Deep water and ultra-Deep water has expanded greatly during the 
past decades. ONGC is focusing to expand its exploration activities in India’s vast 
sedimentary areas falling in the Deepwater and ultra-deep water Offshore areas 
with an objective of converting the HC resources to reserves.  ONGC is actively 
participating in OALP bid rounds and up to OALP Bid Round-IX, ONGC has been 
awarded a total of 15 blocks in deep & ultradeep water sector covering an area 
of 99,980 Sq.km. Increasing no. of blocks in deep/ultradeep-water sector in 
subsequent OALP bid rounds reflect ONGC’s dedicated efforts for exploration in 
these areas. With the persistent exploratory efforts, as on 01.01.2026, ONGC 
has notified 3 hydrocarbon discoveries in deep/ultradeep-water OALP blocks, 
namely Utkal & Konark in Mahanadi-DW and Chola in Cauvery-UDW. 
 ONGC is currently operating 20 acreages in Deep Water and Ultra Deep-Water 
offshore areas spanning a total of 1,02,597 km² spread over Mahanadi, Krishna-
Godavari, Cauvery, Andaman, Kerala-Konkan and Saurashtra Offshore. Water 
depth in these acreages ranges from 200 to 3200m.  
OIL has partnered with a range of national and international universities, research 
institutions, and private sector technology developers to explore cutting-edge 

13 
 
techniques such as CO2 injection (CO2-EOR) and microbial enhanced oil 
recovery (MEOR) for boosting oil recovery from ageing fields and reservoirs. 
Customised EOR screening methods specific to matured field of Assam has been 
devised through the collaborative study with University of Houston, USA. Studies 
related to Chemical EOR have been completed as collaborative projects and is 
currently in the field implementation stage. Further, these R&D collaborations, 
have paved the way for the designing of new chemical formulations to improve 
the recovery efficiency like utilizing optimized “Low Saline Water flooding (LSW)” 
techniques aimed at enhancing oil displacement. Currently, OIL is planning such 
R&D collaboration projects with some of the national institutes like IIT-Kharagpur, 
IIT (ISM) Dhanbad, IIT-Bombay etc. HPCL R&D has signed an MOU with Oil India 
Limited (OIL) towards exploring Enhanced Oil Recovery using CO2 captured 
through in-house developed HP-BH2 technology, and development of novel 
products for upstream applications.” 
 
VII. R&D ON SHALE OIL AND GAS HYDRATES 
1.31 As regards R&D activities undertaken in the shale and oil and gas hydrates and 
their economic viability in the near and long term, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:   
 “Gas hydrates in nature are crystalline solids containing water and mostly 
methane gas in a cage-like structure. Gas hydrate is basically found in high-
pressure and low-temperature regimes in nature. These conditions are found 
mainly in continental margin and permafrost regions. In India, gas hydrate 
resources are found only in the continental margins in deep offshore. The gas 
hydrate research in India is being steered by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas, under National Gas Hydrate Program (NGHP) with participation from 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), National E&P companies and 
National CSIR Research Institutions. The program implementation is through the 
Technical Committee being coordinated by DGH. Commercial extraction of gas 
hydrate is still in the experimental phase globally, with no proven large-scale 
production. 
 
 
 
There are three phases planned under NGHP out of which two expeditions 
Expedition Objective Outcome 
NGHP-01 To establish the presence of gas hydrate 
in Indian offshore areas and assessment 
of the Gas hydrate resources. 
Gas Hydrates presence 
was established in 
Krishna Godavari, 
Mahanadi and 
Andaman basins. 
NGHP-02 Identification of sites with sand dominated 
reservoir and identify a suitable site for 
pilot production testing in NGHP-03 
expedition. 
Gas Hydrates bearing 
sand reservoirs were 
identified in Krishna 
Godavari basin. 
NGHP-03 Identification of site(s) for Pilot Production 
testing, Preparation of Pilot Production 
Test Project Report, Evaluation of well 
integrity during Pilot production testing 
etc. 
Expedition on-going. 

14 
 
namely NGHP Expedition-01 and 02 has already been completed. The objective 
and outcome of these expedition is summarised as follows: 
Bharat Petro Resources Limited (BPRL) has undertaken shale gas exploration 
activities in the operated Block in Abu Dhabi. ONGC had drilled total 30 
assessments (10 exclusive shale gas wells and 20 dual objective) wells under 
Shale Gas Policy, 2013 in four basins viz. Cambay, KG, Cauvery and Assam & 
Assam-Arakan recovering a total of 118 conventional cores measuring total 1708 
m along with recording of special logs for providing continuous inputs for 
geological and laboratory studies. 
Shale Gas Exploration: National Oil Companies viz. ONGC and OIL were advised 
to carry out Shale Gas Assessment Program through the Shale Gas Policy notified 
by the Govt. of India 2013. ONGC began its shale oil/gas assessment with a pilot 
shale gas drilling programme in Damodar Valley. Four wells were drilled in this 
campaign targeting the Barren Measures Shale, two in Raniganj and two in North 
Karanpura. One of the wells in Raniganj where production testing was carried out 
flowed little gas.   
ONGC drilled total 30 assessment (10 exclusive shale gas wells and 20 dual 
objective) wells in four basins viz. Cambay, KG, Cauvery and Assam & Assam-
Arakan recovering a total of 108 conventional cores measuring total 1700 m along 
with recording of special logs. Based on the analysis of data generated through 
drilling, it is concluded that there are characteristic differences between the Indian 
Shale Play and the established shale systems of North America and the shale 
gas/oil potential does not demonstrate exploitation potential to be very 
encouraging in the areas assessed in the country till now. 
ONGC under Shale Gas Policy Guidelines (Section-1, Para-V) had expressed for 
withdrawal from shale gas and oil operations in the nomination blocks.  
OIL was granted permission for shale gas and oil exploration in six nominated 
blocks under Shale Gas Policy notified by the Govt. of India in October 2013 by the 
DGH. Based on the analysis of data generated through drilling, it is concluded that 
these formations do not hold encouraging potential for commercial shale oil and 
gas production.” 
 
VIII. R&D ON IMPROVING REFINING EFFICIENCY 
1.32 With regard to the initiatives undertaken to improve refining efficiency and 
produce cleaner fuels, the Ministry stated as follows in their written reply:   
“Following R&D initiatives are being undertaken to improve refining efficiency 
and produce cleaner fuels  
 Technical service support to refineries for improving process efficiency. 
 Development of technologies and catalysts and chemicals to optimize refining 
processes, operational efficiency, resid upgradation, and improving fuel quality 
to support the clean fuel initiatives.  
 Development of differentiated fuels with better fuel efficiency, lower emissions, 
and improved engine cleanliness.  

15 
 
 Development and deployment of clean technologies such as production of SAF, 
biomass gasification to hydrogen, 2G Ethanol, Bio methanation to produce 
CBG, Ethanol/ Methanol adoption etc.  
 Circular economy initiatives like plastic circularity 
 Leveraging AI/ML and digital technologies to improve operational efficiency. 
 Development of real time crude oil assay crude oil compatibility prediction. 
 Availability of technologies for boosting energy efficiency with cleaner fuels. 
   Development of indigenous enzyme for production 2G bio ethanol.” 
 
IX.  UMBRELLA RESEARCH ORGANISATION 
1.33  As regards establishing an umbrella Research organization in the Petroleum 
sector on the lines of CSIR or ICAR, the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
 “In 2019, the Centre of Excellence in Oil, Gas, and Energy (CoEOGE) at IIT 
Bombay was established, as an umbrella platform, through an MoU signed by 
major seven oil and gas PSUs (IOCL, ONGC, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL, OIL and EIL) 
and IIT Bombay. The center fosters collaboration between PSUs and academia, 
allowing shared projects related to pressing national-level issues and bridging 
knowledge gaps.  
MoPNG had also established Scientific Advisory Committee on Hydrocarbons 
(SAC), to promote research and innovation in downstream hydrocarbon sector. 
Today, the industry has been successful in developing ecosystem for carrying out 
research and innovation in the country.”  
1.34  Detailing further on the functioning of CoEOGE, the Ministry submitted the 
following written information:   
“The Centre of Excellence in Oil, Gas and Energy (CoE-OGE) is an 
interdisciplinary Centre, setup at IIT Bombay, under an MoU signed by seven 
PSUs of the Indian Oil & Gas sector, viz., IOCL, ONGC, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL, 
OIL and EIL and IIT Bombay.  
The objectives of CoEOGE are as follows: 
o Providing competitive advantage to India’s energy sector and its PSUs in the 
emerging business ecosystem driven by climate challenges, stressed 
resources, and disrupting technologies globally. 
o Identifying areas of challenge beyond company boundaries and beyond the 10-
year horizon. 
o Translation of potential laboratory research to field prototyping and developing 
implementation-ready technology through collaboration with industrial 
professionals. 
o Re-skilling and up-skilling of existing oil and gas industry professionals. 
o Creating the next generation skilled human resources in the oil, gas, and new 
energy sectors and reducing the skill gap being faced in the sector. 
o Exposing undergraduate and postgraduate students to the oil and gas sector. 
The total budget for initial five years was Rs. 85 Crore, inclusive of Rs 25 crore 
as the initial setup and facility grant and an annual operation and research grant 
of Rs 12 crore. Initially the MOU was valid up to 2024 and later extended up to 

16 
 
2029. The total budget for initial five years was Rs. 85 Crore and for the next five 
years is Rs.88 Crore. The details of the grants and the shares of the participating 
PSUs are decided by the Governing Council. The CoEOGE carries out R&D 
works through mission, seed modes and PhD Fellowships. The CoEOGE also 
follows Strategized Research Approach (SRA) for carrying out specific research 
work in Battery, catalyst and Digitalization etc. 
CoEOGE has undertaken 84 R&D projects through its various channels, namely 
exploratory seed projects, PhD fellowships, mission mode projects, and 
translational bridge-the-gap projects. The R&D projects completed at CoEOGE 
are now at the stages of further testing at relevant industrial conditions for 
translation to industrial applications and commercialization.  
EIL is actively engaged in seven (7) mission mode projects with CoEOGE. EIL 
is also contributing to projects focused on Strategized Research Areas (SRA), 
including advanced batteries and Green Hydrogen. 
OIL is pursuing Geothermal Energy Extraction from Abandoned Oil and Gas 
Wells with CoEOGE.  
ONGC has very actively undertaken a total of 16 projects out of which 6 are 
SEED projects, 5 Mission Mode projects, 3 PhD Fellowship projects and 2 
Bridge-the–gap project covering critical domains of unconventional 
hydrocarbons (gas hydrates, CBM), reservoir characterization, offshore/ocean 
monitoring, water & wastewater management, CCUS, renewable energy 
(offshore wind), and digital/numerical modeling. 
These projects integrate exploration, production optimization, environmental 
sustainability, and energy transition, supported by capacity building through 
specialized training programmes for ONGC personnel.” 
 
X. USE OF INDUSTRY 4.0 IN R&D 
1.35 With respect to the use of AI, Robotics, Internet of Things (loT) and big data 
analytics in R&D activities of the Oil PSUs, the Ministry furnished the following written 
reply:   
“R&D Centre of Oil PSUs are working for adoption of AI, Robotics, Drone, the 
Internet of Things (IoT), and Big Data Analytics to enhance R&D activities, 
optimize operations, and making operations more intelligent, predictive, and 
automated.  
Key initiatives are as follows: 
 Adoption of data-driven simulation models to improve energy efficiency and 
reduce operational costs of in-house developed processes, developing digital 
twins of in-house developed refining processes, testing, and predicting lube and 
fuel formulations, development of catalysts and additives, material, and 
corrosion protection research. 
 AI platforms are regularly employed for data analysis, trend analysis, gap 
analysis and predictive analytics, Cybersecurity Applications, Safety and 
Surveillance, Drone based inspection and AI based safety monitoring activities. 

17 
 
AI-enabled platforms for efficient Design of Experiments (DOE) in scientific 
projects. AI language models are used to facilitate complex brainstorming 
methods like TRIZ.  
 AI tools, robots and drones are increasingly used for Molecular Modeling and 
Simulations such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Molecular Dynamics 
(MD) to gain insights into fundamental & scientific mechanisms.  
 AI/ML based real time Optimizer have been developed and deployed for the 
power plant, polypropylene unit, and PFCC unit. AI/ML based predictive models 
for critical rotary machines have been implemented. AI based flare monitoring 
to identify the root cause of flaring has been deployed across the refinery 
complex. 
 AI Applications with drone technology is utilised in Construction Site Safety to 
detects safety violations by analyzing worker behavior, equipment usage, and 
environmental conditions, providing real-time alerts to improve safety 
compliance. 
 Inspection by AI powered self-navigating robots for pipe inspections, tank 
inspections, maintenance & monitoring of remote facilities, enhancing safety by 
reducing human exposure to dangerous environments and drones for 
monitoring column internals where human access is limited.  
 GAIL, in collaboration with IIT Madras, is developing an AI-powered fiber-optic-
based intrusion and leak detection system for gas pipelines. This advanced 
system aims to significantly improve safety and asset reliability by enabling real-
time monitoring and rapid response to potential threats. 
 IoT devices are being extensively used to monitor vibration and corrosion and 
take proactive action. Use of IoT-enabled sensors installed across refineries, 
pipelines, and storage tanks to monitor processes, physical assets (refineries, 
pipelines) gathering data for simulation, predictive analysis, and process 
optimization.  
 EIL provides an IoT based Earthquake Warning System in technical 
collaboration with CSIR-CSIO. The system is presently in operation in Delhi 
Metro. 
 ONGC has recently inducted its Seistelligence software integrating advanced 
Machine Learning (ML) workflows for seismic as well as data analysis, 
modelling and prediction.  
 EIL is engaged with CERT-In/NCCC on the Honeypot project, which is used for 
enhancing threat intelligence.” 
XI. PROTECTION OF R&D DATA AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
1.36 In respect of R&D activities to protect infrastructure and R&D data of the Oil 
PSUs from cyber threats, the Ministry furnished the following reply:   
 “The R&D initiatives in cyber security are in line with the National Cyber 
security Frameworks and global best practices to enhance resilience against 
cyber threats. Continuous innovation and proactive defense mechanisms are 
being deployed to safeguard critical infrastructure and R&D data. Oil PSUs 
invest in robust cybersecurity measures for infrastructure, use advanced 
encryption, threat detection systems, and multi-layered firewalls to safeguard 
against cyber-attacks. All oil and gas PSUs have implemented a cyber-Resilient 
IT Infrastructure with cyber security frameworks integrated into industrial control 
systems (ICS) and IoT-based monitoring solutions. Security Information and 
Event Management (SIEM) systems also adopted for proactive monitoring and 

18 
 
response. Zero Trust Architecture Implementation, ensuring continuous 
verification of users, devices, and applications accessing the infrastructure. Use 
of multi-factor authentication (MFA), role-based access control (RBAC), and 
micro-segmentation strategies for enhanced security. Cyber Threat Intelligence 
and Information Sharing through dedicated teams for real-time monitoring, 
analysis, and mitigation of cyber threats established at Corporate Level.  
Deployment of Incident Response and Disaster Recovery Frameworks to 
minimize downtime and ensure business continuity in case of cyberattacks. 
Also, deployed AI-driven security orchestration, automation, and response 
(SOAR) tools at corporate level for efficient threat mitigation. Simulation-based 
training and cyber drills to prepare personnel for cyber incidents. The R&D data 
is monitored through 24X7 central team. All the servers and end user machines 
have latest updated antivirus and patches. NextGen Firewalls and advanced AI 
tools are used to monitor threats and take appropriate action. The role-based 
internet access of users is monitored, and malicious sites are blocked.  Cyber 
security is ensured for all the infrastructure used for various development 
activities. These AI-driven solutions continuously monitor security events, 
perform advanced log analysis, and strengthen the overall security posture 
through anomaly detection and behavioral pattern analysis”.  
XII COLLABORATION WITH ACADEMIA IN R&D 
1.37 With regard to collaboration with eminent research laboratories, universities 
and institutes in R&D Sector, the Ministry provided the following written reply:   
 “Oil PSUs either do the research work directly or as per need collaborate with 
various Indian and Foreign academic institutes with an objective to promote 
education, research, and innovation in the areas of mutual interest.  
The company wise status is as follows: 
PSU DETAILS 
IOCL 
IOCL R&D collaborates with various Indian and Foreign academic institutes 
like IIT Delhi, IIT Kharagpur, ICT Mumbai, IISc Bangalore, IIT Mumbai, IIT 
Madras, Andhra University, IIT Roorkee, RGIPT, JC Bose University, CSIR 
and foreign universities like Deakin (Australia), Lund University (Sweden), 
etc. with an objective to promote education, research, and innovation in the 
areas of mutual interest.  
IOCL R&D has 48 number of such collaboration with various Indian and 
Foreign academic institutes of repute in last 3 years.  
BPCL 
BPCL R&D has 31 number of ongoing collaborations with various Indian 
and Foreign academic institutes of repute like IITs BARC, Curtin University, 
Australia, ICAR etc.  
HPCL 
HPCL R&D Centre is pursuing collaborative research projects with IITs, 
IISc, and other National and Research Institutes & Universities in the 
diverse areas around both core and futuristic domains. Collaborative work 
is also pursued with various international institutes such as RMIT Australia 

19 
 
for seawater electrolysis. Further, HPGRDC also actively participates and 
is a member of several international forums such as CISTAR (Center for 
Innovative and Strategic Transformation of Alkane Resources), PSRI 
(Particulate Solid Research, Inc.), IEA Task 34 (Direct Thermochemical 
Liquefaction), IEA Task 37 (Energy from Biogas), IPI 
EIL 
Major collaborative projects being pursued by EIL are: 
CSIR-IIP (Bio-ATF, PVSA O2, Aromatic Extraction, Lube Extraction, Sulfur 
dioxide (SO2) Removal, Visbreaking, Delayed Coking, Propane 
deasphalting, Slurry Hydrocracking), IIT Delhi (Trickle Bed Reactor 
Technology, Cross Flow Reactor),  PMPL (Membrane Technology),  OECT 
(He Recovery),  CSIR-NCL (DME technology),  DBT-ICT (3G Algal Biofuel 
production, Direct CO2 conversion to Dimethyl Ether through Catalytic 
Hydrogenation with IIT-Roorkee, Thermo-catalytic cracking of ammonia to 
produce Hydrogen with IIT-Kanpur 
 
XIII.  INVOLVEMENT OF START-UPS IN R&D 
1.38 When the Committee desired to know whether start-ups of the country have 
been involved by R&D Departments of Oil PSUs in their research activities and the 
details of research projects supported by Oil PSUs as well as the business model of 
collaboration with them, the Ministry furnished the following written reply:   
 “Under the stewardship of MoPNG, Oil & Gas PSUs including IOCL, HPCL, 
BPCL, &EIL supports Indian startups using varied funding models like Grant-in-
Aid, Equity, Mix of Grant/Equity and Loans. Ideation domains are identified by 
capturing pain points/possible areas of operational efficiency improvement broadly 
related to Operational issues of Sector, Clean Energy challenges, technology 
adoption, ways to promote health/safety and protect environment thereby creating 
social capital for overall good of society. Mentoring support is also provided to 
Start-ups thru’ Tie-ups with educational/ professional institutions like 
IITs/IIMs/NITs/NRDC, etc. 
 
The Role of R&D Centers of various Oil PSUs & mechanism of selection of 
startups is given below: 
PSU DETAILS 
IOCL 
At IOCL, startup is funded and engaged by R&D Centre. Till date thru 3 
Rounds (including Green Resolve – Amrit KaalAdhyay startup round) of 
Open Innovation Challenge, 42 startups are funded and incubated under 
IndianOil Startup Scheme. Major areas of funding / support are artificial 
intelligence, robotics, societal relevance, pipeline surveillance & 
maintenance etc. IOCL floats Open Innovation challenges through 
dedicated web portal for call of innovative ideas / concepts / research 
proposals from startups / aspiring entrepreneurs for funding & incubation. 
Subsequently, project proposals are selected following a rigorous 3 level 
transparent selection process. 
BPCL 
At BPCL, selection and enrolment of start-up is done by Corporate Strategy 
department through open participative programs like innovation grand 
challenge. 30 Start-up are engaged in developing solutions pertaining to 
refinery, retail and healthcare. They have collaborated with these startups 

20 
 
on projects ranging from scaling up membrane less electrolyser technology 
to carbon capture and conversion of CO2 to dimethyl ether. 
HPCL 
HPCL, through its startup initiative ‘HP Udgam’ has funded 28 Startups 
through CCPS mode and provided 30+ pilot project opportunities to startups 
in the areas of electric mobility, renewable energy, biofuel, safety & 
sustainability, digital initiatives etc. An exclusive portal 
(www.hpcl.startup.co.in) allows any DPIIT-registered startup to apply for 
funding at any time throughout the year. HPCL follows a robust selection 
process including two high-level evaluation committees followed by detailed 
due diligence through mentor institute IIM Lucknow Enterprise Incubation 
Centre. 
EIL 
Till date, 29 Nos Startups have been funded under EIL’s Startup Initiative. 
Model of collaboration with Startup is grant (with provision of equity/royalty 
in agreements). Proposals for startup funding are received through 
registered Host Institutions and Incubation centers for Phase-I (Innovation 
Challenge Grant), Phase-II (Seed Fund), and Equity Funding. Each 
proposal undergoes rigorous eligibility screening to ensure alignment with 
predefined criteria. Following this, proposals are evaluated and shortlisted 
based on their potential and feasibility. 
GAIL  
GAIL startup initiative “Pankh” is managed by R&D department and through 
this initiative GAIL has invested and supported 38 Start-ups in the areas of 
CBG, Battery, Pipeline monitoring, fintech etc. 
NRL 
NRL is engaging with M/s Zymolent for development of indigenous enzymes 
for production 2G ethanol. The startup has been funded through a mix of 
grant and equity investment. 
OIL 
Oil India Limited (OIL) startup program is named as SNEH (Startup 
Nurturing Enabling and Handholding). OIL’s SNEH program is intended 
to provide both technical and financial support to startups across all the 
sectors, fostering growth through innovations. OIL had entered into MoU 
with 5 (five) leading institutions as incubator for selection, guiding and 
mentoring the startups. Currently 25 (startups) are being funded by OIL . 
ONGC 
A Decision Support System (DSS) tool was developed through the 
collaborative project between IDWE, ONGC and IIT-Guwahati titled 
"Development of Comprehensive interactive well monitoring software tool 
for Drilling Supervisors”. This Resulted in a Tripartite Legal Agreement (TLA) 
exists between IDT, ONGC, IIT Guwahati and M/s Softdrill Solutions. 
 
1.39 As regards, major technological breakthrough in research projects of Start-ups 
carried out with the support of Oil PSUs, the Ministry provided the following written reply:   
“IOCL:  
IndianOil R&D spearheads the Start-up funding scheme which has seen 
incubation of 42 start-ups in 3 rounds of funding. The total valuation of these 
startups stands at an impressive ~Rs. 2580 Crores, as independently evaluated 
by third-party agencies. (Round 1 &2). IndianOil incubated startups have till 
date created 89 IPRs. Some important technological breakthrough achieved 
under IndianOil Startup Scheme are given below: 
 M/s Netprise Solutions, Bengaluru - An automated fuel dispensing station having 
a Smart & Auto Fuel Dispenser, with secure authentication for user, consumer 
mobile app with digital wallet integration to ensure quality & quantity.  

21 
 
 M/s Sukriti Social Foundation, Gurugram - Self-sustaining low maintenance, AI 
enabled with intelligent flushing system, „Eco-toilet‟ which consumes less fresh 
water for Retail Outlets.  
 M/s Vasitars Pvt Ltd., Delhi - Low cost, simple to use composite nano material 
for online in-situ repair (cold work) of cross-country pipelines.  
 M/s Amol Carbons Pvt Ltd., Pune - Technology for production of fuel grade r-
DME from agricultural waste.  
 M/s EzeRx Pvt Ltd., Bhubaneswar - Non-invasive and non - contact device for 
measurement of Hemoglobin.  
HPCL:  
At HPCL, Startup initiative „Udgam‟ is steered by Corporate Strategy and 
Planning Group. Two R&D based start-up technological supported under 
„Udgam‟ Startup Scheme are given below :-  
Voltrez Tech Pvt Ltd HPCL has supported the startup on its project of 
manufacturing Dendrite-free cells, first of its kind globally. With the fund received 
through HPCL startup initiative „Udgam‟, the startup has completed the following 
phases –  
1. large scale synthesis of proprietary material  
2. electrode coating and technique development  
3. anode processing  
4. Cell making  
Currently the cells are at 360 Cycles at 25 Degree C and 1C charging rate. The 
startup has raised funds from new investors and working on improving the cycle 
life.  
ASN Fuels Pvt Ltd With the support received from HPCL „Udgam‟ Startup 
Fund, the startup has successfully demonstrated the operation of a continuous 
process of 10 Litre Per Day (LPD) of 2G Bioethanol by way scaling up a lab 
scale continuous process of 2G Bioethanol production developed in 
collaboration with IIT Tirupati. 
EIL:  
Vayujal Technologies Pvt Ltd, Host Institution IIT Madras- Prototype for Water 
Extraction from Atmosphere. 
It is an Innovative idea for extraction of water from atmospheric air. o Modular filter 
cartridges to make water potable. Avoids uses of RO cartridges and required power 
and water re-circulation.  
o Smart IoT for adaptive controls to provide optimum machine performance leading to 
lowest energy consumption per liter of water produced.  
o Solar operated units to make fully stand-alone unit, can be installed anywhere.  
 IIT Kanpur - Project title: Designing of Farmers Friendly Electrospray Machine from 
Lab to Field Application 
 o The farm spin Nanomachine will be using a rental model for framers.  
o It will be used to spray fertilizers and pesticides.  

22 
 
o The machine will have an attachment with tractors for easy of operations. 
 o The consumables, like nano-fertilizers, will supply to farmers.  
o Also, the machine will be used to spray pesticides and other components for plant 
protection.  
 IIT Kanpur : Project title: Development of Steel-Integrated Floating Jetties (SIFJ)  
o designed to enhance operational efficiency, durability, and sustainability in maritime 
applications 
 o sustainable waterways infrastructure  
o expertise in floating jetty installations customized to meet diverse industrial 
requirements 
 
XIV. INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION IN R&D 
1.40 With regard to international collaborations in R&D in upstream as well as 
downstream operations, the Ministry stated as follows in a written reply:   
 “With the objective to promote education, research, and innovation in the areas 
of mutual interest, IOCL R&D collaborates with Foreign academic institutes like 
Deakin (Australia), Lund University (Sweden), etc. and also collaborating with 
foreign research labs, such as INEOS, Virdis, VITO, Phinergy, Lanzatech, 
Lanzajet, Lubrizol and technology licensors like Lummus, USA for marketing in-
house developed technologies in foreign territories. 
HPCL R&D has ongoing international research collaborations with RMIT 
Australia, CISTAR (Center for Innovative and Strategic Transformation of Alkane 
Resources) led by Purdue University, PSRI (Particulate Solid Research, Inc.), 
International Energy Agency Task 34 & Task 37 (Direct thermochemical 
liquefaction & Energy from Biogas) and University of Birmingham. HPCL R&D 
has also associated with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and 
American Fuels and Petrochemical Manufacturers (AFPM) association for 
industry collaboration program. 
BPCL has Joint development and marketing arrangement for its BPMARRK®-A 
tool for rapid crude assay, at global level with M/s AspenTech, USA for. On 
similar lines, web platform for K-model (A digital tool for crude compatibility) has 
been developed. In the overseas blocks, BPRL is in partnership with global oil 
majors like Petrobras, Rosneft, ADNOC and TOTAL. Through such partnerships 
BPRL has been accessing latest innovations and methodologies in development 
drilling and the production enhancement.  
 OIL has signed a MoU with Research Institutes, and Universities from both 
national and international organizations to work towards a collective R&D 
Program for the development of indigenous technologies to improve the 
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons and alternative energy sources.  
 Carryout subsurface modelling Study for revitalization of the field along with 
identification of potential for amenable EOR schemes through collaborative 

23 
 
static and dynamic modelling study with Texas A&M Engineering Experiment 
Station (TEES).  
 Collaborations and knowledge transfer in diverse areas like exploration and 
development studies, training & skilling, R&D upgradation, Net Zero initiatives & 
geothermal projects etc with M/s IFPEN, France.  
 ONGC is pursuing International Outreach programme to collaborate with global 
E&P majors with the objective of Joint technical studies, acquiring technical 
assistance / partnership in specific portfolios, knowledge sharing and skill 
development. In this regard Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been 
executed with some of the Global Majors; the details are given below:  
ExxonMobil: ONGC signed MoU with ExxonMobil with a focus on Joint 
technical studies and cooperation in frontier offshore areas and PEL blocks on 
the east and west coasts, and open acreages for joint EoI submissions/bidding. 
MoA with present focus area in KG deep water sector, was also signed in 2024.  
IFP Energies Nouvelles, France: The MoU was signed with IFPEN in 2023, to 
cooperate and collaborate in the development and application of expertise and 
leveraging suitable technologies relating to production from India's hydrocarbon 
reserves.  
BP Exploration Alpha Limited:  ONGC inked MoU with BP Exploration Alpha 
Limited to collaborate for joint bidding of the block GS-OSHP-2022/2, transfer 
of operatorship to RIL upon successful award of the block, execution of the JOA, 
and participation in future OALP rounds.  
PEPOV, Petronas (E&P): Confidentiality Agreement entered between ONGC 
and PEPOV in 2024 for potential collaboration and farm-in opportunities in 
Andaman, KG, Bengal, Kerala- Konkan and new blocks specially those offered 
in OALP-X bid round.  
Petrobras:      Confidentiality Agreement (CA) entered with Petrobras in 2025 
to explore potential farm-In opportunities in OALP-IX round blocks and 
collaborations opportunities for the OALP-X /Future bid round. 
Chevron New Ventures PTE Limited: ONGC signed MoU in 2022 for Joint 
exploration opportunities and evaluation of ONGC-operated and open offshore 
acreages in Bengal, Assam Fold belt, KG, Cauvery &Mannar Basins.  
Total Energies: ONGC signed MoU with Total Energies in 2022 for Joint 
technical studies of G&G data in Mahanadi, Bengal Offshore, Andaman and KG 
Offshore.  A series of meetings and technical workshop held involving 
TotalEnergies (TE) and ONGC teams.  
Shell:  MOU signed with Shell Markets Private Limited and ONGC in 2022 to 
collaborate and explore opportunities to create Low Carbon Industrial Hubs 
enabled by CCUS solutions in India through a Joint Study of potential storage 
sites and collaboration in CCUS project delivery.   
University of Texas at Austin, USA: Collaboration for work of development of 
suitable chemical EOR formulation. 
BP India Private Limited: ONGC plans to drill stratigraphic wells in Category II 
& III offshore basins (Saurashtra, Bengal, Mahanadi and Andaman) to improve 
geological understanding and enable future exploration. BP’s technical support 
will include identification of suitable well locations using G&G data and 

24 
 
assistance in well design and drilling supervision, in coordination with ONGC 
teams. 
EIL is having a continued relationship with both the international educational 
institutes as well as industrial consortium. Some of the key partnerships are 
listed below: 
- Process Integration Research Consortium (PIRC) Membership - offered by 
University of Manchester 
- Fractionation Research Inc, US has 71 members worldwide, including the 
world’s leading petroleum, chemical, engineering, and distillation equipment 
supplier companies 
- PSTC is an industry-academia collaboration that carries out advanced 
research in the three focus areas of separations technology development, 
process optimization, control & safety and energy & environmental research”. 
1.41 As regards, collaboration with State Universities for R&D initiatives, the Ministry 
furnished the following written reply:   
  
 “Yes, Oil PSUs collaborating with IITs, CSIR labs, NITs, IISC- Bengaluru, ICT-
Mumbai, RGIPT, BITS, State Universities and various Private academic 
institutions for research & development initiatives.  
Besides, MoPNG has founded The Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Oil, Gas and 
Energy to provide a competitive advantage to India’s Oil and Gas sector PSUs 
and its energy sector in the emerging business ecosystem driven by climate 
challenges, stressed resources and disrupting technologies globally. The Centre 
is an interdisciplinary collaboration between Indian Oil and Gas PSUs (IOCL, 
ONGC, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL, OIL & EIL) and IIT Bombay.” 
 
XV.    R&D FOR NET ZERO TARGETS  
1.42 With reference to the R&D activities undertaken by each PSU to reduce their 
carbon footprint and achieve net zero targets, the Ministry submitted the following 
written reply:  
“Upstream and Downstream Industry in Oil Sector are faced with a more 
challenging and complex market going forward. The challenge for Oil sector in 
India is not only to grow to meet rising need for energy in the country but also to 
innovate continuously to reduce operational carbon footprint and produce 
alternative fuels that are green.  
Petroleum Refining is one of the hard-to-abate sectors of the economy, where 
decarbonization options are limited and difficult to achieve. Various state-run oil 
companies are in the process of formulating their strategies to achieve goal of 
becoming net zero operational emission encompassing scope-1 and 2 
emissions. PSU R&D Centres are actively engaged in several initiatives to 
facilitate this transition.  
R&D Centres are actively engaged in several initiatives to reduce carbon 
footprint and facilitate transition to net-zero emissions. Some of the major 
ongoing R&D initiatives towards net zero are as follows: 

25 
 
 Development of high efficiency lubes and differentiated fuel grades for improved fuel economy and lower carbon emissions such as Xtragreen, Xtraboost, Xtra-Tej, PropanePlus and Green Combo Lube solutions.  Alternative Fuels: Improving the production processes, optimizing blends, and ensuring the compatibility of bio fuels with existing infrastructure.  Hydrogen Economy: Hydrogen production, storage, and utilization, including fuel cells with the aim to promote clean and efficient energy solutions for various applications.  Battery Technologies: For energy storage applications & carrying out R&D related to increasing efficiency of lead acid batteries, advanced batteries including aluminum-air batteries, lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles and renewable energy integration.   Nanotechnology: Exploring the application of nano catalysts, nanocomposites & nanofluids in various refining and petrochemical processes, development of novel formulations of fuels and lubricants etc.  Circular Economy: Coprocessing of non-edible and Used Cooking Oil in DHDS/ DHDT Unit for production of Green Diesel (Demonstrated at commercial scale). Re-refining of Used Lube Oil for production of Group-II/ III LOBS (Developmental stage). Study on feasibility of co-processing of plastic / tyre / biomass pyrolysis oil in Refinery Units (Developmental stage). INDEcoP2F - Co-processing of Waste Plastic in Delayed Coker (Demonstrated at commercial scale)  CCUS Technologies: Development of carbon capture (IOCL’s eCO2Sorb technology), utilization, and storage (CCUS) technologies. CO2 Valorization through utilization of CO2 to valuable products through Bi-reforming/Tri-reforming Technology (Developmental stage)  Evolving Areas: Production of Advance Carbon Material – Carbon Fiber, Electrodes for Battery Application, Polymer composites, graphene etc. (Research at Initial stage). Development of Membrane based Separation Processes for gaseous applications for improving energy efficiency (Research at Initial stage). The Net Zero target year of various Oil PSUs are given as under; 
GAIL EIL ONGC MRPL NRL HPCL  BPCL OIL IOCL CPCL 
2035 2035 2038 2038 2038 2040 2040 2040 2046 2046 
 Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU): 
Pursuing a research project with IISER, Tirupati for the conversion of CO2 into 
polycarbonate diols.” 
 
1.43 Detailing on the same, the Ministry submitted as follows during the oral 
evidence [Ref.: Verbatim Proceeding, Sitting dated 24.02.2025, Page No. 3-4] 
 “डाउनèĚȣम सैÈटर मɅ Ïयादातर आरएंडडी फोकस नेट-ज़ीरो कȧ तरफ है। इस Ǒदशा मɅ हम 
लोग, जैसा ͩक ͪपछलȣ बार भी बताया गया था ͩक एनजȸ एͩफͧशएंसी पर काफȧ काय[ हो रहा 

26 
 
है। इसमɅ हम लोग एनजȸ एͩफͧशएंट Ýय ूãज़ और ãय ूǒĦकɅ ɪस मɅ काय[ कर रहे हɇ, कनवɅशन 
ǒबजनेस तो एज़-य ू ज ु अ ल चलेगा। इसक े अलावा green hydrogen, biofuels, advance 
mobility and carbon capture utilization and petro chemicals पर काफȧ हद तक 
फोकस रहेगा। Đू ड ऑयल ट ू पेĚोक ेͧमकãस पर भी काफȧ ĤोजेÈɪस हम लोग कर रहे हɇ। 
……….अपèĚȣम मɅ भी Ûय ू एनजȸ फोकस एǐरया है। ज ै स ा ͩक हाइĜोजन, पàÜड हाइĜोजन 
èटोरेज, सीबीजी, िजयोथम[ल पर भी काय[ हो रहा है। अनकÛवɅशनल ǐरसोसȶज़ ज ै स े ͩक 
सीबीएम, गैस हाइĜेɪस और हȣͧलयम पर भी काय[ हो रहा है। अपèĚȣम मɅ बायोÝय ूãस और 
बायो एनजȸ भी काफȧ फोकस का एǐरया है। Co2 sequestration utilization भी अपèĚȣम 
क े ͧलए एक मेजर Ġèट एǐरया रहेगा।”   
XVI. PATENTS AND MONETISATION OF R&D PRODUCTS 
1.44 With regard to a query on the success rate of patents and monetisation of 
patents, the Ministry gave the following reply:   
“In the downstream sector and for GAIL the, major areas in which IPs are 
filed include Refining technology, Lubricant technology, Bioenergy, gas 
processing, Petrochemicals, Catalysts, Nanotechnology, Pipeline 
Transportation, hydrogen production technologies, CO2 utilization, etc. The 
company wise details of Patent filing and status of commercialization of patents 
are as under: 
 Upstream Sector (ONGC/ OIL) 
 Several patents granted to ONGC are in the field of Database management, 
Seismic and Well logging Interpretation and analysis, Remote sensing analysis, 
Geochemistry, Oil & Gas Production Technology, Ocean Engineering, etc. which 
are being actively used in ONGC in-house projects. 1 patent of ONGC has been 
  IOCL HPCL BPCL EIL GAIL MRPL 
Patent Filed 1767 610 167 122 46 24 
Patents Granted 
(Indian / Foreign) 416 / 965 125 / 108 45 / 53 71 / 1 31 / 3 9 / 0 
Patents filed / granted 
in last 5 years (2019 
to till date) 
782 / 883 362 / 184 70 / 64 57 / 36 10 / 22 24 / 9 
No. of Technologies & 
Products developed 
in last 5 years 
115 97 33 16 - 9 
No. of Technologies & 
Products 
commercialized in 
last 5 years 
    65 61   21    13 -     7 
No. of Lubricant 
formulations 
developed 
>7000 >3800 >3400 - - - 

27 
 
commercialized outside.  As on date the number of patents granted to ONGC is 
114 against 134 processed cases. 37 number of patent applications are under 
process at Indian Patent Office.  
Oil India Ltd (OIL) has filed 23 patents, out of which 18 have been granted (7 
Indian and 11 foreign patents). All the secured patents are being utilized in-house 
in OIL’s activities / processes".  
 
1.45 When the Committee sought to know whether any comprehensive data is 
available on the monetary benefits/revenue generated from R&D in Oil and Gas sector, 
the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“Various R&D centers have been instrumental in driving innovation across 
refining, petrochemicals, upstream and sustainable energy solutions for 
changing product mix. While for these centres profit is not the primary driver, but 
still revenue is generated either directly through royalties, license fees, technical 
services etc. or indirectly by improving/ optimising operational efficiency of 
existing products and processes, providing niche products to create 
differentiation in market and also reducing cost by replacing imports or 
dependence on other suppliers with cheaper in-house alternatives for critical 
inputs.  
Besides, these centers provide huge notional benefits to the parent 
organisations by playing key role in understanding and adaptation of technology 
by working hand in hand with their business units including dissemination and 
sharing of the knowledge, thus contributing significantly to the reliability of 
company’s operations and supporting profitability and strategic goals through 
self-reliance. Some of them also related to O&M activities to enhance efficiency, 
safety, and sustainability 
IOC R&D has earned revenue of Rs 27.49 Cr & Rs.14.91 Cr in F.Y 23-24 & 
FY 24-25 till date respectively as direct earnings in royalties, license fees, and 
service charges from commercialized technologies and products. Besides 
significant notional benefit has accrued through following activities; 
 In-house testing of fuels and lubes using extensive facilities as Climatic 
Chamber, emission labs, engine testing and field-testing labs, analytical division 
facilities, to test the efficacy and suitability of new lube, grease and fuel 
formulation.  
 By developing Basic Design Engineering Packages (BDEP) for patented 
processes, R&D saved Rs. 33.32 Cr in license fees, BDEP fee & fee for post 
BDEP services in FY 23-24, avoiding substantial external licensing costs for 
IOCL Refineries.  
 Licensing DRA technology to a third party is anticipated to save Rs. 50 Cr for the 
IOCL’s PL-division over five years, with additional recurring royalties from sales 
to other companies, ensuring a steady income stream.  
 R&D Centre on an average tests 4000-6000 samples per years that are collected 
by field force and sent for detailed evaluation  
 Applied Metallurgy and Corrosion research groups regularly works with sister 
divisions to help them for failure analysis, residual life analysis and provide 
solution to predict and improving the life and availability of existing assets which 
has a definite economic benefit. 

28 
 
Benefits on similar lines have also been earned by other R&D Centres.  
BPCL has successfully commercialized products such as BMCG-Bharat 
Metal Cutting Gas-Nxt Gen for metal cutting application since 2019. This has 
resulted in annual revenue generation of Rs. 20 Crore since 2019. The use of 
digital tools namely BPMARRK® and K-Model for rapid crude assay and crude 
blending, respectively, have resulted into monetary benefits of Rs. 300 Crore 
during last 5 years. 
Expected benefits from the patented First principle - AI Hybrid based 
applications developed by MRPL are as follows: 
a. Real time optimizers for Poly Propylene Unit: 40-45 INR Crore/ Year 
b. Real time optimizers for power plant:  50 INR Crore/year. 
c. Real time optimizers for Petrochemical Fluidized Catalytic Cracking: Rs 30-
50 Crore/year. 
The revenue generated/ business secured by EIL R&D over the last F.Y 2023-
24 include Royalty/ License Fees of Rs 46.2 Lakh and BDEP Fees/ Study/ 
Hardware supply of Rs 453 lakh.” 
1.46  Upon the Committee’s desire to know about the action plan by Oil/Gas 
companies to bring R&D developed products in the market, the Ministry submitted the 
following written reply:  
 “Some of the initiatives are enumerated below; 
 Some of the R&D projects are taken up based on interaction with the business 
units to ensure ready market and acceptance, ensuring that innovations are 
effectively translated into commercially viable solutions. Field trials and pilot 
projects are conducted in collaboration with business units and external 
partners to evaluate the product's real-world applicability.  
 As part of the above activities, R&D centres often works closely with Oil PSUs, 
research institutes, and governmental agencies to ensure that the product 
meets both industry standards and regulatory requirements. 
 Regular engagement with Marketing Division as well as directly with OEMs to 
develop lube and grease formulations as per market needs.  
 Catalyst Manufacturing Unit has recently been commissioned by IOCL at 
Panipat refinery to meet the DHDS/ DHDT and FCC Additive requirements of 
IOCL refineries. Till date around 19000 MT of the IOCL R&D in-house 
developed catalysts have been used for captive requirements. IOCL is planning 
to set up a JV company to manufacture and market the catalysts based on in-
house formulation of meeting internal needs and to sell it to other customers. 
 Joint marketing arrangements are also made with technology licensors to 
market in-house developed technologies. Developing and supporting Marketing 
Division for development and successful commercialization of number of 
specialty products and chemicals for import substitution.  
 Promotion of in-house developed R&D technologies and products through 
Technical Exhibitions and Conferences, Workshops and Webinars, investor 
forum, and Digital Outreach”. 

29 
 
 
XVII.  DEVELOPMENT OF BIO-FUELS AND FLEX-FUELS 
1.47 When the Committee desired to know about the status of development of bio-
fuels and flex-fuels, the Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
“The development of bio-fuels and flexi-fuels in India has seen significant 
progress, with active participation from Govt., industry stakeholders, and 
OMCs, who are the key player in Ethanol Blending Program (EBP) of 
Government of India (GoI). Govt. has aimed to achieve 20% blending target by 
25-26.  
IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and NRL have taken up project for production of 2G 
ethanol based on linguicellulosic biomass with financial assistance under 
Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana. IOCL plant has been commissioned and other 
plants are under advance stage of completion/ commissioning. OMCs are also 
setting up demonstration plants to innovate and improve technology. 
E20 and E93 fuels are already being dispensed at select retail outlets. 
Work on development of other flex fuel blends is also underway as per BIS 
standard.     
Oil companies are also key players in Sustainable Alternative Towards 
Affordable Transportation (SATAT) initiative of GOI, which aims to promote the 
production and use of CBG using various raw materials.  
Government of India has targeted blending of 1% Sustainable Aviation 
Fuel (SAF) with aviation fuel by 2027 and 2% SAF by 2028 (initially for 
international flights) as part of its strategy to decarbonize the aviation sector. 
Oil companies are pursuing research and feasibility studies including 
demonstration to produce SAF through Alcohol To Jet (ATJ).”  
1.48 As regards the initiatives taken for conversion of biomass into bio fuels, the 
Ministry submitted the following written reply:   
 “Oil companies have undertaken several initiatives for the conversion of 
biomass, particularly rice straw (parali), into biofuels, contributing to sustainable 
energy solutions and addressing environmental concerns like stubble burning. 
Key initiatives in these areas are listed below: 
 IOCL, HPCL, BPCL have taken up commercial scale 2G ethanol bio-refineries, 
which processes lignocellulosic biomass like rice straw to produce ethanol. 
Additionally, as part of the research initiative, integrated demonstration plants 
using in-house developed technology are also being set up. 
 Oil companies are the key players in Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation (SATAT) initiative of GOI, which aims to promote the production 
and use of CBG. As part of R&D efforts, to scale up in-house developed 
biomethanation technology, Plans are underway for setting-up of 
demonstration/commercial plants. 

30 
 
MRPL is working on a combination of Biomass gasification and Gas 
fermentation technology with the technology supplier for production of 2G 
Ethanol from Biomass like Corn cob and cotton stalk. GAIL is working on 
Gasification Research for efficient conversion of biomass into syngas which can 
be converted in to liquid and gaseous fuels (e.g. green hydrogen). 
ONGC is carrying out feasibility study on bio-hydrogen generation In 
addition. CBG plants are planned to be setup in various states based on 
biomass (Parali) as feedstock.  
OIL is presently forming Joint Ventures with established CBG player for 
production of Bio Gas using Agri Waste as a feed stock.” 
  
  

31 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
1. MANDATING A MINIMUM SPEND ON R&D 
The Committee observe that the current funding model of R&D for Oil PSUs 
remains largely dependent on internal resources with limited budgetary support 
from the Government.  The Ministry has stated that as such no financial 
constraint is faced by Oil PSUs in meeting the requirement of funds for R&D 
activities.  
Over the years, the R&D expenditure of Oil PSUs has shown a general 
upward trend increasing from around Rs.2083.64 crore in FY 2021-22 to 
Rs.2098.95 crore in FY 2025-26 which is largely driven by the spending of IOCL 
and ONGC followed by HPCL, GAIL, BPCL and OIL. Balmer Lawrie & Co., MRPL, 
NRL and CPCL have also shown increase in percentage expenditure on R&D. 
The Gross Expenditure in Research & Development (GERD) in the Petroleum 
sector in 2020–21 was Rs.1,634.45 crore which was 1.3% of the Country’s total 
GERD i.e. 1,27,380.96 crore.  It is also notable from the data that some of the 
major Oil PSUs have spent around 2.16 % of their combined ‘Profit After Tax’ in 
the Financial Year 2025-26 on R&D. However, the percentage of spending by 
each PSU differ.  
The Committee are of the view that a uniform R&D investment norm across 
PSUs may be explored for sustained innovation and technological advancement 
in petroleum sector, especially in view of the Country’s energy transition goals 
and the present geopolitical situation evolving in West Asia which is a major oil 
exporting region. Therefore, in order to institutionalize a robust, outcome-driven 
R&D ecosystem in the oil and gas sector, the Committee recommend the 
following: 
(i)  The Ministry may consider setting a benchmark of minimum expenditure 
on R&D for all Oil PSUs, preferably a minimum percentage of their ‘Profit Before 
Tax’, subject to periodic review and adjustments based on sectoral priorities 
and performance benchmarks. 

32 
 
(ii)  The Ministry may explore the feasibility of creating a dedicated fund, 
managed through an institution, to co-finance high-impact, cross-sectoral R&D 
projects in areas such as green hydrogen, carbon capture, biofuels, waste-to-
energy technologies etc., involving collaboration between PSUs and premier 
research institutions.  
(iii)  The Ministry may come up with ways and measures to encourage private 
co-investment in R&D sector. 
2. MANPOWER IN R&D SECTOR 
  
The Committee note that Oil PSUs are following a reasonably structured 
approach to R&D recruitment by combining open advertisements, campus 
placements, fixed-term specialist hiring as well as internal deputations. The 
recruitment process is aligned with DPE guidelines, offering performance 
incentives and training opportunities.   
  
The Ministry has stated that the R&D recruitment is largely requirement 
based which the Committee feel is detrimental to maintaining a continuous 
talent pipeline aligned to long term national energy priorities. The Ministry 
has stated that fixed-term hiring is done but a sustained lateral inflow from 
global research entities, premier academic institutions or startup 
ecosystems need to be put in place. It is stated that structured career growth 
and performance incentives are offered in line with Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) guidelines to attract top talent. The Committee find from 
the replies of the Ministry that structural mechanisms for attracting talent in 
the R&D sector exist, but there appears to be a need for a long-term plan to 
match human resources with R&D goals or mandates. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the following:   
  
(i) A dedicated R&D career track may be put in place to attract and retain top 
researchers whereby they can progress on a ‘technical excellence’ route in 
the Oil PSUs/Organisations. Further, performance-linked incentives for 
patents that actually get deployed and technologies that earn royalties may 
be instituted so that the Scientists/Researchers stay motivated.   
  

33 
 
(ii)  The Ministry/Oil PSUs may develop a robust HR framework to 
standardize recruitment, mobility and progression norms across Oil PSUs 
covering human resource planning with at least 3 year projection on 
manpower requirement for R&D in emerging technology domains. 
  
(iii)  The Oil PSUs may also explore the feasibility of organising ‘National 
R&D Talent Conclaves’ in collaboration with reputed institutes/ 
Colleges/Universities to identify and nurture young researchers.  
  
  
3.      INFRASTRUCTURE IN R&D CENTRES and BENCHMARKING 
  
The R&D ecosystem of the Country’s Oil PSUs has evolved into a network 
of business-driven, technology-oriented centres focusing on applied research 
in refining, alternate fuels, catalysts, materials and process efficiency. It is also 
aligned with commercial objectives and overall government priorities around 
self-reliance, and import substitution. However, with regard to research in “pure 
science”, which serves as the base for long-term innovation rather than 
immediate business outcomes, the Ministry has stated that analytical facilities 
for pure-science-based work are broadly available. 
As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the current R&D 
infrastructure expansion projects are IOCL’s second R&D campus in Faridabad 
(Rs.3199 crore, completion by 2026-27), HPCL’s Centre of Excellence (CoE) in 
Bitumen and Pavement Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka (Rs. 70 crore - was to 
be completed by March 2026 but pending completion as on date) and GAIL’s 
planned R&D campus at Sohna, Haryana (Rs.550–600 crore – completion by 
March 2029). The timelines of these expansions vary and it is not clear whether 
there is any collaborative framework among these centres to prevent 
duplication or to create national-level synergies in R & D sector. Moreover, only 
IOCL’s R&D department has Board-level representation. Further, the Ministry 
has stated that there is no mandated benchmark to grade or evaluate the 
performance of PSU research centres. Current parameters applied by Oil PSUs 
are patents filed, number of publications in journals, demonstration of products 
and technologies, etc. In view of the above, the Committee recommend the 
following: 

34 
 
(i) The Ministry may formulate a standardized benchmarking system for 
R&D centres across Oil PSUs in consultation with NITI Aayog/CSIR/other 
research bodies or any such agencies, including metrics like innovation 
productivity, technology transfer success rate, external research 
collaborations, commercial adoption levels, amenability to cleaner energy, etc.   
(ii) The PSUs may look into the feasibility of including the R&D 
department’s representation at the Board-level to ensure that innovation 
strategy, capital allocation and business goals remain well-aligned.  
(iii) The PSUs may also examine the scope of providing adequate funding 
to pure science or fundamental science research related to its core technologies 
with a long term vision with mechanisms in place to evaluate research quality.  
(iv) The Ministry may also monitor the ongoing R&D infrastructure 
projects to make sure that they are completed on time and within budget and 
that they lead to useful research outcomes. 
(v) The Committee also suggest that Oil PSUs may explore the feasibility 
of establishing R&D Centres close to Oil or Gas producing fields such as 
Mumbai High.  
4.      RESEARCH ARTICLES 
The Committee note that the R&D Centres of Oil PSUs have actively 
published research articles in major national and international science journals 
in recent years, with a total output of 363 papers between 2022 and 2025. IOCL's 
R&D Centre has contributed the largest share with 127 publications, while BPCL 
accounts for 71, HPCL for 144 and EIL for 21. Additionally, IOCL R&D scientists 
have gained international recognition by being featured in Stanford University's 
top 2% scientist database as well as the Elsevier BV rankings for the past two 
years.  
 While commending this notable achievement, the Committee are of the 
view that the Ministry may mandate a standardized, detailed annual R&D 
reporting mechanism covering publication metrics such as journal, impact 
factor, patent conversion, collaboration details, applied outcomes etc. for all Oil 
PSUs, ensuring transparency and enabling informed resource allocation.  
  

35 
 
5. MONITORING OF R&D PROJECTS 
  
         The Committee note the Ministry’s assertion that R&D activities of Oil PSUs 
are closely monitored through annual MoUs signed by Oil PSUs with MoPNG. 
The Centre for High Technology (CHT) functions as a nodal coordinator for 
selecting research areas aligned with Government priorities as well as for 
funding, monitoring, avoiding overlapping in areas of national importance and 
reviewing collaborative projects through working groups and committees 
comprising of R&D heads of major PSUs such as IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and EIL. 
The Committee also observe that Oil PSUs have internal oversight mechanisms 
similar to Research Advisory Committees; they submit details of major projects 
and allocations, track performance through Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
like patents, publications, technology transfer and cost-effectiveness and 
undergo regular internal audits for compliance and efficiency assessment.  
However, the Committee are of the view that there is a need to make these 
institutional arrangements outcome-centric in addition to being process-
centric. The Committee, therefore, recommend the following: 
(i) Ministry may institutionalize a unified, periodic review mechanism that 
brings together the Centre for High Technology (CHT), Scientific Advisory 
Committee (SAC), R&D heads of all oil PSUs and independent experts. This 
review body can set clear benchmarks, monitor progress on collaborative 
projects, identify emerging technology areas, national priorities and facilitate 
inter-PSU knowledge sharing for avoiding duplication of efforts and ensure 
timely integration of R&D outputs into operational practices. 
(i) While avoidance of overlapping research is claimed through inter-PSU 
committees coordinated by the CHT, there seems to be no explicit, standardised, 
cross-PSU benchmarking framework to demonstrate how duplication is 
prevented in practice. The Committee are of the view that while duplication at 
the early research stage need not be discouraged as parallel exploration often 
strengthens the eventual outcome, the same flexibility should not extend to 
maturing technologies. Accordingly, all R&D projects approaching a 
Technologically Readiness Level 6 (TRL-6) stage, i.e., technology demonstrated 
in a relevant environment, should undergo a comprehensive cross-PSU review, 
at which point each overlapping effort may either be consolidated under a 
designated lead Oil PSU or taken forward through structured joint research. 

36 
 
 (iii) A list of ongoing and completed projects, as well as indigenous 
technologies developed by oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) may be 
published on the CHT website.  
 
 6. R&D ACTIVITIES FOR EOR/IOR/DEEP WATER EXPLORATION 
  
The Committee are note with satisfaction that ONGC is implementing 
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR)/Increased Oil Recovery (IOR) technologies in its 
fields on pilot as well as commercial basis and is aggressively pushing deep 
water/ultra deep water exploration while OIL is exploring cutting edge 
techniques for boosting oil recovery from ageing fields and reservoirs.  
Considering the strategic importance of these technologies in enhancing 
recovery from mature fields, unlocking frontier offshore resources, reducing 
import dependence and strengthening country's energy security, especially in 
the wake of  the present geo-political situation, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to extend all possible policy, financial, technological and regulatory support to 
the upstream  companies to enable the successful execution of EOR/IOR/deep 
water exploration and production activities in order to maximise domestic 
hydrocarbon production. Further, the Government may ensure the expeditious 
evaluation of Pilot projects and facilitate the timely commercial deployment 
of technically and economically viable projects.  
 
7.  R&D ON SHALE OIL AND GAS HYDRATES 
  
The Committee observe that while outlining the ongoing research and 
developmental status of the Country’s shale and gas hydrate exploration, the 
Ministry has emphasized that both the domains remain technologically and 
economically challenging with commercial extraction still in the experimental 
phase. The National Gas Hydrate Program (NGHP) has completed two 
expeditions, identifying substantial gas hydrate deposits, especially in the 
Krishna Godavari basin. However, progress since 2015 has been limited with no 
breakthroughs in commercial extraction. The Country’s efforts in shale gas 
production, including policy initiatives since 2013, have resulted in extensive 

37 
 
pilot studies and investments. However, analytical results suggest that Indian 
shale formations are less promising than North American analogues. Both 
ONGC and OIL have not found much promise in the explorations so far.  
 The Committee feel that in view of the growing energy needs of the 
country, prevailing geopolitical uncertainties and the resultant volatility in 
global energy markets, there is need to explore and develop all viable 
unconventional hydrocarbon resources to contribute to the country’s long-term 
energy security and reduce dependence on import.  Though the explorations 
conducted so far have not yielded positive results, the Committee urge the 
Government to keep up the R&D on shale oil and gas exploration, explore the 
possibilities of structured collaboration with international leaders in gas hydrate 
extraction technology and emulate the best practices to accelerate the 
Country’s learning process and reduce costs. The Government may also 
examine the feasibility of putting in place PPP models or any such mechanisms 
for pilot production and scale up in order to optimize risk sharing and resource 
allocation 
8. R&D ON IMPROVING REFINING EFFICIENCY 
The Committee note that current R&D activities undertaken by Oil PSUs 
reveal a noteworthy spectrum of initiatives designed to improve refining 
efficiency and shift towards cleaner fuel production. The focus areas include 
technical service support to refineries, development of advanced refining 
technologies and differentiated fuels, promotion of clean technologies such as 
Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), 2G ethanol and bio methanation to produce 
CBG as well as incorporating digital solutions and circular economy measures 
like plastic circularity etc.   
The Committee understand that refining efficiency and Gross Refining 
Margin (GRM) are tightly linked because efficiency directly influences both the 
cost of producing materials from crude oil and the value that a refinery can 
extract from each barrel.  The Committee also understand that the Ministry has 
initiated a comprehensive approach to refinery modernization as well. 
Therefore, while appreciating the Ministry for these initiatives aligned with 
global best practices in refinery efficiency and decarbonisation, the Committee 
would like to be apprised about the specific outcomes achieved as a result of 
these initiatives by quantifying the GRM pre and post the initiatives. Further, the 

38 
 
Committee would also urge the Ministry to maintain their momentum in 
modernisation of older refineries as such refineries tend to have structurally 
lower and more volatile GRMs than modern, high-complexity refineries. In view 
of the ongoing geopolitical situation, all the refineries of Oil PSUs are operating 
at more than 100% capacity. The Committee also recommend that adequate 
measures may be undertaken to ensure long term sustainability of refinery 
operations with minimum impact on domestic supply of petroleum products.  
  
9.      UMBRELLA RESEARCH ORGANISATION 
The Committee note that the petroleum research front has a Centre of 
Excellence in Oil, Gas, and Energy (CoEOGE) at IIT Bombay backed by seven 
PSUs (IOCL, ONGC, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL, OIL and EIL) and guided by an eminent 
leadership anchored in MoPNG’s ecosystem, covering a broad spectrum of 
objectives. The Ministry also cites the Scientific Advisory Committee on 
Hydrocarbons (SAC) as an institutional mechanism for downstream R&D 
promotion and long-term strategic studies.  CoEOGE has so far undertaken 84 
R&D projects through its various channels (viz., seed projects, PhD fellowships 
etc.) and some PSU-specific initiatives (Viz. EIL’s seven mission mode projects, 
OIL’s geothermal energy work etc.). The details of the grant and share of the 
participating PSUs are decided by the Governing Council of CoEOGE. 
However, it is not clear from the replies of the Ministry as to how the R&D 
priorities are set, how cross-PSU missions are chosen or how duplication with 
in-house R&D centres and SAC-funded downstream projects are 
avoided.  Further, the reply does not throw light on any quantitative linkage 
between CoEOGE and SAC portfolios and key national goals such as import 
dependency reduction, refinery decarbonization, hydrogen and battery 
technology leadership. The Committee feel that existence of an umbrella 
organisation overseeing downstream R&D promotion and long term strategy 
studies is necessary to have synergies in R&D efforts. 
In view of the same, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may 
explore the feasibility of mandating the Governing Council of CoEOGE and the 
SAC/CHT mechanism to run a single, rolling ‘National Mission Portfolio’ with 
clearly prescribed outcomes.      
  

39 
 
 
10.    USE OF INDUSTRY 4.0 IN R&D 
The Committee note that Oil PSUs have taken several promising steps in 
embedding AI, robotics, Internet of Things (IoT), drones and advanced analytics 
into their R&D and operational ecosystem. The initiatives listed by the Ministry 
indicate a strong focus on using digital technologies to optimise existing 
refinery and pipeline operations, enhance safety and support in-house process 
and catalyst development. While appreciating the Ministry for the extensive use 
of Industry 4.0 to enhance R&D activities, the Committee advise the Ministry to 
carry out regular ‘Digital Maturity and Safety Audit’ for all AI, IoT and robotics 
projects by a panel of experts in order to check that rapid digitisation is not 
creating any hidden risks and to ensure that safety, ethics and resilience are 
built in from the start.  
 
11.    PROTECTION OF R&D DATA AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
The Committee note that the Oil sector has deployed a fairly strong layer 
of cyber protection around R&D operational infrastructure with elements like 
advanced encryption, threat detection systems, Security Information and Event 
Management (SIEM), Multi Factor Authentication (MFA), Role Based Access 
Control (RBAC), AI-enabled monitoring, 24×7 teams in place to monitor R&D 
data, etc.   
However, it is not clear whether these efforts are fragmented and 
company-specific or are consistently adopted across all oil PSUs.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend that a unified cyber and data protection 
governance model, aligned to global frameworks such as NIST SP 800-171 and 
ISO 27001 may be explored across all Oil PSUs engaged in R&D.   
 
12.    COLLABORATION WITH ACADEMIA IN R&D 
The Committee observe that IOCL, BPCL, HPCL and EIL have reported 
collaborations with reputed national and international academic and research 
institutions.  However, it is not clear whether the upstream companies like 
ONGC or OIL also engage in such collaborations. The Committee are of the view 

40 
 
that partnerships with academia are critical in R&D as they accelerate 
innovation, lower risks and costs for industry and build a skilled, future-ready 
workforce while ensuring that research addresses real-world challenges. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to increase the collaboration of Oil PSUs 
with the academia while ensuring that national priorities such as energy 
transition, net-zero pathways, Atmanirbhar Bharat, etc. are inevitably integrated 
into these partnerships. Additionally, outcome indicators of these 
collaborations like patents, commercialized technologies, pilots, start-ups, 
publications or capacity-building outcomes, etc. may also be evaluated.  
 
 13. INVOLVEMENT OF START-UPS IN R&D 
The Committee find that oil and gas PSUs have a reasonably mature start-
up support ecosystem in place using multiple funding models viz., Grant-in-Aid, 
Equity, Mix of Grant/Equity and Loans, structured selection processes and 
linkages with IITs/IIMs and startup incubators, leading to creation of valuable 
technologies and patents in areas like pipeline repair, clean fuels and advanced 
batteries.  So far, the number of Start Ups funded by IOCL, BPCL, HPCL, EIL and 
GAIL are 42, 30, 28, 29, and 38, respectively. Further, NRL, OIL and ONGC are 
also engaging with Start Ups to foster growth through innovations. Indian Oil 
incubated startups have, till date, created 89 number of Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPRs).   
However, the Committee feel that while having focus on early-stage ideas 
and small pilots, a well-defined path for taking a proven solution and rolling it 
out at scale across units or across different PSUs may also be explored. The 
Committee are of the view that R&D departments of Oil PSUs may increasingly 
engage with start-ups so as to strengthen and speed up innovation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Oil PSUs may explore the feasibility of 
creating a special fund that not only supports ideas and pilots, but actually 
finances full-scale trials and commercial use of start-up technologies in PSU 
plants and pipelines, once the technology proves itself.  
 
 
  

41 
 
14. INTENRATIONAL COLLABORATION IN R&D 
The Committee observe that Oil PSUs pursue a wide range of 
international R&D collaborations across upstream and downstream operations 
with foreign universities, research labs and technology licensor.  They also 
engage extensively with Indian IITs, CSIR labs, premier institutes and Centre of 
Excellence in Oil, Gas and Energy at IIT Bombay for interdisciplinary work on 
emerging technologies and energy transition. The Committee also observe that 
current engagements largely consist of short-term projects with global 
universities, facilitated through MoUs specific to individual PSUs. The 
Committee are of the view that in order to strengthen coordination, capability 
and impact of international R&D for Oil PSUs, an international R&D roadmap can 
be developed at the Centre of Excellence (CoE) level around a few national goals 
like decarbonisation, methane abatement, energy transition, net zero target, etc. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mission oriented R&D 
roadmap may be developed under the Centre of Excellence (CoE, Mumbai), with 
clear national priority themes and time-bound outcome targets, instead of 
fragmented PSU-wise MoUs.  Further, in addition, of focussing on short term 
projects, Oil PSUs may enter into long-term partnerships with leading global 
universities/ labs/companies with joint labs in the Country, shared funding and 
agreements on Intellectual Property sharing, so that PSUs help to create new 
technologies.    
 
 15.    R&D FOR NET ZERO TARGETS  
The Ministry has stated that oil PSUs face the dual challenge of meeting the 
Country’s rising energy demand while reducing operational emissions and that 
their R&D centres are exploring several technology tracks to achieve the net 
zero target. The Committee acknowledge the fact that petroleum refining is one 
of the hard-to-abate sectors of the economy where decarbonisation options are 
limited and difficult to achieve. However, the Committee are also seized of the 
fact that to avert the worst impacts of climate change, aggressive and 
front-loaded action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions across all sectors is 
imperative.  

42 
 
The Committee believe that robust R&D can enable net zero by creating 
and scaling technologies, business models and processes that cut emissions 
faster and cheaper than today’s options.  Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Ministry and the Oil PSUs to focus on accelerated and mission oriented R&D 
programmes explicitly aligning with net-zero outcomes so that the nation’s 
commitment towards net-zero is fulfilled. 
  
16.    PATENTS AND MONETISATION OF R&D PRODUCTS 
The data provided by the Ministry show that Oil and Gas PSUs have built 
a large portfolio of patents and technologies and use many of them inside their 
own operations but they are earning relatively little from selling or licensing 
these to others. It appears that the Oil PSUs have many technologies or 
inventions in hand but they have not built the structured machinery to scale 
them up and take them to market. The Committee are of the considered view 
that Oil and Gas PSUs should treat patent generation and monetisation as a 
strategic pillar for revenue and competitiveness. Each successfully deployed 
patent directly strengthens financial resilience for the energy transition and 
reduces dependence on imported technologies and costly licenses. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the following: 
(i) The Ministry and the Oil PSUs may move from treating patents mainly 
as technical outputs to managing them as a focused business portfolio that 
funds the energy transition.  The Ministry and Oil PSUs may explore the ways 
and means to set customised monetisation targets and KPIs for each PSU, 
depending on the performance of the PSUs, so that Oil PSUs become active 
technology suppliers rather than just asset owners and technology buyers.  
(ii) Although the R&D spending by Oil PSUs is growing steadily, the 
Ministry may identify strategies to obtain commercial outcomes from R&Ds 
developed by the Oil PSUs. The Ministry may take appropriate measures to 
address the situation. 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
17. DEVELOPMENT OF BIO-FUELS AND FLEX-FUELS 
The Committee note that the Ministry has stated that the Country is 
making significant progress in developing biofuels and flex-fuels. The progress 
is anchored by the Ethanol Blending Programme targeting 20% blending by 
2025-26. Public sector undertakings like IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and NRL are setting 
up 2G ethanol plants using lignocellulosic biomass under the Pradhan Mantri 
JI-VAN Yojana. Flex-fuel blends are being developed as per Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS). Oil companies are also central to the SATAT initiative for 
compressed biogas from agricultural residues (including parali) and are piloting 
or planning commercial biomethanation, biomass gasification, gas 
fermentation, green hydrogen projects, etc.  
The Oil PSUs have created an impressive architecture for biofuels, 
Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) and Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF).  The 
Committee are of the considered view that progress in this sector may be made 
uniform to meet the full potential with targeted reforms in feedstock policy. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may mandate that every 
large new 2G ethanol or SATAT (Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation) CBG project include at least one co-developed local skill centre 
and MSME incubation facility for services like biomass aggregation, 
organisation and management and component manufacturing. This would not 
only help the bio fuel project to run successfully but also provide a means for 
rural employment generation. The Oil PSUs can also coordinate with the State 
agencies and jointly set up hubs near major stubble-burning and agri-residue 
clusters to collect, clean, process and store residue and then send it out as 
needed to several different plants in the area. 
  
***** 
 New Delhi; 
10 August, 2026 
19 Sravana,1948 (Saka)     
                      Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                        Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
  

44 
 
Annexure-1 
Details of 16 R&D Centres: 
 
S.NO PSU NAME OF R&D Centre LOCATION OF R&D CENTRES 
1 
2 
IOCL R&D Centre Faridabad, Haryana 
New R&D Centre Faridabad, Haryana 
3 BPCL Corporate R&D Centre Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 
4 HPCL Hindustan Petroleum Green Research and 
Development Centre, (HPGRDC)  
Bengaluru, Karnataka. 
5 EIL EIL R&D Centre Gurgaon, Haryana. 
6 
 
7 
OIL  R&D Department Field Headquarters, Duliajan, 
Assam 
 Centre of Excellence of Energy Studies (CoEES) Guwahati, Assam 
8 BALMER 
LAURIE 
Applications Research Laboratory (ARL) Kolkata, West Bengal 
Balmer Lawrie Manufacturing & Testing Facility Manali, Chennai 
9 ONGC  Keshava Deva Malaviya Institute of Petroleum 
Exploration (KDMIPE) 
Uttarakhand, Dehradun,  
10 Institute of Reservoir Studies (IRS) Ahmedabad, Gujarat  
11 Institute of Drilling and Well Engineering (IDWE) Dehradun, Uttarakhand  
12 Institute of Production Engineering and Ocean 
Technology (IPEOT)  
Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra  
13 Geodata Processing and Interpretation Centre 
(GEOPIC) 
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 
14 Institute of Biotechnology &Geotectonics 
Studies (INBIGS) 
Jorhat, Assam 
15 ONGC Advanced Training Institute (ATI) Goa  
16 Centre for Excellence in Well Logging 
Technology (CEWELL) 
Vadodara, Gujarat  
 
Regional Labs of ONGC:  
 
S.NO Name of Lab Location 
1 Regional Geoscience Laboratory Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra 
2 Regional Geoscience Laboratory Kolkata, West Bengal 
3 Regional Geoscience Laboratory (Southern / Cauvery 
Basin) 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
4 Regional Geoscience Laboratory (Eastern / Assam Basin) Jorhat / Sivasagar, Assam 
5 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Regional Geoscience Laboratory 
(Western Region) 
Vadodara, Gujarat 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
(28.02.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28th February, 2023 from 1130 hrs. to 
1320 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Girish Chandra 
4 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
5 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
6 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
7 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
8 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
9 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
10 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
11 Shri Lallu Singh 
12 Shri Ajay Tamta 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
14 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
15 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
16 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 

46 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Represenatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain   - Secretary 
2. Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja  - Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Sujata Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
 
Represenatives of PSUs 
1. Shri Pushp K. Joshi   - CMD, HPCL 
2. Shri Vetsa Rama Krishna Gupta - CMD, BPCL 
3. Dr. S.S.V. Ramakumar  - Director, IOCL 
4. Shri S. Bharathan   - Director, HPCL 
5. Shri Sanjay Khanna   - Director, BPCL 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. ‘Briefing by representatives of 
the Ministry/PSUs in connection with the examination of the subject “R&D 
activities of PSU OMCs”.   
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/PSU OMCs were called 
into the sitting of the Committee to brief the Committee on the subject.  The 
Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry/PSUs and stated that 
since India is an established player in refining industry with world’s fourth largest 
refining capacity, it needs to properly invest in research and development of 
refining technology to keep its competitive edge.  Accordingly, he requested the 
representatives to brief the Committee on the R & D activities of PSU OMC’s.  He 
also requested them to brief the Committee on the role of CHT in Research and 
Development Projects of PSU OMCs, monitoring by the Ministry of the Research 
and Development Projects of PSU OMCs, R&D projects pertaining to PSU OMCs 
carried out in government funded scientific institutitions etc.    
 

47 
 
4. After customary introduction, the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG and PSU 
OMCs gave a power point presentation on the subject covering various issues such 
as Manpower and Expenditure, R&D: PSU OMCs at a glance, Product/Technology 
basket, augmenting core competence, be future ready, oil and gas sector - towards 
net zero, green H2 Projects, Sustainable and Green Uniform - a step towards Net 
Zero, Start Up Schemes of PSU OMCs etc. 
 
5. Subsequently, Members of the Committee sought clarifications on various issues 
such as R&D budgets of PSU OMCs, sharing of R&D activities by PSU OMCs with 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, research into net zero emissions, research 
pertaining to safety of gas cylinders, cooperation of R&D departments of PSU 
OMCs with outside scientists and experts, blending of diesel, R&D initiatives of 
PSU OMCs in the field of development of alternate fuels, commercialization of 
technologies development by PSU OMCs and their valuations, restructuring of 
R&D activities of PSU OMCs and carrying out them through a subsidiary company, 
need to focus on core areas, R&D initiatives of PSU OMCs in the field of treatment 
of water used in refineries, R&D projects on reduction in emission of nitro oxide 
from transport fuels, research on reduction in production cost of ethanol, use of 
nano technology in production of petrol and diesel, solar cooker and solar panel 
etc.     
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry/PSU OMCs furnished clarifications on some of 
the queries raised by the Members.  On some of the points on which the information 
was not readily available with the representatives, the Chairperson asked them to 
furnish written replies on the same within ten days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/PSU 
OMCs for providing valuable information on the subject before the Committee.        
 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 

48 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
TWELFTH SITTING 
(19.05.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th May, 2023 from 1200 hrs. to 1400 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
4 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya  
5 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
6 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
7 Shri M.K. Raghavan  
8 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar  
9 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
11 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
12 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
13 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
14 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli  
15 Dr. V. Sivadasan  
16 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 

49 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Represenatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain  Secretary 
2. Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja  Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Sujata Sharma   Joint Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of ONGC 
 
1. Dr. Arun Kumar Singh - CMD  
2. Shri O.P. Singh  - Director  
3. Smt. Sushma Rawat - Director 
4. Shri Pawan Aggarwal - ED 
 
Representatives of EIL 
 
1. Smt. Vartika Shukla  CMD 
2. Shri Rajiv Agarwal  Director 
 
Representatives of OIL 
 
1. Dr. Ranjit Rath  CMD 
2. Shri Pankaj Kumar Goswami  Director 
3. Dr. Manas Kumar Sharma  Director 
 
Representatives of GAIL 
 
1. Dr. M.V. Iyer  Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar  ED 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. ‘Briefing by representatives of 
the Ministry/Oil PSUs in connection with the examination of the subject “R&D 
activities of PSU with specific reference to ONGC, OIL, GAIL and EIL”.   
 

50 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/Oil PSUs were called into 
the sitting of the Committee to brief the Committee on the subject.  The Chairperson 
welcomed the representatives of the Ministry/Oil PSUs and requested them to give 
an overview of the current R&D activities of ONGC, OIL, GAIL and EIL also areas 
in focus for developing R&D capabilities for futuristic technologies, R&D activities in 
upstream sector for Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and Enhanced Oil Recovery 
(EOR), details of funds allocated by each of Oil PSU’s, number of persons working 
in R&D units/departments in each PSU, details of R&D centres, number of patents 
and Intellectual Property Rights obtained over the last five years, mechanism to 
transfer the technology for commercial production and royalty earned from such 
transfer of technology, details of joint ventures/collaborations with prominent 
national and international institutes etc.  He also highlighted that. since India is an 
established player in refining industry with world’s fourth larest refining capacity, it 
needs to properly invest in research and development of refining technology to keep 
its competitive edge.  He further requested them to brief the Committee on the role 
of CHT in Research and Development Projects of PSU OMCs, monitoring by the 
Ministry of the Research and Development Projects of PSU OMCs, R&D projects 
pertaining to PSU OMCs carried out in government funded scientific institutitions 
etc.    
 
4. After customary introduction, the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG and Oil 
PSUs viz. ONGC, OIL, GAIL and EIL gave a power point presentation on the subject 
covering various issues such as  structure of Research and Development, 
Manpower, Budget, R&D Centre, research activities in core areas of business, 
energy transition and clean energy, technology developed and technologies 
commercialized, patents applied for and patents granted etc. 
 
5. Subsequently, Members of the Committee sought clarifications on various issues 
such as lack of in-house R&D Centre of GAIL, technologies developed in last five 
years by EIL, cost benefit of R&D activities, duplication of R&D activities among Oil 
PSUs specially in areas of energy transition and clean energy and lack of proper 
coordination among them for selection of research projects for judicious and 
optimum utilization of resources, under staffing of some of the R&D Centres of 
ONGC, new hardware/instruments developed by EIL in last two years, impact of 
R&D activities on production of Oil PSUs, undue delay in plastic to diesel project 
being undertaken by GAIL, monitisation of patents, new technologies developed in 

51 
 
the field of exploration, feasibility of budgetary support by Government of India for 
R&D activities, sources of cheap diesel being sold in Gujarat illegally, lack of growth 
in R&D expenditure by EIL, association of corporations and local self governing 
bodies in research activities of ONGC, research initiatives in exploitation of 
unconventional hydro carbons, association of startups in research activities by 
ONGC and other Oil PSUs, principles of fixation of R&D budget, development of 
technology for fixing leackage of gas from pipelines etc.    
6. The representatives of the Ministry/Oil PSUs furnished clarifications on some of the 
queries raised by the Members.  The representatives of the Ministry also agreed in 
principle to the suggestions of the Committee pertaining to the need of in-house 
R&D Centre of Oil PSUs, establishment of the coordination mechanism among Oil 
PSUs for selection of research projects, development of technology for fixing gas 
leackage from pipelines.  On some of the points on which the information was not 
readily available with the representatives, the Chairperson asked them to furnish 
written replies on the same within ten days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. The 
Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/Oil PSUs for 
providing valuable information on the subject before the Committee.        
 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 

52 
 
APPENDIX III 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
 
FIFTH SITTING 
(09.12.2024) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 9th December, 2024 from 1530 hrs. to    
1735 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 
3 
Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy  
Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar  
5 
6 
Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
7 
8 
Shri Dilip Saikia 
Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat    
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
Dr. Amar Singh  
Shri Vivek Thakur  
Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava  
Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
14 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
15 
16 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
Shri Chandrakant Handore 
17 Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
18 
19 
20 
Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak  
Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
Dr. V. Sivadasan  

53 
 
21 
 
Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
 
1 Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Asheesh Jos -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vinod Seshan -  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri D.K. Ojha -  DDG 
 
Representatives of IOCL 
 
1. 
2. 
        Shri A.S. Sahney 
         Dr. Alok Sharma  
-      Chairman 
-      Director 
  
 
Representatives of BPCL 
 
1. 
2. 
Shri G. Krishnakumar 
Shri N. Chandrashekhar  - 
- 
CMD 
Head R&D      
Representatives of EIL 
 
1. 
2. 
Smt. Vartika Shukla 
Shri Rajiv Agarwal 
- 
- 
CMD 
Director 
     
Representatives of ONGC 
 
1. 
2. 
Shri Arun Kumar singh 
Smt. Sushma Rawat  
- 
- 
CMD 
Director 
  
Representatives of HPCL 
 
1. 
2. 
        Shri Rajneesh Narang 
         Shri S. Bharathan 
-      CMD 
-      Director 
  
 
Representatives of OIL 
 
1.      Shri Saloma Yamdo  -  Director  
Representatives of GAIL 
 
1. Shri Sandeep Kumar Gupta - CMD 

54 
 
2. Shri R.K. Singhal  - Director 
     
Representatives of CHT 
 
1. Shri Shekhar Kulkarni  - Director  
  
 
Representatives of DGH 
 
1. Shri Kaustav Nag  - ADG  
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. consideration of the 
Draft Report of the Committee i.e. ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and thereafter to take oral evidence from the 
representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs on the subject 
‘R&D Activities of Oil PSUs’.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  Some hon. Members 
made certain suggestions to the draft recommendations of the Committee. The report 
was then adopted with slight modifications in the recommendations.   
4. The Committee, then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up the second agenda of the sitting i.e. to take 
oral evidence from the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas/Oil PSUs on the subject ‘R&D Activities of Oil PSUs’. Then the representatives of 
the Ministry of P&NG/Oil PSUs were called into the sitting. The Chairperson welcomed 
the representatives of the Ministry/Oil PSUs and requested them to introduce 
themselves and brief the Committee on the subject. After customary introduction, the 
representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs made a power 
point presentation on the subject.  
  
6. Subsequently, the Members of the Committee raised several issues related to 
the subject such as R&D activities being undertaken by Oil PSUs, major thrust areas 
in focus for developing R&D capabilities, R&D expenditure by Oil PSUs, quantum of 
investments made and man-power engaged in R&D activities, details of existing as 
well as new R&D centres proposed to be set up in coming years, R&D initiatives of 
PSU OMCs in the field of development of alternate fuels, commercialization of 

55 
 
technologies developed by Oil PSUs, research and development activities for 
achieving net emissions, R&D activities in fields of oil exploration, production and 
refining processes so as to ensure self-reliance, major achievements in field of R&D, 
number of patents and intellectual property rights obtained over the last five years and 
details of joint ventures/collaborations with other national/international institutes of 
prominence in the field of R&D by Oil PSUs, need to find innovative technologies to 
find solution to waste management particularly for tackling crop residue burning by 
farmers, development of green-hydrogen and hydrogen fuel cell technology, future 
projects being chalked out by Oil PSUs for R&D activities etc; 
 
7. The representatives of the Ministry/PSUs furnished clarifications to the queries 
raised by the Members.  On some of the points on which the information was not 
readily available, the Chairperson asked the representatives to furnish written replies 
on the same within seven days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.                                                                         
8. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs for providing valuable information on the subject.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9. The Committee also deliberated upon undertaking study visit of the Committee 
in the month of January 2025 in connection with examination of subjects selected. The 
Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the proposed study visit. 
 
10.   A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record.  
 
The Committee then adjourned  
***** 
  
 

56 
 
APPENDIX IV 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(04.02.2025) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 04th February, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 
1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 
5 
Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda 
6 Smt. Joba Majhi 
7 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
8 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
9 
10 
Shri Dilip Saikia 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
11 
12 
13 
14 
 
Dr. Amar Singh  
Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
  
                      RAJYA SABHA 
15 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
16 Shri Chandrakant Handore 
17 Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
18 Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
19 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
  

57 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
 
1 Shri Pankaj Jain -  Secretary 
2 Shri D.K. Ojha -  DDG 
 
Representatives of IOCL 
 
1.       Shri A.S. Sahney -      Chairman 
2.       Shri Alok Sharma -       Director 
 
Representatives of BPCL 
 
1. Shri N. Chandrasekhar - Head R&D 
2. Shri Sanjay Khanna - Director 
 
Representatives of ONGC  
 
1.      Smt. Sushma Rawat - Director  
 
Representatives of GAIL 
 
1. Shri Sandeep Kumar Gupta - CMD 
Representatives of OIL 
 
1. Dr. Ranjit Rath  - CMD  
2. Shri Saloma Yamdo - Director 
3. Shri Trailukya Borgohain - Director 
  
Representatives of EIL 
 
1. Shri U.K. Verma  - ED  
Representatives of CHT 
 
1. Shri Shekhar Kulkarni - Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and apprised them of the agenda of the sitting i.e. oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs on the 
subject ‘R&D activities of Oil PSUs’. 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/Oil PSUs were called 
into the sitting of the Committee to brief the Committee on the subject. After customary 
introduction, representatives of the Ministry/PSUs made a power point presentation 

58 
 
on the subject giving overview of the R&D activities in upstream and downstream 
segments of oil and gas sector in the country. 
 
4. Subsequently, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the 
subject such as major thrust areas of R&D activities of oil PSUs, R&D infrastructure 
facilities in oil PSUs, products and technologies developed through R&D initiatives, 
allocation of funds and actual utilization for R&D activities of Oil PSUs, increasing 
budgetary allocation on R&D in view of energy transition requirements need to set-up 
an umbrella Research organization in the Petroleum sector on the lines of CSIR or 
ICAR, to coordinate R&D activities being undertaken by oil PSUs. Energy efficiency 
improvement in refineries, timely completion of under construction R&D centres of oil 
PSUs, roadmap for augmenting Green Hydrogen production in the country along with 
steps taken towards use of indigenous technologies in manufacturing of Electrolyser 
for Green Hydrogen production. Some members also raised query about the initiatives 
of oil PSUs for achieving Net zero targets and carbon capture and utilization, status of 
R&D for development of new and alternate fuels like ethanol, bio-diesel etc: R&D in 
lubricants segment, hydrogen purification, solar energy, number of patents filed and 
obtained by oil PSUs, revenue generated from royalty, licensing fees and 
commercialization of technologies by oil PSUs. Members also sought clarification 
about current staff strength and measures taken for augmenting skilled manpower in 
R&D centres of oil PSUs, R&D activities for reducing environmental impact due to oil 
and gas processes, Industry-Academia linkages for developing indigenous 
technologies in oil and gas industry, international collaborations of oil PSUs for R&D 
activities, use of Artificial Intelligence in R&D projects of oil PSUs. functioning of Centre 
of High Technology, long term plan of the Government on R&D in oil and gas industry, 
steps taken to engage Start-ups in R&D projects, etc. 
 
5.  Further. Secretary of the Ministry apprised the Members about the upcoming 
India Energy Week Event being organized at Yashobhumi Convention Centre. Delhi 
from 11 to 14 February, 2025 and invited members of the Committee to visit the same. 
 
6.  It was also decided that another sitting of the Committee will be held on the 
subject 'R&D activities of oil PSUs'. 
 
7.  The representatives of the Ministry/PSUs furnished clarifications to the queries 
raised by the Members. On some of the points on which the information was not readily 

59 
 
available, the Chairperson asked the representatives to furnish written replies on the 
same within seven days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
 
8.  The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs for providing valuable information on the subject 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.  A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record 
The Committee then adjourned 
***** 
 
  

60 
 
APPENDIX V  
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
(24.02.2025) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 24th February, 2025 from 1445 hrs. to 
1615 hrs in Committee Room ‘G- 074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 
5 
Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy  
Smt. Pratima Mondal 
6 Shri Jai Prakash 
7 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
8 Shri Vivek Thakur 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
11. Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
13. Dr. Amar Singh 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
15. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
16. Shri Chandrakant Handore 
17. Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
18. Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak  
19. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
20. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 

61 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
1 Shri Pankaj Jain -  Secretary 
2 Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja -  Additional Secretary 
3 Smt. Kamini Chauhan Ratan - Additional Secretary& Financial Advisor 
4 Smt. Sujata Sharma -  Joint Secretary 
5 Ms. Esha Srivastava -  Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Asheesh Joshi -  Joint Secretary 
7 Shri Vinod Seshan -  Joint Secretary 
8 Shri D.K. Ojha -  DDG 
9 Shri Rajinder Kumar -  Economic Advisor 
10 Shri Deepak Srivastava -  Director 
 
Representatives of ONGC 
 
1. Shri Arun Kumar singh -      Chairman 
2. Shri Vivek C. Tongaonkar -       Director 
3. Smt. Sushma Rawat -       Director 
 
Representatives of DGH 
 
1. Smt. Pallavi Jain Govil -      DG, DGH 
2. Dr. Kaustav Nag -      ADG 
 
Representatives of BPCL 
 
1. Shri G. Krishnakumar - CMD 
2. Shri V.R.K. Gupta - Director 
 
Representatives of OIL 
 
1. Shri Saloma Yamdo - Director 
2. Shri Trailukya Borgohain - Director 
3. Shri Abhijit Majumder - Director 
 
Representatives of GAIL 
 
1. Shri Sandeep Kumar Gupta - CMD 

62 
 
 
Representatives of EIL 
 
1. Shri Rajiv Agarwal - Director 
2. Shri R.P. Batra - ED 
 
Representatives of IOCL 
 
1. Dr. Alok Sharma - Director 
 
Representatives of HPCL 
 
1. Shri Rajneesh Narang - CMD 
 
Representatives of Balmer & Lawrie 
 
1. Shri Adhip Nath Palchaudhuri - CMD 
 
Representatives of CHT 
 
1. Shri Rajesh Agarwal - ED 
2. Shri Shekhar Kulkarni - Director 
 
Representatives of M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers 
 
1. Shri Anurag Rohatgi - Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. 
 
1. Shri S.C. Mugderikar - CMD 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. to take oral evidence 
by representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs and Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)/Rashtriya Chemicals and 
Fertilizers Ltd. on the subject ‘R&D Activities of Oil PSUs’. 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil 
PSUs and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)/Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. were called into the sitting of the Committee to brief the 
Committee on the subject. After customary introduction, representatives of the 
MoPNG/PSUs made a power point presentation on the subject giving overview of R&D 

63 
 
initiatives of oil and gas PSUs over the years. Thereafter, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)/Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. briefed 
the Committee on the Subject. 
 
4. Subsequently, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the 
subject such as key areas identified in upstream and downstream sectors for 
undertaking R&D activities by oil PSUs, manpower engaged in R&D activities, revenue 
generated by oil PSUs from R&D activities by way of commercialization of patents and 
innovative technologies, collaboration in R&D projects with national and international 
players in oil and gas sector, action plan to create synergy among R&D centers of oil 
PSUs, initiatives to improve energy efficiency of automobiles, number of CBG plants 
functional in the country and steps taken to expedite setting up of more CBG plants. 
Further, some members also raised queries regarding low investments in R&D sector 
by oil PSUs, quantum of budgetary support to oil PSUs for R&D activities, need to 
increase expenditure on R&D activities, challenges being faced by oil PSUs in 
augmenting their R&D capabilities, development of new and alternative energy 
sources like solar, wind, bio-fuels etc and R&D activities for achieving net-zero 
commitments of the Country. A few members sought clarifications on the need to 
evolve national policy for coordinating R&D activities in oil and gas sector, status of 
implementation of recommendations made by Dr. Anil Kakodkar Committee for 
creation of separate R&D cadre for oil PSUs, functioning of Centre of High Technology 
(CHT) to promote R&D in oil and gas sector etc; 
 
5. The Members also raised queries on the issues such as natural gas 
consumption in manufacturing of fertilizers, measures taken for energy efficiency in 
fertilizer industry, steps taken to popularize Fermented Organic Manure (FOM) and 
Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) to reduce dependency on chemical 
fertilizers, release of subsidy to CBG producers, development of new technologies for 
production of nano fertilizers, implementation of PM-PRANAM Scheme to promote 
sustainable agriculture by reducing excessive reliance onchemical fertilizers, new 
fertilizers plants being set-up in the country, details of R&D centers set up for fertilizer 
industry, objectives of PM Kisan Urja Suraksha Evam Utthan Mahabhiyan and its 
outcome, reasons for fall in share prices of Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Ltd.Etc. 
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs and 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)/Rashtriya Chemicals 

64 
 
and Fertilizers Ltd. furnished clarifications to the queries raised by the Members.  On 
some of the points on which the information was not readily available, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies on the same within seven days to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat.                                                                                                                   
7. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers)/Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. for providing valuable information 
on the subject. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
8.   The committee, thereafter, deliberated on the subject of next sitting and it was 
decided that the next sitting of the Committee will be held on the subject ‘Review of 
On-going Projects of Oil PSUs including CGD Projects with special reference to 
ongoing pipeline projects’. It was also decided that in addition to the MoPNG/PSUSs, 
the state government authorities concerned will also be called in the next sitting 
subject to approval of the Hon’ble Speaker.  
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record.  
The Committee then adjourned  
***** 
  
 
 
  

65 
 
 
APPENDIX VI 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2025-26) 
 
NENETEENTH SITTING 
(10.08.2026) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th August, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 
hrs. in Committee Room Samanvay - 5, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy  
3 Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
4 Smt. Pratima Mondal  
5 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
6 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
7 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
8 Shri Ve Vaithilingam  
  
                                                             RAJYA SABHA 
 
9 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
10 Shri Mithlesh Kumar  
11 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha  
12 Shri Mayankkumar Nayak     
13 Dr. V. Sivadasan  
14 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 

66 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
2.  
Shri Harish Chandra Bist 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.  XXX       XXX         XXX        XXX       XXXX   XXX        XXX  
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft report on the 
subject ‘Examination of R&D Activities of Oil PSUs’ and adopted the Report with slight 
modifications.   
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report.  
  
 