8 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’] 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


CP&NG NO.     
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2025 - 26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
  
 


CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)                                                              (iii) 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                  (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report                      1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………………   
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies………………………………………..   
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee……………………………………………   
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited………  
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2025-26) 
held on   10.08.2026. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2025-26) on 
‘Demand for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare – Chairperson 
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Chandrakant Damodar Handore  
24 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha  
25 Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
26 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha  
27 Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
28 Shri Mayankkumar Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
1 
2 
Shri Harish Chandra Bist  
Shri Sujay Kumar 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
3 
 
 
Smt. Raji Manish  
 
Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas’. 
2. The Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2026.  The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report were received 
on 26.05.2026. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2025-26) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 10.08.2026.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
10 August, 2026 
19 Sravana,1948 (Saka)     
                      Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                        Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2026. 
2.         The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Replies have been received from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in respect 
of all the 16 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have 
been categorized as follows: 
(i)       Observations/ Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,15 and 
16.                                    
(Total – 16) 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: - Nil 
(Total - Nil) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)      Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: - Nil                                   
  (Total - Nil) 
(Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - Nil                                                          
(Total - Nil) 
(Chapter- V)   
 
3.     The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should 
be furnished expeditiously.  
  
4.     The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  

2 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG 
5.         The Committee had recommended in their Original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that expenditure under the Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG 
(DBTL) Scheme depends on the actual claims submitted by Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) towards net under-recoveries which in turn reflect international prices and net 
ocean freight. In 2024-25, extreme volatility in net ocean freight led to some negative 
bills from OMCs, resulting in a much lower net claim than in the previous year, so that 
against a BE of Rs. 1,500 crore, reduced to Rs. 500 crore at RE, actual expenditure 
was only Rs. 375.27 crore. For 2025-26, an outlay of Rs. 1,500 crore at BE and Rs. 
1,000 crore at RE has been provided but actual expenditure up to 31.12.2025 is nil 
because the Scheme is under appraisal by the Department of Expenditure (DoE) as it 
transitions to the next Finance Commission cycle. The Ministry has submitted a 
comprehensive proposal on 01.10.2025 for fresh appraisal and continuation of the 
DBTL Scheme, covering both existing commitments and future requirements, and has 
temporarily withheld settlement of part of the OMCs’ bills pending finalisation of this 
appraisal, even though DBT transfers to beneficiaries have already taken place. 
Taking into account the accumulated but unsettled past claims of OMCs as well as 
expected future claims, an allocation of Rs. 1,500 crore has been provided in BE 2026-
27 by the Ministry. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to coordinate with DoE to secure early 
approval so that the pending claims can be cleared in a timely manner and the 
expenditure position for 2025-26 accurately reflects the committed liabilities and the 
2026-27 BE allocation is justified with expeditious settlements thereby safeguarding 
OMC liquidity and ensuring uninterrupted delivery of subsidised LPG to consumers. 
The Ministry has stated that corresponding DBT transfers have already been executed 
and credited to beneficiaries’ bank accounts. The Committee may be furnished the 
details in this regard. 
The Committee also opine that in order to cushion LPG subsidies from extreme 
volatility in net ocean freight, the Ministry may explore the feasibility of developing a 
freight management framework that narrows year-to-year swings in net ocean freight, 
thereby smoothing DBTL subsidy claims, enabling more realistic BE and RE 
formulation and avoiding large negative adjustments or abrupt under spending that 
hinder fiscal planning. The Committee further suggest that the Ministry, in consultation 
with Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC), OMCs and the Department of 
Expenditure, devise this framework through suitable contractual guidelines and 
monitoring arrangements.” 
 6.         In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The Revised Estimates (RE) for the DBTL Scheme for 2025–26 of Rs 1000 crores, 
have been fully utilized as on 25.03.2026, and the corresponding funds have been 

3 
 
released to the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) towards settlement of eligible 
claims. 
With regard to the suggestion for developing a framework to mitigate volatility in net 
ocean freight impacting subsidy claims, it is submitted that the pricing mechanism 
under the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme, 2014 inherently factors in all variable components, 
including international LPG prices and ocean freight. Given that India is significantly 
dependent on imports to meet its domestic LPG demand, the ocean freight component 
remains subject to considerable uncertainty, owing to dynamic global factors, including 
geopolitical developments, fluctuations in shipping markets, and supply chain 
disruptions, which are beyond domestic control and not amenable to precise 
forecasting. Consequently, while efforts are continuously made to monitor and manage 
costs efficiently, the scope for instituting a rigid or predictive freight management 
framework remains limited. 
Notwithstanding above, the Ministry, in consultation with the Petroleum Planning and 
Analysis Cell (PPAC), OMCs, and the Department of Expenditure, will explore feasible 
measures to improve cost predictability and enhance the robustness of subsidy 
estimation.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7.         The Committee note that the RE of 1000 crores for the DBTL Scheme for 
the FY 2025-26 have been fully utilised and the corresponding funds have been 
released to the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) towards settlement of eligible 
claims. Regarding the suggestion of the Committee to cushion LPG subsidies 
from extreme volatility in net ocean freight, the Ministry has stated that sudden 
changes in ocean freight are driven by external factors like geopolitical 
developments and supply-chain disruptions which are beyond domestic control 
and are not amenable to precise forecasting as a result of which the scope for 
instituting a rigid or predictive freight management framework remains limited. 
While noting the factors stated by the Ministry for having a limited scope for 
instituting a freight management framework, the Committee are of the view that 
cushioning LPG subsidies may benefit the low-income households covered 
under the PMUY. The Committee while noting the Ministry’s submission for 
exploring feasible measures in consultation with the Petroleum Planning and 
Analysis Cell (PPAC), OMCs, and the Department of Expenditure to improve cost 

4 
 
predictability and enhance the robustness of subsidy estimation would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited 
8.         The Committee had recommended as under: 
            “The Committee note that the North East Gas Grid (NEGG) Natural Gas 
Pipeline Project of Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited (IGGL), envisaged to connect eight 
North Eastern states with a 1,656 km pipeline at an estimated cost of Rs. 9,265    crore 
with 60% Viability Gap Funding (VGF) which comes to Rs. 5,559 crore, has 
experienced substantial delays in execution. While the approved project cost and VGF 
quantum have not been revised, the timeline for release of VGF has been extended 
from 31.03.2025 to 31.03.2027, resulting in time overrun without cost overrun. 
The Ministry has attributed the under spending against the BE 2025-26 
provision of Rs. 700 crore and RE of Rs. 300 crore to the impact of Right of Use (RoU) 
acquisition difficulties, delays in permissions from National Highways and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (NHIDCL) and other authorities and 
environmental vulnerabilities such as flash floods, landslides and force majeure 
conditions in Sikkim and Mizoram. The Committee note that as of 31.12.2025,   IGGL 
has incurred cumulative CAPEX of Rs. 6,678 crore, with cumulative VGF sanctioned 
at Rs. 4,414 crore and utilisation of Rs 4,383 crore indicating that the remaining works 
and VGF tranches are time-critical for realising project benefits.  The Committee note 
that the project is falling behind its completion schedule.   The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize to give due priority to this crucial infrastructure project and put in place a 
strengthened coordination mechanism      with state governments and key agencies 
to fast-track RoU and statutory clearances, adopt targeted seasonal and terrain-
sensitive construction planning wherever necessary and align budgetary provisions 
with realistic CAPEX trajectories. Further, remaining VGF releases may be more 
closely linked to physical progress milestones while IGGL should implement dedicated 
RoU task forces, enhanced risk management for disaster-prone stretches and 
stakeholder engagement programmes to minimise local disruptions and ensure 
completion of NEGG by 31.03.2027 and early commissioning of completed sections, 
in order to realise Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for North-East.” 
  
9.         In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) while according approval to the 
NEGG project, also approved the proposal for constituting an Inter-Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) for effective monitoring of its implementation. Accordingly, an IMC 

5 
 
comprising officials from various Ministries and Departments was constituted. 
Representatives from NHIDCL and concerned State authorities have also been co- 
opted into the IMC to facilitate quicker resolution of field-level issues and expedite 
pending permissions. Various hindrances/challenges viz. delay in RoU acquisition; 
land allotment for SVs, RTs etc; and permissions from various  authorities/ State 
Government etc. have been addressed-based on the directions of the IMC. Further, 
the Project Monitoring Group (PMG) is an institutional mechanism for the expedited 
resolution of issues and regulatory bottlenecks in projects with investments upwards 
Rs. 500 Crores in India. The PMG seeks to enlist the unresolved project issues in 
respect of all mid and large sized Public, Private and 'Public—Private   Partnership' 
(PPP) Projects and takes up fast- tracking of approvals, sectoral policy issues and 
removal of bottlenecks in expeditious commissioning. DPIIT is mandated as the nodal 
body for the review of public and private projects facing challenges and facilitates their 
resolution through PMG. Moreover, this Ministry has internal mechanism to   monitor 
the oil and gas projects regularly. 
As per the recommendation of the Committee, IGGL has been advised to implement 
dedicated RoU task forces, enhanced risk management for disaster-prone stretches 
and stakeholder engagement programmes to minimise local disruptions. The 
Government remains fully committed to the timely completion of the NEGG project.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
10.    From the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note 
that IGGL has been advised to implement the recommendations of the 
Committee and that the Government is fully committed to the timely completion 
of the NEGG project. The Committee also take note that an Inter-Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) comprising of officials from various Ministries, Departments, 
NHIDCL and concerned State authorities has been formed. It is further stated 
that an institutional mechanism exists in the form of Project Monitoring Group 
(PMG) for expedited resolution of issues and an internal mechanism of the 
Ministry also exist for tracking and monitoring oil and gas projects. While 
appreciating these institutional mechanisms, the Committee note that the 
recommendation regarding linking of remaining Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
releases with achievement of physical progress milestones of the NEGG project 
need to be addressed. The Committee emphasise that the remaining VGF 
releases may be potentially associated with the objectively verifiable physical 
achievements such as completion of Right of Use (RoU) acquisition, completion 

6 
 
of defined stretches of pipeline laying, successful testing and commissioning 
of individual sections. The Committee may be apprised of the Ministry’s 
comments to this recommendation. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
            “The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN (Jaiv Indhan- Vatavaran 
Anukool Fasal Awashesh Nivaran) Yojana, launched in 2019, aims to provide financial 
support for advanced biofuel and 2G ethanol projects using lignocellulosic biomass 
and other renewable feedstock. Under the scheme, 14 commercial and 8 
demonstration proposals were received, of which 8 commercial and 4 demonstration 
projects have been approved, though 3 commercial projects were later withdrawn by 
the developers. To attract wider participation, the scheme was amended in August 
2024 to expand its scope from 2G ethanol to broader advanced biofuels, allow bolt-on 
plants and brown field projects and the timeline was extended up to FY 2028-29. 
Following this amendment, 14 additional proposals have been received under Request 
for Selection (RFS-V) which are currently under review. 
The Committee also note that the budgetary allocations under the scheme have 
remained underutilized. In 2023-24, against a BE of Rs. 227.26 crore and RE of Rs. 
151.99 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 75.75 crore (33.33% of BE). In 2024-25, 
against a BE of Rs. 117.41 crore and RE of Rs.30 crore, Rs. 7.575 crore (6.45% of 
BE) were spent. In 2025-26, against a BE of 117.41, RE was reduced to Rs. 37.88 
crore which is expected to be released by the end of FY 2025-26. For FY 2026-27, Rs. 
196.94 crore has been allocated for the scheme.  
The Committee note that despite the efforts by the Ministry, out of 5 approved 
commercial plants, only one commercial plant at Haryana has been commissioned as 
of now. Out of 4 Demonstration Projects, only one project at Haryana is mechanically 
completed. Remaining projects are under various stages of completion. Considering 
the envisaged benefits of this ambitious Scheme, the Committee find its progress very 
slow. 
The Committee note that the scheme's total outlay up to 2028-29 is Rs. 1,969.5 crore. 
The Ministry has indicated that the number of commercial projects are expected to 
increase from 5 to 13 and demonstration projects from 4 to 11, with the cumulative 
design capacity of advanced biofuels projected to increase from 17.66 crore litres in 
2024-25 to 38.66 crore litres. The Committee are of the view that while projecting its 
budgetary requirements, the Ministry may look at better alignment between the 

7 
 
financial allocation and the pace of project implementation. The Ministry may also 
ensure that administrative and procedural delays in release of financial assistance are 
minimized so that allocated funds are fully utilized. 
The Committee note that the Ministry has attributed the under-utilization of funds 
mainly to technological and operational challenges associated with advanced biofuel 
and 2G ethanol technologies which are still in early stages globally and the developers 
worldwide are facing challenges in biomass conversion. In view of the same, the 
Ministry may endeavour to promote greater collaboration with research institutions, 
technology providers and industry stakeholders to support technology validation, 
operational troubleshooting and knowledge sharing among project developers with a 
view to strengthen technology support and capacity building. 
The Committee note that 14 proposals received under RFS-V are currently under 
review and further proposals are expected under upcoming selection rounds. The 
Ministry should ensure expeditious evaluation and approval of viable proposals so that 
the expanded scope of the scheme translates into tangible capacity addition and 
improved utilization of allocated funds. Further, in order to strengthen implementation 
of the Scheme, the Ministry may consider a time- bound implementation framework 
with clearly defined milestones for each approved project and closely monitor progress 
to ensure timely commissioning of the remaining projects.” 
12.       In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN (Jaiv Indhan- Vatavaran Anukool Fasal 
Awashesh   Nivaran) Yojana, launched in 2019, aims to provide Financial Assistance 
for 2G ethanol projects using lignocellulosic biomass and other renewable feedstock 
with total outlay of Rs.1,969.5Crore.  Under the scheme, 14 commercial and 8  
demonstration proposals were received, of which 8 commercial and 4 demonstration 
projects have been approved. Subsequently 3 commercial projects were withdrawn by 
the developers. 
            To attract wider participation, the scheme was amended in August 2024 to 
expand its scope from 2G ethanol to broader advanced biofuels, allow bolt-on plants 
and brown field projects and the timeline was extended up to FY 2028-29.  
Subsequently, under RFS-V, 14 proposals have been received, covering advanced 
biofuels such as Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), bio-methanol, and 2G ethanol. 
These proposals are currently under review and will be evaluated in line with the 
outlined procedure in the PM JI-VAN scheme. 
The 100 KLPD 2G ethanol plant of Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) at Panipat is 
utilizing paddy straw as feedstock. The plant is currently under capacity ramp-up. The 
185 KLPD 2G Ethanol plant at Numaligarh Refinery Limited utilizing bamboo as 
feedstock was dedicated to nation by Prime Minister in Sep 2025. The plant is 
commissioned and currently under stabilization. The 100 KLPD 2G ethanol plant of 
BPCL at Bargarh- Odisha, utilizing paddy straw has been commissioned in March 

8 
 
2026.The plant is currently under stabilization. HPCL is establishing a 2G ethanol plant 
at Bathinda, Punjab, with a capacity of 100 KLPD, utilizing paddy straw as feedstock. 
This plant has achieved mechanical completion in March 2026. 
Budgetary allocations under the scheme have remained under-utilized, primarily due 
to execution delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain disruptions 
arising from the Russia-Ukraine conflict. The sharp increase in steel and construction 
material prices led to vendor defaults, while onboarding new vendors required 
additional time. Further, limited vendor experience in biomass conversion technologies 
added to the challenges. Although initial hurdles in biomass sourcing have been 
addressed, issues related to pre-treatment and achieving stable operations at higher 
capacities continue to persist. 
While planning the annual budget, physical progress of plants is considered along with 
challenges in the implementation. The Ministry has already defined clear milestones 
for disbursal of financial assistance and is closely monitoring the progress of advanced 
biofuel projects to ensure timely implementation. Following the scheme amendment, 
project developers are willing to establish advanced biofuel plants, including SAF; 
successful global references for the technology already exist, so project execution is 
unlikely to face the same challenges encountered by 2G ethanol developers. 
Further, the Export Policy for 2G ethanol notified in September 2025 aims to enable 
market avenues and improve project viability, thereby attracting further investments, 
promoting technological advancement, and facilitating the establishment of additional 
2G ethanol plants. 
The Ministry and CHT have undertaken several initiatives to promote greater 
collaboration with research institutions, technology providers, and industry 
stakeholders. The collective actions have helped in expediting project execution and 
in addressing the operational issues. Key efforts include 
o Periodic review of 2G ethanol projects by the Scientific Advisory Committee of 
MoPNG to deliberate on technical challenges in project execution and 
technology development. 
  
o Stakeholder consultations to support technology providers and attract 
investment in advanced biofuel projects. 
  
o Knowledge-sharing among project developers and address execution 
challenges collectively. 
  

9 
 
o Activity Committee Meetings on Biofuels (2023 & 2024), providing a forum for 
industry, vendors, academia, and R&D institutions to exchange views and 
showcase the latest developments in the field. 
CHT in support with IOCL has sponsored a R&D project to TERI for valorisation of 
lignin produced from 2G Ethanol plant. ” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
13.      The Committee appreciate the 185 KLPD 2G Ethanol plant at Numaligarh 
Refinery in Assam being dedicated to the Nation in Sep 2025 utilizing bamboo 
as feedstock and the 100 KLPD 2G Ethanol plant of BPCL at Bargarh, Odisha 
commissioned in March, 2026, which is utilizing paddy straw. The Committee 
also note that the 100 KLPD 2G Ethanol plant of Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
at Panipat (Haryana) is utilizing paddy straw as feedstock and is currently under 
capacity ramp-up. The Committee further note that HPCL is establishing a 2G 
Ethanol plant at Bhatinda, Punjab with a capacity of 100 KLPD, utilizing paddy 
straw as feedstock and this plant has achieved mechanical completion in March, 
2026. However, the Committee would also like to be apprised of the current 
status of other approved plants out of 8 Commercial and 4 demonstration 
projects as stated in the Action Taken Reply. Further, the Ministry has indicated 
that under the RFS-V, 14 proposals have been received covering advanced 
biofuels such as Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), bio-methanol and 2G ethanol, 
which is under review for evaluation in line with the outlined procedure in the 
PM JI-VAN scheme. The Committee may be apprised of the time period set by 
the Ministry to complete the appraisal of these 14 proposals and further 
developments in this regard.  
Recommendation No. 12 
Payment to ISPRL for Construction of Caverns Phase-II 
14.. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that with a view to strengthening the country’s energy security, 
the Government approved the construction of two additional Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves (SPR) under Phase-II on 8 July 2021 with a total storage capacity of 6.5 
MMT, comprising of 4 MMT at Chandikhol in Odisha and 2.5 MMT at Padur in 

10 
 
Karnataka. Land acquisition of Chandikhol is at an advanced stage and financial 
closure is in progress to meet the conditions precedent as per the Concessionaire 
Agreement in Padur-II project. 
 As regards budget allocation for the Scheme, the Committee observe that the 
allocation has been scaled down at the RE stage over the past three years. For the 
financial year 2023-24, an amount of Rs.508 crore was projected at the BE stage 
which was reduced to Rs.40 crore at RE but no expenditure could be incurred. In FY 
2024–25, the BE was Rs.408.00 crore which was reduced to Rs.30.00 crore at the RE 
stage and an expenditure of Rs.17.25 was incurred. In FY 2025–26, the BE was 
Rs.100.00 crore, which was revised downward to Rs.20.00 crore at the RE stage with 
expenditure standing at Rs.14.54 crore. For 2026-27, Rs. 20 crore is allocated for the 
project. 
  
 The Committee are of the view that scaling down Budget Estimates may be avoided 
and projects may get off the ground as fast as they should. The Committee note that 
delays in finalising the bidding process and subsequent stages under the PPP 
framework led to the withdrawal of funds projected for milestone payments at the BE 
stage, particularly for the Phase-II project at Padur in Karnataka. The Committee are 
of the view that the Ministry may project realistic and need-based budgeting, taking 
into account the actual progress of land acquisition, readiness of project 
implementation and contractual milestones at the BE stage itself. 
  The Committee, while taking note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry, are of the 
view that in projects of strategic national importance, the allocated funds may be fully 
utilized. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure better planning, timely 
execution and optimal utilisation of funds so that the objectives of the Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve programme are achieved within the stipulated timeframe. The 
Committee also recommend to the Ministry/OMCs to explore the possibility of 
constructing more such caverns across the country wherever geological conditions 
are favourable keeping in view the overall energy security of the country. 
  Furthermore, in light of the global energy crisis arising from current geopolitical 
situations, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to make every possible effort to 
achieve the global standard of maintaining 90 days of crude oil storage within the 
country for strengthening the nation’s energy security and safeguarding the economy 
against potential supply shocks and external uncertainties.”  
  
15.       In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
            “Land acquisition of 400 acres of land at Chandikhol, Odisha has been 
completed..The RFP for the project is under review and will be floated after finalization. 

11 
 
 In respect of Padur-II, the Concessionaire Agreement was signed between ISPRL and 
selected bidder on 01.10.2025. Financial closure is in progress to meet the conditions 
precedent as per the Concessionaire Agreement. 
 In addition to the Phase-II SPRs of 6.5 MMT capacity, Indian Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves Limited (ISPRL) has completed a feasibility study for developing 1.75 MMT 
of additional storage capacity at Mangalore, adjacent to the existing Phase-I facility 
within the SEZ area. ISPRL has already acquired approximately 155 acres of land and 
is in the process of SEZ notification for 66 acres of land, which is expected by April 
2026. This would add additional buffer against the supply chain disruptions, further 
enhancing energy security. 
 The Government also continuously evaluates new sites and expansion 
opportunities for augmenting crude oil and petroleum product storage capacity, 
based on technical, commercial, and strategic considerations. Two more new SPR 
projects are under consideration, at Bikaner and Bina. Feasibility studies for the 
Bikaner caverns have been completed and under finalization, while the pre-feasibility 
study for the Bina caverns has also concluded and the DFR to be initiated. ” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
16.       The Committee are apprised that for increasing the capacity of Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves, 400 acres of land has been acquired at Chandikhol, Odisha 
and the Request for Proposal (RFP) for the project is under review and will be 
floated after finalization. As regards caverns at Padur-II, it is stated that the 
Concessionaire Agreement between ISPRL and the selected bidder was signed 
on 01.10.2025 and final closure to meet the conditions precedent is in progress. 
The Committee are also apprised that in addition to Phase-II SPRs of 6.5 MMT 
capacity, Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) has completed a 
feasibility study for developing 1.75 MMT of additional storage capacity at 
Mangalore for which it has already acquired approximately 155 acres of land 
and is in the process of SEZ notification for 66 acres of land. The Committee are 
further apprised that two new SPR projects are under consideration at Bikaner 
and Bina, where feasibility studies have been completed for Bikaner caverns 
and pre-feasibility study for Bina caverns has concluded and the DFR is to be 
initiated. The Committee while noting from the Action Taken Reply that the 
Government continuously evaluates new sites and expansion opportunities for 
augmenting crude oil and petroleum product storage capacity based on 

12 
 
technical, commercial and strategic considerations, urge the Ministry to ensure 
finalisation of RFPs, Special Economic Zone (SEZ) notification and financial 
closures as per scheduled timelines and also ensure optimal utilisation of 
funds. The Committee also urge that the global standard of maintaining 90 days 
of crude oil storage within the country for strengthening the nation’s energy 
security may be achieved as soon as feasible. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Financial Support for collection of Bio-Mass 
 17.       The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Scheme for Providing Financial Assistance to 
Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) producers for procurement of Biomass   Aggregation 
Machinery (BAM) was launched on 9 January 2024 and so far, 37 CBG projects have 
received in-principle approval with a total Financial Assistance (FA) of Rs.248 crore 
approved by the Project Appraisal Board (PAB). The Committee also note that despite 
a Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs.150 crore during FY 2024–25 and FY 2025–26, the 
actual expenditure has remained significantly low at Rs.1.72 crore and Nil expenditure 
(as on 31.12.2025) respectively, even though the scheme has an overall outlay of 
Rs.564.75 crore for the period 2023–24 to 2026–27. 
The Committee are informed that the low utilization of funds is primarily due to non-
submission of claims by beneficiaries, as disbursement is contingent upon   the 
procurement of Biomass Aggregation Machinery (BAM) and submission of the 
required documents. The Committee also note that only one claim has been received 
so far, resulting in Rs.1.72 crore being released in FY 2024–25, while Rs.4.37 crore 
for the same project is under process in FY 2025–26. The Committee further take note 
of the Ministry’s submission that several beneficiaries are still in the process of 
procuring machinery or have sought extensions. 
While acknowledging the revision of the scheme in July 2025 which broadened 
eligibility criteria, reduced the minimum physical progress requirement from 50% to 
25% for eligibility and introduced mobilization advance, the Committee are of the view 
that the pace of implementation of the Scheme remains slow. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may take proactive measures to expedite 
procurement of Biomass Aggregation Machinery by approved CBG projects, facilitate 
timely submission of claims and ensure faster disbursement of Financial Assistance 
under the scheme. The Ministry may also closely monitor the progress of approved 
projects, address procedural bottlenecks and undertake greater outreach and 
handholding of beneficiaries so that the intended objective of supporting 100 agri-

13 
 
residue based CBG projects and promoting effective utilization of agricultural residues 
is achieved within the stipulated timeframe.” 
 18.       In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The Ministry is committed to accelerating the implementation of the Scheme for 
Providing Financial Assistance to CBG producers for procurement of Biomass 
Aggregation Machinery. In this regard, the progress of all approved projects will be 
closely monitored through regular review meetings with the project   developers. 
Workshops and awareness programmes will also be organized for greater outreach 
and handholding of beneficiaries to facilitate timely procurement of machinery, 
expedite submission of claims, and ensure faster disbursement of financial assistance. 
Necessary steps will be taken to address procedural bottlenecks so that the objective 
of supporting agri-residue based   CBG projects and promoting effective utilization of 
agricultural residues is achieved within the stipulated timeframe.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
19.  The Committee, having noted the slow pace of the ‘Financial Support for 
Collection of Bio-Mass’ Scheme, had recommended that the Ministry may 
expedite biomass machinery procurement, speed up claim processing and 
disbursements, monitor projects closely, remove procedural bottlenecks and 
increase outreach so that the intended objective of supporting 100 agri-residue 
based CBG projects and promoting effective utilization of agricultural residues 
is achieved within the stipulated timeframe. The Committee are pleased to note 
from the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry is in agreement with the 
suggestions given by the Committee and is committed to accelerating the 
implementation of the Scheme. The Committee trusts that the Ministry will 
adhere to these recommendations in letter and spirit and will ensure faster roll 
out of the Scheme.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
achieved in so far as the issue of beneficiaries procuring the Biomass 
Aggregation Machinery is concerned. 
Recommendation No. 16 
Mission Anveshan 
20.      The Committee had recommended as under:   
“The Committee note that Mission Anveshan, launched as a continuation of the 
National Seismic Program, envisages acquisition, processing and interpretation       of 
20,275 Line Kilometers (LKM) of 2D seismic data across seven onshore sedimentary 

14 
 
basins namely Rajasthan, Ganga-Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Cuddapah, Krishna-
Godavari, Deccan Syneclise and Saurashtra with an approved outlay of Rs.792 crore 
and is scheduled for completion by FY 2026–27. The Committee have been informed 
that 10,663.44 LKM of seismic data has been acquired as on 31 December 2025 which 
constitutes more than half of the targeted survey work.  
           The Committee also take note that the work is being carried out by Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) and Oil India Limited (OIL) and out of 10,663.44 Line 
Kilo Meter (LKM) data, ONGC acquired 4,179.62 LKM and OIL acquired 6843.82 LKM. 
Further, OIL has awarded the Processing and Interpretation (P&I) contract while 
ONGC is currently in the process of issuing tender for its P&I work. The Committee 
also note that the Budget Estimate for FY  2025–26 was revised from Rs.592 crore to 
Rs.200 crore due to delayed award of contracts with Rs.107.03 crore utilization as on 
31.12.2025. Further, bills amounting to Rs.39.44 crore, though concurred by the 
Internal Finance Division, are yet to be reimbursed, pending exemption from the 
Department of Economic Affairs for release of funds. 
           While appreciating the Ministry for the commendable progress made under the 
Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may ensure timely   completion 
of the remaining seismic survey work and expedite pending payments awaiting 
clearance from the Department of Economic Affairs. Further, ONGC may accelerate 
its tendering process so that targets under Mission Anveshan are achieved within the 
stipulated timeline and a stronger, more reliable domestic energy base for future 
growth is built for the Country.” 
21.       In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
            “As on 31.03.2026, a total of 14,714.54 LKM of seismic data has been acquired 
by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Ltd. and Oil India Limited (OIL) under 
Mission Anveshan. Out of this, ONGC has acquired   6,152.86 LKM, while OIL has 
acquired 8,561.68 LKM. 
           Further, an amount of ₹200 crore has been released to the Directorate General 
of Hydrocarbons (DGH) during FY 2025–26 for onward reimbursement to ONGC and 
OIL. In addition, ONGC has initiated the tendering process for processing and 
interpretation (P&I) of the acquired seismic data. The   tendering process is expected 
to be completed by the last week of June 2026.” 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee note that as on 31.03.2026, a total of 14,714.54 Line Kilo 
Metre (LKM) of seismic data has been acquired by Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation (ONGC) Ltd. and Oil India Limited (OIL) under Mission Anveshan. 
Further, ONGC has initiated the tendering process for Processing and 
Interpretation (P&I) of the acquired seismic data which was to be completed by 

15 
 
the last week of June 2026. The Committee note with satisfaction the 
achievement of seismic data acquired and hope that the progress in seismic 
data acquisition shall be leveraged by the Ministry by completing its Processing 
and Interpretation (P&I) at the earliest so that the entire Scheme is translated 
into production outcomes at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress in this regard.  
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Need for Prudent Budgeting 
The Committee note that during the FY 2023-24, against a total Budget 
Estimate (BE) of Rs. 41,007.72 crore, the Revised Estimate (RE) was reduced to Rs. 
14,757.01 crore and the Actual Expenditure (AE) stood at Rs.14,330.21 crore, which 
is only about 34.9 per cent of BE but 97.1 per cent of RE. The Committee observe that 
in 2024-25, the situation somewhat improved with total BE of Rs. 15,930.26 crore, RE 
of Rs. 20,305.61 crore and AE of Rs.19,887.49 crore, resulting in AE standing at about 
124.84 per cent of BE and 97.94 per cent of RE.  
 
Further, in 2025-26, with an enhanced BE of Rs. 26,702.93 crore and a higher 
RE of Rs. 32,934.47 crore, AE was Rs.17,074.19 crore, which corresponds to about 
63.94 per cent of BE and 51.84 per cent of RE. The under-utilisation is also seen in 
the capital segment where AE of Rs. 281.89 crore is 2.28 per cent of the capital BE of 
Rs. 12,323.13 crore and 10.83 per cent of capital RE of Rs.2,601.26 crore.  
 
For FY 2026-27, the Ministry has proposed a total BE of Rs. 37,653.22 crore, 
with Revenue BE at Rs. 37,414.77 crore and a reduced Capital BE of Rs. 238.45 crore, 
indicating a significant increase in revenue allocation and a marked reduction in capital 
provision compared to previous years. The Committee are of the view that the ministry 
may adopt sound budgeting and forecasting models in order to minimize the wide 
variations in fund allocations and help in reducing last-minute surrenders and 
curtailment or topping-up of provisions at the RE stage.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 In financial year 2025-26, MoPNG had Budget Estimate of Rs. 26702.93 
Crores which was enhanced to Rs. 32934.47 Crores in RE. The actual expenditure of 
Rs. 17074.19 Crores as mentioned by the Standing Committee in its recommendation 
is as on 31.01.2026. The final actual expenditure for the financial year 2025-26 is Rs. 
28599.62 Crores which is about 107.10 per cent of BE and about 86.83 per cent of 
the RE. This shows slight decrease in expenditure as compared to previous financial 
year when comparing actual expenditure with respective BE and RE. However, regular 
advisories are issued to concerned Programme Divisions for efficient utilization of 
allocated budget and also ensuring sound projections of budget at RE level and BE 
for subsequent year.    
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
  
 
Enhanced Budgetary Support for Capital Expenditure  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry’s pattern of capital expenditure has been 
marked by volatility and significant under-utilisation of budgeted 34 provisions. In 
2023–24, against a Budget Estimate of Rs.35,508.98 crore under the Capital Section, 
the Actual Expenditure was only Rs.40 crore (0.11 percent of BE), primarily because 
major heads such as ‘Capital support to OMC’ (BE Rs.30,000 crore) and ‘Payment to 
ISPRL for Crude Oil Reserve’ (BE Rs.5,000 crore) recorded zero Actual Expenditure. 
A similar pattern recurs in 2025–26 where the Capital BE of Rs.12,323.13 crore 
translated into an Actual Expenditure of only Rs.281.89 crore (2.28 percent of BE), 
with key strategic heads like ISPRL crude oil reserves (BE Rs.5,597 crore) and 
transfers to the Oil Industry Development Fund (BE Rs.5,697 crore) again remaining 
largely unspent. There is reduction in the Capital BE to Rs.238.45 crore in 2026–27 
against a Revenue BE of Rs.37,414.77 crore. 
 
 Given the fact that Capital expenditure should be on the higher side as it 
creates long-lived public assets and delivers strong returns in terms of economic 
expansion and employment generation, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
may endeavor to provide government budgetary support for capital expenditure in 
order to fructify the Union Government’s strategy of using infrastructure-led investment 
as the main driver of medium and long term growth. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 
 It is submitted that the budgetary allocation for Capital Expenditure is made in 
accordance with the mandate of the respective schemes and their approved financial 
outlays. The PSUs/OMCs under the administrative control of MoPNG are generally 
self-sufficient and are able to meet their CAPEX requirements through internal 
resources; therefore, Government budgetary support towards their capital expenditure 
is ordinarily not required. 
 
 The scheme ‘Payment to ISPRL for Crude Oil Reserves’ constitutes the major 
component of capital expenditure under the Grant of MoPNG. Expenditure under the 
scheme, being linked to procurement of crude oil, is highly dependent on prevailing 
international oil prices and market conditions. Accordingly, capital expenditure under 
the scheme is undertaken judiciously keeping in view the overall financial and strategic 
interests of the Government of India. Budget allocations under other schemes in the 
Capital Section are made as per their approved mandates and are utilised efficiently. 
 
 Further, expenditure under the head ‘Transfer to OIDF’ for schemes relating to 
Sovereign Strategic Storage of Crude Oil in Capital Section are entirely dependent on 
the provisions made by the Ministry of Finance and the actual expenditure incurred 
under the concerned schemes of MoPNG, which may be met from OIDF. In cases 
where actual expenditure under the concerned schemes is lower than anticipated or 
nil, the corresponding provisions under ‘Transfer to OIDF’ are required to be 

18 
 
surrendered, after accounting for the actual expenditure incurred. Thus, utilisation 
under ‘Transfer to OIDF’ is directly linked to the actual expenditure incurred under the 
related schemes. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG 
 
 
 The Committee note that expenditure under the Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG 
(DBTL) Scheme depends on the actual claims submitted by Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) towards net under-recoveries which in turn reflect international prices and net 
ocean freight. In 2024-25, extreme volatility in net ocean freight led to some negative 
bills from OMCs, resulting in a much lower net claim than in the previous year, so that 
against a BE of Rs. 1,500 crore, reduced to Rs. 500 crore at RE, actual expenditure 
was only Rs. 375.27 crore. For 2025-26, an outlay of Rs. 1,500 crore at BE and Rs. 
1,000 crore at RE has been provided but actual expenditure up to 31.12.2025 is nil 
because the Scheme is under appraisal by the Department of Expenditure (DoE) as it 
transitions to the next Finance Commission cycle. The Ministry has submitted a 
comprehensive proposal on 01.10.2025 for fresh appraisal and continuation of the 
DBTL Scheme, covering both existing commitments and future requirements, and has 
temporarily withheld settlement of part of the OMCs’ bills pending finalisation of this 
appraisal, even though DBT transfers to beneficiaries have already taken place. 
Taking into account the accumulated but unsettled past claims of OMCs as well as 
expected future claims, an allocation of Rs. 1,500 crore has been provided in BE 2026-
27 by the Ministry. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to coordinate with DoE to secure 
early approval so that the pending claims can be cleared in a timely manner and the 
expenditure position for 2025-26 accurately reflects the committed liabilities and the 
2026-27 BE allocation is justified with expeditious settlements thereby safeguarding 
OMC liquidity and ensuring uninterrupted delivery of subsidised LPG to consumers. 
The Ministry has stated that corresponding DBT transfers have already been executed 
and credited to beneficiaries’ bank accounts. The Committee may be furnished the 
details in this regard. 
 
 The Committee also opine that in order to cushion LPG subsidies from extreme 
volatility in net ocean freight, the Ministry may explore the feasibility of developing a 
freight management framework that narrows year-to-year swings in net ocean freight, 
thereby smoothing DBTL subsidy claims, enabling more realistic BE and RE 
formulation and avoiding large negative adjustments or abrupt under spending that 
hinder fiscal planning. The Committee further suggest that the Ministry, in consultation 
with Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC), OMCs and the Department of 
Expenditure, devise this framework through suitable contractual guidelines and 
monitoring arrangements. 
 

19 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 
The Revised Estimates (RE) for the DBTL Scheme for 2025–26 of Rs 1000 
crores, have been fully utilized as on 25.03.2026, and the corresponding funds have 
been released to the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) towards settlement of eligible 
claims. 
With regard to the suggestion for developing a framework to mitigate volatility 
in net ocean freight impacting subsidy claims, it is submitted that the pricing 
mechanism under the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme, 2014 inherently factors in all variable 
components, including international LPG prices and ocean freight. Given that India is 
significantly dependent on imports to meet its domestic LPG demand, the ocean 
freight component remains subject to considerable uncertainty, owing to dynamic 
global factors, including geopolitical developments, fluctuations in shipping markets, 
and supply chain disruptions, which are beyond domestic control and not amenable to 
precise forecasting. Consequently, while efforts are continuously made to monitor and 
manage costs efficiently, the scope for instituting a rigid or predictive freight 
management framework remains limited.  
Notwithstanding above, the Ministry, in consultation with the Petroleum 
Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC), OMCs, and the Department of Expenditure, will 
explore feasible measures to improve cost predictability and enhance the robustness 
of subsidy estimation. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
LPG Connection to Poor Households (Pradhan Mantri UjjwalaYojana) 
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY), launched in 
May 2016 to provide deposit-free LPG connections to poor women, has largely 
achieved saturation of LPG access, with 10.43 crore connections issued by 
01.01.2026 and another 25 lakh sanctioned for 2025-26, of which 10.35 lakh are 
already released. Budget utilisation has strengthened, with 100% utilisation of Revised 
Estimates in 2023-24 and 2024-25 and expected full utilisation in 2025-26 through 
settlement of pending claims of Rs. 4,958 crore. The Committee also note that to 
improve budgeting and accounting, three separate heads have been created viz., (i) 
new PMUY connections, (ii) targeted subsidies to PMUY beneficiaries and (iii) 
PME/IEC ( Publicity, Monitoring & Evaluation/Information, Education and 
Communication) Campaign expenses. The Committee find this a welcome step 
towards greater transparency. While appreciating the achievements of the Ministry on 

20 
 
PMUY, the Committee wish to underline that the main challenge now is sustaining 
LPG usage, especially in rural areas where over 80% of PMUY connections are 
located. 
 According to the Ministry, average per-connection consumption has increased 
from about 3.6–3.7 refills in 2021-22/2022-23 to roughly 4.8 refills (pro-rated) in 2025-
26, with most States showing a similar upward trend, suggesting that the Rs 200, 
increased to Rs 300 later on, per-cylinder subsidy (up to nine refills) and programme 
outreach are having a positive impact. However, the Committee are of the view that 
average usage of only 4–5 refills a year indicates that many households still do not 
rely on LPG as their primary cooking fuel throughout the year and inter-State 
differences—with some States at 5 or more refills and others at 3 to 4—show 
persistent pockets of low usage despite near-universal connections. 
 The Ministry has stated that consumption of domestic LPG by households 
depends on several factors like food habits, household size, cooking habits, 
preferences, price, availability of alternate fules etc. However, the Committee are 
aware that there is widespread evidence from independent evaluations that high 
effective refill cost, cash-flow constraints at the time of purchase, continued availability 
of solid fuels and service-delivery issues including lack of doorstep delivery and 
transaction costs may be acting as major impediments to sustained LPG use among 
low-income households. The Committee are of the view that unless these issues of 
affordability and refill behaviour are addressed systematically, PMUY may not become 
an effective instrument for durable transition to clean cooking fuels. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that: 
(i) Considering the lower number of refills, the committee recommend that the Ministry 
may explore the feasibility of introduction of a targeted expansion of the LPG subsidy 
components, wherein regions which have lowest refill rates could be given a higher-
than-average subsidy amount; 
(ii) sustained and affordable LPG availability among existing beneficiaries, particularly 
in rural and low-income areas may be ensured. The Ministry may use granular refill-
behaviour data for the 10.43 crore PMUY consumers to identify the households that, 
despite holding a connection, are unable to use LPG regularly due to refill costs, 
liquidity constraints or local supply-chain issues. The Ministry may, therefore, explore 
to design targeted interventions to ensure durable and meaningful access to clean 
cooking; 
(iii) The Ministry may strengthen their monitoring framework for PMUY; and  
(iv) The service-delivery aspects of PMUY may be substantially strengthened with 
particular emphasis on rural areas. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT w.r.t. Recommendation No. 4 (i) 
 To make LPG more affordable to PMUY consumers and ensure sustained 
usage of LPG by them, Government started a uniform targeted subsidy of Rs.200/- 
per 14.2 kg cylinder (and proportionately pro-rated for 5 Kg connections) to the PMUY 

21 
 
consumers in May 2022. In October 2023, Government increased the targeted subsidy 
to Rs.300/- per 14.2 kg cylinder. During FY 2025-26, the Government is providing a 
targeted subsidy of ₹ 300/- per cylinder for upto 9 refills of 14.2 Kg cylinders per annum 
(proportionately pro-rated for 5 Kg connections). 
  
 After a targeted subsidy of Rs. 300/cylinder to PMUY consumers, Government 
is providing 14.2 Kg LPG cylinders at an effective price of Rs. 613 per cylinder (in 
Delhi). This is available to more than 10.56 crore Ujjwala beneficiaries, across the 
country. The subsidy of Rs 300 per consumer is uniformly given as refill profile varies 
not just region/state wise, but within a district as well. 
  
Recommendation No. 4 (ii)  
  
 Sustained and affordable LPG availability among existing beneficiaries, 
particularly in rural and low-income areas may be ensured. The Ministry may use 
granular refill-behavior data for the 10.43 crore PMUY consumers to identify the 
households that, despite holding a connection, are unable to use LPG regularly due 
to refill costs, liquidity constraints or local supply-chain issues. The Ministry may, 
therefore, explore to design targeted interventions to ensure durable and meaningful 
access to clean cooking. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT w.r.t. Recommendation No. 4 (ii) 
 Prices of LPG in the country are linked to its prices in the international market. 
Government continues to modulate the effective price to consumer for domestic LPG. 
  While the average Saudi CP (international benchmark for LPG pricing) rose by 
41% (from US$ 385/MT in July 2023 to US$ 542/MT in February 2026) along with 
exchange rate, the prices of domestic LPG were reduced by about 17% (from Rs. 1103 
in August 2023 to Rs. 913 in March 2026). For PMUY consumers, effective price for 
domestic LPG has been reduced by about 32% (from Rs. 903 in August 2023 to Rs. 
613 in March 2026). 
  The Retail Selling Price (RSP) of a 14.2 Kg domestic LPG cylinder is currently 
Rs. 913 in Delhi. To make LPG more affordable to PMUY consumers and ensure 
sustained usage of LPG by them, during FY 2025-26, the Government is providing a 
targeted subsidy of ₹ 300/- per cylinder for upto 9 refills of 14.2 Kg cylinders per annum 
(proportionately pro-rated for 5 Kg connections). 
  After a targeted subsidy of Rs. 300/cylinder to PMUY consumers, Government 
of India is providing 14.2 Kg LPG cylinders at an effective price of Rs. 613 per cylinder 
(in Delhi) to all eligible PMUY beneficiaries. 
  Total Numbers of refills taken by PMUY consumers have gone up from 22.79 
crore refills in FY 2019-20 to 46.22 crore refills in FY 2024-25 of domestic LPG 
cylinders. 

22 
 
 Recommendation No. 4 (iii) 
 The Ministry may strengthen their monitoring framework for PMUY. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT w.r.t. Recommendation No. 4 (iii) 
 The Ministry is undertaking continuous efforts to strengthen the monitoring 
framework. A number of measures have been undertaken to identify and exclude 
ineligible beneficiaries, as detailed below: 
 (i) System integration with CBDT for identification and exclusion of high-income 
consumers from scheme benefits- 
An MoU has been signed between MoPNG and CBDT for sharing data of LPG 
consumers with Gross Taxable Income (GTI) exceeding ₹10 lakh. A formalised data-
exchange framework has been established between OMCs and CBDT. Under this 
arrangement, OMCs share Aadhaar numbers of LPG consumers through a secure 
SFTP channel, and CBDT returns a binary response on GTI status (High Income 
Group/Not HIG) without disclosing actual income figures. Further, discussions with 
Income Tax department are currently underway to get details of Income Tax Payees 
as they are not eligible for PMUY. 
 (ii) System integration with UIDAI to weed out deceased LPG consumers from 
database- 
OMCs have entered into anMoU with UIDAI for sharing information relating to 
deceased Aadhaar authenticated LPG consumers. Under this established 
arrangement, OMCs periodically access UIDAI services through APIs and securely 
obtain updates on deceased Aadhaar holders in an automated manner.  
These measures are continuously evolving with improved availability and 
quality of cross-sectional datasets and will progressively ensure exclusion of ineligible 
consumers from the beneficiary list, thereby limiting Government expenditure. 
  Other steps: Further, the Ministry has been taking continuous steps to ensure 
that only eligible consumers receive benefits under the scheme. These steps include 
implementing biometric Aadhaar authentication of all PMUY beneficiaries, SOP on 
Handling PMUY Consumers with No Refills Beyond Installation, Monitoring High-Refill 
Distributors/ High Consumption Consumers and taking corrective actions, capping of 
refills that can be booked seamlessly to only 15 refills a year and further refill booking 
on submission of request with detailed justification, launch of a Combined LPG 
Database Platform for effective Real-time de-duplication and weeding out of 
ineligible/ghost beneficiaries from scheme, capping on number of refills eligible for 
subsidies to 9 from earlier 12 a year, mandatory annual Biometric Aadhaar 
authentication for PMUY consumers for being eligible for targeted subsidy on 8th and 
9th refill etc. 
Recommendation No. 4 (iv) 
The service-delivery aspects of PMUY may be substantially strengthened with 
particular emphasis on rural areas. 

23 
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT w.r.t. Recommendation No. 4 (iv) 
Refill booking options: The Government has undertaken a series of targeted 
measures to strengthen service delivery under PMUY , with a special focus on 
improving accessibility and usability in rural and remote areas. To enhance last-mile 
service delivery, multiple user-friendly refill booking channels have been enabled, 
including IVRS, SMS, WhatsApp, distributor-assisted booking, mobile applications of 
Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), and web-based platforms. These measures ensure 
convenient and timely access to LPG services for rural beneficiaries. 
Small package options: Recognizing the affordability and logistical challenges in 
rural areas, beneficiaries are provided the option to opt for smaller 5 kg cylinders, 
including double bottle connections, thereby improving sustained usage and 
convenience. In addition, community-based interventions such as LPG Panchayats 
and targeted awareness campaigns have been strengthened to promote safe usage 
and address local concerns regarding LPG usage. 
  
Eligibility criteria simplification: As per earlier applicable provisions of PMUY, every 
applicant was required to submit a 14-point declaration, derived from the exclusion 
criteria of SECC 2011, along with KYC application form. While 14-point declaration 
was a standalone eligibility category, it was also required to be submitted as a part of 
the application process by all applicants, even for other categories, and hence had 
redundancy into the eligibility process. 
 Accordingly, the 14-point declaration was reviewed and has been replaced with a 
revised Deprivation Declaration in the recently approved extension of PMUY scheme 
wherein 25 lakh more connections have been sanctioned. With an objective to reduce 
redundancy, enhance inclusivity, and simplify the process, the eligibility criteria in this 
phase has been simplified to a single category—adult women from poor households 
based on submission of Deprivation Declaration. 
 Distribution Network: As on 01.03.2026, there were a total of 25,606 LPG 
distributorships operating across the country, out of which 17,678 distributorships are 
serving rural areas. Further, in order to enhance the LPG distribution network and to 
improve access of LPG in rural and remote areas, OMCs have commissioned 8033 
distributorships, during 01.04.2016 to 28.02.2026 across the country, out of which 
7440 (i.e. 93 %) are catering to rural areas. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
One-time grant to OMCs 
 
 The Committee observe that under the head ‘One-time Grant to PSU OMCs 
for under-recoveries in Domestic LPG’, against a Revised Estimate of Rs. 12,500 crore 
in 2025-26, the actual expenditure is only Rs. 7,500 crore, whereas the BE for 2026-
27 is enhanced to Rs. 17,500 crore. The Committee are informed that this flows from 
the Cabinet approval of an overall compensation package of Rs. 30,000 crore, 
approved in August 2025 to be disbursed in 12 equal monthly tranches commencing 
from November 2025, of which five tranches fall in FY 2025-26 and seven in FY 2026-
27. The Committee note that as on 31.12.2025 the Ministry has spent Rs. 7,500 crore. 
Since each tranche consist of Rs. 2,500 crore, the Ministry may apprise whether they 
would be able to completely utilize the remaining Rs. 5,000 crore by 31 March, 2026. 
The Committee are of the view that a realistic internal assessment at RE stage about 
whether all five scheduled tranches would be fully disbursed or booked in accounts by 
31 March 2026 would have helped the Ministry in projecting its RE in line with realistic 
disbursement capacity. The Ministry may apprise the final details of the expenditure 
on this account during 2025-26, while furnishing action taken replies to the Committee. 
 Further, the Committee, suggest that timely disbursement of the sanctioned 
grant of Rs. 17,500 for the year 2026-27 to OMCs may be made in order to enhance 
their financial strength and viability in the wake of constant volatility in oil prices. 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 Compensation to PSU OMCs for under-recoveries in domestic LPG is being 
disbursed in terms of the Cabinet approval of an overall compensation of Rs. 30,000 
crore, to be released in 12 equal monthly installments of Rs. 2,500 crore each, 
commencing from November 2025. 
 During FY 2025–26, all five installments due for the financial year, amounting 
to Rs. 12,500 crore, have been released and the Revised Estimates (RE) allocation 
has been fully utilized. 
 For FY 2026–27, the Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 17,500 crore has been 
provided in line with the remaining seven installments under the approved 
compensation amount. The Ministry remains committed to ensuring timely 
disbursement of these funds to OMCs to support their financial position.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
  

25 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Other Subsidy Payable Including North East Region (Domestic Natural Gas)   
 The Committee note that under the head ‘subsidy payable including NE 
region’, the 2025-26 Budget Estimate was Rs. 1,200 crore, the Revised Estimate Rs. 
1,103 crore and expenditure by February 2026 about Rs. 785.3 crore, reflecting 
subsidy on gas sales up to October 2025, with additional audited claims for November 
2025 to February 2026 expected to be paid once the Department of Economic Affairs 
relaxes Quarterly and Monthly Expenditure Plans. The expenditure pattern of the 
scheme shows 100 % utilisation of BE/RE in 2023-24, 91.97% of BE/RE in 2024-25 
and 71.19 percent of RE in 2025-26. The Ministry has assured that the entire allocation 
under RE 2025-26 will be fully utilised subject to the approval of the proposal sent to 
Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) for relaxation/revision of 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP)/Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP). 
 The Committee understand that North East (NE)-specific gas subsidies are 
used as a regional-equity instrument to provide affordable Administered Pricing 
Mechanism (APM) gas to industries and consumers in a geographically constrained 
region, thereby promoting industrial growth, jobs and cleaner fuel use. The Committee, 
urge the Ministry to follow up the matter so that settlement of all pending claims related 
to subsidy payable including NER may be made effective with a view to utilise the 
allocated funds. The Committee also emphasize that the Ministry may periodically 
review and refine the coverage of the NE APM Gas Subsidy Scheme so that support 
is increasingly focused on priority, job-creating sectors and genuinely disadvantaged 
consumers in the North-Eastern Region, with clear caps in place.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
It is submitted that the entire allocation of Rs. 1103 Crore under RE 2025-26 
has been utilized as on31.03.2026.it is further submitted that third party evaluation of 
the Scheme has been conducted and the Government has noted the 
recommendations of the Committee to review and refine the coverage of the NE APM 
Gas Subsidy Scheme.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
  
Recommendation No. 7 
Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited  
 The Committee note that the North East Gas Grid (NEGG) Natural Gas 
Pipeline Project of Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited (IGGL), envisaged to connect eight 
North Eastern states with a 1,656 km pipeline at an estimated cost of Rs. 9,265 crore 
with 60% Viability Gap Funding (VGF) which comes to Rs. 5,559 crore, has 
experienced substantial delays in execution. While the approved project cost and VGF 

26 
 
quantum have not been revised, the timeline for release of VGF has been extended 
from 31.03.2025 to 31.03.2027, resulting in time overrun without cost overrun. 
 The Ministry has attributed the under spending against the BE 2025-26 
provision of Rs. 700 crore and RE of Rs. 300 crore to the impact of Right of Use (RoU) 
acquisition difficulties, delays in permissions from National Highways and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (NHIDCL) and other authorities and 
environmental vulnerabilities such as flash floods, landslides and force majeure 
conditions in Sikkim and Mizoram. The Committee note that as of 31.12.2025, IGGL 
has incurred cumulative CAPEX of Rs. 6,678 crore, with cumulative VGF sanctioned 
at Rs. 4,414 crore and utilisation of Rs 4,383 crore indicating that the remaining works 
and VGF tranches are time-critical for realising project benefits. The Committee note 
that the project is falling behind its completion schedule. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize to give due priority to this crucial infrastructure project and put in place a 
strengthened coordination mechanism with state governments and key agencies to 
fast-track RoU and statutory clearances, adopt targeted seasonal and terrain-sensitive 
construction planning wherever necessary and align budgetary provisions with 
realistic CAPEX trajectories. Further, remaining VGF releases may be more closely 
linked to physical progress milestones while IGGL should implement dedicated RoU 
task forces, enhanced risk management for disaster-prone stretches and stakeholder 
engagement programmes to minimise local disruptions and ensure completion of 
NEGG by 31.03.2027 and early commissioning of completed sections, in order to 
realise Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for North-East.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) while according approval 
to the NEGG project, also approved the proposal for constituting an Inter-Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) for effective monitoring of its implementation. Accordingly, an IMC 
comprising officials from various Ministries and Departments was constituted. 
Representatives from NHIDCL and concerned State authorities have also been co- 
opted into the IMC to facilitate quicker resolution of field-level issues and expedite 
pending permissions. Various hindrances/challenges viz. delay in RoU acquisition; 
land allotment for SVs, RTs etc; and permissions from various authorities/ State 
Government etc. have been addressed-based on the directions of the IMC. Further, 
the Project Monitoring Group (PMG) is an institutional mechanism for the expedited 
resolution of issues and regulatory bottlenecks in projects with investments upwards 
Rs. 500 Crores in India. The PMG seeks to enlist the unresolved project issues in 
respect of all mid and large sized Public, Private and 'Public—Private Partnership' 
(PPP) Projects and takes up fast-tracking of approvals, sectoral policy issues and 
removal of bottlenecks in expeditious commissioning. DPIIT is mandated as the nodal 
body for the review of public and private projects facing challenges and facilitates their 
resolution through PMG. Moreover, this Ministry has internal mechanism to monitor 
the oil and gas projects regularly. 
As per there commendation of the Committee, IGGL has been advised to 
implement dedicated RoU task forces, enhanced risk management for disaster-prone 

27 
 
stretches and stakeholder engagement programmes to minimise local disruptions. The 
Government remains fully committed to the timely completion of the NEGG project. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
   
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Indian Institute of Petroleum Energy (IIPE) 
 The Committee note that the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) 
which was operating from a temporary campus in Andhra University, Vishakhapatnam 
since its inception in 2016, has shifted to a permanent campus in Anakapalli District on 
05.01.2026. The Committee also note that owing to a prolonged legal dispute, the land 
allotted free of cost by the Government of Andhra Pradesh for the Institute could be 
formally handed over to IIPE only in March 2023. As of 31.12.2025, Phase-I 
construction of IIPE has achieved about 79% progress with essential academic and 
hostel buildings being completed.  
 As regards the budget allocations for the project, the Committee note that 
although substantial Budget and Revised Estimates had been provided for the project, 
the actual release of funds in 2024–25 and 2025–26 remained constrained. In 2023–24 
and 2024–25, the Budget Estimates (BE) were maintained at Rs. 168 crore for each 
year. The Revised Estimates (RE) were subsequently reduced to Rs. 90.00 crore and 
Rs. 88.08 crore respectively. While the entire RE allocation for 2023–24 was fully 
utilised, no expenditure was incurred during 2024–25. The Ministry informed in this 
regard that as the construction of the Institute was delayed due to land litigation issues, 
timelines for release of capital outlay as approved by the Cabinet lapsed and hence, no 
fund could be released during FY 2024-25 due to pending extension of project’s 
timelines. Further, BE 2025-26 was 0.00 due to the same reason, and Rs.50.00 Crore 
have been allocated to IIPE in January, 2026 only, through 1st Supplementary Demand 
for Grants.  
 The Committee hope that the Ministry will take adequate steps to fully utilize 
the allocated Rs. 50 Crore of RE 2025-26 & Rs.302 Crore of BE 2026-27. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Rs. 50.00 crore allocated to Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) 
through 1st Supplementary Demand for Grants during FY 2025-26 has already been 
released to the Institute during the year and utilised towards payment of dues to CPWD 
and other agencies for the ongoing work of construction of the permanent campus of 
the institute.  

28 
 
In anticipation of Rs. 302.36 crore, allocated for IIPE in BE 2026-27, the institute 
has already initiated the process for completing the balance work as approved by the 
Cabinet. Item-wise indicative expenditure plan has also been devised and some of the 
work services are already under progress. With the ongoing monitoring activities and 
measures taken in the Institute and the Ministry, the Ministry is hopeful of utilizing Rs. 
302.36 crore during FY 2026-27 itself.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana  
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN (Jaiv Indhan- Vatavaran 
Anukool Fasal Awashesh Nivaran) Yojana, launched in 2019, aims to provide financial 
support for advanced biofuel and 2G ethanol projects using lignocellulosic biomass 
and other renewable feedstock. Under the scheme, 14 commercial and 8 
demonstration proposals were received, of which 8 commercial and 4 demonstration 
projects have been approved, though 3 commercial projects were later withdrawn by 
the developers. To attract wider participation, the scheme was amended in August 
2024 to expand its scope from 2G ethanol to broader advanced biofuels, allow bolt-on 
plants and brown field projects and the timeline was extended up to FY 2028-29. 
Following this amendment, 14 additional proposals have been received under Request 
for Selection (RFS-V) which are currently under review. 
 The Committee also note that the budgetary allocations under the scheme 
have remained underutilized. In 2023-24, against a BE of Rs. 227.26 crore and RE of 
Rs. 151.99 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 75.75 crore (33.33% of BE). In 2024-
25, against a BE of Rs. 117.41 crore and RE of Rs.30 crore, Rs. 7.575 crore (6.45% 
of BE) were spent. In 2025-26, against a BE of 117.41, RE was reduced to Rs. 37.88 
crore which is expected to be released by the end of FY 2025-26. For FY 2026-27, Rs. 
196.94 crore has been allocated for the scheme.  
The Committee note that despite the efforts by the Ministry, out of 5 approved 
commercial plants, only one commercial plant at Haryana has been commissioned as 
of now. Out of 4 Demonstration Projects, only one project at Haryana is mechanically 
completed. Remaining projects are under various stages of completion. Considering 
the envisaged benefits of this ambitious Scheme, the Committee find its progress very 
slow. 
 The Committee note that the scheme's total outlay up to 2028-29 is Rs. 1,969.5 
crore. The Ministry has indicated that the number of commercial projects are expected 
to increase from 5 to 13 and demonstration projects from 4 to 11, with the cumulative 
design capacity of advanced biofuels projected to increase from 17.66 crore litres in 
2024-25 to 38.66 crore litres. The Committee are of the view that while projecting its 

29 
 
budgetary requirements, the Ministry may look at better alignment between the 
financial allocation and the pace of project implementation. The Ministry may also 
ensure that administrative and procedural delays in release of financial assistance are 
minimized so that allocated funds are fully utilized. 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has attributed the under-utilization of 
funds mainly to technological and operational challenges associated with advanced 
biofuel and 2G ethanol technologies which are still in early stages globally and the 
developers worldwide are facing challenges in biomass conversion. In view of the 
same, the Ministry may endeavour to promote greater collaboration with research 
institutions, technology providers and industry stakeholders to support technology 
validation, operational troubleshooting and knowledge sharing among project 
developers with a view to strengthen technology support and capacity building. 
 The Committee note that 14 proposals received under RFS-V are currently 
under review and further proposals are expected under upcoming selection rounds. 
The Ministry should ensure expeditious evaluation and approval of viable proposals 
so that the expanded scope of the scheme translates into tangible capacity addition 
and improved utilization of allocated funds. Further, in order to strengthen 
implementation of the Scheme, the Ministry may consider a time- bound 
implementation framework with clearly defined milestones for each approved project 
and closely monitor progress to ensure timely commissioning of the remaining 
projects. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 The Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN (Jaiv Indhan- Vatavaran Anukool Fasal Awashesh 
Nivaran) Yojana, launched in 2019, aims to provide Financial Assistance for 2G 
ethanol projects using lignocellulosic biomass and other renewable feedstock with 
total outlay of Rs.1,969.5Crore.Under the scheme, 14 commercial and 8 
demonstration proposals were received, of which 8 commercial and 4 demonstration 
projects have been approved. Subsequently 3 commercial projects were withdrawn by 
the developers. 
 To attract wider participation, the scheme was amended in August 2024 to 
expand its scope from 2G ethanol to broader advanced biofuels, allow bolt-on plants 
and brown field projects and the timeline was extended up to FY 2028-29. 
Subsequently, under RFS-V, 14 proposals have been received, covering advanced 
biofuels such as Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), bio-methanol, and 2G ethanol. 
These proposals are currently under review and will be evaluated in line with the 
outlined procedure in the PM JI-VAN scheme. 
 The 100 KLPD 2G ethanol plant of Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) at 
Panipat is utilizing paddy straw as feedstock. The plant is currently under capacity 
ramp-up. The 185 KLPD 2G Ethanol plant at Numaligarh Refinery Limited utilizing 

30 
 
bamboo as feedstock was dedicated to nation by Prime Minister in Sep 2025. The 
plant is commissioned and currently under stabilization. The 100 KLPD 2G ethanol 
plant of BPCL at Bargarh- Odisha, utilizing paddy straw has been commissioned in 
March 2026.The plant is currently under stabilization. HPCL is establishing a 2G 
ethanol plant at Bathinda, Punjab, with a capacity of 100 KLPD, utilizing paddy straw 
as feedstock. This plant has achieved mechanical completion in March 2026. 
 Budgetary allocations under the scheme have remained under-utilized, 
primarily due to execution delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain 
disruptions arising from the Russia-Ukraine conflict. The sharp increase in steel and 
construction material prices led to vendor defaults, while onboarding new vendors 
required additional time. Further, limited vendor experience in biomass conversion 
technologies added to the challenges. Although initial hurdles in biomass sourcing 
have been addressed, issues related to pre-treatment and achieving stable operations 
at higher capacities continue to persist. 
 While planning the annual budget, physical progress of plants is considered 
along with challenges in the implementation. The Ministry has already defined clear 
milestones for disbursal of financial assistance and is closely monitoring the progress 
of advanced biofuel projects to ensure timely implementation. Following the scheme 
amendment, project developers are willing to establish advanced biofuel plants, 
including SAF; successful global references for the technology already exist, so project 
execution is unlikely to face the same challenges encountered by 2G ethanol 
developers. 
 Further, the Export Policy for 2G ethanol notified in September 2025 aims to 
enable market avenues and improve project viability, thereby attracting further 
investments, promoting technological advancement, and facilitating the establishment 
of additional 2G ethanol plants. 
 The Ministry and CHT have undertaken several initiatives to promote greater 
collaboration with research institutions, technology providers, and industry 
stakeholders. The collective actions have helped in expediting project execution and 
in addressing the operational issues. Key efforts include 
o Periodic review of 2G ethanol projects by the Scientific Advisory Committee of 
MoPNG to deliberate on technical challenges in project execution and 
technology development. 
 
o Stakeholder consultations to support technology providers and attract 
investment in advanced biofuel projects. 
 
o Knowledge-sharing among project developers and address execution 
challenges collectively. 
 

31 
 
o Activity Committee Meetings on Biofuels (2023 & 2024), providing a forum for 
industry, vendors, academia, and R&D institutions to exchange views and 
showcase the latest developments in the field. 
 
CHT in support with IOCL has sponsored a R&D project to TERI for valorisation of 
lignin produced from 2G Ethanol plant.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserve Limited - Strategic Crude Oil Reserve 
(O&M) 
The Committee note that the Government provides budgetary support to Indian 
Strategic Petroleum Reserve Limited (ISPRL) under the scheme “Payment to ISPRL for 
Strategic Crude Oil Reserve (O&M)” for meeting the Operations and Maintenance (O&M) 
expenses of Strategic Petroleum Reserve facilities (established under phase-I) located 
at Visakhapatnam, Mangaluru and Padur, having a total storage capacity of 5.33 MMT of 
crude oil. The Committee also note a gap between the Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates and the Actual Expenditure (AE) under the scheme in the last three financial 
years with the actual expenditure standing at 75%, 45% and 47% of BE allocated in 
FYs.2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
   The Committee further note that the Ministry has attributed the reduction in 
expenditure to factors such as non-deployment of planned security personnel, lower 
electricity and manpower costs, delays in deputation of staff, lower crude oil 
operational activities and delays in finalising the warehousing agreement with 
Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited. 
 
While the Committee acknowledge that certain reductions may have arisen due 
to operational efficiencies and lower-than-estimated expenditure, they are of the opinion 
that recurring downward revisions from BE to RE indicate shortcomings in realistic 
assessment of operational requirements and planning. The Committee are of the opinion 
that given the strategic importance of crude oil reserves in strengthening the country’s 
energy security, such variations in budgeting merit closer examination. 

32 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may undertake a more 
realistic assessment of O&M requirements, particularly with regard to manpower 
deployment, security arrangements and operational agreements, so as to minimise wide 
variations between BE and RE. The Committee also urge the Ministry to expedite 
pending operational arrangements and contractual agreements so that the infrastructure 
created under the Strategic Petroleum Reserve programme is utilised efficiently and the 
budgetary allocations are optimally utilised. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 ISPRL prepares the Budget estimates from the Inputs submitted by all 
locations based on the circumstances prevailing and data available at that time. 
Requirement of head wise financials are discussed and deliberated by committee 
consisting of CEO& MD, Dy.CEO, CFO and head Site & Deputy Head sites of all 
locations and other designated person. Based on the feedback received, requirement 
provided by the user are modified. 
BE for any period is decided by ISPRL six-seven months before the year is 
actually started considering the activities which might take place and considering 
contingencies which may or may not occur during the given period for which budget is 
prepared and sent for approval of competent authorities. In case, the said activity is 
not expected to be undertaken in the year, the BE is revised and RE is provided 
considering reduction in BE figure. Even after above, there always remains a 
possibility that contingency or activity as predicted may or may not occur due to 
unforeseen future. Hence, considering unforeseen future, there exists a possibility of 
variation in actual expenditure incurred v/s budget as anticipated. 
However, Recommendations of the committee are noted and more proactive steps 
will be taken by ISPRL to ensure that when budget is prepared, due care will be taken for 
manpower deployment, security arrangements and operational agreements so as to 
minimise wide variations between budgeted and actual expenditure.   
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Payment to ISPRL for purchase of land 
The Committee note that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed 
between Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) and Mangalore Special 
Economic Zone Limited (MSEZL) on 17 March 2023 for acquisition of 154.90 acres of land 
by ISPRL from MSEZL for establishing additional cavern storage at its facility in Mangalore. 
As per the terms of the MoU, ISPRL was required to decide whether the proposed facilities 
would be developed under the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) or within the Special Economic 
Zone (SEZ) framework. Based on this decision, MSEZL was required to either de-notify 

33 
 
88.16 acres of land or notify 66.74 acres, together constituting the total area of 154.90 acres. 
ISPRL decided to proceed with the option of notification of 66.74 acres of land and the 
decision was communicated to MSEZL on 18 June 2025. An amount of Rs.215.59 crore 
has already been paid by ISPRL against a total cost of Rs.226.94 crore. However, the 
Committee note that the signing of deed with MSEZL is still pending due to the awaiting 
confirmation regarding notification of 66.74 acres of land by MSEZL. An amount of Rs.10 
crore is allocated in 2026-27 BE for purchase of land by ISPRL. 
The Committee are of the view that Strategic Petroleum Reserves play a crucial 
role in strengthening the energy security of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas pursue the matter with MSEZL 
and other authorities concerned on priority to expedite the notification of the remaining land 
and facilitate the early execution of the lease deed. Ministry may also ensure close 
coordination with all the stakeholders and establish a clear timeline for completion of the 
remaining formalities so that the development of additional cavern storage at Mangalore 
can commence at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
   ISPRL, vide email dated 18th June 2025 informed MSEZL to go ahead with 
notifying the De-notified land (66.74 acres—DTA land) to develop the SPR in SEZ 
notified land and requested MSEZL to proceed for needful action at their end. MSEZL 
had initially indicated a timeline of about 04 – 06 months for completing notification 
activities. However, MSEZL vide email dated 16th March 2026 informed ISPRL that 
the subject activity involved the various approvals viz., Seeking the 
approvals/Certificates from Special Land acquisition officer, KIADB, NoC from State 
Govt, No Due certificate from the Specified Officer, Joint Inspection and survey Report 
by Development Commissioner and SLAO, KIADB. All these activities have been 
completed. Now the Application for Notification is sent by Development Commissioner, 
MSEZ to the Board of Approval, MoCI, New Delhi for notification. Once approved, the 
land will be notified as SEZ and Gazette will be issued. 
  All efforts are being made to commence the project at the earliest.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Payment to ISPRL for Construction of Caverns Phase-II 
The Committee note that with a view to strengthening the country’s energy 
security, the Government approved the construction of two additional Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves (SPR) under Phase-II on 8 July 2021 with a total storage capacity 
of 6.5 MMT, comprising of 4 MMT at Chandikhol in Odisha and 2.5 MMT at Padur in 
Karnataka. Land acquisition of Chandikhol is at an advanced stage and financial 
closure is in progress to meet the conditions precedent as per the Concessionaire 
Agreement in Padur-II project. 

34 
 
  As regards budget allocation for the Scheme, the Committee observe that the 
allocation has been scaled down at the RE stage over the past three years. For the 
financial year 2023-24, an amount of Rs.508 crore was projected at the BE stage 
which was reduced to Rs.40 crore at RE but no expenditure could be incurred. In FY 
2024–25, the BE was Rs.408.00 crore which was reduced to  Rs.30.00 crore at 
the RE stage and an expenditure of Rs.17.25 was incurred. In FY 2025–26, the BE 
was Rs.100.00 crore, which was revised downward to Rs.20.00 crore at the RE stage 
with expenditure standing at Rs.14.54 crore . For 2026-27, Rs. 20 crore is allocated 
for the project. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that scaling down Budget Estimates may be 
avoided and projects may get off the ground as fast as they should. The Committee 
note that delays in finalising the bidding process and subsequent stages under the 
PPP framework led to the withdrawal of funds projected for milestone payments at the 
BE stage, particularly for the Phase-II project at Padur in Karnataka. The Committee 
are of the view that the Ministry may project realistic and need-based budgeting, taking 
into account the actual progress of land acquisition, readiness of project 
implementation and contractual milestones at the BE stage itself. 
 
 The Committee, while taking note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry, are of 
the view that in projects of strategic national importance, the allocated funds may be 
fully utilized. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure better planning, 
timely execution and optimal utilisation of funds so that the objectives of the Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve programme are achieved within the stipulated timeframe. The 
Committee also recommend to the Ministry/OMCs to explore the possibility of 
constructing more such caverns across the country wherever geological conditions 
are favourable keeping in view the overall energy security of the country. 
 
 Furthermore, in light of the global energy crisis arising from current geopolitical 
situations, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to make every possible effort to 
achieve the global standard of maintaining 90 days of crude oil storage within the 
country for strengthening the nation’s energy security and safeguarding the economy 
against potential supply shocks and external uncertainties. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Land acquisition of 400 acres of land at Chandikhol, Odisha has been 
completed. The RFP for the project is under review and will be floated after finalization. 
 
In respect of Padur-II, the Concessionaire Agreement was signed between 
ISPRL and selected bidder on 01.10.2025. Financial closure is in progress to meet the 
conditions precedent as per the Concessionaire Agreement. 
 
In addition to the Phase-II SPRs of 6.5 MMT capacity, Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL) has completed a feasibility study for developing 
1.75 MMT of additional storage capacity at Mangalore, adjacent to the existing 
Phase-I facility within the SEZ area. ISPRL has already acquired approximately 155 
acres of land and is in the process of SEZ notification for 66 acres of land, which is 

35 
 
expected by April 2026. This would add additional buffer against the supply chain 
disruptions, further enhancing energy security. 
 
The Government also continuously evaluates new sites and expansion 
opportunities for augmenting crude oil and petroleum product storage capacity, 
based on technical, commercial, and strategic considerations. Two more new SPR 
projects are under consideration, at Bikaner and Bina. Feasibility studies for the 
Bikaner caverns have been completed and under finalization, while the pre-feasibility 
study for the Bina caverns has also concluded and the DFR to be initiated. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation No. 13 
Financial Support for collection of Bio-Mass 
 The Committee note that the Scheme for Providing Financial Assistance to 
Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) producers for procurement of Biomass Aggregation 
Machinery (BAM) was launched on 9 January 2024 and so far, 37 CBG projects have 
received in-principle approval with a total Financial Assistance (FA) of Rs.248 crore 
approved by the Project Appraisal Board (PAB). The Committee also note that despite 
a Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs.150 crore during FY 2024–25 and FY 2025–26, the 
actual expenditure has remained significantly low at Rs.1.72 crore and Nil expenditure 
(as on 31.12.2025) respectively, even though the scheme has an overall outlay of 
Rs.564.75 crore for the period 2023–24 to 2026– 27. 
 
 The Committee are informed that the low utilization of funds is primarily due to 
non-submission of claims by beneficiaries, as disbursement is contingent upon the 
procurement of Biomass Aggregation Machinery (BAM) and submission of the 
required documents. The Committee also note that only one claim has been received 
so far, resulting in Rs.1.72 crore being released in FY 2024–25, while Rs.4.37 crore 
for the same project is under process in FY 2025–26. The Committee further take note 
of the Ministry’s submission that several beneficiaries are still in the process of 
procuring machinery or have sought extensions. 
 
 While acknowledging the revision of the scheme in July 2025 which broadened 
eligibility criteria, reduced the minimum physical progress requirement from 50% to 
25% for eligibility and introduced mobilization advance, the Committee are of the view 
that the pace of implementation of the Scheme remains slow. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may take proactive measures to expedite 
procurement of Biomass Aggregation Machinery by approved CBG projects, facilitate 
timely submission of claims and ensure faster disbursement of Financial Assistance 
under the scheme. The Ministry may also closely monitor the progress of approved 
projects, address procedural bottlenecks and undertake greater outreach and 
handholding of beneficiaries so that the intended objective of supporting 100 agri-

36 
 
residue based CBG projects and promoting effective utilization of agricultural residues 
is achieved within the stipulated timeframe. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The Ministry is committed to accelerating the implementation of the Scheme for 
Providing Financial Assistance to CBG producers for procurement of Biomass 
Aggregation Machinery. In this regard, the progress of all approved projects will be 
closely monitored through regular review meetings with the project developers. 
Workshops and awareness programmes will also be organized for greater outreach 
and handholding of beneficiaries to facilitate timely procurement of machinery, 
expedite submission of claims, and ensure faster disbursement of financial assistance. 
Necessary steps will be taken to address procedural bottlenecks so that the objective 
of supporting agri-residue based CBG projects and promoting effective utilization of 
agricultural residues is achieved within the stipulated timeframe. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 Recommendation No. 14 
 
Scheme for Development of Pipeline Infrastructure for injection of Compressed 
Bio Gas (CBG) in City Gas Distribution Network  
  The Committee note that the Scheme for Development of Pipeline 
Infrastructure (DPI) for injection of Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) into the City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) network was approved on 15th March, 2024 with the objective of 
ensuring full off-take of CBG through cost-effective pipeline transportation from 
production facilities to consumption centres. The Committee further note that the 
scheme guidelines were issued on 26th June, 2024 and the application portal was 
activated from 1st September, 2024. As informed by the Ministry, the Project Appraisal 
Board has so far approved 24 projects amounting to Rs.56.31 crore and these projects 
are expected to be connected to CGD networks by the year 2026-27, subject to 
completion of pipeline laying within the stipulated time frame. 
 
 The Committee also note the gap between the Budget Estimate (Rs.250 crore) 
and the actual expenditure (Rs.0.91 crore) under the scheme in FY 2025-26. The 
Committee note the Ministry’s explanation that financial assistance under the scheme 
is released only after commissioning of the pipeline and that most of the sanctioned 
projects are still under construction, with only five projects having received partial 
disbursement upon achieving the 50 per cent milestone. 
 
 The Committee take note of the Ministry’s decision to revise the scheme 
guidelines in August, 2025 to allow connectivity not only with CGD networks but also 
with trunk pipelines through a cluster-based approach and to provide for mobilisation 
advance as well as milestone-based financial assistance. The Committee consider 

37 
 
these modifications as positive steps to address the earlier limitations of the scheme, 
particularly in areas where CGD demand was insufficient to absorb the entire CBG 
output. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may closely monitor 
the progress of the approved projects and ensure that pipeline infrastructure is 
completed within the stipulated timelines so that the targeted connectivity to CGD or 
trunk pipelines by 2026-27 is achieved. The Committee further urge the Ministry to 
strengthen coordination with CBG producers, CGD entities and other stakeholders to 
expedite project execution and avoid delays in submission of claims for financial 
assistance. The Committee also recommend that periodic awareness programmes 
and stakeholder consultations may be continued to enhance participation under the 
scheme and ensure optimal utilisation of the allocated funds. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 The Ministry will closely monitor the progress of all approved projects under 
the Scheme for Development of Pipeline Infrastructure for injection of Compressed 
Bio-Gas (CBG) into the City Gas Distribution (CGD) network. Regular review meetings 
will be held with the project developers to ensure that the pipeline infrastructure is 
completed within the stipulated timelines. The Ministry will further strengthen 
coordination with CBG producers, CGD entities and other stakeholders to expedite 
project execution and avoid delays in submission of claims. Periodic awareness 
programmes and stakeholder consultations will continue to be organized to enhance 
participation under the scheme.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
    
Expansion of PNG Connections  
   The Committee observe that in recent times, PNG (Piped Natural Gas) 
connections have emerged as an effective alternative to LPG cylinders, especially in 
larger cities of Delhi and Mumbai due to higher convenience and flexibility for domestic 
consumers and also because PNG connections are considered safer. The Committee 
note that the target for PNG connections by the year 2034 is over 12 crores, however, 
the number of PNG connections currently is much lower. The Committee, therefore, 
are of the opinion that the Ministry may explore the possibility of according priority for 
expanding PNG connections in the form of CGD (City Gas Distribution) network.  
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  

38 
 
 Providing Piped Natural Gas (PNG) connections, laying of pipeline 
infrastructure is part of the development of City Gas Distribution (CGD) Network, which 
is carried out by the entities authorized by Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) as per their Minimum Work Programme (MWP) and techno-
commercial feasibility. After completion of 12/12A CGD bidding round, PNGRB has 
authorized entities for the development of CGD network in 307 Geographical Areas 
(GAs), covering the entire mainland area for the development of CGD network across 
the country. The expansion and roll out of CGD network is a continuous process. As 
on 31.01.2026, the authorized entities have provided 1.62 crore PNG Domestic (PNG 
(D)) connections. 
Progress of CGD networks is regularly monitored based on reports submitted 
by the CGD entities. If there are any delays or shortfalls, the entities are advised to 
take corrective action. This includes calling them for progress review meetings or 
statutory hearings under existing regulations to discuss challenges and the latest 
updates on their MWP targets in authorized GAs. In addition, Government conducts 
regular interactions and meetings with State Governments for the development of 
CGD network in respective States and address challenges in this regard. 
Government have taken various steps to ensure the availability of Natural Gas 
to PNG (Domestic) sector in the country which, inter-alia, includes allocating domestic 
gas on priority basis to PNG(D); diverting domestic gas from non-priority sectors to 
meet the requirement for PNG(D) sector, expansion of CGD network, grant of Public 
Utility Status to CGD projects, notification for supply of domestic gas through available 
mode (including cascade mode) for PNG(D) purpose, allocating domestic natural gas 
for PNG (D) segments on a two-quarter advance basis, expansion of National Gas 
Grid Pipeline, setting up of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Terminals, Sustainable 
Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) initiatives to promote Bio-CNG, 
etc. Government have also notified that gas produced from discoveries in Deepwater, 
Ultra Deepwater and High Pressure-High Temperature areas, in any situation which 
may require proportionate distribution of the gas offered under the bidding process, 
the contractor shall offer gas to bidders belonging to PNG (D) sector on priority. 
Recently, a comprehensive control order dated 24.03.2026 has been issued 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to facilitate time-bound expansion of 
pipeline infrastructure across the country, especially CGD. The Order provides a 
uniform framework for grant of right of way (RoW) and permissions by mandating strict 
timelines, enabling deemed approvals in case of delays, and prohibiting imposition of 
unauthorized charges by public authorities. It also addresses access issues in 
residential and private areas by ensuring non-discriminatory and time-bound 
permissions, thereby removing key bottlenecks in pipeline laying. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 

39 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 Mission Anveshan  
 The Committee note that Mission Anveshan, launched as a continuation of the 
National Seismic Program, envisages acquisition, processing and interpretation of 
20,275 Line Kilometres (LKM) of 2D seismic data across seven onshore sedimentary 
basins namely Rajasthan, Ganga-Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Cuddapah, Krishna-
Godavari, Deccan Syneclise and Saurashtra with an approved outlay of Rs.792 crore 
and is scheduled for completion by FY 2026–27. The Committee have been informed 
that 10,663.44 LKM of seismic data has been acquired as on 31 December 2025 which 
constitutes more than half of the targeted survey work. 
The Committee also take note that the work is being carried out by Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) and Oil India Limited (OIL) and out of 10,663.44 Line 
Kilo Meter (LKM) data, ONGC acquired 4,179.62 LKM and OIL acquired 6843.82 LKM. 
Further, OIL has awarded the Processing and Interpretation (P&I) contract while 
ONGC is currently in the process of issuing tender for its P&I work. The Committee 
also note that the Budget Estimate for FY 2025–26 was revised from Rs.592 crore to 
Rs.200 crore due to delayed award of contracts with Rs.107.03 crore utilisation as on 
31.12.2025. Further, bills amounting to Rs.39.44 crore, though concurred by the 
Internal Finance Division, are yet to be reimbursed, pending exemption from the 
Department of Economic Affairs for release of funds. 
 While appreciating the Ministry for the commendable progress made under the 
Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may ensure timely completion 
of the remaining seismic survey work and expedite pending payments awaiting 
clearance from the Department of Economic Affairs. Further, ONGC may accelerate 
its tendering process so that targets under Mission Anveshan are achieved within the 
stipulated timeline and a stronger, more reliable domestic energy base for future 
growth is built for the Country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As on 31.03.2026, a total of 14,714.54 LKM of seismic data has been acquired 
by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Ltd. and Oil India Limited (OIL) under 
Mission Anveshan. Out of this, ONGC has acquired 6,152.86 LKM, while OIL has 
acquired 8,561.68 LKM. 

40 
 
 Further, an amount of ₹200 crore has been released to the Directorate General 
of Hydrocarbons (DGH) during FY 2025–26 for onward reimbursement to ONGC and 
OIL. In addition, ONGC has initiated the tendering process for processing and 
interpretation (P&I) of the acquired seismic data. The tendering process is expected 
to be completed by the last week of June 2026.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
O.M. No. - G-38011/16/2026-Fin.I [E-55145] dated 26th May, 2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
  
  
  

41 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
    
  

43 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
10 August, 2026 
19 Sravana,1948 (Saka)     
                   Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare,                                                 
Chairperson, Standing Committee                    
on Petroleum & Natural Gas                                                     
 
 
  

44 
 
 
Annexure -I 
MINUTES 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
NENETEENTH SITTING 
(10.08.2026) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th August, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room Samanvay - 5, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy  
3 Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
4 Smt. Pratima Mondal  
5 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
6 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
7 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
8 Shri Ve Vaithilingam  
   
                                                             RAJYA SABHA 
 
9 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
10 Shri Mithlesh Kumar  
11 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha  
12 Shri Mayankkumar Nayak     
13 Dr. V. Sivadasan  
14 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 

45 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
2.  
Shri Harish Chandra Bist 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas' and adopted the same without any 
modifications.  
 
3. XXX      XXX    XXX      XXX       XXX       XXX       XXX        XXX      XXXX  
  
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report.  
 
 

46 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS (2025-26) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 
 
16 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 14, 15 and 16)  
16 
 Percentage of Total 100% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies. 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil) 
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total 0.00% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil) 
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total 
 
0.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total 0.00% 
  
 
 