 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
                   
   
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
          
 
               MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
                                           
  
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2022-23) on the subject, ‘Evaluation of Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(Urban)’] 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
      
 
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 
 
20 


 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                                
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2022-23) on 
the subject, ‘Evaluation of Implementtion of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)”] 
   
 
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  08.12.2023 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 


 
 
   H.U.A.  No.139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and printed by ................ 
 
 
 
 

 
 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee  (ii) 
 
Introduction  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  1 – 12 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 13 – 25  
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
 26 – 27 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
replies of the Government have not been accepted by  the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 28 – 32 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  38  
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 33 
ANNEXURES 
 
I.  I Minutes of the 2nd Sitting of the Committee held on  
31.10.2023 
II  
 34-35 
II.  III Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 36 

 
 
(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh        -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Adv. A. M. Ariff 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi  
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
5. Shri Benny Behanan  
6. Shri Ramcharan Bohra  
7. Shri Hibi Eden  
8. Shri Gautam Gambhir  
9. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Hema Malini  
12. Shri Hasnain Masoodi  
13. Shri P.C. Mohan  
14. Shri C.R. Patil  
15. Shri S. Ramalingam 
16. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy  
17. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi  
18. Shri M V V Satyanarayana  
19. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangare 
20. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
21. Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
23. Shri R. Girirajan 
24. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham  
25. Shri Ram Chander Jangra  
26. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
27. Dr.  K. Laxman 
28. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
29. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
30. Dr.  Kalpana Saini 
31. Shri Sanjay Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
          1.      Shri Raju Srivastava       -      Joint Secretary 
          2.      Ms Archna Pathania                   - Director 
          3.      Ms Swati Parwal        -      Deputy Secretary 
  
 

 
 
  
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twentieth Report (1 7th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on the subject, ‘Evaluation of Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban). 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March 2023 but had been laid on the 
table of Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2023 . The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 18 August, 2023. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 31st October, 2023. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the  recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of  reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                      Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
alias Lalan Singh 
05 December, 2023                                      Chairperson,        
14 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
 
           

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs ( 2023-24) deals 
with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in their 
Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on the subject, “Evaluation of Implementation 
of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March, 
2023. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 15 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Recommendation Srl Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14                    (Total- 10) 
                        (Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies: 
 Recommendation Srl Nos. 2,                (Total- 1) 
                           (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation Srl Nos. 1, 8, 11,15                (Total- 4) 
                            (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 Recommendation Srl Nos. Nil                 (Total- 0) 
                           (Chapter-V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the Committee as 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them  at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months from the presentation of this Report. 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
GAP IN HOUSING DEMAND ASSESSMENT 
1.5 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (U) [PMAY(U)] Mission was introduced with the objective 
“Housing for all”. The total housing shortage initially envisaged to be addressed through the four 
verticals of the Scheme viz. In-situ Slum Rehabilitation (ISSR), Beneficiary Linked Construction 
(BLC), Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) and Affordable Housing Project (AHP) was 2 crores. It 
was proposed that 1.8 crore slum households and 20 lakh non -slum poor will be covered under  the 
Mission. However, the actual validated demand for housing under PMAY(U) stands at 1.23 crore, 
less than what was envisaged by the Mission itself. In their response, the Ministry deposed before 
the Committee that the housing shortage was based on estim ation whereas PMAY -U adopted a 
demand driven approach by letting the States and Union Territories to assess the housing needs 
under four verticals of PMAY(U). The Ministry has accepted that they had not conducted any 
independent urban housing need assessment study. The Committee feel that being a demand -driven 
scheme, there are chances that some homeless people who did not fulfil the eligibility conditions for 
the scheme or due to other impediments like maximum contribution from individuals, requirement of 
land etc., could not avail the benefit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry could 
conduct an impact assessment study of the scheme to find out the ground realities i.e. its benefits, 
gaps and shortcomings. The Ministry, may thereafter, ex plore the feasibility of either extending the 
existing scheme with modifications based on impact assessment study or to formulate another such 
scheme to benefit the urban poor at large so as to achieve the Government of India's objective of 
“Housing for All”. 
 
1.6  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
 
“After launch of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban (PMAY -U) in 2015, States/UTs with 
their respective Urban Local Bodies were entrusted to assess th e actual demand in their 
jurisdiction, without imposing any ceiling with universal coverage and ensure no eligible 
beneficiary is left out, so as to achieve the vision of Housing for All. As per the demand survey 
conducted by States/UTs, a demand of 1.12 c rore houses was assessed initially. However, 
during the course of implementation of the scheme, more people became eligible and same 
were approved accordingly under the scheme. All the project proposals submitted by the 
States/UTs has been sanctioned by th e Ministry and no further proposal are pending. The 
Union Cabinet has approved continuation of PMAY(U) up to 31st December 2024 for all 

3 
 
verticals, except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) vertical so as to complete all the 
houses sanctioned under the sch eme without changing the funding pattern and 
implementation methodology”.  
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry could conduct an impact 
assessment study of the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (Urban) and based on the findings of 
that study, the Ministry may eith er extend the existing scheme or introduce another scheme 
to bridge the gap left, if any, in ensuring ‘housing for all’. However, the Ministry, in their reply , 
has reiterated the demand assessment approach/method used under the scheme and the fact 
that the scheme, in its current form, has been extended up to 31 st December, 2024 for 
completion of pending houses. However, since the basic objective of PMAY(U) is to provide 
‘housing for all’, therefore, it becomes inevitable to undertake  an impact assessment study to 
gauge the gap in housing needs in the urban areas. The Committee reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that the  impact assessment study of the PMAY(U) Scheme  may 
be initiated at the earliest and Committee be informed of its findings.   
Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
 
LOW SANCTIONING OF HOUSES UNDER ISSR VERTICAL AND IN -SITU SLUM 
DEVELOPMENT BY OTHER LAND-OWNING CENTRAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 
 
1.8 The Committee believe that ISSR vertical ought to be the most important vertical of PMAY(U) 
because the real challenge of ‘decent housing’ is for ‘landless’ urban slum. It is due to absence of 
pucca house with all basic amenities to migrants that slums gro w. However, the Committee are 
dismayed to note that against the demand received of 14.35 lakh, only 4.33 lakh houses were 
sanctioned under In -Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) vertical.   Further, the progress as on 
31.12.2022 remains tardy as only 99,000 hous es delivered to beneficiaries (about 23%) and 1.08 
lakh houses are non -starter houses under this vertical. The Ministry has submitted before the 
Committee that the availability of land, seeking various statutory clearances, clearing the slums for 
redevelopment, arrangement of 50 transit accommodation etc. along with the unwillingness of slum 
dweller are the challenges under ISSR vertical.  

4 
 
The Committee have learnt that there is a provision in the Scheme under which Government 
land owning agencies should also undertake "in-situ" slum redevelopment on their lands occupied by 
slum and the Ministry have written to all State/ UT Governments and Central Government land 
owning Ministries/ Departments to explore the possibilities of rehabilitation of slums on their  land and 
seek central assistance from MoHUA under PMAY(U).  Knowing that ‘availability of land’ is a 
challenge in Urban areas, particularly metro cities, the Committee fail to understand as to why this 
particular provision of ISSR vertical was not persuad ed and implemented by the Ministry. 
 Considering that as on 31.12.2022, there are more than 1 lakh non -starter houses under ISSR 
vertical which are to be reviewed, the Committee suggest that the Ministry should –  
 
(i) seek report from States/UTs where ISSR projects are halted as to why these 
issues/hiccups not foreseen/addressed at the time of submission of the proposal to the 
Centre;  
 
(ii) direct the States/UTs to provide details of slum settlements on Central Government 
agencies’ land and the communications made for redevelopment of those slums with 
the land-owning agencies, if any;  
 
(iii) based on the information so received, the Ministry shoul d intervene and initiate 
trilateral talks involving Central Government agencies and States/UTs to implement 
the ISSR vertical on the Central Government agencies’ land as envisaged in the 
Mission guidelines.  
 
(iv) direct the State Governments to review the non-starter houses under this vertical and if 
decided to be curtailed then replaced under ISSR vertical itself.  
 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“After continuous review of the progress of IS SR projects with States/UTs, it has been 
observed that major challenges faced by the implementing agencies include non -availability of 
encumbrance free land, unwillingness of slum dwellers, delay on getting statutory 
clearances/NoCs, issues pertaining to c learing the slums for redevelopment, transit 
accommodation and other unforeseen circumstances. The States/UTs have been directed to 
review the progress of each non -starter projects of ISSR and identify the feasibility of 
starting/grounding the same at earl iest and curtail if the projects cannot start. So far, against 
the 3.2 lakh houses sanctioned under ISSR verticals, a total of 2.3 lakh have been grounded 
of which 1.5 lakh have been completed/delivered to the beneficiaries. Based on the 
recommendations of States/UTs a total of 1.23 lakh ISSR houses have been curtailed.  

5 
 
The clause 4.1 of the PMAY -U scheme Guidelines itself envisages that State/UTs, 
should take up slums whether on Central Government land/State Government Land/ ULB 
land/ private land under ‘ in-situ’ redevelopment vertical for providing houses to all eligible 
slum dwellers by using land as a Resource. In this regard, several communications have been 
made with States/UTs/Central/State Government Land owning agencies such as Ministry of 
Railways; Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Central PSUs etc. for redevelopment of slums on their 
land under ISSR vertical of PMAY-U.  
The Ministry has been consistently reviewing th e progress of the Mission including 
projects of ISSR vertical for timely completion of sanctioned houses by States/UTs with the 
extended Mission period. Rigorous review on monthly basis is conducted with States/UTs to 
expedite grounding & completion of san ctioned projects of ISSR or urgently submit proposal 
for curtailment of non-starter projects”.  
  
1.10 The Committee have sought information on the number of slum settlements on Central 
Government agencies’ land and the communication(s) made for redevelopment of those slums 
with the land-owning agencies. On this aspect , the Ministry, in their Action Taken Replies, has 
reiterated their stand  that several communication(s)  have been made with 
State/UTs/Central/State Government Land owning agencies such as Ministry of Railways ; 
Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of  Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways; Central PSUs, etc. , for redevelopment of slums on their l and under 
ISSR vertical of PMAY (U). In this context, the Committee are keen  to know the  specific 
outcome of Ministry’s efforts  in this direction in terms of number and the details of  in-situ 
slum redevelopment projects that have been undertaken by the Government land -owning 
agencies under PMAY(U).  

6 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
SETTING OF TIMELINES FOR TECHNOLOGY SUB-MISSION PROJECTS 
 
1.11 The Committee have been informed that under PMAY(U) modern technologies are being 
employed for faster completion of houses. Accordingly, across States and UTs, a total of 15,38,474 
houses were sanctioned to be constructed by using new and speedy construction technologies, 
however, as on 31.10.2022, only 5,95,261, i.e., 38.69% houses have been co mpleted. The 
Committee believe that such delay in construction of projects where the focus is precisely on 
promotion of modern, rapid, resource efficient, disaster resilient construction technologies, is 
unacceptable. Accordingly, the Ministry is advised t o closely monitor the progress of these projects 
and technologies, in particular and set timelines for their completion. The Ministry must also look into 
the reasons for delay in these projects and submit a report to this Committee with regard to the best 
technologies so discovered in terms of speed and resource efficiency.  
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“Like other PMAY -Urban projects, these projects of innovative technologies were also  
progressively submitted by the States to the Ministry for consideration of Central Assistance. 
As on date 15,47,328 houses have been sanctioned to be constructed using innovative 
technologies, against which 6,23,494 houses have been completed. The remaini ng houses 
are at advance stage of construction. Further, it is stated that Statutory approvals/clearances 
such as building plan/layout approval, environmental/Defence/ Airport authority/ coastal 
clearances, infrastructure layout, Real Estate Regulation Act  (RERA) etc. are also required for 
grounding of these projects which generally takes considerable time. Issues such as difficult 
terrain/regional topography, availability of building/construction materials, labour etc. also 
have an impact on grounding and completion of projects/houses. Further, in some cases, 
grounding and completion are affected due to climate related hazards such as 
floods/landslides/water logging/incessant rain etc”. 
 
1.13 In the reply submitted, the Ministry has furnished detailed reaso ns affecting the 
grounding and completion of 15,38,474 houses under Technology Sub -Mission Project.  
However, the Committee have  also sought a report with regard to best technologies so 

7 
 
discovered in terms of faster completion and resource efficiency. It is  reiterated that the same 
may be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 8) 
SHIFTING OF FOCUS ON ‘OUTCOME’ RATHER THAN ‘OUTPUT’  
1.14 The Committee have been apprised that there are a total of 5,13,654 ‘unoccupied’ houses 
under AHP vertical of PMAY(U). The Ministry has explained that as per standard practices, 
construction in AHP vertical is taken up block by block where each block consists of multiple dwelling 
units. The Ministry has accepted that as soon as the block gets comp leted, Mission acknowledges 
the completion of number of houses but, such completed dwelling units are unsafe for occupancy 
due to ongoing on -site construction activities including infrastructure facilities for other remaining 
blocks. Such blocks/units beco me habitable only once all the on -site construction activities get over 
including physical and social infrastructure facility. Further, the completion time of AHP houses 
generally takes 24 months to 36 months. Moreover, the occupancy of AHP houses is also based on 
the completion of the whole project in all respect such as availability of water, sewerage, electricity 
and other social amenities along with issuance of Completion Certificate by the ULB. Location of the 
projects can be one reason but the major reason for dwellings to be unoccupied.  
The Committee are given to understand that the physical completion of houses, pending 
completion of the entire project and pending availability of basic amenities, is being counted as 
‘completed’ houses. The Ministry without ensuring the livability and occupancy of the houses which is 
the actual target of the Mission is focusing on merely ‘output’. The Committee strongly feel that this 
approach of the Ministry is misleading. The Ministry being the nodal agency should s how the result in 
terms of outcome, that is, the number of houses actually occupied by beneficiaries and not merely 
output in term of houses completed. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“Land and colonization being the State subjects, all housing schemes are implemented by 
respective State/UT governments. MoHUA is supplementing the efforts of States/UTs through 
providing Central Assistance under PMAY -U. As per the schemes’ architecture, t he Central 
Assistance is provided in instalments for construction of house as per the progress of the 
project in stages. Provision of basic infrastructure is done by ULBs/implementing agencies 
from their own funds or converging with other Central/State sch emes. Financial buoyancy of 

8 
 
these institutions acts as a limiting factor causing delay in provision of infrastructure.   
Occupancy of house in AHP projects is a gradual process which includes steps such as 
completion of house followed by provision of infras tructure and allotment of houses, final 
payment of beneficiary share and occupancy. Moreover, States/Uts face challenges of 
occupancy such as beneficiaries moving to the completed projects sites citing issues related 
to occupation, transport, education of children etc.  
Under AHP vertical, the Ministry counts the houses completed in one block as 
“Completed” but the project is considered to be completed only after completion of all houses 
in the project along with provision of infrastructure facilities for t he entire project. However, 
MoHUA is consistently following up with the respective State/UT governments for expediting 
completion of infrastructure and speedy occupancy of houses in AHP projects to achieve the 
outcome. Further, MoHUA has also been coordina ting with State/UT authorities to ensure that 
trunk infrastructure works such as road, sewage, water supply, electricity is taken up 
parallelly”. 
 
1.16 The Ministry’s submission that they count the ho uses completed in one block as 
‘completed’ but the project is considered to be completed only after completion of all houses 
in the project  along with provision of infrastructure facilities for the entire project, is not 
acceptable to the Committee. Under PMAY (U), the progress of the Scheme is bei ng reflected 
in terms of number of houses, and not in terms of the number of projects. Hence, the relevant 
data appears to be  misleading. The mere completion of physical structure of houses without 
provision for basic amenities, such as, road, sewerage, water supply, electricity, etc. , which 
renders such houses uninhabitable, should not be reflected/accounted under the category 
‘completed’ houses. Therefore, the Committee reiterates their recommendation.  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
ENSURING INVOLVEMENT OF MPS/MLAS IN HOUSING PROJECTS 
 
1.17 The Committee have learnt that PMAY(U) scheme has provisioned to conduct demand survey 
and prepare HFAPoAs with involvement of elected representatives including Hon’ble MPs/MLAs of 
respective areas. Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are required to ensure that Hon’ble MPs/MLAs are 

9 
 
consulted and their views are taken into account while finalizing the HFAPoAs and AIPs and include 
households of all sections of the society without any prejudice with equal opportunity to all. The 
Committee have been apprised that the views of local MP/MLAs are sought by ULBs and inclusion of 
eligible beneficiaries are done on their request. The Ministry has issued directions to the States/UTs 
to constitute District Level Advisory and Monitoring Commi ttee (DLAMC) for Urban Development 
under the chairpersonship of an elected representative. The DLAMC is responsible to oversee, 
review and monitor the urban missions viz. a) Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) b) Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transform ation (AMRUT) c) Heritage City Development and Augmentation 
Yojana (HRIDAY) d) Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) - (Urban) e) Deendayal Antyodaya 
Yojana-National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM).  
However, despite above written provisions, the Committee have  observed that the elected 
representatives are neither involved at the ground level nor their views taken into account while 
formulation of policy or its implementation. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to seek 
compliance report from the State  and UT governments regarding regular involvement of local 
MPs/MLAs in all the meetings held at ULB or State level on PMAY(U) and furnish the same to this 
Committee. 
 
1.18  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as 
follows:- 
“As per the scheme guidelines, the role of local elected representatives including Hon’ble MPs 
& MLAs is crucial and it is envisaged that their view and suggestions are adequately factored 
in at each stage starting from planning to implementat ion and monitoring of the scheme. The 
Hon’ble MPs representing the district are the Chairpersons or Co -chairpersons of District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) so as to get their directions 
and suggestions for implementation of th e Scheme as per the guidelines and resolution of 
conflicts of any kind. The role of elected representatives is crucial and their constant 
involvement and guidance to the programs is essential for successfully delivering the desired 
outcomes in an inclusive  and sustainable manner. States/UTs have also been directed to 
constitute District Level Advisory and Monitoring Committee (DLAMC) for Urban Development 
under the chairpersonship of an elected representative to oversee, review and monitor the 
urban mission s including PMAY -Urban. The committee also undertakes site visits to the 
project areas and meet the beneficiaries to assess the impact and progress of the scheme.  
The directions/suggestions of local MP/MLAs and other elected representatives are 
always considered important in the scheme and their role in decision making is crucial. In 
Many States, Hon’ble MP are ex-officio member of Urban Local Bodies also”.  

10 
 
 
1.19 In their reply, the Ministry acknowledges the role of elected representatives in 
decision-making as crucial, yet compliance to the Committee’s recommendation has not been 
done. The Scheme has been extended upto 31 st December, 2024 for completion of pending  
projects. In view of the fact that against the 1.19 crore houses sanctioned as on 16.08.2023, a 
total of 113.13 lakh houses, have been grounded and the number of completed houses stands 
at 76.25 lakh, the Committee find it imperative for the Ministry  to seek compliance report from 
the State and UT G overnments regarding regular involvement of local MPs/MLAs in all the 
meetings held at ULB or State level on PMAY(U) and furnish the same to the Committee. 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
NEED FOR MORE ROBUST THIRD PARTY MONITORING 
 
1.20      The Committee have noted that under the Scheme guidelines an elaborate quality 
assessment and monitoring mechanism has been stated and the Third Party Monitoring is linked to 
release of instalments. States/UTs draw their q uality monitoring and assurance plans involving third -
party agencies. Such plan includes visits by third party agencies to the project site and to advise 
State/UT and Urban Local Bodies on quality related issues. The Ministry provides Central Assistance 
to implement third party quality monitoring mechanism by sharing basis to States/UTs for a maximum 
of three visits by TPQMA to each project. However, the Committee have received reports on 
unsatisfactory quality of houses constructed under the Mission. The C ommittee think that leaving the 
quality assessment entirely to State/UT governments is not the best policy. Since States and ULBs 
are executing the projects, the monitoring should be ideally by another authority to be just and 
independent. The Committee, h ence, recommend that the Ministry should ascertain the quality of 
construction at all the projects by a Third Party Quality Assessment team either constituted by State 
Government in consultation with Central Government or by Central Government.  
 
1.21        In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as 
follows:-  
“As per the scheme guidelines, the houses under the Mission should be designed and 
constructed to meet the requirements of structural safety against earthquake, flood, cyclone, 

11 
 
landslides etc. conforming to the National Building Code (NBC) and other releva nt Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) codes. Ensuring quality of PMAY -U is shared responsibility of 
State/UT Government and the Ministry.  
The TPQMA is hired by the State/UT for monitoring the quality of the construction and 
on the basis of the quality assur ance report, States/UTs/ULBs take both preventive and 
curative measures to ensure that standard quality houses, and infrastructure are constructed 
under the mission. Further, the State/UT government also conducts frequent quality 
assessment through their own technical staff and curative actions are taken accordingly.  
The Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on TPQMA reports are approved by the SLSMC 
which is chaired by the Chief Secretary of the concerned State/UT and the same is required 
for release of 2nd & 3rd instalment of Central Assistance”.  
 
1.22     The Committee are well aware of the elaborate mechanism which has been reiterated 
above and is in place for third party monitoring. However, the issue which the Committee 
flagged here is the need to establish a more robust third party mechanism, for which the 
Ministry should be more actively involved. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
should constitute an independent Third Party Monitoring team for assessing the quality of 
houses under -construction or lying with implementing agencies under AHP and ISSR 
verticals and submit an action taken report to the Committee.  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
SOCIAL AUDIT 
1.23 The Committee have been informed that Social Audit of 5 -10% of the sanctioned PMAY(U) 
projects under BLC, AHP and ISSR verticals is to be done using random sampling technique through 
agencies selected by States/UTs through a competitive bidding process. Conducting Social Audit is 
mandatory for States/UTs for release of third 59 installment of Central Assistance for all PMAY -U 
projects under BLC, AHP and ISSR verticals. MoHUA provides 100% financial assistance to 
States/UTs for undertaking social audit based on the Social Audit Pla n submitted by the States/UTs. 
The Committee have noted that s o far 21 States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 

12 
 
Mizoram, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal are carrying out Social Audit as per the scheme guidelines. The 
remaining States/UTs are in the process of conducting Social Audit. The Committee feel that as 
social audit is a pre -requisite for release of final installment of Central Assistanc e for PMAY -U 
Projects, the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments/UT administrations the need to 
complete the requirement at the earliest and inform the Committee the latest status of fulfilment of 
Social Audit stipulation by States/UTs within a period of 3 months of presentation of the Report. 
1.24 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“So far, in addition to the 21 States/UTs mentioned above, 5 more States/UTs namely Punjab, 
Maharashtra, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have also engaged an Independent 
Facilitating Agencies for conducting the Social Audit under PMAY -U”. 
 
1.25 As social audit is a n essential  pre-requisite for release of final instalment  of Central 
Assistance for PMAY( U) Projects, the Committee have instructed the Ministry to impress 
upon the State and UT Governments  the need to complete the requirement at the earliest and 
inform the Committee the latest status of fulfilment of Social Aud it stipulation by the 
States/UTs within a period of 3 months of presentation of the Report.  The Ministry , in their 
Action Taken Reply , has submitted that so far , 26 States/UTs are either carrying out Social 
Audit as per the scheme guidelines or have engage d Independent Facilitating Agencies for 
conducting the Social Audit under PMAY -U. This shows that 10 States/UTs are yet to engage 
an independent Facilitating Agencies for conduct ing the Social Audit under PMAY ( U). To 
avoid any delay in the release of fu nds and final completion of projects, t he Committ ee 
reiterate their recommendation  that the Ministry should  impress upon the State and UT 
Governments the need to conduct the Social Audit of pending/ongoing projects under 
PMAY(U) at the earliest and update the Committee on the  status of the remaining 10 
States/UTs also.  
*** 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
LOW SANCTIONING OF HOUSES UNDER ISSR VERTICAL AND IN -SITU SLUM 
DEVELOPMENT BY OTHER LAND-OWNING CENTRAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 
2.1 The Committee believe that ISSR vertical ought to be the most important vertical of PMAY(U) 
because the real challenge of ‘decent housing’ is for ‘landless’ urban slum. It is due to absence of 
pucca house with al l basic amenities to migrants that slums grow. However, the Committee are 
dismayed to note that against the demand received of 14.35 lakh, only 4.33 lakh houses were 
sanctioned under In -Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) vertical.   Further, the progress as on 
31.12.2022 remains tardy as only 99,000 houses delivered to beneficiaries (about 23%) and 1.08 
lakh houses are non -starter houses under this vertical. The Ministry has submitted before the 
Committee that the availability of land, seeking various statutory clearances, clearing the slums for 
redevelopment, arrangement of 50 transit accommodation etc. Along with the unwillingness of slum 
dweller are the challenges under ISSR vertical.  
The Committee have learnt that there is a provision in the Scheme under which Government 
land owning agencies should also undertake “in-situ” slum redevelopment on their lands occupied by 
slum and the Ministry have written to all State/ UT Governments and Central Government land 
owning Ministries/ Departments to explore the possibilities of rehabilitation of slums on their land and 
seek central assistance from MoHUA under PMAY(U).  Knowing that ‘availability of land’ is a 
challenge in Urban areas, particula rly metro cities, the Committee fail to understand as to why this 
particular provision of ISSR vertical was not persuaded and implemented by the Ministry. 
 Considering that as on 31.12.2022, there are more than 1 lakh non -starter houses under ISSR 
vertical which are to be reviewed, the Committee suggest that the Ministry should  
(i) seek report from States/Uts where ISSR projects are halted as to why these issues/hiccups 
not foreseen/addressed at the time of submission of the proposal to the Centre;  
(ii) direct the States/U ts to provide details of slum settlements on Central Government 
agencies’ land and the communications made for redevelopment of those slums with the land -
owning agencies, if any;  
(iii) based on the information so received, the Ministry should intervene and initiate trilateral 
talks involving Central Government agencies and States/U ts to implement the ISSR vertical 
on the Central Government agencies’ land as envisaged in the Mission guidelines.  

14 
 
(iv) direct the State Governments to review  the non-starter houses under this vertical and if 
decided to be curtailed then replaced under ISSR vertical itself.  
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“After continuous review of the progre ss of ISSR projects with States/U ts, it has been 
observed that major challenges faced by the implementing agencies include non -availability of 
encumbrance free land, unwillingness of slum dwellers, delay on getting statutory 
clearances/NoCs, issues pertain ing to clearing the slums for redevelopment, transit 
accommodation and other unforeseen circumstances. The States/U ts have been directed to 
review the progress of each non -starter projects of ISSR and identify the feasibility of 
starting/grounding the same  at earliest and curtail if the projects cannot start. So far, against 
the 3.2 lakh houses sanctioned under ISSR verticals, a total of 2.3 lakh have been grounded 
of which 1.5 lakh have been completed/delivered to the beneficiaries. Based on the 
recommendations of States/Uts a total of 1.23 lakh ISSR houses have been curtailed.  
The clause 4.1 of the PMAY -U scheme Guidelines itself envisages that State/U ts, 
should take up slums whether on Central Government land/State Government Land/ ULB 
land/ private land  under ‘in -situ’ redevelopment vertical for providing houses to all eligible 
slum dwellers by using land as a Resource. In this regard, several communications have been 
made with States/U ts/Central/State Government Land owning agencies such as Ministry of 
Railways; Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Central PSUs etc. For redevelopment of slums on their 
land under ISSR vertical of PMAY-U.  
The Ministry has been consistently revi ewing the progress of the Mission including 
projects of ISSR vertical for timely completion of sanctioned houses by States/U ts with the 
extended Mission period. Rigorous review on monthly basis is conducted with States/U ts to 
expedite grounding & completio n of sanctioned projects of ISSR or urgently submit proposal 
for curtailment of non-starter projects”.  
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

15 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
MORE CENTRAL ASSISTANCE TO ADDRESS THE ISSUE OF AFFORDABILITY OF HOUSES  
2.4 The Committee have been informed that the cost of an EWS house constructed under the 
Scheme comes to around Rs. 6.5 lakh on an average, which is shared by Central Government, State 
Government, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and beneficiaries. The Ministry has further submitted that 
the estimated average cost of an EWS house under PMAY -U in metropolitan city, non -metropolitan 
city, hilly terrain and North-Eastern States comes to Rs.1 3.34 lakh, Rs. 10.34 lakh, Rs. 8.98 lakh and 
Rs. 8.55 lakh, respectively. 51 Central Assistance and average financial assistance for all the four 
verticals under this Mission are as given below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Vertical Central 
Assistance 
(in lakh) 
Average financial 
Assistance (Central, 
State/ UT, ULB 
contribution) 
(Rs. In lakh) 
1 In-situ slum redevelopment (ISSR) 1 2.51 
2 Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC) 1.5 2.37 
3 Affordable Housing Project (AHP) 1.5 4.49 
4 Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 2.31 2.31 
  
As per scheme guideline, there is no prescribed limit of state share/ULB contribution, and 
States/UTs are providing State contribution varying from ₹16,000 to ₹3.00 lakh. Some States such 
as Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Rajasthan are not providing any state contribution 
under the scheme. The construction cost, sale price and individual contribution of an EWS house 
varies from State to State and within a State/city also, from location to location.  
The Committee have observed that due to less/nil State assistance and fixed Central 
assistance, beneficiary contribution rises and thereby making EWS houses non -affordable among 
the targeted group. From the data furnished by the Ministry the Committee have inferred that the 
average individual contribution under this scheme comes to around 60%. The Committee have 
observed that in some cases the beneficiaries are not in position to fully pay their share due to low 
income. The Ministry in this regard has stated that in order to assist beneficiaries to pay their share 
many State Governments are playing active role in facilitating housing loan from the Banks and 
Housing Finance Companies. However, Banks has largely  been reluctant to approve the loan to 
such beneficiaries who do not have sustained income or proof of income. Nonetheless, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should consider suggesting the State Governments:  

16 
 
(i)  to ensure that beneficiaries are no t left out because of lack of financial capacity to pay 
one’s share and employ all means to extend financial assistance to such beneficiaries;  
(ii)  to explore the viability of exempting projects under AHP/BLC vertical of PMAY(U) from 
GST so that construc tion cost is reduced and thereby making it affordable for intended 
beneficiaries. 
(iii)  if, after completion, a second phase of the PMAY(U) Mission is contemplated then the 
Ministry may do away with uniform and fixed central assistance across country. Cen tral 
assistance should vary depending upon the cost of construction which in turns depends upon 
the topography and other factors. This is more so required because several States have 
resource crunch to fill the gap and thereby, bringing the sale price with in the affordable range 
of the targeted beneficiary. 
 
2.5 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is only supplementing the efforts of 
States/UTs by prov iding Central Assistance under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban 
(PMAY-U) since June 25, 2015 to provide pucca house with basic amenities across the 
country. Each State/UT may have its own specific programs and initiatives to cater to the 
housing needs of  different income groups. As per the scheme guidelines, the States/UTs are 
encouraged to converge with the existing schemes of Central as well as State sponsored 
schemes.  
In order to assist the beneficiaries in bridging the financial gap for construction of 
houses, many State governments are playing pro -active role in facilitating housing loans from 
financial institutions such as banks and housing finance companies. Few States also facilitate 
low-cost credit facility to the beneficiaries by signing tripart ite agreement between banks, 
beneficiaries and States as a Guarantor. Loan melas are also conducted by 
States/UTs/Implementing agencies to connect beneficiaries with the banks for availing 
housing loans.  
The Central Government has also extended several be nefits to boost the affordable 
housing segment in the country like granting infrastructure to affordable homes, extension of 
construction timeline for affordable housing projects, reduction of GST from 8% to 1%, tax 
holidays to the developers of affordable  housing projects etc. To provide an impetus to 
Affordable housing, union budget 2018 -19 had announced a dedicated fund called Affordable 
Housing Funds (AHF). Recently under AHF, the interest rate on housing loans to EWS 
beneficiaries has been relaxed for 7 years by providing interest capping of 10% to HFCs. 

17 
 
PMAY-U has also provided financial incentives through its Central Nodal Agencies to first -
time home loan borrowers who approach Banks/HFCs etc under CLSS component.  
Since the period of the scheme has be en extended till December 2024 with existing 
funding pattern and implementation methodologies for completion of sanctioned houses, at 
present no proposal for either extending the Central Assistance or second phase of the 
PMAY(U) Mission is under consideration of MoHUA.  
The recommendation of the Committee is noted”.  
  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 5) 
SETTING UP TIME-LINE FOR GROUNDING AND COMPLETION OF PENDING PROJECTS  
2.6 According to the data furnished to the Committee, out of total 122.69 lakh houses sanctioned 
under the Mission, 107.3 lakh houses are grounded till 31.12.2022, and out of these, only 61.45 lakh 
houses delivered to the beneficiary. In terms of vertical -wise progress, out of these 61.45 lakh 
houses delivered, 22.48 lakh are under CLSS vertical and 32.78 lakh under BLC vertical where 
States are free from the responsibility of providing land to beneficiaries. Whereas under ISSR and 
AHP verticals taken together only 2.77 lakh houses delivered to beneficiaries till 31.12.2022 even. 
Further, as on 31.12.2022, 11 lakh houses are still yet to be grounded and 7.93 lakh non -starter 
houses. It has also been observed that by 31.10.2022, the percentage of houses completed  in North 
Eastern States except Tripura is less than 50% due to various geographical and economic reasons.  
The Ministry has submitted that States/UTs have been advised to review non -starter houses 
and get them curtailed, if necessary, with replacement of new BLC houses within the overall ceiling 
of 122.69 lakh houses. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry must examine the reasons 
for non-initiation of these projects and take steps to get these houses either grounded or replaced at 
the earliest. T he Committee also recommend that in order to achieve the completion target by 31 st 
December, 2024, Ministry may ensure that strict timelines are set for grounding and completion of 
projects, particularly for North Eastern States and address issues impacting the pace of construction 
of projects. 
 
2.7 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows:- 
“The Ministry has adopted a workable strategy for timely completion of sanctioned houses by 
States/UTs with the extended Mission period. Rigorous review on monthly basis is conducted 

18 
 
with States/UT s including NE States to expedite the grounding & completion of sanctioned 
projects or urgently submit proposal for curtailment of non -starter projects. These review 
meetings focus on identifying the bottlenecks and provide handholding support to States/UT s 
for faster implementation of the projects.  
Further, States/UTs have been communicated that all sanctioned houses are to be completed 
well in advance of the conclusion of the PMAY -U Mission and after completion of the 
extended PMAY -U Mission period i.e. 31.12.2024 any spill over liability for completion of 
houses/projects will have to be borne by the State/UT Governments from their own 
resources”.  
  
  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
SETTING OF TIMELINES FOR TECHNOLOGY SUB-MISSION PROJECTS 
 
2.8 The Committee  have been informed that under PMAY(U) modern technologies are being 
employed for faster completion of houses. Accordingly, across States and UTs, a total of 15,38,474 
houses were sanctioned to be constructed by using new and speedy construction technologi es, 
however, as on 31.10.2022, only 5,95,261, i.e., 38.69% houses have been completed. The 
Committee believe that such delay in construction of projects where the focus is precisely on 
promotion of modern, rapid, resource efficient, disaster resilient cons truction technologies, is 
unacceptable. Accordingly, the Ministry is advised to closely monitor the progress of these projects 
and technologies, in particular and set timelines for their completion. The Ministry must also look into 
the reasons for delay in  these projects and submit a report to this Committee with regard to the best 
technologies so discovered in terms of speed and resource efficiency.  
 
2.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“Like other PMAY -Urban projects, these projects of innovative technologies were also 
progressively submitted by the States to the Ministry for consideration of Central Assistance. 
As on date 15,47,328 houses have been sanctioned to be constructed using inn ovative 
technologies, against which 6,23,494 houses have been completed. The remaining houses 
are at advance stage of construction. Further, it is stated that Statutory approvals/clearances 
such as building plan/layout approval, environmental/Defence/ Airp ort authority/ coastal 

19 
 
clearances, infrastructure layout, Real Estate Regulation Act (RERA) etc. Are also required 
for grounding of these projects which generally takes considerable time. Issues such as 
difficult terrain/regional topography, availability o f building/construction materials, labour etc. 
Also have an impact on grounding and completion of projects/houses. Further, in some cases, 
grounding and completion are affected due to climate related hazards such as 
floods/landslides/water logging/incessant rain etc”. 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
ENSURING BASIC AMENITIES IN HOUSES CONSTRUCTED UNDER ISSR AND AHP 
VERTICALS  
2.11 As per Schemes guidelines, all houses constructed under ISSR and AHP verticals are to be 
provided with basic civic infrastructure like water, sanitation, sewerage, road, electricity etc. Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) should also ensure that individual houses u nder CLSS and BLC verticals also 
have access to basic civic services.  
Under PMAY -U, Central Assistance is released for construction of houses only. The 
Committee appreciates that States/UTs through various Central or State schemes, are providing 
necessary infrastructure and other civic amenities for the houses constructed under the scheme. 
Thus, converging the PMAY -U mission with other ongoing Central and State sponsored schemes 
has been an integral part of the process. Accordingly, it is observed that the re has been convergence 
with Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) for water supply, Swachh 
Bharat Mission- Urban (SBM-U) for toilet construction, Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM -JAY) 
for health benefits, Pradhan Mantri Ujjawa la Yojana for cooking gas connection, Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana - National Urban Livelihood Mission (DAY -NULM) for skill upgradation and 
livelihood in most of the States/UTs.  
The Committee have observed that in -spite of convergence of various schemes with  PMAY-U 
mission to provide houses with basic infrastructure, as on 31.12.2022, 5,62,858 number of houses 
could not be delivered to the beneficiaries due to lack of basic civic services. The Committee 
therefore, implored upon the Ministry the need to pursue  with State/UTs to ensure the availability of 
basic infrastructure in the ISSR/AHP verticals to achieve the very objective of the scheme.  

20 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: -
  
“Land and coloni zation being the State subjects, all housing schemes are implemented by 
respective State/UT governments. MoHUA is supplementing the efforts of States/UTs through 
providing Central Assistance under PMAY -U. As per the schemes’ architecture, the Central 
Assistance is provided in instalments for construction of house as per the progress of stages. 
Provision of basic infrastructure is done by ULBs/implementing agencies from their own funds 
or converging with other Central/State schemes. MoHUA is continuously pur suing with the 
States/UTs through periodic review meetings and field visits to ensure that basic infrastructure 
facilities are provided in the AHP/ISSR projects. The problem of completed but not occupied 
houses relates to AHP vertical mainly. States have b een advised to complete the basic 
infrastructure facilities in these AHP/ISSR projects either through their own resources or by 
converging with other Central/State schemes so that they may be delivered to the eligible 
beneficiaries in time.  
It is stated t hat against the 1.19 crore houses sanctioned as on 16.08.2023, a total of 
113.13 lakh, have been grounded and 76.25 lakh have been completed”.  
  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 9) 
IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES UNDER AHP VERTICAL  
2.13 About the identification process of beneficiaries, the Committee have been informed that the 
list of beneficiaries is entered in the PMAY -U MIS which is a mandatory clause before release of 
1stinstallment under BLC/ISSR projects and 2 ndinstallment under AHP projects. The Allotment  of 
AHP/ISSR houses is done to beneficiaries entered in MIS only and any change requires approval of 
SLSMC and CSMC. Irrespective of the set procedure, in case of AHP vertical, the Ministry has 
deposed before the Committee that identification of beneficiar y is not a pre -requisite for the first 
instalment because in case of apartments, many times beneficiaries come later. Under AHP the 
beneficiaries have also declined house offer subsequently and the houses are lying ‘unoccupied’. 
Here, the Committee are of the opinion that houses under PMAY(U) are not being constructed for the 
sake of construction, therefore, the beneficiaries should not be roped in later once the house is 
constructed and all investments done. Rather, AHP or ISSR verticals should be executed  as joint 
venture between the beneficiaries and other stakeholders (Central, State, ULB and Private investor, 
if any). Identification of beneficiaries for whom the houses are constructed should be a prior 
construction exercise and from the initiation of th e project the beneficiary should be involved as any 

21 
 
other stakeholder and his concerns or feedback about the project should be acknowledged and 
acted upon throughout to avoid later ‘un-occupancy’. 
 
2.14 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows:- 
“As per the Scheme Guidelines, allotment of houses to identified eligible beneficiaries in multi -
storeyed projects should be made following a transparent procedure as approved by SLSMC. 
For releasing the first ins talment for ISSR projects, it is mandatory to have the Aadhaar 
seeded beneficiaries entered in the MIS as ISSR is a demand side intervention and these 
projects are planned for providing houses to already identified eligible slum dwellers.  
However, AHP is a  supply side intervention and the Ministry provides financial assistance to 
EWS houses being built with different partnerships by States/UTs/Cities. As per the scheme 
guidelines, identification of beneficiaries is not a pre -requisite for the first instalme nt of Central 
Assistance as this installment is released to States/UTs to initiate the construction of the 
project on ground through implementing agencies to build a confidence among the potential 
beneficiaries for booking the houses/flats in that project.  But it is mandatory to identify and 
enter the Aadhaar seeded beneficiaries for AHP projects in the MIS before releasing the 
second instalment of Central Assistance. The Ministry is of the view that these projects are 
shared responsibilities of Central Gov ernment, States/UTs and beneficiaries. Identification of 
beneficiaries at the initiation of the project should be preferable strategy for the success of the 
projects and the same has been reiterated to the States/UTs from time to time.   However, 
various St ates/UTs adopts different mechanism and different timeline for identification of 
beneficiaries for these multi-storey projects as per their respective policies and requirement”.  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 10) 
DATA ON DE-NOTIFICATION OF SLUMS 
2.15 The PMAY(U) document mentions that “In -situ” slum rehabilitation using land as a Resource 
with private participation for providing houses to eligible slum dwellers is an important component of 
the “Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) – Housing for All” miss ion. This approach aims to 
leverage the locked potential of land under slums to provide houses to the eligible slum dwellers 
bringing them into the formal urban settlement. Slums so redeveloped should compulsorily be de -
notified. However, the Ministry has informed the Committee that land and colonization being the 
State subjects, all data pertaining to notification and de -notification is maintained by the respective 

22 
 
State Governments. At the Central Government level only slum population and number of slums are 
maintained by Census of India and National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). Further, the 
Ministry has, so far, not conducted any study to assess whether construction of houses in other 
verticals has led to reduction in the number of slum households. Nevertheless, they have estimated 
that around 20 lakh slum beneficiaries have availed benefits under BLC and AHP verticals of PMAY -
U. 
The Committee understand that information on de -notification of slums is maintained at the 
State level but the very guidel ines of the Mission says that slums redeveloped under ISSR should 
compulsorily be de -notified. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry is duty bound to 
maintain the data pertaining to outcome of its Mission and schemes. The Committee are keen on 
knowing the number of slums denotified since implementation of ISSR vertical of PMAY(U). The 
Ministry is, therefore, directed to approach the States and collate data on the impact of ISSR vertical 
in terms of de-notification of slums by States and place the same before the Committee. 
2.16  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as 
follows:- 
“The Ministry shall request the States/UTs to share data on the number of de -notified slums 
redeveloped under PMAY-U and place the same before the Committee”. 
  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 12) 
EXTENDING ARHC SCHEME TO MEET THE TARGET SHORTFALL  
2.17 The Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs), a sub -scheme under Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY -U) was launched on 31.07.2020 and will implemented up to 
31.03.2022 with the aim to provide ease of living to urban migrants/ poor in Industrial Sector as well 
as in non -formal urban economy to get access to dignified affordable rental housing close to their 
workplace and prevent them from staying in slums, informal settlements and peri -urban areas. It has 
two Models. The Model-1 of the Scheme has target of converting 75,000 existing government funded 
vacant houses constructed under JnNURM/RAY into ARHCs and under Model -2, 2, 20,000 new 
ARHC units by Public/Private Entities. The Committee are dismayed to note that under Model 1, so 
far only 5,648 units have been converted into ARHCs and proposal for converting 7,413 existing 
Government funded vacant houses into ARHC units has b een processed. The Ministry has also 
informed the Committee that under Model -2, so far, 82,273 new ARHC have been approved.  

23 
 
The Committee are of the view that urban migration is continuous feature and so complete 
eradication of urban homeless is not possi ble unless affordable rentals are made available to them. 
In this direction, the Committee consider ARHC as a promising step and accordingly recommend that  
(i)      Since no new construction is involved in Model 1 and the focus is on converting already 
existing 75000 government funded, the Ministry should ensure the execution of the same at 
the earliest so as to provide ease of living to at least 75000 urban migrants/poor households.  
(ii)     The Ministry should ensure that the targets set under both the Models are achieved with 
specific focus on metro cities where migration and rentals, both are considerably high.  
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“So far, 5,648 units have been converted into ARHCs. Further, proposal for converting 7,413 
existing Government funded vacant houses into ARHC units are under process in the States 
of Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.  
Under Model -2, this Ministry has approved Tech nology Innovation Grant  
(TIG) of ₹173.89 Cr, for 13 proposals with 82,273 new ARHC Units in 07 States. Against this, 
construction of 48,113 units is in advance stages.  
MoHUA is closely coordinating with States/UTs for issuance of RFP under Model -1 for 
conversion of existing Government funded vacant houses in cities for urban migrants/poor”.  
  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
NEED FOR MORE ROBUST THIRD PARTY MONITORING  
2.19      The Committee have noted that under the Scheme guidelines an elaborate quality 
assessment and monitoring mechanism has been stated and the Third Party Monitoring is linked to 
release of instalments. States/UTs draw their quality monitoring and assurance pl ans involving third-
party agencies. Such plan includes visits by third party agencies to the project site and to advise 
State/UT and Urban Local Bodies on quality related issues. The Ministry provides Central Assistance 
to implement third party quality monitoring mechanism by sharing basis to States/UTs for a maximum 
of three visits by TPQMA to each project. However, the Committee have received reports on 
unsatisfactory quality of houses constructed under the Mission. The Committee think that leaving the 
quality assessment entirely to State/UT governments is not the best policy. Since States and ULBs 
are executing the projects, the monitoring should be ideally by another authority to be just and 
independent. The Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry should ascertain the quality of 

24 
 
construction at all the projects by a Third Party Quality Assessment team either constituted by State 
Government in consultation with Central Government or by Central Government.  
 
2.20 In their Action Taken Reply, the Minist ry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as 
follows:-  
“As per the scheme guidelines, the houses under the Mission should be designed and 
constructed to meet the requirements of structural safety against earthquake, flood, cyclone, 
landslides etc. Conforming to the National Building Code (NBC) and other relevant Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) codes. Ensuring quality of PMAY -U is shared responsibility of 
State/UT Government and the Ministry.  
The TPQMA is hired by the State/UT for monitoring the qua lity of the construction and 
on the basis of the quality assurance report, States/U Ts/ULBs take both preventive and 
curative measures to ensure that standard quality houses, and infrastructure are constructed 
under the mission. Further, the State/UT govern ment also conducts frequent quality 
assessment through their own technical staff and curative actions are taken accordingly.  
The Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on TPQMA reports are approved by the SLSMC 
which is chaired by the Chief Secretary of the concerne d State/UT and the same is required 
for release of 2nd & 3rd instalment of Central Assistance”.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 14) 
SPEEDY COMPLETION OF LIGHT HOUSE PROJECTS  
2.22 Under the Scheme, six Light House Projects (LHPs) and nine Demonstration Housing 
Projects (DHPs) in various States to show case field level application of new technologies and 
propagate technologies have been approved. As regards the progress of these proj ects the 
Committee have been informed that so far, Light House Projects (LHPs) at Chennai, Tamil Nadu with 
1152 houses has already been completed. The LHP at Rajkot for 1,144 houses has also been 
completed and inaugurated by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 1 9.10.2022. Remaining LHPs at 
Lucknow, Indore, Ranchi and Agartala are at advance stage of completion. However, during the visit 
of the Committee to the Light House Project in Agartala, the State government made a submission 
before the Committee that being a small State, there is problem in arranging the huge state and 

25 
 
beneficiary share for this project. Therefore, they requested the Ministry through the Committee to 
provide sanction of ₹50.00 crore ( ₹.5 lakh per unit) as additional central assistance for ti mely 
completion of this project. The above request of the State government was rejected by the Ministry 
stating that as per the operational guidelines of LHPs, the request of Government of Tripura for 
additional sanction of ₹50.00 crore ( ₹ 5 lakh per unit)  is not feasible. The Committee here want to 
stress the fact that the very name of this initiative ‘Light House Projects’ suggests that these projects 
are the guiding light for other PMAY(U) projects, hence, despite all the hindrances and challenges, 
the Committee recommend  
i. the Ministry to ensure time bound completion of these projects and submit a report in this 
regard to the Committee within three months;  
ii. the Ministry to consider relaxations in the guidelines to the extent that genuine demands 
for further moderate assistance can be admitted as in case of the State of Tripura.  
2.23 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“Light House Projects (LHPs) at Chennai and Rajkot have already been completed and 
inaugurated by the Hon’ble Prime Minister. The remaining LHPs at Lucknow and Indore are 
almost completed and will be ready to inauguration in next three months.  The work at  LHP 
Ranchi and Agartala are at advance stage of construction.  
As per the operational guidelines for implementation of LHPs, initially MoHUA had 
provisioned for Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) of ₹2.00 lakh per Dwelling Unit (DU) or 
20% of the estimated  cost per DU, whichever is less. The TIG is in addition to the existing 
funding of ₹1.5 lakh per DU under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY-U). However, 
as per the requests received from various LHP States to enhance the TIG share so that the 
burden on EWS beneficiaries can be substantially reduced, and projects are implemented 
successfully. MoHUA has taken a conscious decision to enhance the TIG share. The TIG has 
been revised to ₹4.00 lakh per DU or, 40% of the tendered cost per DU, whichever is less in 
case of LHP Chennai (Tamil Nadu), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Indore (Madhya Pradesh), Rajkot 
(Gujarat) and Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh). For LHP Agartala (Tripura), TIG has been increased 
to ₹5.00 lakh per DU or, 40% of the tendered cost per DU, whichever is less, which is already 
higher as compared to other LHP States. At this crucial juncture where the projects are 
nearing completion, any further revision in TIG is not feasible”.  
  
***** 

26 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Recommendations (Sl. No. 2) 
ISSUE OF CURTAILMENT OF HOUSES AND OVER EMPHASIS ON BLC VERTICAL  
 
3.1 Out of total 122.69 lakh houses sanctioned under the four verticals of PMAY(U), 73.45 lakh 
(around 60%) houses have been sanctioned under BLC vertical itself. The Committee feel that the 
majority of urban ‘homeless’ are also ‘landless’ and purchasing a pie ce of land in urban area is more 
challenging than constructing a house on it. The Committee are of the view that over -emphasis on 
BLC vertical diluted the objective of reducing the total number of urban homeless and providing 
housing to all urban homeless.  The Committee are dismayed to note that though BLC Vertical is the 
most preferred vertical but out of the 20,45,390 houses so far curtailed on account of unavoidable 
circumstances, 12.51 lakh houses were under the BLC vertical itself where availability of  land is not a 
problem.  
The common reasons for curtailment of projects/houses across verticals put forth by the 
Ministry include land clearance/disputes, permanent migration of beneficiaries etc. Moreover, as per 
data given by the Ministry, the number of non-starter houses across verticals as on 31.10.2022 
stands at 7.93 lakh and it is in BLC vertical that the Ministry is suggesting to divert the non -starter 
houses because statutory approvals/clearances required for grounding of AHP/ISSR projects 
generally takes considerable time and houses under BLC are constructed by the beneficiaries 
themselves in lesser time than other verticals. The Committee opine that such issues should have 
been looked into at proposal stage and the estimation should have been objec tive and accurate. The 
curtailment of houses reflects failure both on the part of the Ministry and State Government. The 
Committee therefore recommend the following:  
i. The Ministry should ponder on the observation of the Committee so as to avoid such 
issues at the time of implementation of any such scheme.  
ii. There should not be any delay in sanctioning houses against these curtailed/non -starter 
houses and the houses should be sanctioned in all verticals evenly and not just BLC 
vertical to cover the population which cannot avail it under BLC vertical. 
3.2 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 

27 
 
“States/UTs have the autonomy to choose the verticals under PMAY -U based on the housing 
demand. The Ministry does  not prioritize any specific vertical of the scheme.  All four verticals 
of the scheme are open to the States/U Ts/Beneficiaries to choose from, based on the 
suitability without any emphasis on any specific vertical. However, the major demand is for 
constructing houses on their own land. The beneficiaries owning land in the urban area prefer 
the BLC vertical so that they have an independent house rather than multi -storied apartments. 
The external factors such as continuity of livelihood opportunities, childre n education and 
other family needs are also the reasons why beneficiaries prefer building houses on their own 
land. There is also flexibility of design, colour and quality based on their preferences.   
The Mission period was up to 31.03.2022 and based on th e demands of States/U Ts, the 
Mission has been extended upto 31.12.2024. The Ministry has taken conscious decision to 
allow replacement against the curtailment of long pending non -starter houses of any vertical 
in the interest of timely completion of all ho uses previously as well as newly sanctioned. In 
view of the remaining Mission period i.e. December 2024, the houses sanctioned under AHP 
and ISSR vertical will not be completed and at the same time houses under BLC vertical 
takes less time to complete. The refore, it is anticipated that States/U Ts may be able to 
complete the houses sanctioned under BLC vertical as compared to AHP and ISSR within the 
extended Mission period. The proposals for curtailment of non -starter houses are sanctioned 
regularly without any delay, based on proposals received from States/U Ts. The percentage of 
curtailment in AHP verticals is much higher than the BLC vertical ”. 
 
  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
 
GAP IN HOUSING DEMAND ASSESSMENT 
4.1 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (U) [PMAY(U)] Mission was introduced with the objective 
“Housing for all”. The total housing shortage initially envisaged to be addressed  through the four 
verticals of the Scheme viz. In -situ Slum Rehabilitation (ISSR), Beneficiary Linked Construction 
(BLC), Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) and Affordable Housing Project (AHP) was 2 crores. It 
was proposed that 1.8 crore slum households and 20 lakh non -slum poor will be covered under the 
Mission. However, the actual validated demand for housing under PMAY(U) stands at 1.23 crore, 
less than what was envisaged by the Mission itself. In their response, the Ministry deposed before 
the Committ ee that the housing shortage was based on estimation whereas PMAY -U adopted a 
demand driven approach by letting the States and Union Territories to assess the housing needs 
under four verticals of PMAY(U). The Ministry has accepted that they had not conduc ted any 
independent urban housing need assessment study. The Committee feel that being a demand -driven 
scheme, there are chances that some homeless people who did not fulfil the eligibility conditions for 
the scheme or due to other impediments like maximum  contribution from individuals, requirement of 
land etc., could not avail the benefit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry could 
conduct an impact assessment study of the scheme to find out the ground realities i.e. its benefits, 
gaps and shortcomings. The Ministry, may thereafter, explore the feasibility of either extending the 
existing scheme with modifications based on impact assessment study or to formulate another such 
scheme to benefit the urban poor at large so as to achieve the Gov ernment of India's objective of 
“Housing for All”. 
 
4.2  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“After launch of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban (PMAY -U) in 2015, States/UTs with 
their respective Urban Local Bodies were entrusted to assess the actual demand in their 
jurisdiction, without imposing any ceiling with universal coverage and ensure no eligible 
beneficiary is left out, so as to achieve the vision of Housing for All. As per the demand surv ey 
conducted by States/U Ts, a demand of 1.12 crore houses was assessed initially. However, 
during the course of implementation of the scheme, more people became eligible and same 

29 
 
were approved accordingly under the scheme. All the project proposals submitt ed by the 
States/UTs has been sanctioned by the Ministry and no further proposal are pending. The 
Union Cabinet has approved continuation of PMAY(U) up to 31 st December 2024 for all 
verticals, except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) vertical so as to co mplete all the 
houses sanctioned under the scheme without changing the funding pattern and 
implementation methodology”.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 8) 
SHIFTING OF FOCUS ON ‘OUTCOME’ RATHER THAN ‘OUTPUT’ 
4.4 The Committee have been apprised that there are a total of 5,13,654 ‘unoccupied’ houses 
under AHP vertical of PMAY(U). The Ministry has explained that as per standard practices, 
construction in AHP vertical is taken up bl ock by block where each block consists of multiple dwelling 
units. The Ministry has accepted that as soon as the block gets completed, Mission acknowledges 
the completion of number of houses but, such completed dwelling units are unsafe for occupancy 
due t o ongoing on -site construction activities including infrastructure facilities for other remaining 
blocks. Such blocks/units become habitable only once all the on -site construction activities get over 
including physical and social infrastructure facility. F urther, the completion time of AHP houses 
generally takes 24 months to 36 months. Moreover, the occupancy of AHP houses is also based on 
the completion of the whole project in all respect such as availability of water, sewerage, electricity 
and other social amenities along with issuance of Completion Certificate by the ULB. Location of the 
projects can be one reason but the major reason for dwellings to be unoccupied.  
The Committee are given to understand that the physical completion of houses, pending 
completion of the entire project and pending availability of basic amenities, is being counted as 
‘completed’ houses. The Ministry without ensuring the livability and occupancy of the houses which is 
the actual target of the Mission is focusing on merely ‘out put’. The Committee strongly feel that this 
approach of the Ministry is misleading. The Ministry being the nodal agency should show the result in 
terms of outcome, that is, the number of houses actually occupied by beneficiaries and not merely 
output in term of houses completed. 
 
4.5 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 

30 
 
“Land and colonization being the State subjects, all housing schemes are implemented by 
respective State/UT governments. MoHUA is supplementing the efforts of States/UTs through 
providing Central Assistance under PMAY -U. As per the schemes’ architecture, the Central 
Assistance is provided in instalments for construction of house as per the progress of the 
project in stages. Provision  of basic infrastructure is done by ULBs/implementing agencies 
from their own funds or converging with other Central/State schemes. Financial buoyancy of 
these institutions acts as a limiting factor causing delay in provision of infrastructure.   
Occupancy of house in AHP projects is a gradual process which includes steps such as 
completion of house followed by provision of infrastructure and allotment of houses, final 
payment of beneficiary share and occupancy. Moreover, States/U ts face challenges of 
occupancy such as beneficiaries moving to the completed projects sites citing issues related 
to occupation, transport, education of children etc.  
Under AHP vertical, the Ministry counts the houses completed in one block as “Completed” 
but the project is considered to be completed only after completion of all houses in the project 
along with provision of infrastructure facilities for the entire project. However, MoHUA is 
consistently following up with the respective State/UT governments for expediting completion 
of infrastructure and speedy occupancy of houses in AHP projects to achieve the outcome. 
Further, MoHUA has also been coordinating with State/UT authorities to ensure that trunk 
infrastructure works such as road, sewage, water supply, electricity is taken up parallelly”. 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
ENSURING INVOLVEMENT OF MPS/MLAS IN HOUSING PROJECTS  
4.7 The Committee have learnt that PMAY(U) scheme has provisioned to conduct demand survey 
and prepare HFAPoAs with involvement of elected representatives including Hon’ble MPs/MLAs of 
respective areas. Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are required to ensure that Hon ’ble MPs/MLAs are 
consulted and their views are taken into account while finalizing the HFAPoAs and AIPs and include 
households of all sections of the society without any prejudice with equal opportunity to all. The 
Committee have been apprised that the vi ews of local MP/MLAs are sought by ULBs and inclusion of 
eligible beneficiaries are done on their request. The Ministry has issued directions to the States/UTs 

31 
 
to constitute District Level Advisory and Monitoring Committee (DLAMC) for Urban Development 
under the chairpersonship of an elected representative. The DLAMC is responsible to oversee, 
review and monitor the urban missions viz. a) Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) b) Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) c) Heritage City Develop ment and Augmentation 
Yojana (HRIDAY) d) Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) - (Urban) e) Deendayal Antyodaya 
Yojana-National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM).  
However, despite above written provisions, the Committee have observed that the elected 
representatives are neither involved at the ground level nor their views taken into account while 
formulation of policy or its implementation. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to seek 
compliance report from the State and UT governments regarding regular involvement of local 
MPs/MLAs in all the meetings held at ULB or State level on PMAY(U) and furnish the same to this 
Committee. 
 
4.8  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as 
follows:- 
“As per the scheme guidelines, the role of local elected representatives including Hon’ble MPs 
& MLAs is crucial and it is envisaged that their view and suggestions are adequately factored 
in at each stage starting from planning to implementation and monitoring of the scheme. The 
Hon’ble MPs representing the district are the Chairpersons or Co -chairpersons of District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) so as to get their directions 
and suggestions for implementation of the Scheme as per the guidelines and reso lution of 
conflicts of any kind. The role of elected representatives is crucial and their constant 
involvement and guidance to the programs is essential for successfully delivering the desired 
outcomes in an inclusive and sustainable manner. States/UTs hav e also been directed to 
constitute District Level Advisory and Monitoring Committee (DLAMC) for Urban Development 
under the chairpersonship of an elected representative to oversee, review and monitor the 
urban missions including PMAY -Urban. The committee a lso undertakes site visits to the 
project areas and meet the beneficiaries to assess the impact and progress of the scheme.  
The directions/suggestions of local MP/MLAs and other elected representatives are 
always considered important in the scheme and their role in decision making is crucial. In 
Many States, Hon’ble MP are ex-officio member of Urban Local Bodies also”.  
 
  
 

32 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
SOCIAL AUDIT 
4.10 The Committee have been informed that Social Audit of 5 -10% of the sanctioned PMAY(U) 
projects under BLC, AHP and ISSR verticals is to be done using random sampling technique through 
agencies selected by States/UTs through a competitive bidding process. Co nducting Social Audit is 
mandatory for States/UTs for release of third 59 instalment of Central Assistance for all PMAY -U 
projects under BLC, AHP and ISSR verticals. MoHUA provides 100% financial assistance to 
States/UTs for undertaking social audit based on the Social Audit Plan submitted by the States/UTs.”  
The Committee have noted that so far 21 States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Manipur, Meghal aya, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal are carrying out Social Audit as per the scheme guidelines. The 
remaining States/UTs are in the process of conducting Social Audit. The Committee feel that a s 
social audit is a pre -requisite for release of final instalment of Central Assistance for PMAY -U 
Projects, the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments/UT administrations the need to 
complete the requirement at the earliest and inform the Commi ttee the latest status of fulfilment of 
Social Audit stipulation by States/UTs within a period of 3 months of presentation of the Report.  
4.11 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have stated as follows: - 
“So far, in addition to the 21 States/UTs mentioned above, 5 more States/U ts namely Punjab, 
Maharashtra, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have also engaged an Independent 
Facilitating Agencies for conducting the Social Audit under PMAY -U”.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer Para No.1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
****** 

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
"Nil" 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi               RAJIV RANJAN SINGH  
ALIAS LALAN SINGH 
05 December, 2023                         Chairperson,  
14  Agrahayana, 1945                               Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the second sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs held on 
Tuesday, 31 October, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1700 hours in  Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Benny Behanan 
3. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
4.  Shri Hibi Eden  
5. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel  
6. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
7. Shri S. Ramalingam 
8. Shri MVV Satyanarayana   
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri R. Girirajan  
10. Smt Jebi Mather Hisham  
11. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
12. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
13. Dr. K. Laxman 
14. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
15. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
   
Secretariat  
1. Smt. Archna Pathania  Director  
2. Ms Swati Parwal   Deputy Secretary 

35 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Standing Committee 
on Housing and Urban Affairs to the Sitting of the Committee and thereafter took up for 
consideration the Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Housing and Urban Affairs on the subject 'Evaluation of implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)' and adopted the Draft Report without any modification.  
 
 
 
*  *  *  *  *                   *                 * 
* matter not related with the report 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 

36 
 
 APPENDIX-II 
 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON  THE SUBJECT, ‘  EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATION 
OF PRADHAN MANTRI AWAS YOJANA (URBAN)”. 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations  15 
 
II.  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government:  
 
 10 
  Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13 & 14 
 
  
  Percentage to total recommendations  (66.66%) 
 
III.  I. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:  
II.  
  
01 
  III. Recommendation No. 2 
IV.  
  
  V. Percentage to total recommendations  (6.66 %) 
 
IV.  VI. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
VII.  
 04 
 
  VIII. Recommendation Nos. 1, 8, 11 & 15 
IX.  
  
  X. Percentage to total recommendations  (26.66 %) 
 
V.  XI. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
 Nil 
 
 
  XII. Percentage to total recommendations  (0 %) 
 