 
19 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on the subject “Grants-in-aid to State Tribal Development 
Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) for Minor Forest Produce (MFP) Operations” 
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  30.11.2006 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on  30.11.2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment on the subject “Grants-in-aid to State Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) for Minor Forest 
Produce (MFP) Operations”of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
       
       P A G E
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 CHAPTER I           Report……………………………                                       1   
 
 
 CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   8  
accepted by the Government…………        
 
 CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the             12 
  Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
  the replies of the  Government……………                                  
 
 CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of       16 
  which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter I……………          
 
 CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of       20 
  which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature……                               
 
  
 ANNEXURE          Minutes of the  Sixth Sitting of the Standing      26 
  Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment  
  held on 23rd November, 2006…….. 
 
 
 APPENDIX          Analysis of the action taken by the Government     28   
  on  the  recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)…………   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT(2006-2007) 
 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
6. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
7. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
10. Shri Jual Oram    
11. Smt. Pratibha Singh   
12. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
13. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
14. Smt. Usha Verma    
15. Vacant  
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Shri Silvius Condpan 
23. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
24. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
25. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
26. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
27. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
28. Shri Veer Singh 
29. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
30. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
31. Vacant 
             
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -  Additional  Secretary 
 2.   Shri A.K. Singh            -  Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -  Deputy Secretary 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -  Under Secretary 
          5.    Km. M.Tunglut                 -   Sr. Executive Assistant 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised by the Comm ittee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Grants-in-aid to State Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) for 
Minor Forest Produce (MFP) Operations” of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
12 December, 2005.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 22 August, 2006. The Report 
was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 23
rd November, 2006. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth  Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:       SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
23 November, 2006         Chairperson,  
2 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
     
 
 

 
CHAPTER–I 
 
REPORT 
         
1.1 This Report of the Sta nding Committee on Social Just ice and Emp owerment 
deals with t he action ta ken by the Govern ment on the recommendatio ns/observations 
contained in the Tent h Report of the Stand ing Commit tee on Social Ju stice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on th e subject “Grants-in-aid to State Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corpora tions (STDCCs) for Minor Forest Produce ( MFP) 
Operations” of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya  Sabha on 
12 Decemb er, 2005.  It contained  21 recommendations.  Replies o f Govern ment in  
respect of all the recommendations have been examined and are categorised as under:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have  been accepted by the  
Government: 
 Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  3, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 20   
 
(Total 6  - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do  not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 2,11,12, 13 and 18 
 
(Total 5 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter I: 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.  4, 15, 17 and 19.  
 
(Total 4 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which r eplies of  t he 
Government are interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Sl. Nos.  1, 8, 10, 14, 16 and 21 
  
(Total 6  - Chapter V)  
 
 
 
 
 1

1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations  
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken  notes in respect of the  
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Re port ma y be furnished to  
them at the earliest and in a ny case n ot later th an three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will no w deal with the action taken replie s of the Governme nt 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. NON RELEASE OF F UNDS BY STATE GOVERN MENTS TO THE IR TRIBAL 
DEVELOPMENT COOPERATIVE CORPORATIONS ON TIME 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 1.30) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted that during 2005-06 the overall budgetary allocation of  
the Ministry had been enhanced by more tha n Rs. 352 crore.  However, out of  the  
enhanced allocation, Rs.230 crore h ad been ear marked exclusively for development of 
forest villag es and Rs.  50 crore for  providing ir rigation fa cilities in triba l areas.  Al so, 
allocation u nder the P ost Matric Scholarship Scheme had been in creased du e to  
enhanced rates of scholarship. As a result, allocation under other schemes including the 
schemes of STDCCs h ad either been kept at par with 2004-05 or had been reduced.  
The Committee had further noted that though the demand f or funds from the States was 
larger than the allotment under the scheme, the inter-scheme allocations were made on 
the basis of  the allo cations given b y the Planning Commis sion to the  Ministry.  The 
Committee had further noted that in some c ases even  the funds released by the  
Ministry under the scheme were  released by the State Govern ments to their 
Corporations in a  delayed manner.  The Committee were o f the view t hat grants-in-aid 
for STDCCs Scheme should be enhanced adequately to cover the pote ntial of MFPs in 
States and make them financially viable.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended 
that the Ministry should  approach t he Planning Commission to give due priority to the 
STDCCs Scheme by allocating more funds spec ifically for Corporation’s scheme within 
the overall budgetary allocation s of the Ministry.  The Co mmittee ha d desired th at the 
Ministry should ensure that the gran ts-in-aid released to th e States are  actually utilized 
for procurement of minor forest pro duce.  The Committee had also urged the Ministry to  
pursue with the States to provide funds to their Tribal Development Cooperative  
Corporations without any delay as well as submit proposals complete in all respect s and 
utilization certificates of earlier funds released to them in time and regularly. 
 2

 
1.6 In the action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated that 
as in th e past, in future also the Ministry would take up  with the Planning Commis sion 
the matter of enhancement of the allocation  under the Scheme during the 11th Five Year 
Plan. 
 
1.7 Insofar as the current year (2006-07) is concerned, as against the BE 2005-06 of 
Rs.10.80 crore for MFP, the Planning Commission has a llocated a higher amount for the 
year in BE 2006-07, namely Rs.16 crore. 
 
1.8 The Committee note with concern that the Ministry  have not t aken any action 
to address the problem of non release of fu nds by the State Gove rnments to their 
Tribal Development Cooperativ e Corporations on ti me and to  ensure that the  
grants-in-aid released to the States are actu ally utilized for procurement of minor 
forest produce. Also, the Ministry  have not mentioned  about the steps take n to  
pursue the States to submit proposals complete in all respects along w ith the 
utilization certificates of funds released in previous years. T he Committee,  
therefore, reiterate their earlier recomm endation and urge the Ministry  to 
vigorously pursue the State Governments to release th e grants under the STDCC 
scheme to their Tribal  Development Cooperative Corp orations without any delay 
and also ensure that the funds released are actuall y utilized to wards MFP 
operations. The States ma y als o be persuaded to send adequate number of 
proposals complete i n all resp ects  alon g with the  utilization  certificates of  
releases made in previous years in time and regularly. 
 
B. MARKETING SUPPORT FOR MINOR FOREST PRODUCE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.29) 
 
1.9 During their on-the-spot study visit to Adilabad in November, 2004 the Committee 
had observed that the tribals were g etting very low price for their MFP, though the same 
was being sold at a much higher price in the ope n market.  The tribal collectors of MFPs 
 3

were not getting any subsidy or marketing suppor t.  The Committee were not happy with 
the situation  and had d esired that the State Governments  or its Corp orations sh ould 
provide adequate marketing support to the tribals and take steps to ensure that they are  
able to reap the full benefits accr uing from t he sale of MFPs.  The  Committee  had, 
therefore, u rged the Ministry to ta ke stringent  steps to minimize the role of P rivate 
Traders in the MFP market and ensure maximization of returns to the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their action taken reply have stated that t hey had 
brought to the notice of  the State Govern ments the recommendations/observations o f 
the Hon’ble Committee for necessary action.    
 
1.11 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have not given due 
consideration to their recommendation for providing adequate marketing su pport 
to the triba ls and also minimizing the role of private traders in the MFP ma rket.  
The Ministry  have simpl y brou ght to the  notice of  State Governments the 
recommendation/observation o f the Co mmittee for necessary  action.   The 
Committee are of the v iew that the Central Government should take initiative and 
pursue the State Go vernments/STDCCs to  take concrete steps for prov iding 
marketing support to the tribals collecting the minor forest produces so that t hey 
could reap the benef its accruing from the sale of MFPs otherw ise they  will 
continue to be exploited b y the private traders.  The Com mittee, therefore , 
strongly re iterate thei r earlier re commendation and urge the Ministry to tak e up  
with the State Govern ments at the highest l evel the is sue of providing ade quate 
marketing support to the tribals for their minor forest produces and als o to  
minimize the role of private traders in MFP markets. 
 
C. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  ACTIVITIES RELATING TO MINOR 
FOREST PRODUCE 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 3.15) 
 
1.12 The Committee had noted with regret that most of the STDCCs are not having 
the facility of Research and Deve lopment for enhancing  the quality of MFPs, which 
 4

would commensurately enhance the marketability of MF Ps.  Only two State bodies i.e.  
Girijan Cooperative Corporation, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat State Forest Development 
Corporation had involved themselves in Research and Development works.  The 
Committee were of the view that th e tribals de pending on MFP would be able to derive  
maximum income through marketing of their minor forest pr oduce only after refining the 
quality and value addition  of the  MFPs and ha d desired that the STDCCs should focus 
on Research and Development to enhance the marke tability of the MFPs.  The  
Committee had, therefore, recommended th at the Mini stry should render financia l 
assistance to augment the Research and De velopment efforts of STDCCs thro ugh 
increased budgetary allocation so that income derived from MFPs may be adeq uately 
enhanced.  The Committee had also desired th at TRIFED should provide assistan ce to 
STDCCs in setting up Research and Development Centres for value addition activities of 
MFPs and maintaining strict quality control nor ms and also to ensure t hat their products 
are viable in the competitive market.  
 
1.13 In the action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated that 
the recommendations of  the Hon’ble  Committee have been noted for co mpliance.  The 
Scheme of ‘ Grants-in-aid to STDCCs for MFP  Operations’  being implemented by the  
Ministry already provides for financial assistance for research and development activities 
to be under taken by STDCCs.    TRIFED also has its own R&D Centre for MF P 
products. 
 
1.14 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry  should render financial  
assistance to augment the research and development efforts of ST DCCs through 
increased budgetary  allocation. The repl y of the Min istry that the scheme of 
`Grants–in-aid to STDCCs fo r Mino r Forest Produce Op erations’ being 
implemented b y them already pro vides for financial assistance for research and  
development activities to be undertaken b y STDCCs is not at all convincing to the 
Committee as onl y two State bodies, i.e. Girijan Cooperative Corporation, Andhra  
Pradesh a nd Gujarat State Fo rest Devel opment Corporation  have involved  
themselves in research and deve lopment activities so f ar.  The Co mmittee are of 
the view  t hat research and development activities w ould en able the tribal 
 5

collectors of MFPs to derive m aximum in come from the MFPs through v alue 
addition, appropriate processing as w ell a s exports and urge the Ministry to  
persuade the STDCCs to give priority  to research and development so that the  
MFPs mark eted by the m are com mercially viable in the  competitiv e market. T he 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should enhance financial assistance 
to all the STDCCs s pecifically for setting up R&D Centres, and monitor the  
progress/achievement made in this regard. 
 
 
D. TRAINING PROGRAMMES FOR SCIENTIFIC COLLE CTION AND  
HARVESTING OF MINOR FOREST PRODUCE  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 3.20) 
 
1.15 The Committee had noted with dee p concern that during the year 2002 -2003, no 
training/workshop/seminar had b een organized for scientific colle ction, proce ssing, 
storage and  marketing of MFPs.  The number of  tribals imparted training from April,  
2003 to March, 2004 i.e . 174 SHGs  and 237 tribals were  not adequate keeping in view 
the fact that most of the  tribals still used their traditional too ls and were ignorant about  
scientific methods of collection  an d harvesting of MFPs.  The Committee had also  
observed that during the year 2004 -2005, only 20 SHGs h ave been trained in scientific 
collection and harvesting of Hone y in Karnataka; 24 tribal women in Hill Broom making 
at Jagdalpu r and 213 tr ibals in making plates a nd bowls fr om Sal and Siali leave s by 
using bio-f uel based moulding machines.  The Committee had expressed their 
dissatisfaction at the  d ecline in th e number of training  pr ogrammes held during  the  
previous years and ha d desired  t hat the Ministry/TRIFED should o rganize training 
programmes, workshop s and seminars for the skill upgra dation, revenue generation, 
value addition, usages of latest tool kits, scientific pract ices for pre & post ha rvest 
management on a large scale.  The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry 
should pursue the States to organize awareness generation and train ing programmes 
regarding scientific co llection and harvesting of MFP as well as provide adequate funds 
for the sam e so that  the poor triba ls who mainly depend on MFP are able to reap  the 
harvest to the maximum.   
 
 6

1.16 The Ministry have stat ed, in their  action taken reply that TRIFED has bee n 
engaged in  providing training pro grammes for tribals fo r various trades and skills.   
TRIFED has during 2003-04 onwards taken up the training of: 
 
- 2450 tribal honey-hunters in Karnataka;  
- 2825 tribal honey-hunters in Chhatt isgarh, And hra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat and Maharashtra;  
 
- training programmes fo r developing resource persons/mast er trainers in Andhra  
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh  
 
- 1000 gum-p ickers in Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat  
and Maharashtra. 
 
- Demonstrative project on medicinal pl ants like Safed Musli and Amla at  
Jagdalpur, Bastar, Chhattisgarh 
 
- Demonstrative project on Stevia Cultivation at Jagdalpur, Bastar, Chhattisgarh 
 
1.17 The Central Govern ment has also  brought  t o the specific notice o f State 
Governments the views of the Hon’ble Committee about the need for training.  
 
1.18 The repl y of the Ministry that they had brought to the specific notice of th e 
State Gov ernments the need for training  regarding  scientific collection and 
harvesting of MFPs is not satisfactory  as th e State Governments/STDCCs are not 
having adequate re sources or expertis e to con duct specialized training 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge the Ministry  to assist the State Governments to organize more 
awareness camps and training programmes in scientific collection of minor forest 
produce.  The Committee also des ire the Ministry  should provide ad equate funds 
and technological inputs in skill up-gradation, revenue generation, value addition, 
usages of latest tool kits, scientifi c practices for pre & post harvest management. 
The STDCCs and TRIFED should involve itself more actively and extensively in the 
training of the tribal  collectors of MFPs tow ards scientific collection and 
harvesting of the minor forest produce. 
 7

 
CHAPTER –  II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No 1.16) 
 
2.1 The Committee note th at due to limited numb er of officia ls in the Min istry, the  
nominees of the Central Govern ment have not b een able to  attend the B oard meetings 
of STDCCs  on a regular basis.  The Committee are of the opinion that pr oper 
coordination is to be maintained between the Ministry and TRIFED on one hand and the 
State Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations on  t he other fo r their eff ective 
functioning.  The Co mmittee, therefore, desir e that the nominated members of  the  
Ministry should attend the meetings of the Board of Directors of STDCCs regul arly, 
acquaint themselves with the overall function ing of the Stat e bodies an d ensure be tter 
coordination between the Ministry and STDCCs/TRIFED.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  
2.2 The nominee-Directors of the Central Govern ment on the Board of Directors of 
STDCCs have been instructed by this Ministry to attend the Board meetings of STDCCs 
regularly.    
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para  No. 1.31) 
 
2.3 The Committee are constrained to note that most of the funds of the STDCCs are 
spent on salaries as there are no se parate provisions for the establishment expenses o f 
the STDCCs inclu ding TRIFED.  The Committ ee have been apprised  that meeting the 
expenditure on establishment and administrative matters  is the responsibility of the  
States.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to persuade the State Govern ments 
to make separate provision for meeting establish ment costs either through Plan or Non-
Plan budget and ensur e that the funds rele ased to the S TDCCs are utilized in MFP 
operations. 
     
 
 
 
 8

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.4 This Ministr y has broug ht to the no tice of the State Go vernments the concern 
expressed by the Hon’ble Committee.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.32) 
 
2.5 The Committee regret to note that STDCCs are obtaining loans from Banks and 
repaying them with int erest to increase their  p resence in t he trade of  MFPs inclu ding 
Haat Bazars.  The Committee expre ss apprehension that this practice will not be in  the 
best interest of the poor tribals depending on collection of  MFP for their livelihood.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to  im press upon  the States to examine the 
commercial viability of MFPs thoroughly before taking lo ans from Banks and st rictly 
adhere to prudent business practices. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 The views of the Hon’ble Committee have been brought to the notice of the State 
Governments for necessary action.  
 
 [Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 1.38) 
 
2.7 The Committee note with concern that most of t he States are enjoying monopoly 
rights for t he collect ion of MFPs.  The States have devised varying procedures of  
procurement through different agencies at the grass-roots level, includ ing Large Area 
Multi-purpose Projects and other primary le vel cooperative societie s.  The Committee  
are, however, of the firm view that the poor tri bal collector s of MF Ps will be optimally 
benefited if they are allo wed to collect and sell MFPs throu gh Cooperatives or Self Help 
Groups formed by them. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to direct the States 
and their Corporations to assist the  tribals in  forming Cooperatives or Self Help Groups 
while providing the infrastructural su pport and acting as a facilitator for t he marketing of 
the MFPs.   
 
 
 
 9

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.8 TRIFED has already been implementing project s for organizing Self Help Groups 
of tribals to deal in MFPs.  The servi ces of TRIFED would be utilized in a more  involved 
manner under a new R oad Map being drawn up by TRIFED.  The Ministry has also 
asked the  State Govern ments to take action  in acco rdance wit h the  
recommendations/observations of the Hon’ble Committee.  
  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.7) 
 
2.9 The Commi ttee are constrained to  note that th ere is no u niformity in fixing the 
price of MFPs amongst the States.  Generally, the District Authorities fix the prices of the 
MFPs through their Price Fixation Committees in consultation with the relevant bodies, 
including the representatives from the STDCCs/FDCs, etc.   However, t he details of  the 
Price Fixation Committ ees are not  available w ith the Ministry as well as TRIFED.  The 
Committee desire that members of tribal community should also be r epresented in the 
Price Fixation Committ ees proport ionately and the State s should  a dopt (as fa r as  
possible) common minimum prices for the min or forest produce of the tribals an d urge 
the Ministry to pursue the matter with the States so tha t the issue is resolved and 
implemented at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.10 This Ministry has included its intent ion of provi ding Minimu m Support Price for 
MFPs as o ne of its goals in the Draft National Policy on Tribals, 200 6 prepared by it 
recently.  T he State Governments have been asked to take action  on the Committee’s 
recommendations that members of  the tribal communit y  be represen ted in the Price  
Fixation Committees proportionately and adopt ion of Common Minimum Support Price 
for MFPs by States, as far as possible.    
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 10

Recommendation (Sl. No. 20,Para No. 3.25) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that procurement and marketing of MFPs at the execution  
level remain s with the STDCCs and  are largely governed b y policies and decisions of 
the State Governments.   The Co mmittee, however, feel t hat there are lots of areas 
where the Ministry/TRI FED can work togethe r like development of the MFP sector, 
analyzing of proposals from the State Governments, technological inputs and in the field 
of research  and deve lopment.  The Committee,  therefore,   urge    t he     
Ministry/TRIFED to  maintain proper  coordination with the S TDCCs by providing market 
intelligence thereby a ugmenting t he volume  of trade of  the STDCCs, ensure that 
nominees to the Board of STDCCs attend the meetings regularly;  provide R&D inputs to 
STDCCs;  p ersuade the States to implement th e provisions of the PESA Act, 1996 and   
confer ownership rights of MFPs to the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 2.12 The Committee’s recommendations have already been noted and action initiated 
by  issuing necessary directions to t he State Go vernments and by in volving TRIFED in  
MFP Opera tions along  with STDCCs; directin g the Central Government nominees to 
attend the meetings of Board of Directors of STDCCs regularly;  providing for  R&D 
inputs under the Scheme; by introducing the Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest  
Rights) Bill, 2005. 
 
 [Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
 11

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 1.15) 
 
3.1 The Committee find th at  State Tribal Development Coo perative Corporations 
(STDCCs), whose main function is to procure MFPs, are functioning in fourteen States 
at present.  In some St ates, certa in MFP items are procu red and marketed by State  
Forest Development Corporations,  MFP Deve lopment Cooperative Federations, other 
State Go vernment org anizations like MARKF ED, Large Area Multip urpose Project s 
(LAMPs) Societies etc.  The Committee are not happy with this situation.  They  strongly 
feel that in the absence of STDCCs , the poor tribals would not be able to procure and 
market the produce e ffectively and would also not g et remunerative prices. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigoro usly persuade the rema ining States to 
set up STDCCs  in their States at the earliest so that MFPs are procured from the tribals  
and marketed at remunerative prices thereby benefiting them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 Most of th e States h ave established State  Tribal Development Cooperative  
Corporations (STDCCs). Those States which have not established STDCCs, operate the 
Scheme relating to MFP operation through other State Government organisations like  
Forest Development Corporations or Large  Area Multi-purpose P rojects (LA MPs) 
Societies, etc.  
 
3.3 Nevertheless the attent ion of the State Gove rnments/UT Administrations has 
been drawn to the recommenda tions/observations of t he Hon’ble Committee fo r 
necessary action.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.18) 
 
3.4 The Committee are dismayed to n ote that the forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes, 
who have  been residing there for generations and are dependant on MFP for their 
livelihood ar e still not e njoying ownership of th eir MFP mostly due to ambiguity in the  
 12

definition of the term ‘Minor Forest Produce’.  The Ministry have informed that they are in 
the process of finalizin g a draft “Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 
2005” to recognize and  confer ownership rights to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes.  
The Committee urge the  Ministry to clearly define the term “ Minor Forest Produce” and 
bring within the ambit of the term ‘MFP’ all the traditional minor forest produce in the Bill.  
The Committee further desire that in order to recognize an d vest the forest rights and 
occupation of forest lands to the  forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes, the Ministry should  
finalise the  “Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2005”, in consultation 
with the Ministry of Environment a nd Forests and concer ned Departments/States and  
bring it to the Parliament at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.5 The Ministry has since  introduced t he Scheduled Tribes ( Recognition of Forest  
Rights) Bill, 2005 in the Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005.  The term ‘ minor forest produce’ has 
been defined in Clause 2(i) of the  Bill. The Joint Committee of both the House s of 
Parliament which consi dered the Bill, has made a number of mo difications and 
suggestions.  The Bill as revised will be taken up for discussion in Parliament.  
 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.19) 
 
3.6 The Committee further  note that  for finalizing a Model Bill for conferring 
ownership rights in resp ect of MFP on forest d ependant communities, the Ministry o f 
Environment and Forest s have soug ht the comments of co ncerned Ministries, including 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in this regard.  Kee ping in view the fact tha t the Ministry of  
Tribal Affairs is the nod al Ministry concerned with the welfare and deve lopment of the 
Scheduled Tribes, majority of whom live in forests and  depend on MFP for their 
sustenance, the Commi ttee urge th e Ministry to lend their  expertise t o the Minist ry of  
Environment and Forests and actively involve themselves in the drafting of the Bill.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.7 The Ministry  of  Environment & Fo rests had dr afted the “Model Bill – S tate/UT 
Minor Forest Produce ( Ownership Rights of F orest Dependent Community) Act,  2005” 
 13

for conferring ownership rights in respect of minor forest produce on forest dependent  
communities.   
 
3.8 As the provisions of  this model Bill overlapped with the pro visions of th e draft 
“Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2005 ” formulated by this Ministry 
for recognizing and vesting the fo rest rights and occupa tion of forest land in f orest 
dwelling Scheduled Tribes who ha ve been residing in  such forests for  generations but 
whose rights could not be recorded, the Commi ttee of Secretaries in a meeting held on 
12.8.2005  discussed if there was a need for enacting two bills.  
 
3.9 The Scheduled Tribes ( Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2 005 prepared by the  
Ministry was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005.  The said Bill defines the term 
‘minor forest produce’ to include a ll non-timber forest produ ce of plant origin, including 
bamboo, brush wood, stumps, cane, tussar, cocoons, honey, wax, lac, t endu or kendu  
leaves, medicinal plants and herbs, roots, tuber s and the like.  As per the said Bill,  the 
forest rights of forest d welling Sch eduled Trib es also include the rig ht of ownership  
access to use or dispose of minor f orest produce.  The Bill was, howe ver, referred to a  
Joint Committee of the Parliament for examination.  The Joint Committee of the  
Parliament has since pr esented its Report to Lok Sabha on 23.5.2006, which was also 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.   
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.20) 
 
3.10 The Commi ttee note t hat though  the Panch ayats  (Extension to  Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 gives the ri ghts of ownership of MFP to  the respective  
Panchayats/Gram Sabh as and is applicable to  all the Scheduled areas, yet it has  not 
been implemented by t he States in  the right sp irit.  The Co mmittee, therefore, urge the  
Ministry to pursue the States to a mend their legislation s in accordance with the  PESA 
Act, 1996 so that own ership right s of MFPs  is conferred on the Panchayats/Gram 
Sabhas and the poor S cheduled Tribe families living in the  forests are not deprive d of 
their source of livelihood.  
 
 
 
 
 14

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
3.11 The Pancha yats (Exten sion to Sch eduled Area s) Act, 199 6 is administered by 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has, the refore, to ensure 
that the Stat es amend t heir legislations in accor dance with the PESA Act, 1996 so that  
the ownership of MFPs is conferred on the Pan chayats/Gram Sabhas. The Scheduled 
Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2005  introduced by the  Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs in the Lok Sabha, however,  inter alia seeks to recognize the right of ownership 
access to u se or di spose of minor f orest produce also, in respect of  the forest dw elling 
scheduled tribes, vide clause 3(c) of the Bill.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 3.16) 
 
3.12 The Commi ttee note that the Mini stry have  sanctioned e valuation studies on 
‘Procurement and marketing of it ems of tribal produce marketed by TRIFED during 
2003-04’ and ‘Quantification of State-wise minor forest produces, value addition  and 
backward, forward linkages with the market to ensure enhanced income of the 
Scheduled Tribes’ durin g 2004-05.  The Committee desire t hat these st udies should be 
completed at the earliest so that the  Ministry wo uld be able to plan a wide spectru m of 
activities pertaining to  MFP operations.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.13 Consequent on a change in its mandate through amendments made in its bye-
laws, TRIFED has since stopped making direct procurement of tribal produce and its 
sale for the past 2/3 years, but is now engaged in market development for tribal products 
instead.  T herefore, the evaluation study on ‘Procurement and marketing of ite ms of  
tribal produce marketed by TRIFED during 2003 -04’ is no longer relevant and has been 
dropped.  H owever the evaluation study on ‘Quantification of State-wise m inor forest  
produces, value additio n and backward, forward linkage s with the m arket to ensure 
enhanced income of the Scheduled Tribes’ is being pursued.   
 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
 15

CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED 
UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER – I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 1.30) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that during 2005-06 the overall budget ary allocation of the 
Ministry has been enhanced by more than Rs.352 crore.  However, out of the enhanced 
allocation, Rs.230 crore has been earmarked  exclusively for develo pment of fo rest 
villages and Rs.50 cror e for providing irrigation  facilities in tribal areas.  Also allocation 
under the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme has been increased due to enhanced rates 
of scholarship. As a result allo cation under other schemes includ ing the schemes of  
STDCCs has either been kept at par with 2004-05 or has been reduced.  The Committee 
further note that though the demand for funds from the States is larger than the allotment 
under the scheme, the inter-scheme allocations are made on the basis of the allocations 
given by the Planning Commission to the Ministry.  The Committee fu rther note t hat in 
some cases even the fu nds released by the Ministry under  the scheme are relea sed by 
the State Governments to their Corporations in  a delayed manner.  The Committee are 
of the view that grants-in-aid for STDCCs Sche me should be enhanced adequately t o 
cover the potential of MFPs in States and make t hem financially viable.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should  approach the Planning  Commission to 
give due priority to the STDCCs Scheme by allocating more funds specifically for 
Corporation’s scheme within the overall budgetary allocations of the Ministry.  The 
Committee desire that t he Ministry should ensure that the grants-in-aid  released to the 
States are actually utilized for pro curement of minor forest produce.  The Committee 
also urge t he Ministry to pursue with the States to provide funds to their Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporations without  any delay a s well as submit proposals 
complete in all respe cts and utiliza tion certificates of earlie r funds rele ased to the m in  
time and regularly. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
4.2 As in the past, in futur e also this Ministry would take u p with the Planning  
Commission the matter of enhancement of the allocation  under the Scheme durin g the 
11th Five Year Plan. 
 
 16

4.3 Insofar as the current year (2006-07) is concer ned as against the BE 2005-06 of 
Rs.10.80 crores for MFP, the Planning Commi ssion has allocated a h igher amount for 
the year in BE:2006-07, namely Rs.16 Cr. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.29) 
 
4.4 During their on the spot study visit to Adilabad in November, 2004 the Committee 
observed that the tribals are gettin g very low price for the ir MFP, tho ugh the same is  
being sold at a much higher price in the open market.  The tribal colle ctors of MFPs are 
not getting any subsidy or marketin g support.  The Commit tee are not happy with the  
situation an d desire t hat the Stat e Govern ments or its Corporations should  pr ovide 
adequate marketing support to the tribals and ta ke steps to ensure that they are able to  
reap the full benefits accruing from the sale of MFP.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to take stringe nt steps to minimize the role of  Private Tra ders in the  MF P 
market and ensure maximization of returns to the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5 This Minist ry has brought to the notice o f the State Govern ments the  
recommendations/observations of the Hon’ble Committee for necessary action.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 3.15) 
 
4.6 The Committee regret to note that most of the S TDCCs are not having the facility 
of Research and De velopment for enhancing the quality of MF Ps, which would 
commensurately enhance the marketability of MFPs.  Onl y two State bodies i.e. Girijan 
Cooperative Corporation, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat State Forest Development 
Corporation have involved themselves in  Research and Development works.  The 
 17

Committee are of the view that the tribals dep ending on MFP would be able to derive 
maximum income through marketing of their minor forest pr oduce only after refining the 
quality and value addition  of the MFPs and desire that the STDCCs  should focus on 
Research and Development to enhance the marketability of the MFPs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should  render fina ncial assist ance to aug ment 
the Resear ch and Development efforts of STDCCs th rough increased budgetary 
allocation so that inco me derived  from MFPs may be adequately enhanced.  The  
Committee also desire that TRIFED should provide assistance to STDCCs in setting up 
Research and Develo pment Cen tres for va lue additio n activities of MFPs  and 
maintaining strict quality control nor ms and also to ensure that their products are viable  
in the competitive market.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
4.7 The recommendations of the  Hon’ble Co mmittee have been n oted for 
compliance.  The Sch eme of ‘ Grants-in-aid t o STDCCs for MF P Operations’ being  
implemented by this Ministry already provides for financial assistance for R&D activities 
to be under taken by STDCCs.    TRIFED also has its own R&D Centre for MF P 
products. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 3.20) 
 
4.8 The Commi ttee note w ith deep concern that during the year 2002-2003, no 
training/workshop/seminar has be en organized for scie ntific co llection, processing,  
storage and  marketing of MFPs.  The number of  tribals imparted training from April,  
2003 to March, 2004 i.e. 174 SHGs and 237 tribals are not adequate keeping in view the 
fact that most of the tribals still use their traditional tools and are ignorant about scientific 
methods of collection and harvesting of MFPs.  The Committee also ob serve that during 
the year 2 004-2005, only 20 SHGs have  b een trained in scientific collection  and  
harvesting of Honey in Karnataka; 24 tribal women in Hill Broom making at Jagda lpur 
and 213 tribals in making plates and bowls from Sal and Siali leaves by using bio-fuel 
 18

based moulding machines.  The Committee express their dissatisfaction at the decline in 
the number of training p rogrammes held during the previous years and desire that t he 
Ministry/TRIFED should organize training programmes, workshops and seminars for the 
skill upgradation, revenue generation, value ad dition, usages of latest tool kits, scientific 
practices fo r pre & post harvest management on a large scale.  The  Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry should pursu e the States to organize awareness 
generation and training  programmes regardin g scientific collection a nd harvesting of  
MFP as well as provide adequate funds for the same so tha t the poor tribals who mainly 
depend on MFP are able to reap the harvest to the maximum.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.9 TRIFED ha s been eng aged in pr oviding training progra mmes for tribals for  
various trades and skills.  TRIFED has during 2003-04 onwards taken up the training of: 
 
- 2450 tribal honey-hunters in Karnataka;  
- 2825 tribal honey-hunters in Chhatt isgarh, And hra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat and Maharashtra;  
 
- training programmes fo r developing resource persons/mast er trainers in Andhra  
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh  
 
- 1000 gum-p ickers in Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat  
and Maharashtra. 
 
- Demonstrative project on medicinal pl ants like Safed Musli and Amla at  
Jagdalpur, Bastar, Chhattisgarh 
 
- Demonstrative project on Stevia Cultivation at Jagdalpur, Bastar, Chhattisgarh 
 
4.10 The Central Govern ment has also  brought  t o the specific notice o f State 
Government the views of the Hon’ble Committee about the need for training.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 19

 
 CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.9) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that Minor Forest Produce is central to the existence of  
tribal communities.  According to the Report of an Expert Committe e set up by the 
Ministry of Environmen t and Forest s in 1999, t he amount of MFP produced annu ally is 
1,17,71,850 MT.  The study conducted by Insi ght Management Consultants in  the year 
2002 had estimated  the share of the tribals in the MFP market, except for Tamarind and 
Honey, to be 100%.  The Committee are, ho wever, distressed to n ote that du e to  
scarcity of MFP resources, there is stiff comp etition among the tribal MFP collecting  
families which leads to  collection of immature  plant parts, leaves, flowers, fruits, bark 
and roots thereby causing damage to the mother plant and  less than o ptimum return to 
the forest d ependent communit y. The Commi ttee observe that MFPs are playing a  
pivotal role in the lives of the forest dependant  tribal families but express its serious 
concern tha t colle ction of immature  plant parts and unscientific explo itation of M FP 
resources w ould ultimately lead to the destruction of the source of livelihood of t hese 
tribal families. The Committee are of the view that the existi ng potential of Minor Forest 
Produce sh ould be exploited econo mically and scient ifically so that th ey remain a s a  
sustainable and renewable source of income for the tribal families.  The Commi ttee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should pursue with the States to prepare specific 
action plan for harnessing the exist ing potential of MFP in their respective States in a  
scientific manner, provide technological in puts for value addition t o Minor Forest  
Produces and undertake procurement activities with improved methods.  The Committee 
also desire  that the Ministry/TRIFED should lend their  expertise to the States for  
preparation of specific a ction plan s and in their  procurement operation s so tha t Minor  
Forest Produce continu e to be a viable and self- sustainin g source of income for the 
forest dependant tribal families for many generations to come. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Tribal Cooperative Marketing Develo pment Fed eration of India Ltd. 
(TRIFED), being an Ape x Cooperative Federation, and an organization with the go al of 
developing markets for tribal products, has been  asked to prepare a new Road Map for 
 20

the organization which will, inter-alia, include  helping the State Tri bal Develop ment 
Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) to take up exploitation of Minor Forest Produce  
(MFP) economically and scientifically so that MFP remains a sustainable and renewable  
source of income for the tribal families.  
 
5.3 To this end TRIFED would ensure that tribals are trained in collectin g MFPs in a  
scientific manner with t he aid of technology inputs and to further process the MF Ps for 
value addition so that this activity continues to be a viable and self-sustaining sour ce of 
income.  
 
5.4 TRIFED ha s already t aken up projec ts on providing an improved  t echnology 
package co mprising use of protective clothes and equipments for non -destructive and 
safe collect ion and extraction of forest honey. The pro gram has been started in 
Karnataka and is going  to be taken up in other States namely Chha ttisgarh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra for 5275 tribal honey collectors.  
 
5.5 A similar programme is  also proposed to be taken up for scientific collection and 
tapping of gum from the gum yielding trees for 10,000 tribal gum pickers in the State s of 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Andh ra Pradesh and Maharashtra, as w ell as 
for lac in the State of Orissa. 
 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 1.39) 
 
5.6 The Commit tee note that markets explored by the STDCCs  are generally local 
and national in nature a nd MFPs are sold witho ut much value addition.  TRIFED has, to  
some exten t, played a role in the international trade of commodities including Niger 
Seed, Gum Karaya, Mustard DOC etc.  The Committee de sire that the Ministry/TRIFED 
should assist the STDCCs in educating the tribals about marketing channels, m arket 
knowledge regarding weights and  measures,  costin g an d quality control and also 
explore the avenues for sale of  MFPs in intern ational markets on a larger scale.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to play a proactive role in the marketing of MFPs 
by providing market intelligence about their products,   rendering export related services, 
opening of Export Facilitation Centres to enabl e the STDCCs to sell th eir products and 
adopting direct selling through outlets of T RIBES und er a national brand.  The  
 21

Committee also de sire the Ministry to lay dow n guidelines for explorin g the nation al as 
well as international market to expand the scope  for the sup ply of MFPs   and export o f 
the same to other countries. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.7 The Recommendations of the Hon’ble Committe e has been noted.    Thi s will be 
implemented through TRIFED. 
 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.8) 
 
5.8 The Commi ttee expres s serious concern over the fact th at minimu m support  
price is not available for the MFPs o f the tribals as is available for other commodities in 
the agricult ure sector through Agricultural Price Commission.  TRIFED has recentl y 
taken up the issue with the Ministry of Agricultu re as well b ut they are yet to respond to  
the proposal.  The  Co mmittee feel that there is an urgent need to bring the minor f orest 
produce un der the ambit of minimum support price as th ey are the main source of  
livelihood and income for a majority o f the tribal people.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to earnestly pursue the nodal Ministry,  i.e. Ministry of Environment and  
Forests and also the  Ministry of Agriculture to fix minimum support prices for the MFPs 
of the tribals, in consulta tion with concerned State Governments so that the tribals could 
get proper value for the forest produce collected by them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.9 This Ministr y has includ ed its intent ion of providing Minimum Support Price for  
MFPs as one of it s go als in  the Draft National Policy on Tribals, 200 6 prepared by it 
recently.  This will be examined in detail in con sultation with the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Cooperation, Commission for Agricultural Cost s & Prices (CACP), State Governments, 
TRIFED and other stake-holders concerned. 
 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
 
 22

Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.28) 
 
5.10 The Committee  note with deep concern   that marketing of minor forest produce 
remains unorganized mainly in the h ands of private traders/middlemen.  Out of Rs. 650 
crore worth of MFPs a vailable in th e country, 60 per cent is going into  the hands of the   
unorganized sector  an d private traders or middlemen while not even  30 per cen t is 
procured by Govern ment agencies. The Committee have also been inf ormed that only 
Gujarat, Rajasthan and  West Beng al have stat ed that ther e are no in stances wh ere 
private traders or middlemen do no t allow tribals to reap the harvest of their MFPs. The 
Committee strongly feel that monop oly of the MFP market by private traders, legally or 
illegally owing to inadequate control being exercised by State agencies, should  be  
curtailed. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the STDCCs  
to play an active role in the collection and  marketing of MFPs and regulate their 
operations with strict administrative control and effective manage ment techniques.  
Proper coordination among field level agencies involved i n MFP operations should be 
ensured.  T he Committee also de sire that the Ministry should take immediate steps to  
form a consortium of State TDCCs which will organize periodic bu yers-sellers mee t 
thereby ena bling the tribals to get proper price for their MFPs and also  minimize the 
monopoly of the MFP markets by private traders/middlemen.   Steps taken in this regard 
may be communicated to the Committee.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.11 This Ministr y proposes to involve T RIFED more directly and more de eply wit h 
STDCCs to  help the latter in pursuing the activities relating to MFP operations more 
vigorously. This Ministr y has brou ght to the notice of t he State Governments/ UT 
Administrations the re commendations/observations of the  Hon’ble Committee for taking 
action to ensure that STDCCs play an active role in the collection and marketing of  
MFPs and regulating their operations with strict administrative control and effective 
management techniques.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23

Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para  No. 3.6) 
 
5.12 The Commi ttee note that the tribals living in the forest are engaged  in MF P 
operations in accordance with their traditional wi sdom using tools like axes, chise ls, etc. 
for collection of minor forest produ ce and are not updated with the latest technologies in 
this regard.  Due to overall resour ce constraints, TRIFED and STDCCs are no t in a  
position to provide adequate techn ological a ids and tools.   The Committee, however,  
desire that the Ministry should pursue the State Govern ments and their Corporations to 
take necessary action for imparting training to the tribals in the application of modern 
tools, scientific methods of colle ction, processing, storage a nd marketing of MFPs and 
also provid e tool kits and tech nological aid s to them.    TRIFE D, as the  nodal 
organization should develop standard norms for the MFPs so that their market could be 
expanded considerably.  The Committee also re commend that the Ministry should assist 
the STDCCs in setting up common facility cent res/vocational training centres in tri bal 
clusters whi ch could be utilized for  imparting training regarding scienti fic methods of 
collection, value addition and storage besides marketing of the MFP of the tribals.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.13 TRIFED is already engaged in imparting training to tribals in collect ing MFPs,  
viz., wild honey, gum karaya etc.  in a scientific manner with the aid of technology inputs 
and to further process the MFPs for value addition so th at this activity continues to  be a 
viable and self-sustaining source of income for the tribals.   TRIFED also plans to involve 
itself in helping STDCCs with resource mapping, scient ific collect ion, value addition,  
storage, development of quality standards, export facilitation, etc.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 3.32) 
 
5.14 The Committee express concern over the fact th at STDCCs are facing a number 
of obstacle s in carryin g out their  MFP operations viz, financial constraints, lack of 
awareness among the tribals in th e collect ion, storage, gr ading, primary level va lue 
addition, unorganized market of MFPs etc.  The Committee further n ote that und er the 
Indian Forest Act and r elevant State Forest A cts, regulatory provisions such as transit 
fees are statutory in nat ure.  Howe ver, States like Orissa, Rajasthan, Madhya  Pradesh, 
Gujarat and West Beng al have wai ved the fee s leviable on transit of such MFP.  The 
 24

Committee desire that the remaining States should be pursued to abolish the 
taxes/forest levies for trading in MFPs and urge the Ministry to take up the issue with the 
State Governments on priority basis.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.15 This Minist ry has brought to t he notice  of the Sta te Govern ments/UT 
Administrations the co ncerns expressed by the Hon’ble Committee, for necessary 
action.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. No.20012/47/2004-CP&R dated 22.8.2006 ] 
 
  
 
New Delhi:       SUMIT RA MAHAJAN,  
23 November, 2006         Chairperso n, 
2 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
     
 25

ANNEXURE  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERM ENT HEL D ON THURSDAY, 23 rd  
NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room 
`C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora  
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam 
6. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Shri Silvius Condpan 
8. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
9. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
10. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri R.K. Saxena -  Deputy Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
  
  
  
2. ***   ***   ***   ***  
3. ***   ***    ***    *** 
 
4. ***   ***   ***   *** 
5. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
 26

6. The Committee then too k up the Dr aft Nineteenth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Tenth Report of the 
Standing Committee o n Social Justice and Empowerment on the subject “Grants-in-aid  
to State Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations ( STDCCs) f or Minor Forest 
Produce (MFP) Operations” of the  Ministry of Tribal Affa irs and ado pted the sa me 
without any amendment. 
 
7. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report and present the 
same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 27

 28
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
          T o t a l      P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations           21 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which  
have been accepted by the Government:            6        28.57% 
(Sl. Nos.  3, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 20)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which       5        23.81% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Sl. Nos. 2, 11,12,13 and 18) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in                    4        19.05% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Sl. Nos. 4, 15, 17 and 19) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in                     6        28.57% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Sl. No. 1, 8, 10, 14, 16 and 21) 
 