 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -Sixth Re port of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants for the year 2007 -2008 of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.3.2008 
 
                                Laid in Rajya Sabha on  4.3.2008 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
                    NEW DELHI 
        December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
 
31 

 
31 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants for the year 2007 -2008 of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY - FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                
PAGE 
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………                  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                  
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………                 
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……                                       
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..            
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee  on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on  14 December, 2007                                                                  
             
        
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government               
recommendations contained in th e Twenty - Sixth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………                                        
                                       

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
 JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
      (2007-2008) 
 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque*   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Bhai Lal 
8. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
9. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
10. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
11. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
12. Shri Jual Oram  
13. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
14. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma   
16. Dr. R. Senthil  
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
20. Smt. Usha Verma  
21. Vacant   
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
  22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma  
23. Shri Silvius Condpan 
24. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
____________________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqualification from the 
Membership of the 14th Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker on 27 January, 2008. 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
  1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu       -    Additional Secretary 
 2.  Shri Ashok Sarin            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.  Shri R.K. Saxena         -   Director 
 4.  Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Deputy Secretary 
           5.  Smt. Shashi Bisht                -         Executive Assistant 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Thirty -First Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants – 2007-08 relating to the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
  
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 2007 and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on  03 May, 2007.  The Ministry of Minority Affairs furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 28 
August, 2007.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 14 December, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendat ions 
contained in the Twenty -Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2007        Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
     

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
          REPORT 
         
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2007 -08 relating to the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
1.2 The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 2007 and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 03 May, 2007.  It contained 15 observations/recommendations.  
Replies of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
  
Paragraph Nos.  2.9, 3.12, 3.14, 5.14, 6.17 and 6.19. 
 
(Total 6  - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire to  
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 1.10, 1.11, 4.10 and 5.15 
 
(Total 4 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
Paragraph Nos.  3.13, 4.11 and 4.12   
 
(Total 3 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: 
   

Paragraph Nos.   2.8 and 6.18 
  
(Total 2  - Chapter V)  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not l ater than three months of the presentation of 
the Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government  which need reiteration or merit comments. 

A.  ACTION PLAN FOR UPLIFTMENT OF MINORITIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.9  ) 
 
1.5 In    Paragraph 2.9 of the original Report the Committee had observed that the 
‘Working Group on empowerment of the Minorities’ had suggested plans for the overall 
upliftment of the educationally and economically backward minorit ies.  In that regard 
some key areas had been identified by them which require focused attention.  Those 
areas were ‘Equitable access to economic opportunities’, ‘Equitable access to 
educational opportunities’, ‘Equitable access to Government social welfare  schemes and 
programmes’ and ‘Sharply focused research plans to collect quantitative and qualitative 
data on the condition of minorities’, particularly Muslims.  The Committee had expressed 
hope that the Ministry would earnestly consider the suggestions ma de by the Working 
Group on empowerment of minorities and formulate an action Plan for implementing 
them in a time bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.6 The Ministry in their reply have stated that the process of formulating the schemes 
and programmes  on the basis of the recommendations of “the Working Group on 
Empowerment of Minorities”, two schemes, namely, (i) scheme of Merit -cum-means 
based scholarship to students belonging to the minority communities and (ii) Free 
coaching and allied scheme for candidates belonging to minority communities have been 
approved. Other schemes, which are being processed are Pre -matric scholarship 
scheme, Post-matric scholarship scheme, Grant -in –aid to State Channelising Agencies 
of National Minorities Development Finan ce Corporation, Research/studies, monitoring, 

evaluation including publicity scheme and Multi sectoral development programme for 
minority concentration districts. 
 
1.7 The Committee   note  that two schemes, namely, (i) scheme of merit -cum-
means based scho larship to students belonging to the minority communities and 
(ii) free coaching and allied scheme for candidates belonging to minority 
communities have been approved by the Ministry in accordance with the 
recommendations of “the working group on Empowerme nt of Minorities”. The 
formulation of other  schemes like Pre -matric scholarship scheme, Post matric 
scholarship scheme, Grant -in-aids to State Channelising Agencies of National 
Minorities Development Finance Corporation, Research/studies, monitoring, 
evaluation including publicity scheme and multi sectoral development programme 
for minority concentration districts are being processed by the Ministry.  The 
Committee desire that the process of formulation, approval and implementation of 
all the above stated schemes be expedited to ensure overall upliftment of 
educationally and economically backward minority communities in a time bound 
manner.  
  
 
B. MAULANA AZAD EDUCATION FOUNDATION (MAEF) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 6, Para No.  3.13 ) 
 
1.8 The Committee had no ted in paragraph No. 3.13  that funds from Maulana Azad 
Education Foundation were made available to reputed NGOs, throughout the country for 
construction/expansion of schools/colleges/girl hostels/polytechnics/ITIs and purchase of 
equipment/machinery/furniture.  However, it had been observed that no amount was 
sanctioned to Assam, Manipur and Uttarakhand during the last three years.  The 
Committee were constrained to note that MAEF did not disburse funds State -wise in 
proportion to the percentage of minorit y population.  The Committee did not agree with 
the  plea advanced by the  Ministry that the release of funds depend upon the proposals 
received from the  States.  The Committee were of the opinion that unless the funds 
were   made available to the States in proportion to the percentage of minorities, they 
would be deprived of the benefits of the scheme.  The Committee, had therefore, 

recommended that State -wise allocation of funds might be made under the MAEF in 
proportion to the percentage of minorities i n respective States and ensure that funds 
allocated were fully and gainfully utilized by the NGOs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.9 In their action taken note, the Ministry have stated that the Foundation has been 
advised to ensure that distribution of avail able resources across States/ UTs is done 
taking into account the minority population, literacy levels, particularly female literacy and 
enrollment and drop out rates. This will ensure that assistance goes to areas where it is 
needed the most and priority is given to States where the minorities are relatively worse -
off compared to the national average.  
 
1. 10 The Committee had expressed their concern over a distortion observed by 
them in the functioning of the Maulana Azad Education Foundation that the 
disbursement of funds by the MAEF was not being made to various States  in 
accordance with the proportion to the percentage of minority population in the 
respective State.  Also no funds were sanctioned to three States i.e. Assam, 
Manipur and Uttarakhand duri ng the last three years.  The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that State-wise allocation of funds should be made under 
the  Maulana Azad Education Foundation in proportion to the percentage of the 
minorities in respective States.  The Committee feel that the Ministry’s action in 
advising the Foundation to distribute the available resources taking into account 
the minority population, literacy levels and drop out rates will not suffice .  The 
Ministry should also continuously pursue with the  State Gov ernments to send 
proposals in time to the foundation for procurement of requisite funds.  

C. NATIONAL MINORITY DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCIAL CORPORATION 
(NMDFC)- STATE CHANNELISING AGENCIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9, Para No.  4.11) 
 
1.11 The Committee  had been informed that NMDFC implements its scheme through 
State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) and NGOs.  During the inspections of SCAs by 
NMDFC, various shortcomings  like poor selection of beneficiaries, delay in 
documentation and release of loans, improper follow up for recovery from the 
beneficiaries etc. had come to the notice.  The Committee felt that unless   these 
shortcomings were  removed, the schemes of the NMDFC would not be effectively 
implemented and it would not  give a boost to the economic acti vities of the minorities 
living below   the poverty line.  The Committee, had therefore,  recommended that the 
Ministry should take necessary steps   to  analyse  the reasons for these  shortcomings 
noticed during inspections so that the suitable remedial steps could be taken.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.12 The Ministry, in their reply have stated that the shortcomings in the functioning of 
the SCAs are basically because of their lack of resources and weak infrastructure.  The 
Ministry of Minority Affairs ha ve been persistently taking up with State Governments the 
need to strengthen the infrastructure of  SCAs.  Besides, the Ministry proposes to 
implement a scheme for grants -in-aid to the SCAs for strengthening their infrastructure.  
Under the scheme,  financ ial assistance will be given to SCAs to improve their delivery 
system.  A budget provision of Rs. 10 crore have been made in 2007-08 for this purpose. 
 
  
 
1.13 The Committee were concerned to note that during inspection of State 
Channelising Agencies by NM DFC various shortcomings were noticed in its 
functioning like poor selection of beneficiaries, delay in documentation and 

release of funds and improper follow up of resources from the functionaries.  The 
Committee, had therefore, recommended to find out th e reasons for these 
shortcomings and take remedial measures.  The Ministry in their reply have stated 
that the shortcomings in the functioning of SCAs are basically because of their 
lack of resources and weak infrastructure.  The Ministry are stated to hav e 
proposed to implement a scheme for grants -in-aid to the SCAs for strengthening 
their infrastructures.  In the opinion of the Committee, lack of resources and weak 
infrastructure of SCAs are not the only reasons for their improper functioning.  
Poor monitoring and lack of dedication resulting in poor selection of beneficiaries, 
delay in documentation and release of funds also contributed to inefficient 
working of State Channelising Agencies. The Committee, reiterate that in order to 
effectively implement the schemes of NMDFC and boost the economic activities of 
the minorities living below poverty line, the Ministry should analyse all the 
shortcomings in implementation of the scheme and take remedial measures 
immediately in coordination with the State Govern ments.  The Committee hope 
that the proposed scheme for grants -in-aid to the SCAs for strengthening their 
infrastructure would be implemented soon. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 10, Para No.  4.12   ) 
 
1.14 In the Para No. 4.12 the Committee had observed that  State Channelising 
Agencies were the main links between the beneficiaries and the Corporation.  These 
agencies had been conferred with the responsibility to identify the beneficiaries, seek 
sanctions, receive funds and ultimately disburse the funds to the  beneficiaries.  The 
Committee, however, regretted to point out that some State Channelising Agencies are 

not utilizing the full amount   disbursed to them.  The coverage of the intended minority 
beneficiaries was also much below the desired average and th e SCAs were not strong 
enough in respect of infrastructure and staffing etc. and, therefore,  were not able to use 
the funds made available to them for the desired purpose. Consequently many 
beneficiaries  had been deprived of the intended  benefits of the  scheme.  Since the 
SCAs were the main links between the beneficiary and the Corporation and their 
objective was to make funds available for upliftment of the poor minority beneficiaries, 
the Committee had desired that the work structure of the State Chann elising Agencies 
and their manner of functioning be looked into afresh.  Feasibility might be examined to 
allow the State Channelising Agencies to create their own infrastructure, recruit their own 
staff and for deputing some officials of the SCAs  in   di stricts to carry out the designated 
task effectively and efficiently.    
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.15  In their action taken note the Government have stated that the State Channelising 
Agencies are agencies of the respective State Governments.  The Min istry of Minority 
Affairs has been advising State Governments to strengthen the infrastructure of the 
SCAs.  Besides, the Ministry of Minority Affairs also proposes to implement a scheme for 
Grants-in-aid to SCAs and an outlay of Rs. 10 crore has been provided in BE 2007-08 for 
the purpose.  It is expected that financial assistance under the scheme for improving the 
delivery system of the SCAs will result in improvement of their performance.   
 
1.16 The Committee had observed that the SCAs were the main links between the 
beneficiary and the Corporation but they were not in a position to implement the 
schemes for the welfare of minorities because of their poor infrastructure.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desired that the work structure and functioning of the 

SCAs be looked into afresh and the feasibility to allow the SCAs to create their 
own infrastructure and recruit their own staff for carrying out their designated task 
effectively be examined.  The Ministry in their reply have stated that they have 
been advising the State Governments to strengthen the infrastructure of SCAs and 
propose to implement a scheme for grants -in-aid to SCAs to implement their own 
delivery system.  The Committee are not fully convinced with the reply as they feel 
that unless the financi al position and work force of State Channelising Agencies 
are strengthened, they will not be in a position to implement the schemes in an 
effective manner.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should 
examine the feasibility of allowing th e SCAs to create their own infrastructure and 
recruit their own staff so as to enable them to depute some officials in various 
districts and carry out their designated task effectively.    
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.9  ) 
 
2.1  The Committee understand that the ‘Working Group on empowerment of the 
Minorities’ has suggested plans for the overall upliftment of the educationally and 
economically backward minoritie s.  In this regard some key areas have been identified 
by them which require focused attention.  These areas are ‘Equitable access to 
economic opportunities’, ‘Equitable access to educational opportunities’, ‘Equitable 
access to Government social welfare s chemes and programmes’ and ‘Sharply focused 
research plans to collect quantitative and qualitative data on the condition of minorities’, 

particularly Muslims.  The Committee hope that the Ministry would earnestly consider the 
suggestions made by the Workin g Group on empowerment of minorities and formulate 
an action Plan for implementing them in a time bound manner.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The Ministry is in the process of formulating schemes and programmes on the 
basis of the recommendations of “the  Working Group on Empowerment of Minorities”. 
Two schemes, namely, (i) scheme of Merit -cum-means based scholarship to students 
belonging to the minority communities and (ii) Free coaching and allied scheme for 
candidates belonging to minority communities h ave been approved. Other schemes, 
which are being processed are Pre -matric scholarship scheme, Post -matric scholarship 
scheme, Grant -in –aid to state channellising agencies of National Minorities 
Development Finance Corporation, Research/studies, monitorin g, evaluation including 
publicity scheme and Multi sectoral development programme for minority concentration 
districts. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 5, Para No.  3.12 ) 
 
2.3 The Com mittee note that Maulana Azad Education Foundation (MAEF) was 
established in 1989 to formulate and implement educational schemes for the benefit of 
educationally backward minorities.  The Foundation implements its schemes out of the 
interest earned on its corpus fund which has been provided to it by the Government as a 
part of  plan assistance.  Upto 2006, the Foundation was allocated meager funds every 
year and in fact the consolidated figure for 12 years upto 2006 was of Rs. 100 crores.  It 

was during the  year 2006 -07 that its corpus fund was further augmented by Rs. 100 
crores.  However, again during 2007 -08 only Rs. 50 crores have been allocated to it.  
The reduction in amount during 2007-08 has been explained by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Minority Affai rs by indicating that the Foundation was expected to raise the resources 
from Charitable Institutions who would be willing to assist and participate in the 
objectives of the Foundation.  Considering the objectives of the foundation the 
Committee feel that it would be appropriate that the corpus fund of the foundation is 
gradually augmented to meet its avowed objectives. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
2.4 It has already been decided by government that the corpus fund of the Maulana 
Azad Education Foundation should be augmented and its operations expanded and 
streamlined. The plan outlay projected for this purpose in the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-
2012) is Rs.500 crores.  Out of this a provision of Rs. 50 crores has been made for 2007-
08. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.14   ) 
 
2.5 The Committee are constrained to note that there have been instances of misuse 
of grant-in-aid given to NGOs by some States out of the allocation provid ed by MAEF.  
The Committee understand that the MAEF have recovered Rs. 7.50 lakhs from one NGO 
in Pilibhit (U.P.) and filed suit for recovery of interest but Rs. 10.10 lakhs are yet to be 
recovered from five NGOs.  The Committee take a serious view of the mis-utilisation of 
scarce Government funds by unscrupulous NGOs.  Such NGOs need to be dealt with 
firmly and criminal proceedings should be initiated against all those found guilty.  These 

NGOs should then be de -barred from getting any grant -in-aid.  The C ommittee also 
recommend that the Ministry should formulate a comprehensive and strict selection 
criteria for identifying the genuine NGOs.   
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
2.6 In order to ensure accountability and the best use of available funds, it is 
necessary that the bonafides of the grantee organization / NGO is established. To 
ensure this, the MAEF has laid down certain eligibility criteria, which, inter alia, provide 
that Societies / Trusts should be registered under the Central or State Government Act s 
for the last three years and have proper Constitution / Memorandum & Articles of 
Association / Trust Deed etc. 
In order to streamline the procedure of inspections, the Foundation has been 
advised to strengthen the existing system of inspections by a syst em of concurrent and 
post-audit check through professionals/agencies, whose services could be outsourced. 
The MAEF has been further advised to come up with norms in respect of building 
specifications, design, kind and quality of material used, and standard s for educational 
institutions, in consultation with the relevant agencies of the Central and State 
governments.    
Some instances of alleged irregularities in sanctions of grant -in-aid have been 
investigated by the CBI which has registered FIRs in two cas es; the MAEF has 
registered FIR in one such case. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 11, Para No.  5.14   ) 
  
2.7 The Committee note that the objective of the Coaching and Allied scheme for 
minorities is to assist economically weaker sections of candidates belonging to minority 
communities by providing them opportunities for enhancing their knowledge, skills and 
capabilities for employment in Government/private sector through competitive 
examinations, and for admission in reputed institutions in technical and professional 
courses at under -graduate and post -graduate levels and remedial coaching in such 
institutions to complete their courses successfully.  This is an ongoing scheme 
transferred from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  The Committee, 
however, regret to point out that the data in respect of number of minority beneficiaries 
covered during the previous years is not available with the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
The reason put forth by the Ministry is that details for the previous years were sought 
from the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment and will be forwarded as soon as 
they are received.  The Committee are not convinced by this argument of the Ministry.  I t 
is clearly evident that the schemes are launched and their performance is not monitored 
at any level.  Without the resultant data, the efficacy or otherwise of the implementation 
of any scheme cannot be gauged.  The Committee, therefore, desired that the  Ministry of 
Minority Affairs should vigorously pursue with the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment for obtaining the data in respect of number of minority beneficiaries 
covered under the scheme during the previous years so that the impact of the sc heme 
could be assessed and remedial action taken in case of any deficiency.  The progress 
achieved in this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 

2.8 The information about total number of beneficiaries covered under the Coa ching 
and Allied Scheme during the tenth Five Year Plan has been provided by the Ministry of 
Social Justice & Empowerment. 20% of the total beneficiaries in a year were selected 
from minority communities. Year-wise number of total beneficiaries is given below: 
 
Year Total number of beneficiaries 
2002-03 12819 
2003-04 7030 
2004-05 11905 
2005-06 7438 
2006-07 6727 
Total= 45919 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 6.17   ) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the 15 Point Programme of 1983 has been revamped 
and a new programme namely the Prime Minister’s new 15 Point Programme has been 
formulated.  While the earlier programme only dealt with aspects of recruitment, 
communal harmony an d security, the new programme is stated to have schemes which 
directly aim at improving the economic activities, educational levels and living conditions 
of minorities.  The new 15 Point Programme envisages earmarking of 15% of the 
physical targets and fin ancial outlays, out of the allocation, for the schemes which are 
amenable to earmarking.  The names of the Ministries which are considered amenable to 
earmarking are Ministries of Women & Child Development; Human Resources 
Development (Department of Elemen tary Education and Literacy); Rural Development; 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation; Labour and Employment and Finance.  The 
Committee hope that this new programme would be implemented soon in a time bound 
manner. 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 The Prog ramme envisages that at the central level the progress of 
implementation, with reference to targets, will be monitored on a half -yearly basis by the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) and a report will be submitted to the Cabinet.   
 
 The first progress report  was considered by the Committee of Secretaries on 28 th 
March, 2007.  Subsequent to this, the progress report was submitted to the Cabinet and 
considered in its meeting held on 21st June, 2007.    
 
The second report for COS for the period ending 31 st March, 2007 has been 
submitted for consideration of the C.O.S. The targets for 2007-2008 have been approved 
already and communicated to the Ministries/Departments concerned for appropriate 
action.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 6.19   ) 
 
2.11 A number of suggestions, as detailed below need to be implemented by the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs in consultation and coordination with other concerned 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies for focused attention towards various issues relating to 
the minorities and to facilitate the formulation of overall policy and planning for their 
benefit. 
 
(i) The budgetary allocation for the Department should be adequately 
enhanced so as to address the re quirement of the existing as well as the 
new programmes/schemes. 

(ii) Action plan may be drawn up for implementation of the Prime Minister’s 
new 15 point programme in a time bound manner.  Periodic evaluation of 
the 15 point programme may be done in order to as sess the shortcomings, 
lacunae and the impact of the programme with a view to taking suitable 
remedial steps. 
(iii) Different States have different communities as minorities and there are sub 
groups within the minorities.  Their interests need to be considered 
sympathetically in a focused manner while formulating new schemes. 
(iv) The Ministry has to conceptualise and programmatise the scheme in such a 
way that it helps to create confidence in the minorities.   
(v) The activities and programmes of the Ministry should be g iven wide 
publicity in a specialized and focused manner so as to create awareness 
amongst the minorities about such activities or programmes. 
(vi) The monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened so as to have proper 
coordination with State level Minority Comm issions which are more or less 
a replica of the Central Commission for minorities. 
(vii) The Ministry should frame and forward the set of guidelines to the States 
advising them about the manner of formation and functioning of State level 
Minority Commissions. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
2.12 (i) The Ministry of Minority Affairs has proposed an outlay of          
Rs.11724.50 crores for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
 (ii)  As given in the reply to Para at Sl. No. 6.17  
(iii) The  central government has notified  five minority c ommunities under section 
2(c) of the National Commission for Minorities Act,1992, viz Muslims, 

Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Zoroastrians (Parsis). In States, where 
one of the minority communities notified under the said section is, in fact, in 
majority, the earmarking of physical/financial targets under the Prime 
Minister’s New 15 Point Programme for the Welfare of Minorities is for the 
other notified minorities so that all minorities, however, small in number, 
get the benefits of these schemes.  
(iv) A numb er of measures and new schemes for the upliftment of the 
educationally and economically backward minorities have been envisaged 
to facilitate mainstreaming them.  
(v) Last year, the Ministry of Minority Affairs launched a publicity campaign on the 
New 15- Point Programme for the Welfare of Minorities. A sum of Rs. 1.00 
crore was provided for the purpose. As part of the publicity campaign, three 
color advertisements were released by DAVP during the month of 
November/December, 2006, in various newspapers.  DAVP a lso published 
and distributed a number of posters, folders & booklets in English, Hindi 
Urdu, Assamese, Bengali, Gujrati, Kannada, Marathi, Malayalam, Oriya, 
Punjabi, Tamil & Telegu.  
   For 2007-08, there is a provision of Rs.4.86 crores for the publicity  
campaign. A multi-media publicity campaign is being planned in consultation 
with the PIB / DAVP which will cover publicity material, advertisements in 
the newspapers (national and regional), video -clips for TV channels in Hindi 
and regional languages, doc umentary film(s) for use in Publicity and 
Information Campaigns (PICs) organized by Government in different 
districts.    
 

(vi) & (vii)    A total of 15 States and Union Territories have set up State Minorities 
Commissions. The State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhatisgarh, National Capital Territory of Delhi, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Assam, 
Uttarachanal and West Bengal have set up statutory State Commissions for 
Minorities. The State Governments  of Manipur and Tamil Nadu have set up 
non-statutory Commissions for Minorities.  
  Though the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992 does not 
specifically mention State Commissions for Minorities, the State 
Governments/ Union Territories which have not set up State Commissions 
for Minorities have been requested to set up the same.  
  The National Commission for Minorities has also been requested to 
prepare guidelines regarding the powers and functions of States Minorities 
Commissions.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 

CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.10   )  
 
3.1 The Ministry of Minority Affairs was carved out of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment on 29 th January, 2006 with the objective of ensuring more focused 
approach towards the issues relating to the development of minorities.  The Committee 
hope that with the creation of the new Ministry the interests of minority community would 
be taken care of effectively and efficiently.  The Ministry should strive to achieve its 
avowed objectives by ensuring that all the notified minorities get the benefits of the 
ongoing and new schemes in a .focused and time bound manner as it would empower 
them to participate in the developmental process on equal basis on the terms which are 
available to the rest of the communities in the Country.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 3.2   The Prime Minister’s New 15 Point Programme for the Welfare of Minorities, 
launched in June 2006, provides for earmarking for the minorities, 15% of outlays & 
targets of schemes included in the programme and considered amenable to earmarking. 
Existing schemes have been revised to improve their effectiveness and a number of new 
schemes like Merit -cum-Means based Scholarship, Free Coaching & Allied, Pre -matric 
scholarship, Post -matric scholarship, Grant -in–aid to State Channelising Agencies of 
National Minorities  Development Finance Corporation, Research/studies, monitoring, 
evaluation including publicity  and Multi sectoral development programme for minority 
concentration districts have either been approved or are being processed for approval.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 

RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 1.11   ) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that against the projected demand of 120 posts by the 
Ministry only 70 posts in different categories have been sanctioned and 51 thereof have 
been filled so far.  Besides, the Ministry have no facility for Hindi work and are having 
shortage of supporting staff.  The Committee desire that the sanctioned posts may be 
filled up at the earliest to enable the Ministry of to carry out its mandate effectively for 
which the Ministry of Finance should be approached at the earliest at appropriate level.  
Meanwhile, the available staff may be efficiently utilized for successful implementation of 
various welfare schemes launched/to be launched by the Ministry. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.4 All efforts are being made to fill up the vacant posts.  However, bulk of the vacant 
posts viz, 7 posts of UDC/LDC and 4 posts of Stenographer Grade ‘D’ are to be filled up 
through the Department of Personnel & Training / Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, which is the cadre controlling authority for these categories of posts.  
Because of overall shortage in these categories, they have still not been able to deploy 
personnel against these posts.  As regards the post of Hindi translator, deployment is to 
be done by the Department of Official Languages.  This Ministry is pursuing the matter 
vigorously with the concerned Departments.  Meanwhile, work in the Ministry is being 
carried out by optimum utilization of the existing staff. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 4.10   ) 
 
3.5 The Committee note that the budgetary allocation of National Minorities 
Development and Finance Corpo ration has substantially been increased from Rs. 18.29 

crores in 2006 -07 to Rs. 70 crores in 2007 -08 which will be used by the Corporation for 
implementing schemes namely Term Loan, Micro Financing, Education Loan, Mahila 
Samridhi Yojna, Vocational Trainin g, Marketing, Cluster Development as well as new 
schemes/projects that may be taken up in pursuance of the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee set up for suggesting the action plan for improving the operational 
performance of NMDFC.  The Government als o propose to strengthen the infrastructure 
of State Channelising Agency.  The Committee hope that the increased allocation would 
provide a major boost to NMDFC’s  operational performance and desire that NMDFC 
should fix targets for each scheme, draw an act ion plan to achieve the targets and utilize 
the increased allocation prudently so as to cover more beneficiaries.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
3.6   A MOU is signed by the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Minority Affairs and 
NMDFC detailing physical and fi nancial targets and other broad parameters of 
implementation of NMDFC schemes. The progress is monitored through quarterly review 
meetings. 
Based on the annual target and availability of funds, state -wise allocations have 
been finalized in consultation wit h representatives of SCAs. Disbursements and 
coverage of beneficiaries in the first quarter of the financial year 2007 -08 have shown a 
considerable improvement over the disbursement and coverage in the corresponding 
quarter of the last financial year.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 12, Para No.  5.15  ) 
 

3.7 The Committee note that the Finance Minister had announced in his budget 
speech 2006 -07 that 20,000 merit cum -means scholarships  would be awarded to 
students belonging to minority community every year.  The Committee find that under the 
scheme proposed outlay for 2006 -07 was Rs. 30.00 crores and the allocation approved 
by the Planning Commission for 2006-07 was Rs. 10.00 crores and the BE for 2007-08 is 
Rs. 54 crores.  However, the scheme is yet to receive the approval from Planning 
Commission.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should take up the matter with the 
Planning Commission to obtain approval of the scheme at the earli est so that the funds 
earmarked during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 could be utilized and the benefit of the scheme 
accrue to the needy persons.    
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
3.8 The scheme of merit -cum-means based scholarship to the students belonging to 
minority communities has been approved. It is a centrally sponsored scheme. The state 
Governments/UT administrations have been requested to advertise it and invite 
applications for scholarships for 2007-08.     
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 

CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED 
UPON IN CHAPTER –I 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.13   ) 
 
4.1 The Committee note tha t funds from Maulana Azad Education Foundation are 
made available to reputed NGOs, throughout the country for construction/expansion of 
schools/colleges/girl hostels/polytechnics/ITIs and purchase of 
equipment/machinery/furniture.  However, it has been obs erved that no amount was 
sanctioned to Assam, Manipur and Uttranchal during the last three years.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that MAEF do not disburse funds State -wise in  
proportion to the percentage of minority population.  The Committee do n ot agree with 
the plea advanced by the Ministry that the release of funds depend upon the proposals 
received from the States.  The Committee are of the opinion that unless the funds are 
made available to the States in proportion to the percentage of minori ties, they would be 
deprived of the benefits of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
State-wise allocation of funds may be made under the MAEF in proportion to the 
percentage of minorities in respective States and ensure that funds allocate d are fully 
and gainfully utilized by the NGOs. 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 

4.2 The Foundation has been advised to ensure that distribution of available 
resources across States / UTs is done taking into account the minority population, 
literacy levels, particularly female literacy, and enrollment and drop out rates. This will 
ensure that assistance goes to areas where it is needed most and priority is given to 
States where the minorities are relatively worse-off compared to the national average.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 4.11   ) 
 
4.3 The Committee have been informed that NMDFC implements  its scheme through 
State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) and NGOs.  During the inspections of SCAs by 
NMDFC, various shortcomings like poor selection of beneficiaries, delay in 
documentation and release of loans, improper follow up for recovery from the 
beneficiaries etc. have come to the notice.  The Committee feel that unless these 
shortcomings are removed, the schemes of the NMDFC will not be effectively 
implemented and it will not give a boost to the economic activities of the minorities living 
below the poverty line.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
take necessary steps to analyse the reasons for these shortcomings noticed during 
inspections so that the suitable remedial steps could be taken. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
4.4 The shortcomings in the functioning of the SCAs are basically because of their 
lack of resources and weak infrastructure.  The Ministry of Minority Affairs has been 
persistently taking up with State Governments the need to strengthen the infrastructure 

of  SCAs.  Besides, the Ministry proposes to implement a scheme for grants -in-aid to the 
SCAs for strengthening their infrastructure.  Under the scheme,  financial assistance will 
be given to SCAs to improve their delivery system.  A budget provision of Rs. 10 cr ore 
has been made in 2007-08 for this purpose. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 4.12   ) 
 
4.5 The Committee find that State Channelising Agencies are the main links between 
the beneficiaries and the Corporation.  These agencies have been conferred with the 
responsibility to identify the beneficiaries, seek sanctions, receive funds and ultimately 
disburse the funds to the beneficiaries.  The Committee, however, regret to point out that 
some State Channelising Agencies are not utilizing the full amount disbursed to them.  
The coverage of the intended minority beneficiaries is also much below the desi red 
average and the SCAs are not strong enough in respect of infrastructure and staffing etc. 
and, therefore, are not able to use the funds made available to them for the desired 
purpose.  Consequently many beneficiaries have been deprived of the intended benefits 
of the scheme.  Since the SCAs are the main links between the beneficiary and the 
Corporation and their objective is to make funds available for upliftment of the poor 
minority beneficiaries, the Committee desire that the work structure of the Sta te 
Channelising Agencies and their manner of functioning needs to be looked into afresh.  
Feasibility may be examined to allow the State Channelising Agencies to create their 

own infrastructure, recruit their own staff and for deputing some officials of th e SCAs in 
districts to carry out the designated task effectively and efficiently.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
4.6 The State Channelising Agencies are Agencies of the respective State 
Governments.  The Ministry of Minority Affairs has been advising State G overnments to 
strengthen the infrastructure of the SCAs.  Besides, the Ministry of Minority Affairs also 
proposes to implement a scheme for Grants-in-aid to SCAs and an outlay of Rs. 10 crore 
has been provided in BE 2007 -08 for the purpose.  It is expected  that financial 
assistance under the scheme for improving the delivery system of the SCAs would result 
in improvement of their performance.   
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NAUTRE 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  2.8  ) 
 
5.1 The Committee observe from the data made available to them that inadequate 
funds were allocated to the Ministry during the 10 th Five Year Plan (2002 -03 to 2006-07) 
which was at that time under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  For the 
year 2007 -08, budget provision of only Rs.500 crores unde r Plan and Rs.12.83 crores 
under Non -Plan has been made whereas the Ministry had asked for about Rs.1100 
crores.  Considering the fact that in addition to existing schemes some more new 
schemes are in the pipeline for implementation for the upliftment of m inorities (having 
18.42% of population as per 2001 census), the Committee feel that the budgetary 
allocation for the year 2007 -08 needs to be augmented.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should keep on pursuing with the Planning Commission and Minist ry of Finance 
to allocate more funds in order to ensure that implementation of schemes is not 
hampered for want of funds.  At the same time, Committee would like the Ministry to 
ensure prudent and judicious utilization of available scarce funds for the var ious 
schemes.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Ministry has already projected its requirement of Rs.11724.5 crores to the 
Planning Commission for the XIth   Five Year Plan. A final decision has not yet been 
taken on this. 
  

All efforts are being made to get necessary approvals for new schemes so that the 
available funds are fully utilized. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 6.18  ) 
 
5.3 The Committee would like to point out th at “The Constitution One Hundred and 
Third (Amendment) Bill, 2004” was introduced by the Government in Lok Sabha on 23 rd 
December, 2004 and was referred to Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment for examination and report.  The Bill intended to confer constitutional 
status on the National Commission for Minorities with the purpose to inspire greater 
confidence amongst minorities and to enable the Commission to implement the 
safeguards provided in the Constitution and in laws enacted by Parliam ent and the State 
legislatures.  The Committee had examined the Bill and the Report thereon containing its 
considered views was presented to the Parliament on 21.2.2006.  The Committee, 
however, understand that this Bill is still pending with the Governmen t as according to 
them the judicial pronouncements made by Hon’ble Supreme Court regarding giving 
minority status to certain communities is still under consideration.  The Committee hope 
that urgent steps would be taken to bring the amended Bill to Parliament. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
5.4 The recommendations of the Standing Committee on Social Justice & 
Empowerment on the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Bill, 2004 and 
the National Commission for Minorities (Repeal) Bill, 2004 were examined in consultation 
with concerned Ministries / Departments, including the Ministry of Law and Justice. The 
proposed official amendments to the Bill have been approved.  Accordingly, n otice was 

also given to the Secretary General Lok Sabha on 11/05/2007 for mo ving official 
amendments and for consideration and passing of these Bills. 
Some representations raising certain issues regarding the proposed official 
amendments have been received thereafter. The advice of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
has been sought regarding these issues.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20011/1/2007-B & C Dated 13.08.2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2007        Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment. 

ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2007. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
3. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
4. Shri Bhai Lal 
5. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
7. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
8. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
10. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
MEMBERS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Veer Singh 
16. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Saxena   - Director 
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopted the 
following Draft Reports of the Committee. 
 
(i)  Draft Twenty -  ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report on 
Demands For Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
(ii)  Draft    Thirtieth Report on Act ion taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
(iii)  Draft Thirty -first Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
 
(iv)  Draft Thirty-second Report on the subject “Voluntary Organisations Engaged 
in Implementing Integrated Programme for Welfare  of Older Persons” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
3.  XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX.  
 
 
4. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
  
5. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirty -first, Report without any 
amendment. 
6. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
  
7. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these draft Reports and present 
the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 

APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE   TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
          Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations           15 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which         6  40% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 2.9, 3.12, 3.14, 5.14, 6.17,  
and 6.19)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which        4  26.67%     
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Paragraph Nos. 1.10, 1.11, 4.10 and 5.15)  
 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in                     3  20% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 3.13, 4.11 and 4.12)  
 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in                    2  13.33% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.8 and 6.18) 
 
 
 
 