 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
 AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Scheme of Assistance to disabled persons for 
purchase/fitting of Aids and Appliances” (ADIP) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.10.2008 
 
                           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.10.2008 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2008 /Sravana, 1930 (Saka) 
37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Ju stice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Scheme of Assistance to disabled persons for 
purchase/fitting of Aids and Appliances” (ADIP) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2008/Sravana, 1930 (Saka) 
37 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                
PAGE 
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
…………………………………………………………………………………….         
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                   
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………                  
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……     
                                    
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..         
     
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                 
 
 
ANNEXERUE 
  
 Minutes of the first sitting of the Standing Committee on Social  
Justice and Empowerment held on Monday, 11 th August,  2008. 
  
  
          
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     
recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of 
the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)…………… …………………………… 
                   

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2008-2009) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
4. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Bhai Lal 
7. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
8. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
9. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
10. Shri Vasantrao J. More   
11. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
12. Shri Jual Oram  
13. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
14. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana  
15. Dr. R. Senthil  
16. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
18. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
19. Smt. Usha Verma  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
  22. Shri Silvius Condpan 
23. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
24. Shri Ahmad Sayeed Malihabadi 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 

 
 
           
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
   1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -    Additional Secretary 
 2.   Shri Ashok Sarin            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Deputy Secretary 
           4.   Shri Vanlalruata                  -        Executive Officer 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -
seventh Report on the Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -seventh Re port of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Scheme of Assistance to disabled 
persons for purchase/fitting of Aids and Appliances” (ADIP) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
. 
 
2. The Twenty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on   
September 6, 2007.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on June 25, 2008. The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on August 11, 2008. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:       SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
11 August, 2008         Chairperson, 
20 Sravana, 1930 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
     

REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twe nty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Scheme of Assistance to 
disabled persons for purchase/fitting of Aids and Appliances” (ADIP) of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
1.2 The Twenty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 6 th September, 2007 
and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 6 th September, 2007.  It contained 14 
observations/recommendations.  Replies of the Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations have been received and are categorised as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1.49, 1.50, 1.53, 1.57, 1.58 and 1.62 
 
 (Total 6 – Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which  the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1.52, 1.56 and 1.60 
 
 (Total 3 – Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and hav e been commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
 Paragraph Nos.1.54, 1.59 and 1.61 
 
 (Total 3 – Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1.51 and 1.55 
 
 (Total 2- Chapter V) 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the observations/recommendations 
contained in chapter – I and final replies in respect of the observations/recommendations 

contained in Chapter – V of the Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case 
not later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comment. 
 
A. Direct Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 1.54) 
 
1.5 The Committee had been informed that District Disability Rehabilitation Centres 
(DDRCs) were managed through a District Management Team (DMT) and are meant to 
provide longer counselling, ge nerate awareness and also help in issue of disability 
certificates.  At present 125 DDRCs were working for the disabled persons in the 
country.  However, the Committee found that there were some problems in the DDRCs in 
terms of manpower availability.  The  Committee felt that unless such problems were 
taken care of and DDRCs strengthened with required number of rehabilitation 
professionals, these Centres would not be able to fulfill their assigned job.  The 
Committee had desired that for smooth functioning of DDRCs, their problems in terms of 
availability of manpower should be taken care of on priority basis so that they could 
render the desired services for the optimal benefit of disabled persons.  The Committee 
also recommended that District Disabilities R ehabilitation Centres should be opened in 
each district to provide counselling, generate awareness and mitigate the problems of 
disabled persons. 
 
1.6 In their reply, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have stated that the 
District Disability Rehabilitation Scheme is under revision. 
 
1.7 The Committee had noted that District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs); 
set up to provide counselling, generate awareness about the programmes and for help in 
the issue of disability certificates; were facing problems in terms of availability of 
manpower. Consequently, the Committee had desired that for their efficient functioning 
problems being faced by DDRCs on this account should be solved on priority basis.  It 
was also urged that DDRCs should be ope ned in each district so as to take care of 
problems of the disabled persons expeditiously.  The Committee are, however, not 

satisfied with the reply of the Government that the District Disability Rehabilitation 
Scheme is under revision.  The Committee feel  that the Ministry should have indicated 
the measures being contemplated by them to strengthen the DDRCs and what more 
needs to be done for their smooth and effective functioning.   Considering the 
importance of the role being played by DDRCs as an impleme nting agency of the ADIP 
Scheme, the Committee again urge upon the Government to provide adequate manpower 
to DDRCs and also open DDRCs in all districts during the current Plan period, so that the 
problems of disabled persons could be efficiently tackled.   
B. Awareness Generation Camps. 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 1.59) 
1.8 The Committee had noted that the implementing agencies of ADIP scheme 
organize camps in various parts of the country for distributing assistive devices among 
the disabled persons. During the year 2004 -05, the National Institutes and ALIMCO held 
375 and 489 camps whereas in 2005 -06 there were 318 and 410 camps respectively. 
However, the Ministry had no information about the number of camps held State -wise. 
Also no separate camp s were organized to generate awareness among the disabled 
persons for using artificial limbs and appliances. Further, follow up camps to distribute 
equipments to the left over disabled persons were seldom organized and that in the 
North East States coverage was very poor as only 39 districts in 2004 -05 and 47 districts 
in 2005-06 were covered out of the total 76 districts. Keeping in view the importance of 
the scheme, the Committee had desired that it should be given publicity more extensively 
and vigorousl y through both print and electronic media like TV/Radio Channels, in 
vernacular print media, and by distribution of pamphlets etc. The Committee, also 
recommended that the implementing agencies of the scheme should organize more 
camps specifically for generating awareness regularly and distribute aids and appliances 
to all the needy persons particularly in remote and inaccessible areas with special thrust 
on uncovered/less covered areas/districts. Follow up camps should also be organized 
invariably so that the persons who could not get the assistive devices in the camps 
organized earlier, could be provided with such equipments as per their needs. 
 
1.9 In their reply, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have stated that the 
suggestion has been noted. 
 
1.10 The Committee had expressed concern that adequate steps are not taken by the Ministry 
to give publicity through print and electronic media about the aims and objectives of the ADIP 
scheme.   Also, separate camps are not organized to generate aware ness among the disabled 
persons for using artificial limbs and appliances and about their availability particularly in remote 
and inaccessible places.  The Committee had, therefore, desired that suitable steps need to be 

taken by the Ministry.  In response , the Ministry have just noted the suggestion and have not 
indicated any specific steps taken/being taken in this connection.    The Committee, therefore 
reiterate that the Government ought to impress upon all agencies entrusted with implementation 
of the ADIP scheme to make sincere efforts to organize more field camps periodically 
particularly in uncovered areas for generating awareness about the scheme so that disabled 
persons would come forward in large numbers and get assistive devices to suit their nee ds and 
comfort.  The Committee further desire the Government to obtain State -wise data of camps 
organized during last three years along with the details of beneficiaries.    
 

C. Monitoring  
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 1.61)  
 
1.11 The Committe e were constrained to note that the Ministry had not deputed any 
official/team for inspections in recent years. Also no target date had been provided for 
carrying out inspections. The Committee felt that in the absence of inspections by the 
Ministry and the monitoring agencies, effective implementation of the scheme can not be 
ensured. The reason given by the Ministry that the responsibility of inspections has been 
entrusted to the State Governments is not convincing at all as it is for the nodal Ministry 
to ensure effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that a Monitoring Committee might be set up in the Ministry to ensure 
regular and strict monitoring of the implementation of ADIP scheme in a concerted and 
focused manne r. The Ministry should also strengthen its monitoring mechanism and 
send the inspection teams periodically to monitor the implementation of the scheme 
particularly in North-Eastern States. 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their reply , have stated that 
the inspections are carried by the Ministry through its Institutes, regional centres, 
Composite Rehabilitation Centres etc. 
 
 
1.13 In response to the recommendation of the Committee for setting up of a 
Monitoring Committee in the Ministr y for ensuring regular and strict monitoring of 
the implementation of the ADIP scheme in a concerted and focused manner, the 
Ministry have stated that inspections are carried through its Institutes, Regional 
Centers, Composite Rehabilitation Centres etc.  The reply indicates that the 
Government is not serious towards the concern expressed by the Committee.  The 
Committee are of the view of that setting up of a Monitoring Committee would 
certainly ensure effective implementation of the scheme resulting in fu rthering the 
welfare of the target group.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that a Monitoring 
Committee may be set up in the Ministry to ensure regular and effective 
monitoring of the implementation of the scheme in a focused and concerted 
manner.  Insp ection teams may also be sent periodically to all the States, 
particularly in the North -Eastern States for on the spot assessment and to report 
their findings to the Monitoring Committee. 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1 Para No. 1.49) 
 
 
2.1 The main objective of the Scheme of ‘Assistance to Disabled Persons for 
Purchase/Fitting of Aids and Appliances’ (ADIP) is to assist the needy physically 
handicapped persons in procuring dur able, sophisticated and scientifically manufactured 
modern and standard aids and appliances, thus alleviating the effects of disability and 
helping them in their social, economic and psychological rehabilitation.  The Committee, 
however, regret to observe that out of about 22 lakhs disabled persons in the country, 
only about eight lakh have been benefited under ADIP Scheme so far, which is an 
abysmally low coverage. The Committee are not happy with this state of affairs as it 
indicate the lack of dedication and causal approach on the part of the Ministry in handling 
the core issue of the social, economic and psychological rehabilitation of the 
handicapped people in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should prepare an action plan, in consultation with the implementing agencies of 
ADIP Scheme, to increase the coverage of beneficiaries so that the persons with 
disabilities could become more productive, their economic potential enhanced and the 
quality of their lives improved.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 An action plan for covering more beneficiaries through increased participation of 
existing NGOs, encouragement of new NGOs and involvement of National Institutes and 
ALIMCO has been formulated and a new procedure has been circu lated to all the 
implementing agencies.  Proposal for enhanced budget allocation for the year 2008 -09 
has been sent to the Planning Commission.  
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated 25 June, 
2008). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2 Para No. 1.50) 
 
2.3 The Committee are surprised to find that State/UT-wise targets are not fixed under 
the ADIP scheme by the funded agencies.  Also the disability -wise information is not 
available with the Ministry.  The argument put forth by the M inistry that targets are 
assessed by the number of proposals submitted by implementing agencies and that the 
progress of the work done by the implementing agencies is monitored through 
submission of utilization certificates at the time of release of the se cond installment is not 
convincing at all.  In the absence of any disability -wise data the Committee feel that the 
Ministry would not be in a position to fix the targets for the scheme and to monitor its 
implementation effectively.  The Committee, therefor e, recommended that the Ministry 
should take steps to maintain the disability -wise data and also to impress upon the 

funded agencies to fix State/UT -wise targets under ADIP scheme vigorously so that the 
implementation of the scheme could be assessed properly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The disability wise data is available from census, 2001.  The implementing agency 
would be impressed upon to fix targets and achieve them. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25  June, 
2008). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para No. 1.53) 
 
 
2.5 The Committee has been given to understand that the ADIP scheme is mainly 
implemented by the NGOs as they are very close to the people and have ability to reach 
and interact directly with the needy groups.  However, the Committee find that NGOs are 
not encouraged by some State Governments particularly in North Eastern States.  
Consequently, the Ministry are facing difficulty in implementing the scheme in far flung 
and remote areas.  The Committ ee, therefore, urge the Ministry to encourage the NGOs 
to operate in the North Eastern States and in remote/far flung areas by giving them so 
incentives and by allowing them a substantial role in implementing the scheme with 
proper accountability so that t he benefits could reach the uncovered areas.  The 
Committee also desire that inexperienced NGOs should be provided technical support 
through National Institutes and District Disability Rehabilitation Centres. 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The NGOs are be ing encouraged to operate in North -Eastern States.  Wherever 
sought, the ALIMCO/Nis and District Disability Rehabilitation Centres liaise with NGOs 
for holding ADIP camps.  The big NGOs have also been requested to cover at least 10 
district in remote and uncovered areas. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para No.1.57) 
 
 
2.7 ALIMCO is the largest manufacturer of artificial limbs and rehabilitation aids for 
disabled persons.  However, according the Ministry more research is required in the field 
of aids and appliances especially by ALIMCO to enhance the comfort and convenience 
to the users.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the ALIMCO and other Research 
Institutes sho uld be given adequate financial assistances as well as required 
infrastructure and qualified manpower to take up the task of research in the field of aids 

and appliances by using advanced technology and to ensure availability of aids and 
appliance to the beneficiaries at a affordable price. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The ALIMCO in collaboration with the National Institutes in the Ministry and other 
experts has initiated research in the fields of aids and appliances.  A center in ALIMCO in 
this regard has been activated. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated 25 June, 
2008). 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10 Para No.1.58) 
 
 
2.9 Disability being a psychological injury and trauma particularly in cases of 
accidents, there is an ur gent need for psychological rehabilitation of such persons by 
building a system of counseling and supporting them over a longer period of time to 
prepare them to face the reality.  However, the Committee note with dismay that there is 
no specific component  for psychological rehabilitation under the ADIP scheme.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government that this particular aspect of 
psychological rehabilitation of disabled persons should also be given priority and 
included in the scheme at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 This will be incorporated in the Scheme at the time of revision. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14 Para No. 1.62) 
 
2.11 The Committee find that the Government had constituted a Standing Committee 
for ADIP in April, 2003.  The Committee had made some suggestions which included 
circulating the specifications of appliances in common use, inclusion of spectacles and 
low vision aid under the ADIP scheme, ensuring availability of infrastructure with 
agencies conducting more than 50 camps in a year, surprise inspection by monitoring 
agencies, conduction a nation wide survey on usage of aids and appliances, 
strengthening of research and devel opment of appliances and promotion of local 
institutes in unserved districts.  The Committee feel sad to note that they have not been 
intimated about the action taken by the Government on the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee on ADIP, set up in 200 3, so far.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Government to implement the recommendations/suggestions of the Standing 
Committee on ADIP sincerely and apprise the Committee of the precise action taken 
thereon at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 

2.12 The point wise position in respect of advise given by the Standing Committee are 
submitted below: 
 
1. The Scheme provides that the Aids and Appliances supplied must be ISI. The 
Scheme has been circulated. 
2. The low vision aids including hand -held stand, li ghted and unlighted magnifiers, 
speech synthesizers or Braille attachments for computers have been included 
under the Scheme. 
3. One of the points at the time of recommendation by the State Government / 
National Institutes is regarding availability of infrast ructure with the implementing 
agencies. 
4. As and when necessary the surprised inspection are got carried out through 
officers of the Ministry and National Institutes. 
5. A nation wide survey on use of aids and appliances has since been conducted. 
 
Under the S&T  Mission mode, this Ministry sanctions grants to the Industries and 
Researchers for design development and research work for making suitable high quality 
and cost effective aids and appliances to enhance opportunities for persons with 
disabilities for empl oyment, easier living, communication, recreation, mobility and 
integrating in the society through education and skill development. The ALIMCO and 
other National Institutes have been requested to tie -up with reputed institutes for 
ensuring availability of m odern aids and appliances to the beneficiaries at affordable 
price. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated 25 June, 
2008). 

CHAPTER – III 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4 Para No. 1.52) 
 
 
3.1 The Ministry have disbursed grants in aid of Rs. 55 crore, Rs. 63 crore and Rs. 58 
crore to implementing agencies like Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India 
(ALIMCO),  National Institutes and NGOs during 2003 -04, 2004 -05 and 2005 -06 
respectively.  Keeping in view the large nu mber of needy disabled persons the funds 
allocated for providing assistive devices to them, are inadequate.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that budgetary allocation under ADIP scheme may be enhanced 
in accordance with the number of disabled persons i n need of assistance so that 
maximum number of disabled persons could avail the benefits of the scheme.  The 
Committee further find that the allocation and release of funds under the scheme are not 
made State/UT-wise, in proportion to the number of persons with disabilities in respective 
States.  Also the information regarding number of beneficiaries covered State/UT wise is 
not available with the Ministry.  The Committee also observe that a large number of 
persons with various kinds of disabilities have no t been benefited so far and some areas 
like Jammu & Kashmir and North East have been left uncovered.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that funds may be allocated State -wise, in proportion to the 
number of persons with disabilities in respective States achieved.  The Committee also 
desire that number of beneficiaries covered State/UT wise be complied so that the 
impact of the scheme could be assessed and regional imbalance in coverage may be 
rectified. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
3.2 Proposal for enhanced  budget allocation for the year 2008 -09 has been sent to 
the Planning Commission.  The ALIMCO and a few NGOs have been sanctioned funds 
for covering areas like J&K and North -East.  Data of beneficiaries submitted by the 
NGOs/implementing agencies will be c omplied and analyzed to asses the impact of the 
scheme and the coverage. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No. 1.56) 
 
 
3.3 The Committee note that there are seve n National Institutes namely National 
Institute for Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad; Institute for the Physically 
Handicapped, Delhi; Ali Yavar Jung National Institute for the Hearing Handicapped, 
Mumbai; National Institute of Rehabilitation Training an d Research, Cuttack; National 
Institute for the Visually Handicapped, Dehradun; National Institute for Orthopaedically 
Handicapped, Kolkata and National Institute for Empowerment of persons with Multiple 
Disabilities, Chennai in the country for rehabilitat ion, research, clinical and therapeutic 
services to the disabled persons.  These Institutes are mainly for persons who are 
suffering from visual, hearing mental, orthopedic and multiple disabilities.  Considering 

that a large number of persons are sufferin g from various types of disabilities, the 
Committee feel that the number of National Institutes is not sufficient to provide services 
to them to the desired extent.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that more 
National Institutes for disabled persons ma y be set up in the country.  The Committee 
also recommends that Regional Institutes for various types of disabilities, particularly for 
the persons suffering from multiple disabilities, may be opened in the States for their 
benefit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 The National Institutes under the Ministry deal with a particular disability.  These 
Institutes have regional centers to provide services in different parts of the country.  
Efforts are being made to strengthen these centers so that they may render required 
services.  Further, five Composite Rehabilitation Centres have been established to 
provide services to the persons with all types of disabilities.  Further, services are being 
provided through DDRCs and a large number of NGOs supported by the Mini stry.  There 
is a proposal to gradually create DDRCs in every district.  National Institute for 
Empowerment of Persons with Multiple Disabilities (NIEPMD) in Chennai has recently 
been started to cater to the needs of persons with multiple disabilities. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008). 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12 Para No. 1.60) 
 
3.5 The Committee find that the evaluation study on ADIP scheme has been 
entrusted to M/s Santek Consultant Pvt. Ltd., N ew Delhi in December, 2004.  However, 
their Report is still awaited.  The Committee desire that the Government should 
emphasize upon M/s Santek Consultant Pvt. Ltd., to expedite the submission of the 
evaluation Report to the Government so that necessary re medial measures could be 
taken by them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 The report has been received. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008) 

CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 Para No. 1.54) 
 
4.1 The C ommittee have further been informed that District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centres (DDRCs) are managed through a District Management Team (DMT) and are 
meant to provide longer counseling, generate awareness and also help in issue of 
disability certificates.  At present 125 DDRCs are working for the disabled persons in the 
country.  However, the Committee find that there are some problems in the DDRCs in 
terms of manpower availability.  The Committee feel that unless such problems are taken 
care of and DDRC s strengthened with required number of rehabilitation professionals, 
these Centres would not be able to fulfill their assigned job.  The Committee desire that 
for smooth functioning of DDRCs, their problems in terms of availability of manpower 
should be ta ken care of on priority basis so that they could render the desired services 
for the optimal benefit of disabled persons.  The Committee also recommend that District 
Disabilities Rehabilitation Centres should be opened in each district to provide 
counseling, generate awareness and mitigate the problems of disabled persons. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The District Disability Rehabilitation Scheme is under revision. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 Para 1.59) 
 
 
4.3 The Committee note that the implementing agencies of ADIP scheme organize 
camps in various parts of the country for distributin g assistive devices among the 
disabled persons. During the year 2004-05, the National Institutes and ALIMCO held 375 
and 489 camps whereas in 2005 -06 there were 318 and 410 respectively. However, the 
Ministry have no information about the number of camps h eld State -wise. Also no 
separate camps were organized to generate awareness among the disabled persons for 
using artificial limbs and appliances. Further, follow up camps to distribute equipments to 
the left over disabled persons are seldom organized and t hat in the North East States 
coverage is very poor as only 39 districts in 2004 -05 and 47 districts in 2005 -06 were 
covered out of the total 76 districts. Keeping in view the importance of the scheme, the 
Committee desire that it should be given publicity more extensively and vigorously 
through both print and electronic media like TV/Radio Channels, in vernacular print 
media, and by distribution of pamphlets etc. The Committee, also recommend that the 
implementing agencies of the scheme should organize more  camps specifically for 

generating awareness regularly and distribute aids and appliances to all the needy 
persons particularly in remote and inaccessible areas with special thrust on 
uncovered/less covered areas/districts. Follow up camps should also be o rganized 
invariably so that the persons who could not get the assistive devices in the camps 
organized earlier, could be provided with such equipments as per their needs. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.4 Suggestion has been noted. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 4-185/05-DD-I dated      25 June, 
2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para 1.61) 
 
 
4.5 The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry have not  deputed any 
official/team for inspections in recent years. Also no target date has been provided for 
carrying out inspections. The Committee feel that in the absence of inspections by the 
Ministry and the monitoring agencies, effective implementation of t he scheme can not be 
ensured. The reason given by the Ministry that the responsibility of inspections has been 
entrusted to the State Governments is not convincing at all as it is for the nodal Ministry 
to ensure effective implementation of the scheme. The  Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a Monitoring Committee may be set up in the Ministry to ensure regular 
and strict monitoring of the implementation of ADIP scheme in a concerted and focused 
manner. The Ministry should also strengthen its monitoring me chanism and send the 
inspection teams periodically to monitor the implementation of the scheme particularly in 
North-Eastern States. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.6 The inspections are carried by the Ministry through its Institutes, regional centres, 
Composite Rehabilitation Centres etc. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M NO. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated 25 June, 
2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

CHAPTER – V 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para 1.51) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that assistive devices are provided free of cost to persons 
having income up to Rs. 6,500 per month and at 50 percent concession to persons with 
income between Rs. 6,501 and Rs. 10,000. The maximum admissible amount for 
purchase of a de vice is Rs. 6,000. The benefit of the scheme can be availed of again 
after a period of three years. Keeping in view the high cost of disability devices due to 
advancement in technology and rise in price index, the Committee desire that 
Government should ex amine the feasibility of increasing the maximum amount fixed for 
purchase of an assistive device. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.2 The Planning Commission has advised that the income ceiling for availing 
assistance under ADIP Scheme should be raised to Rs. 10,000/- per month. Moreover, 
the ceiling for purchase / fitting of aids and appliances should also be enhanced to Rs. 
25,000/-. This will be taken into account when scheme is revised. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M NO. 4 -185/05-DD-I dat ed 25 June, 
2008) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para 1.55) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee also find that States’ Welfare Secretaries as well as 
Commissioners for Disabilities of all States/UTs have been repeatedly requested to 
promote District Red Cross Societies for im plementing the ADIP Scheme in their States. 
However, the Committee note with surprise that all the States/UTs have not promoted 
District Red Cross Societies in their respective States so far. Also no proposal has come 
from North Eastern States for setting up of District Red Cross Societies. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to ascertain the reasons for not promoting the District Red Cross 
Societies under ADIP Scheme from those States that have not promoted them so far. 
The Committee also recommend the Mi nistry to impress upon such State/UT 
Governments to expeditiously promote District Red Cross Societies in their respective 
States/UTs, particularly in North East States and far flung areas where no NGO is 
working so that benefits of the scheme could reach the large number of disabled 
persons. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.4 The matter has been taken up with the State Governments. 

 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M NO. 4 -185/05-DD-I dated 25 June, 
2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                           SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
11 August, 2008                                       Chairperson, 
20 Sravana, 1930 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on   
             Social Justice and                          
         Empowerment.   
 

 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 11TH AUGUST,  2008. 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad   
3. Shri Tek Lal Mahato  
4. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
5. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
6. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
7. Shri Jual Oram 
8. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
9. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
10. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
11. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya    
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan  
13. Shri Ahmad Sayeed Malihabadi 
14. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
15. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
16. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
17. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
 Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
             
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the  Members and congratulated 
them on their re-nomination to the Committee for the term 2008-09.   
  
3.  The Committee then took up the draft Thirty-seventh Report on Action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh 

Report on the subject “Scheme of Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fitting of 
Aids and Appliances” (ADIP) for consideration and adopted the same with some minor 
modifications/amendments.   
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 

 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE   TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
          Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations      14 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations which         6  42.86% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 1.49, 1.50, 1.53, 1.57  
 1.58 and 1.62)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which        3  21.43%     
 the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Paragraph Nos. 1.52, 1.56 and 1.60 ) 
 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in        3  21.43% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 1.54, 1.59 and 1.61) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in      2  14.28% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.51 and 1.55) 
 
 
 
 