 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH  REPORT 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2006 
 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2006 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
               December, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

   
                
 
   20 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
        TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                                                      December, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
      

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                                                                                                                                     PAGES 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………….   (iv) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION……………       (vi) 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY…………...                                                                                  1 
 
 
REPORT………………….        4 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) 
                     Bill, 2006 -------------------------------------------------------------------            22 
 
 II.      Modalities for deciding claims for Inclusion in, Exclusion 
                     from and Other Modifications in the Orders Specifying  
                    Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Lists ------------------            29 
           
 III.     Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee 
                     on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
                     16 October, 2006--------------------------------------------------------            32             
 
 !V.    Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee 
                    on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
         15 November, 2006 -----------------------------------------------------            36 
 
 V.     Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee 
                    on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
                    23 November, 2006 ----------------------------------------------------             40 
 
 VI.    Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee 
                    on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
                    14 December, 2006 ---------------------------------------------------              43 
 
  
 
 

APPENDICES 
 
I. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 -------------              45 
 
II. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 
   (Union Territories) Order, 19511-----------------------------------      72 
  
III. The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) 
 Scheduled Castes Order, 19561----------------------------------   77 
 
 IV. The Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) 
  Scheduled Castes Order, 1962   ---------------------------- 78   
 
V. The Constitution (Pondicherry) 
 scheduled Castes Order, 1964 ---------------------------------------  79 
 
VI  The Constitution (Sikkim) 
  Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 ---------------------------------------  80  
 
VII. Statement of Recommendations /Observations----------------  81

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2006-2007) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Longanathan Ganesan  
6. Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain 
7. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
8. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
9. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
10. Shri  Rupchand Murmu  
11. Shri Jual Oram 
12. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
13. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
14. Shri P. A. Sangma 
15. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
17. Smt. Krishna Tirath  
18. Smt. Usha Verma  
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
 
           RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24.       Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25.       Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27.       Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28.       Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29.       Shri Veer Singh 
30.       Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandh u - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri. A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri. R.K. Saxena   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri. Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
5. Shri. Vanlalruata  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by  the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Twen tieth Report of the Committee on 
“The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006” of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 31 st June, 2006 and 
was referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 28 th 
August, 2006 under Rule 331 E(b) of t he Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and Report. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express t heir thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Registrar General of 
India and National Commission For Scheduled Castes for tendering 
evidence and placing their considered views before the Committee and 
also for furnishing written notes and information as desired by the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the Bills. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bill at 
their sitting held on 14th December, 2006. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report. 
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
 14 December, 2006   CHAIRPERSON, 
 23 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)            Standing Committee on  Social  
                 Justice and Empowerment. 

 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 The Constitution (Scheduled Cast es) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 31 June , 2006.  The Bill was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Social Justic e and Empowerment on 28 August, 2006 for 
examination and report thereon.  A copy of the Bill as introduced in Lok Sabha is 
appended (Annexure I).  The Bill seeks the achieve the following objectives: 
 
(i) inclusion of new castes based on social, educational and economic 
backwardness; 
(ii) inclusion of synonymous communiti es in respect of a caste in the 
existing list; and  
(iii) Modifications or imposition of ar ea restrictions in the existing entries. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have informed the 
Committee that Article 366(24) of the Constitution defined ‘Scheduled Castes’ as 
“such castes, races or tribes or parts of  or groups within such castes, races or 
tribes as are deemed under ar ticle 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purpose of 
the Constitution.” The test applied for inclus ion in the list of Scheduled Castes is 
“extreme social, educational and economic backwardness arising out of traditional 
practice of untouchability.” 
 
1.3 Clause (1) of Article 341 of the Cons titution provides that “The President 
may with respect to any State or Union Territory and where it is a State after 
consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes,  

races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall, for 
the purposes of the Constitution, be deemed to be Sc heduled Castes in relation to 
that State or Union T erritory, as the case  may be.  As per the said provision,  
following Orders were issued: 
  
(i) The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 (Appendix I). 
(ii) The Constitution (Sc heduled Cast es) (Union T erritories) Order, 
1951(Appendix II). 
(iii) The Constitution (Jammu & Ka shmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 
(Appendix III). 
(iv) The Constitution (Dadra and Naga r Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 
1962 (Appendix IV). 
(v) The Cons titution (Pondicherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964 
(Appendix V). 
(vi) The Constitution (Sikk im) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 (Appendix 
VI). 
 
1.4 Subsequently, the lists of Schedul ed Castes have been amended from time 
to time as per provision under Clause (2) of Article 341 of the C onstitution, which 
provides t hat, “Parliament may by law include in or exclude  from the list of 
Scheduled Castes specified in  a notification issue d under  clau se (1) any caste, 
race or tribe or part of or groups within any caste, race or tribe, but save as 
aforesaid a notification iss ued under the said clause s hall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification”.  The first list of Scheduled Castes after promulgation of  
 2

the Constitution of India in 1950 was notif ied through Presiden tial Orders of 1950 
under Article 341 (1) of the Constitution. 
 
1.5 With a view towards systematically c onsidering the modifications in the lists 
of Scheduled Castes  and Sche duled Tribes, the Government of India finalized 
modalities on 15.06.1999 and modified on 25.06.2002  (copy at Annexure –II).  In   
accordance with the approved modalities ; the proposal of the concerned State 
Government/Union Territory Ad ministration is referred to  the Registrar General of 
India (RGI) for obtaining their comments.   In case the RGI agrees wit h the 
proposal, the proposal is then referred to  the National Commi ssion for Scheduled 
Castes (National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, b efore 
bifurcation into two separate Commiss ion namely National Commiss ion for 
Scheduled Castes and National Commission  for Scheduled Tr ibes).  In case the 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes  also agr ees with the proposal,  then 
such proposals which have been agreed to by the Registrar General of India and 
the National Commission for Scheduled Ca stes, are put to  inter-Ministerial 
consultation and thereafter based on the dec ision of the Government to modify the 
list of Scheduled Castes, a Bill after having followed procedur al requirements is  
introduced in Parliament to wards modificat ions required  in the list of Scheduled 
Castes, as any modification in the list of Scheduled Cas tes can be done by an Act  
of Parliament in view of Article 341(2) of  the Constitution of India.  In view of  
several consultation processes and procedural steps involved,  it is not poss ible to 
specify any time frame in regard to comp letion of the process towards modification 
in the list of Scheduled Castes. 
 
 3

CHAPTER – II 
REPORT 
2.1 The Minist ry of Social Justice and Em powerment have inf ormed the 
Committee that a number of requests wer e received from time to time from the 
State Governments for removing anomalies in  the List of Scheduled Cast es by  
inclusion of new castes, based on social, educational and ec onomic 
backwardness; inclusion of synonymous comm unities in respect of a caste in the 
existing lis t; and modifications  or imposition of area rest rictions in the existing 
entries, from the lists of Scheduled Castes .  Accordingly, the list s of Scheduled 
Castes are proposed to be modified for 7 States in respect of 17 communities after 
consultation, with the concerned State Go vernments, the Registrar General of 
India and the National Commission for Scheduled Castes.  
 
2.2 In the present Bill, 17 claims hav e been included by t he Ministry, out of 
which 12 c laims for inclusion as synonymo us communities, 1 cl aim for imposition 
of area restriction, 1 claim for modification and 3 for new inclusion in the Scheduled 
Castes list.  The proposed Amendments in th is list of Scheduled Castes in respect 
of seventeen communities for the States  of Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,  
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab and Chhattis garh as contained in the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006 are as following:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 4

 
Sl. 
No. 
States / UTs Inclusion as 
synonymous 
Imposition 
of Area 
Restriction
Modification  New 
Entry 
Total  
1. Haryana  2    2 
2. Kerala  1   1 
3. Madhya 
Pradesh 
  1  1 
4.  Maharashtra 4    4 
5. Orissa  6    6 
6. Punjab     2 2 
7. Chhattisgarh     1 1 
 Total      17 
 
A. HARYANA: 
 
2.3 In Part V of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 
1950, the Bill seeks to Substitute. 
(i) “5. Batwal, Barwala” for entry 5 and  
(ii) “24. Megh, Meghwal” for entry 24 
 
2.4 The Ministry in their background ma terial furnished to the Committee have 
stated that the State Government of Haryana have forwarded  the claim  for 
inclusion of Barwala as synonym of Batw al as this community suffers from  
untouchability.  The Registra r General of India and t he National Commission for 
Schedule Castes  s upport the proposal for inclusion of Barwala in the list o f 
Scheduled Castes as a synonym  of Batwal, which is already listed as Scheduled 
Caste in the State of Haryana. 
 
2.5 With regards to the inclusion of Meghwal community as a synonym of Megh 
community, the State Government have stated that the Meghwal and Megh  
 
 5

community are one and the same communities, have the same occupation and are 
at the same ethnic level.  Megh caste is already notif ied as Scheduled Caste in 
Haryana. The Regis trar General of India and the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes support the proposal to include Meghwal as a synonym of Megh 
in the Scheduled Caste list of Haryana. 
 
B. KERALA  
 
2.6 In Part VIII of the Schedule to t he Constit ution (Scheduled Castes) Order 
1950, the Bill seeks to substitute: 
“61.  Thandan (excluding Ezhuvas and Thiyyas who are known as Thandan, 
in the erstwhile Cochin and Malabar areas) and (Carpenters who are known 
as Thachan, in the erstwhile Cochin and Travancore State)” for entry 61. 
 
2.7 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have informed that the 
State Government of Kera la had proposed the follo wing two models to avoid 
ambiguity: 
“Thandan excluding Ezhuvas and Thiy yas who are k nown as Thandan and 
Carpenters who are known as Thachan.” 
 
“Thandan [ excluding Ezhuvas and Thiyyas  who are know as Thandan, in 
the erstwhile Cochin and Malabar areas] and [Carpenters who are known as 
Thachan, in the erstwhile Cochin and Travancore State].” 
  
The former Kerala in the 1930’s consis ted of three political r egions viz.  
Travancore, Cochin and Malabar .  In the historic 1931 Census, all the Castes so 
far known as Backward Classes had been subjected to a test so as to identity the  
 6

real untouchable cast es who were later te rmed as Depressed Classes.  Thus in 
the Depressed Class list of 1931, Thandan was recogn ized as a depressed clas s 
in Travanc ore only and in the list of  Coc hin and M alabar, Thandan was not 
identified as a Depressed Class.  In 1949,  the princely States of Travancore and 
Cochin merged to form a single administrat ive unit, viz. Travancore-Cochin.  Thus  
in the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled T ribes Order of 1950 relating to Kerala, 
Thandan was recognized as a Scheduled Ca ste in the erstwhile Travancore-
Cochin State.  The Chittur taluk of Palghat  district consists of both the regions of 
erstwhile Cochin and Malabar as  well in  1960’s a few persons belonging  to the 
superior Ezhuva community of Chittur taluk claimed Scheduled Caste Thandan 
status.  An election petition of an MLA who contested in a reserved Constituenc y 
on the strength of SC Thandan c ommunity certificate was challenged then but the 
verdict of the Election Tribunal went in favour of SC Thandan claimant.  As a result 
about 100 0 families started enjoying SC Thanda n s tatus there.  Follo wing th e 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976, the area 
restriction relating to t he Thandan communi ty, and many other castes was lifted.  
The relatives of the superior Ez huvas in th e Chittur taluk of Palakkad distric t who 
claimed  SC Thandan status are spr ead in many parts of the erstwhile 
Malabar.  Thus after 1976, a number of liti gations followed and it is estimated that 
during the period bet ween 1976 and 1990 more than 20, 000 fake SC com munity 
certificates were issued to the underserving persons.  The cases reached up to the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India filed by the Palakkad J illa Thandan Samrakshana 
Samiti and another Vs the State of Kera la and other (118, 199 KLT).  As the 
counter affidavit filed by the State was not proper, a supplementary counter  
 7

affidavit was also filed but the latter wa s not considered by  the Apex Court.   
However, the Court observed:- 
  
“A State Government was entitled to  initiate appr opriate proposals fo r 
modification  in cases where it  was sati sfied that modifications  were nec essary 
and, if after appropriate enquiry , the authorities were satisf ied that a modification 
was required, an amendment could be undertaken as provided by the 
Constitution.” 
 The anthropological st udies conducted by  the Kerala Institute of R esearch, 
Training and Development St udies (KIRT ADS), revealed that majority of them 
were Kudikidappukar (Tenents) in the pas t.  They form a class of landless and 
were once labourers attached to the lan ded gentry.  Tree climbing and c oconut 
plucking are their traditional occupation.  Their women folk engage in coconut palm 
leaf platting, rope making and also work as  agricultural labourer .  In the regional 
caste hierarchy of Travancor e, the SC Thandan has  a posi tion lower to t hat of  
artisan cas tes.  They accepted f ood and water from Ezhuva households but the 
Ezhuva did not accept the same from t he Thandans.  Since the Government of 
Kerala had been receiving complaint and repor ts that a section of Ezhava/Thiyya 
community of Palghat and Trichur distri cts who h old the title ‘T handan’ are 
cornering the benefits earmarked for Scheduled Castes on the pretext that they are 
‘Thandan’, a Schedu led Caste, though they were never  subject  to untouchab ility.  
In order to check the infiltration of inelig ible persons  into t he fold of Scheduled 
Castes, on the pretext that they are Thandan, the Government of Kerala had 
proposed modification in the existing entry.  The SC Thandan is fed along with the 
lower polluting castes.  They presented in obeisance (customary present during  
 8

Onam) to their respective masters including Ezhuva.   When a death occurs in an 
Ezhuva master’s house, the Thandan attached to the family acts as messenger.  In 
the funeral  ceremonies rela ting to an Ezhuva  or a Nair, the Thandan do all the 
manual works of cutting trees and splitting of logs for the pyre. 
 
2.8 The Registrar General of India and the National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes examined the issue and expre ssed agreement with the proposal of the 
Government of Kerala to the modification  in entry No. 61 of the Scheduled Caste 
list of State of Kerala. 
 
C. MADHYA PRADESH  
 
2.9 In part IX of the Schedule  to t he Constitution (Scheduled Ca stes) Order, 
1950,  the Bill seeks to substitute. 
“2. Bagri, Bagdi (excludi ng Rajput, Thakur sub-ca stes among Bagri Bagdi)” 
for entry 2. 
 
2.10 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  have intimated that due to 
similarity in the names, the people of Rajput Bagri/Bagdi caste are taking 
advantage of benefit s that ar e available to Scheduled Ca stes.  To prevent the 
malpractices that are being c ommitted by Bagri/Bagdi Rajputs it  is propos ed to 
modify the present entry as Bagri, Bagdi  (excludin g Rajput, Thakur sub-castes 
among Bagri, Badgi). 
 
 9

2.11 The Registrar General of India and National Commis sion for Scheduled 
Castes expressed their agreement with the proposal of the State Government of 
Madhya Pradesh for modification in the Scheduled Caste list of the State. 
 
D. MAHARAS HTRA 
 
2.12 In Part X of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 
1950, the Bill seeks to substitute: 
(i) “8.  Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, Basod,” for entry 8. 
 
(ii) “11 Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asad aru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, 
Chamari, Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar,  
Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Moc hi, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochis,  
Ranigar, Rohidas, Nona, Ramnam i, Rohit, Sam gar, Samagara, 
Satnami, Surjyabans hi, Suriyara mnami, Charmakar, Pardeshi 
Chamar, for entry 11. 
 
(iii) 12. Bhan gi, Mehtar, Olgana, Ru khi, Malk ana, Ha lalkhor, Lalb egi, 
Balmiki, Korar, Zadmalli, Hela,” for entry 12. 
 
2.13 The Ministry have stated that the St ate Government of Maharashtra after 
having carefully considered t he ma tter recommended inclusion of Basod 
community in the list of Scheduled Castes as synonym of Basor, Burud, Bansor, 
Bansodi.  The Registrar General of India and National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes agreed to support the proposal for inclusion of Basod community in the list  
 
 10

of Scheduled Castes as synony m of Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi in the list of 
Scheduled Castes of Maharashtra.   
2.14 With regards to the i nclusion of Charmakar, Pardeshi Chamar as synonym 
of Bhambi,  Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chamari, Chambhar, 
Chamgar, Haralayya,  Harali, Khalpa, Machi gar, Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi,  
Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochis, Ranigar, Rohidas, Nona, Ramnami, Rohit, Samgar, 
Samahgara, Satnami, Suryabanshi, Suriyara mnami in the Scheduled Castes List  
of Maharashtra, the Ministry  has stated that the State Government after carefully 
considering the matter, recommended the in clusion of  the same.  The Registrar 
General of India and National Commission  for Scheduled Castes agreed to wit h 
the propos al for inclusion of Charmakar and Pardes hi Chamar, as  synonym of 
Bhambi, Bhambhi etc. in this List of Scheduled Caste of the State of Maharashtra. 
 
2.15 The Ministry of Social Justice an d Empowerment have fu rther stated that 
the State Government considered carefully and recommended inclusion of Hela as 
synonym of Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Ruk hi, Malkana, Halalkhor,  Lalbegi, Balmik i, 
Korar, Zadmalli in the SC list.  The R egistrar General of India and the Nat ional 
Commission for Scheduled Castes agreed to with the propos al of the State 
Government for inclusion of Hela as sy nonym of Bhangi, Mehtar, etc. on the list of 
Scheduled Castes of the State. 
 
 
 
 
 11

 
E. ORISSA 
 
2.16 In Part XIII of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order 
1950, the Bill Seeks to Subsitute: 
 
(i) “19. Chamar, Chamara, Chamar-Ravidas, Chamar-Rohidas, 
Mochi, Muchi, Satnami” for entry 19 and 
(ii) “42.  Kandra, Kandara, Kadama, Kuduma, Kodma, Kodama”; for 
entry 42. 
2.17  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have informed that the 
State Government have stat ed that the proposals for inclusion of Chamara, 
Chamar-Ravidas, Chamar-Rohidas as synonym of Chamar, Mochi, Muchi,  
Satnami (at Sl. No. 19) in the SC list of Orissa have been recommended by the 
Tribes Adivsory Council and Harijan Welfare Advisory Board and justify the criteria 
laid down.  The Registra r General of India and th e National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes agreed to with the pr oposals of the State Government for  
inclusion of Chamara, Chamar-Ravidas, Chamar Rohidas as synonym of Chamar, 
Mochi, etc. in the State list of Scheduled Castes of Orissa. 
 
2.18 With regards to the inclusion of  Kuduma, Kodma, Kodama as synonym of  
Kandra, Kandara, Kadama in  the Scheduled Castes List  of Orissa, the Committee 
have been informed that the State Governm ent Orrissa have stat ed that the study  
report of the caste status of ‘Kuduma’ community as furnished by the Director, 
THRTI Orissa reveals that the stigma of   untouchability is attached to this 
community and they have matrimonial relationship with Kandaras.  As this  
 12

Kandaras caste has already be en enlisted in the Sc heduled Castes list of Orissa, 
the Kuduma Community may be considered for inclusion in the Scheduled Castes 
list.  The Registrar General of India and the National Commis sion for Scheduled 
Castes considered this propos al and agr eed to with the proposals of the State 
Government for inlusion of Kuduma, K odma, Kadama as synonym of Kandra, 
Kandara, Kadama in the Scheduled Castes List of Orissa. 
 
F. PUNJ AB 
2.19 In Part XIV of the Schedule to t he Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 
1950), the Bill seeks to insert:: 
“39.  Mahatam, Rai Sikhi” after entry 38. 
 
2.20  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have stated that the State 
Government forwarded a proposal for inclusion of Mahatam and Rai Sik h 
communities in the Scheduled Castes lis t of Punjab as an independent Scheduled 
Caste, inst ead of treating them  synonym of Sirkiband.  This  was based on the 
comments of the Registrar General of India.  The RGI had  stated that according to 
published literature, Mahatam formed a cast e of low status and lived as hunters  
and fowlers and wer e also reported as agriculturists.  Based on these facts, the 
RGI agreed for inclusion of Mahatam, Rai Si kh in the SC list of Punjab as an 
independent Scheduled Caste.  The Natio nal Commission for Scheduled Caste s 
considered and approved the proposal of in clusion of Rai Sikh and Mahatam as  
independent Scheduled Caste communities in the SC list of Punjab. 
 
 
 13

G. CHHATTISGARH 
 
2.21 In part XXIII of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes ) Order 
1950, the Bill after entry 43 seeks to insert 
 “44.  Turi”  
2.22 With regards to the inclus ion of the Turi Community in the SC list of  
Chhattisgarh, the Ministry have stated that  the State Government while forwarding 
its proposal had stated that Turi communi ty is recognised as Sc heduled Caste in 
the neighbouring States  of Bihar and Jharkhand, Mahar ashtra, Gujarat, Orissa,  
Rajasthan, West Bengal, etc. Further, it was stated that Turi community is suffering 
from social disability based on traditional practice of untouchabil ity.  Their main 
occupation is making utensils of Bamboo.  The Registrar General of India and the 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes considered the proposal and agreed 
with the same for inclusion of Turi community in the SC list of the State. 
 
H. BENCHMARK FIGURE DESCRIBING EX TREME SOCIAL,  
EDUCATIONAL AND ECONOMIC BACKWARDNESS ARISING OUT OF  
TRADITIONAL PRACTISE OF UNTOUCHABILITY 
 
 
2.23 The Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment  have stat ed that the test 
applied for inclus ion of any community in th e list of Sc heduled Castes is ‘ext reme 
social, educational and economic backwardness arising out of traditional pr actice 
of untouchability.’ 
 
2.24 Asked to state whether the Govern ment have fixed any b enchmark for 
deciding extreme, social, educational and economic backwardness arising out of  
 
 14

traditional practice of untouchabil ity, the Ministry in their written replies stated that 
they have not fixed any such benchmark. 
 
2.25 During the course of oral  evidence, the Secretary, Mi nistry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment, with regar ds to the benchmarks of social, economic and 
educational backwardness stated that these were mere indicato rs only and the 
main criteria is sociological, anthropological and ethnographic, which related to the 
term untouchability.  She furthe r accepted that the litera cy rate as well as how 
many families were b elow the p overty line  figure were to be taken as ind icators 
only and not as benchmarks.  The main criteria or benchm ark is mostly 
sociological. 
 
I. ISSUE OF MIGRANT WORKERS 
 
2.26 The Committee enquir ed whether  the Government had ever taken up the 
issue of SC migrants, so as to ensure t hat they are able to enjoy the benefits of 
being a member of the SC comm unity not only in the State of their origin, but also 
in the State where they migr ated to, the Ministry in thei r written reply furnis hed to 
the Committee stated that the issue of benefits to SC migrants/settlers in the new 
city of Chandigarh has been tak en up for consideration, in view of the pecu liarities 
of the situation. 
 
2.27 During the course of  oral ev idence, when asked to clarify the same the 
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerm ent acknowledged that the 
issue of SC migrants was a problem indeed and the Government was aware about 
it.  But, she stated that the orders issued in 1975, when the Ministry of Home  
 15

Affairs dealt with the task of issuing Schedul ed Caste Certificates, it was clear that 
Castes were State specific, i.e. the State of origin.  This is so,  as a Scheduled 
Caste Certificate is a State specific subj ect.  The representative of the Ministry  
further stated that as per Ar ticle 341 (i) of the Constituti on, the community is State 
/UT specific.  When people migrate to other States, they can obtain the benefit of a 
SC from the State of their origin and not from the State to which they hav e 
migrated to, for the purpose of  seeking educ ation or empl oyment or for any other 
purpose.  This is the Constitutional  position.  They can get a Caste certificate from 
the State where they  have migr ated to, on production of caste certificate of the 
father or mother, but benefits will be drawn only from the State of other origin. 
 
J. PROPOSALS FOR MODIFICATION IN THE LIST  OF SCHEDUL ED 
CASTES PENDING WITH THE  REGISTR AR GENE RAL OF INDIA AND THE 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SCHEDULED CASTES: 
 
2.28 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment informed the Committee 
that at the time of drafting the “Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order  
(Amendment) Bill, 2006” processing of onl y 17 proposals had been completed, as 
per approved modalities.  It was further stated by the Mi nistry that till date 29  
proposals are pending with the Registrar General of India for modification in the list 
of Scheduled Castes and 24 proposals ar e pending with the National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes for modification in the list of Scheduled Castes. 
 
2.29 During the course of evidence when enquired to by the Committee as to the 
reasons for 29 proposals for modification in  the List of Schedu led Castes pending 
with the office of the Registrar General of India, the Registrar General of India and  
 16

Census Commissioner stated that as of date out of the 29 proposals pending with 
them, they have been able to c lear 12 proposals.  Of the 17 pr oposals pending 
with them, only 2 related to  2002, 13 are of 2005 and 2 are of 2006.  He further  
stated that the 2 proposals of 2002 were repeat proposals.   The Registrar General 
of India further clarified t hat the task confronting his of fice was enormous as they 
have to do a very in depth examination of  all the proposals and also refer to past 
data.  He further stated that they try to come to some understanding whet her the 
RGI supports the proposal or do es not support it.  This is a very serious iss ue and 
we cannot  afford to give it any less att ention than it requires.  He was however  
hopeful of giving comments on the pending 17 proposals at the earliest. 
 
2.30 The Secr etary, National Commi ssion for Scheduled Castes in his  
deliberations before the Co mmittee stated that out of  the 24 proposals pending 
with the Commission for modification in  the list of Scheduled Castes, the 
Commission has been able to  give their comments on 5 of those cases.   With 
regards to the 19 cas es under examinatio n by the Commission,  he stated  that  
these are basically of synonyms.  The Castes are already inc luded, but  local 
variation in spelling or names is t here and they are being thor oughly e xamined 
because as regards connotations one has  to go thorough it car efully.  He further 
stated that the basic caste was already a part of the SC list and the questio n is of 
addition of synonyms.  He was hopeful of  the Commission being able to commen t 
on these 19 pending proposals soon. 
 
 
 
 17

2.31 The Committee note that “The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order  
(Amendment) Bill, 2006” relates to the am endment  in the Scheduled  Castes 
lists of 7  States covering 17 communiti es.  The changes proposed are    
inclusion of 12   co mmunities as sy nonymous communities ; imposition of  
area restriction for 1 communit y, 1 for modification and inclusion of 3 ne w 
communities in the Scheduled  Castes lis t.  The Committee further note that 
as per the modalities revised on 25, June, 2002 for deciding claim for 
inclusion in, exclusion from and other m odifications in the orders sp ecifying 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes list, all 17 proposals for 
modification in the  Scheduled Castes List have been dul y processed by the 
Ministry of  Social Justice and Emp owerment in consultation w ith the  
concerned State Government, the Registrar General of India and the National 
Commission for Scheduled  Castes.   The Committe e approve the 
amendments in the Bill in its entirety. 
 
2.32 The Committee note w ith concern that though t he test applied for  
inclusion in the list of Scheduled Ca stes, as stated b y the Ministry, is 
“extreme social, educational and eco nomic backw ardness arising out of 
traditional practice of untouchab ility, y et the Government have not 
benchmarked the figure describing extreme social, educational an d 
economic backwardness and have further stated that factors like literacy rate 
and per capita income are to be  taken as indicators onl y an d not 
benchmarks. Though the Com mittee agree w ith the view of the Ministry  that 
the main criteria for inclusion of a co mmunity in the Scheduled Castes list is  
sociological, anthropological and ethnographic, which relates to the term  
 18

untouchability yet th e Committee are of the view  that in the present era of  
information revolution, the Government should h ave   w ith them the data 
highlighting  per capita income as w ell as literacy rate for all communities 
included in the Scheduled Caste list, as well as of those communities  w hich 
it plans to include in the Sch eduled Castes list.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Ministry not only make available with it the data 
highlighting literacy rate and per capita income but also fix a benchmar k for 
deciding extreme social, educational and economic backwardness.  By doing 
so, the Committee are of the firm opi nion that the Government w ould be 
better able to gauge and monitor th e social emancipation, educational 
empowerment and econo mic development of all S cheduled Caste 
communities. 
 
2.33 The Committee note with concern that the Government have not given 
a serious thought to the ever b urgeoning issue of Scheduled Caste migrants 
and are u nhappy with the present situat ion, which stipulates that a perso n 
belonging to Scheduled Cast e community can avail the benefits of being a 
Scheduled Caste only in the State of his origin and not in the State where he 
migrated to, even though he might have st ayed permanently at his migrated  
State for decades.  The Mini stry have stated that this  restriction stems from 
Article 341 (i) of the constitution, which states that a community  i s 
State/Union Territory specific.  The only benefit that a migrant SC can avail is 
that on pr oduction of the caste certificat e of hi s parents,  he or  she can 
obtain a caste certificate from the Stat e where they migrated to, but cannot  
avail any benefits of being a Scheduled Caste in terms of education,  
 19

employment or any other purpose.   The Committee take note the view of the 
Ministry that these are the provisions  of the Constitution w hich are the 
restricting factor, yet they  are of the firm opinion that keeping in view  the 
prevalent ground situation, wherein mass migration of population takes 
place from one state to another due to economic factors, a change in this 
policy is paramount.  The Committee th erefore desire that the Government 
should consider the feasibilit y of accord ing benefits to SC migrants  in the 
State where they have migrated to. 
 
2.34 The Committee are constrained to note that at the time of drafting “The 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Or der (Amendment) Bill, 2 006, processing 
of only 17 proposals had been complete d as per approved modalities and 53 
proposals for modification in the list of  Scheduled Castes were pending with 
the office of the Registrar General of  India and the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes.  Some of these prop osals are pending w ith the Registrar 
General of India from the y ear 1999,  2000 and so  on and with the National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes from the year 2003, 2005 and 2006. The 
Committee feel that a substantial amount  of time w ould elapse bef ore the 
Registrar General of India and Nati onal Commission for Scheduled Castes 
clear all their pending proposals thus en abling the Ministry  to draft another  
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill.     The Registrar 
General of India and National Commissi on for Scheduled Castes have cited 
the reaso ns for del ay being due to an  in-depth stud y req uired in deciding  
whether a community qualifies to be included in the Scheduled Castes list.   
 
 20

The Committee are not at al l satisfied at this inordi nate delay on the part of 
the Registrar General of India a s well as National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes in clearing these prop osals and  express t heir deep anguish at this 
sordid state of affairs. The Committ ee, therefore, strongl y recommend that 
both the Registrar General of I ndia a nd the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes g et their act togeth er and clear the prop osals pen ding 
with them expeditiously.  The Committe e further desire that the Government  
lay dow n a time fra me for th e RGI and NCSC to give their comments on 
cases referred to them for modification in the list of Scheduled Castes by the 
Ministry so as to overcome this unduly long delay in clearing proposals. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
14 December  , 2006 Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana  , 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on     
Social Justice an d 
Empowerment. 
 21

     A NNEXURE - I  
As Introduced in Lok Sabha 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006. 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 Further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950. 
 
BE: it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
 
 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order  
(Amendment)  Act, 2006.                                                                                     Short title  
       
 
 2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,-   Amendment 
                                                                                                                                of  the  
  
      (a) IN  PART V.-Haryana.                                                                                 Schedule 
 
   (i) for entry 5, substitute - 
 
    “5. Batwal, Barwala”; 
 
   (ii) for entry 24, substitute – 
  
    “24. Megh, Meghwal”; 
 
  (b) IN PART VIII. – Kerala, for entry 61, substitue – 
 
“61. Thandan (excluding Ezhuvas and T hiyyas w ho are know n 
as Than dan, in the erstw hile Cochin  and Malabar areas) and 
(Charpenters who are known as Thachan, in the erst while Cochin and 
Travancore State)”; 
 
  (c) IN PART IX. – Madhya Pradesh, for entry 2, substitute- 
 
“2. Bagri, Bagdi (excluding Rajput, Thakur sub-castes among Bagri, Bagdi)”; 
  (d) IN PART X. – Maharastra.- 
 
 22

   (i) for entry 8, substitute- 
    
    “8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, Basod”; 
 
   (ii) for entries 11 and 12, substitute- 
 
“11. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar,  
Chamari, Chambhar, Chamgar, Harl ayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar, 
Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi, Te legu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, 
Rohidas, Nona, Ramnami, Rohit,  Samgar, Samagara,  Satnami, 
Surijyabanshi, Surijyaramnami, Charmakar, Pardeshi Chamar; 
 
12. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukh i, Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, 
Balmiki, Korar, Zadmalli, Hela”; 
 
  (e) IN PART XIII.-Orissa,- 
 
   (i) for entry 19, substitute- 
 
“19, Chamar, Chamara, Chamar-Ravid as, Chamar-Rohidas, Mochi, Muchi,  
Satnami”; 
   (ii) for entry 42, substitute- 
 
“42. Kandra, Kandara, Kadama, Kuduma, Kodma, Kodama”; 
 
  (f) IN PART XIV. -  Punjab, after entry 38, insert- 
 
   “39. Mahatam, Rai Sikh”; 
 
  (g) IN PART XXIII. – Chhattisgarh, after entry 43, insert- 
 
   “44. Turi”. 
 
 23

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 As per the provisions of article 341 of the Constitu tion, the list of Scheduled 
Castes was first notifi ed in 1950 and this li st was modified from time to time.  A 
number of requests were received from the State Governments for modifications in 
the list, such as, inclusion new communities, inclusion of synonymous communities 
imposing area restrictions other modifications of certain existing entries.   
 
2. The above requests have been processed in accordance with the modalities 
approved by the Government on 15 th June, 1999 and modified on 25 th June, 2002.  
After consultation with the concerned State Governments, the Registrar General of 
India and the National Commission for Scheduled Castes, the list of the Scheduled 
Castes in respect of seventeen communiti es for the States of Haryana, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, P unjab and Chhattisgarh are proposed to 
be amended. 
 
3. The propose amendment s in the Constit ution (Sch eduled Ca stes) Order 
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 broadly fall under the following categories, namely:- 
 
 (i) inclusion of new castes bas ed on social, educational and economic  
backwardness; 
 
 (ii) inc lusion of synonymous c ommunities in respec t of a cas te in the 
existing list; and 
 
 (iii) modifications or imposition of area restrictions in the existing entries. 
 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
MEIRA KUMAR. 
NEW DELHI: 
The 28th June, 2006. 
 
 24

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 The Bill s eeks to include new cast es based on s ocial, educational and 
economic backwardness, synonymous comm unities in respect of a caste and 
modifications in the existing entries relati ng to seventeen communities in the list o f 
Scheduled Castes for the States of  Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,  
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab and Chhattisgarh.  This will entail additional recurring 
and non-recurring expenditure on account of benefits of schemes me ant for 
development of the Scheduled Castes. 
 
2. It is not possible to es timate the likely expenditure to be incurred on this  
account at this stage.   However,  the expenditure, whether recurring or 
non-recurring, will be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 25

ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950 
 
(C.O. 19) 
 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
PART V. – Haryana 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 5. Batwal 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 24. Megh 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
PART VIII. – Kerala 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 61. Thandan 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
PART IX. – Madhya Pradesh 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 2. Bagri, Bagdi 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
PART X. – Maharashtra 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 8. Basor Burud, Bansor, Bansodi 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 26

 11. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadar u, As odi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chamari, 
Chambhar, chamgar, Haralayy a, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar, 
Madig, Mochi, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar , Rohidas, ona, Ram nami, 
rohit, Samgar, Samagara, Satnami, Surjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami 
 
 12. Bhangi, Mehtar, Ol gana, Rukhi, Malk ana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmik i, 
Korar, Zadmalli 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
PART XIII. – Orissa 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 19. Chamar, Mochi, Muchi, Satnami. 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 
 42. Kandra, Kandara 
 
*   *  *  *   * 
 27

 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Smt. Meira Kumar, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
MGIPMRND-1630LS(1)-26-07-2006 
 28

 
                                                                                              ANNEXURE – II 
 
MODALITIES FOR DECIDING  CLAIMS  FOR IN CLUSION IN, EXCLUSION 
FROM AND OTHER MODIFICATIONS IN THE ORDERS SPECIFYING 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES LISTS 
 
(Revised as on 25.6.2002) 
Modalities for decidin g claim for incl usion in, exc lusion from and other 
modifications in the Orders specifyi ng Sc heduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
have been notified.  Such proposals are required to be processed as ind icated 
below. 
(a) Cases fav oured by both the St ate Governments and the Registrar 
General of India (RGI) in their mo st recent reports would be referred 
to the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes for their opinion.  They would be forwarded to the Commission 
individually or in bat ches, as ma y be pr acticable, along  with the 
comments of the State Government s and the RGI as well as  any  
relevant material/information furnished by them or by representatives. 
 
(b) Some issues concern not one b ut se veral States e.g.  the status of 
SC/ST migrants.  These would al so be referred to the National 
Commission if the RGI and majority of concerned states have 
supported modification. 
 
(c) It may be suggested to the Commi ssion that, while examinin g the 
above cases, they should assoc iate, through panels or other means, 
expert individuals, organizations  and institutions in the fields of 
anthropology, ethnography and other so cial sciences,  in addition to 
the State Governments, RGI and the Anthropological Survey of India, 
on a regional basis.  T hey may also consider holding public h earings 
in areas relevant to the claims u nder examination.  These guidelines 
cannot be binding on the Commission,  but may be suggested in the 
interest of fuller exam ination of the cases.  The Commission would 
 29

also be requested to give priorit y to cases in which the Courts have 
given direc tives regarding dec ision wit hin a stipulated time period.  
(In such cases, extension of time  would be sought from the courts 
where nec essary, citing these moda lities for the determination of 
claims).  Such cases  would be separately processed and sent for 
earlier decision. 
 
(d) Amending legislation would be proposed to the Cabinet in all cases in 
which the National Commission, RGI as well as the State 
Governments have favoured modifica tion.   Those cas es with which 
the State Governments and the RGI are in agreement, but which the 
Commission have not  supported, woul d be rejected at the level of 
Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
(e) Claims for inclusion, exclusion or other modifications that neither the 
RGI nor the concerned State Governments have supported would not 
be referred to the National Commission.  These would be rejected at  
the level of the Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
(f) In the case of claims recommended by the con cerned St ate 
Governments, but not agreed to by  the RGI, the State Governments 
would be asked to review or furthe r justify their recommendations in 
the light of RGI’s comm ents.  Thereafter, they would be taken up 
again with RGI.  These cases would remain under consideration until 
agreement is reac hed between v iews of the RGI and  the conc erned 
States, at which time they woul d be dis posed of in accordance with 
the modalities at (a) to (e) above.  Cas es which t he RGI have 
recommended, but which the St ate Governments have not favoured, 
would be similarly processed. 
 
(g) Claims in respect of which the comments of either the RGI or the 
State Governments or of both ar e await ed would remain under 
 30

consideration until their views are re ceived.  Thereafter, they would 
be dealt with the accordance with the modalities at (a) to (f) above. 
 
(h) Claims recommended suo-moto by the National Commission would be 
referred to RGI and the State Governments.   Depending on their r esponses, they 
would be disposed of in accordance with the modalities at (d) to (f) as may be 
applicable. 
 
 
                                                                                                     
 31

ANNEXURE - III 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPO WERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 16 th   
OCTOBER, 2006. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 16.05 hrs. in Committee Room 
`B’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                             PRESENT 
                         Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
3. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam  
4. Shri Rupchand Murmu  
5. Smt Usha Verma  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
6. Shri Silvius Condpan 
7. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
8. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
9. Shri Veer Singh 
10. Ms Anusuiya Uikey 
11. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
  1. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 32

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE  MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation and Organisation  
 
1. Smt. Veena Chhotray Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
2. Shri D.V.S. Ranga Joint Secretary, (SCD) 
 
3. Shri. V.R. Malhotra Director (SCD) 
 
4. Shri. T.C. Joshi Assistant Director (SCD) 
 
 
 
 At the outset Hon. Chairperson welcomed the members and 
representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting of  
the Committee. 
 
2. Hon’ble Chairperson informed the Members that Hon’ ble Speaker Lok 
Sabha had referred ‘The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 
2006” to the Committee for examination and report within thr ee months.  She 
pointed out that the proposed B ill seeks to amend the lists of Scheduled Castes in 
the States of Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab and 
Chhattisgarh, so as to ensure (i) inclusion of new castes based on s ocial, 
educational and economic backwardness (ii) inclusion of synonymous communities 
in   respect  of   caste in the existing list  (iii)  modifications  or  imposition of area 
restrictions in the existing ent ries.  She enquired from the Secretary the 
background, justifications and broad provisions of the proposed Bill. 
 
 
 
 33

3. The Secretary, Ministry of Social  Justice and Empowerment explained  the 
background, justification and br oad provisions of the Bill . She further stated that 
towards  systematically considering the m odifications in the lists of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Government of India final ized the modalities on 15.06.1999 and again 
on 25.06.2002.  As per thes e modalities,  the proposal of the conc erned State 
Government or UT Administration is refe rred to the Registrar General of  India 
(RGI) for obtaining their comments.  Wh en they agree with the propos al, it is 
referred to the National Commission for Scheduled Cast es and after that the 
orders of the Gov ernment a re obtained by Inte r-Ministerial consultations.   
Thereafter, the Bill is  introduced in Parliament. 
 
4. She also apprised the Committee that the Bill proposes to amend the lists of 
Scheduled Castes in respect of 17 communities for the States of Haryana, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab and Chhattisgarh after having 
completed the prescribed modalities. 
 
5. Thereafter, the members raised queries,  which inter-alia inc luded the 
number of proposals  received f rom other St ates for inclus ion in the Scheduled 
Caste List, the number of proposals agr eed to and the number of proposals  
pending, the issue of migrat ion of population from one St ate to another State and 
whether a person who enjoys the status of Scheduled Caste  in his native State will 
also get that advantage in another State and the basis for including a community in 
the Scheduled Castes List.   
 
 
 
 34

6. The representatives  of the Minist ry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
responded to the queries.  Hon’ble Chair person dir ected them to send written 
replies to the queries  of Members for which ready information was not available 
with them. 
 
7. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the repres entatives of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment for giving valuable information to the Committee o n the 
Bill and expressing their views in a candid manner. 
  
 A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 35

 ANNEXURE - IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE FI FTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPO WERMENT HELD ON WEDNE SDAY, 15th 
NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
 
The Committee met from 11.00 hrs. to 12.45 hrs. in Committee Room 
`B’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                             PRESENT 
                      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora  
3. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam 
4. Shri Kailash Meghwal  
5. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
6. Smt. Krishna Tirath  
7. Smt Usha Verma  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8. Shri Silvius Condpan 
9. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
10. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
11. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
12. Shri Veer Singh 
13. Ms Anusuiya Uikey 
14. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
  
  
 
 
  
 36

 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT AND MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE 
DEPARTMENT) 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer   Designation and    Organisation 
 
1. Smt. Veena Chhotray Secretary, Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
2. Shri V.R. Malhotra  Director, (Scheduled Castes 
Division), Ministry of  Social 
Justice and Empowerment  
 
3. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Sec retary & Legislative 
Counsel, Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Legislative Department) 
 
4. Smt. Veena Kothavale Assistant Legis lative Counsel,  
Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) 
 
 
2. At the outset Hon. Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment and Ministry of 
Law and J ustice, Legislative  Department to the sitting  of the Committee.  She 
enquired from the Secretary, Mi nistry of  Social Justic e and Empowerment about  
the benchmark figure describing extrem e social, educational and economic  
backwardness arising out of traditional practice of unt ouchability.  She expressed 
surprise over the fact that 24 proposals for modification in the list of Scheduled  
Castes referred to the National Commission for Scheduled Castes are still pending 
and some cases have been pending since the year 1999. Also, 29 proposals  
referred to the Regist rar General of India during the y ear 2003, 2005 and 2006,  
 37

have not been cleared so far.   She enquir ed from the Secretary the reasons for 
non-clearance of these proposals even after a lapse of many years. 
 
3. The members also raised some querie s, which inter-alia included the issue 
of migration of population from one State t o another State and whether a person 
who enjoy s the status of a Scheduled Cast e in his native State also get s that  
advantage in another state and the number of proposals pending with the Registrar 
General of India and National Commission for Scheduled Castes for modification in 
the List of Scheduled Castes. 
 
4. With regards to the benchmar ks of social, economi c and educational 
backwardness, the S ecretary, Ministry of Social Just ice and Empowerment stated 
that these were indicators only, but the main criteria is sociological, anthropological 
and ethnographic, which related to the term untouchability. About the delay on the 
part of the National Commission for Sc heduled Castes and Registrar General of 
India in clearing the 53 proposals referred to  them for modification in the list of 
Scheduled Castes, the Secretary explained that once a proposal for modification in 
the List of  Scheduled Castes is receiv ed from the State Governments, it is  
forwarded to the Registrar General of India for conducting anthropologica l, 
sociological and ethnographic studies.  Further, the Registrar General of India has  
to look into previous records as well.  In order to satisfy themselves completely, the 
Registrar General of India carries out detailed research, which does involve a lot of 
time.  Once the RGI clears the proposal it is forwarded to the National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes for their views. 
 
5. However, the Committee decided to hold a meeting with the representatives 
of the Registrar General of India and National Co mmission for Scheduled Castes  
to further enquire about the reasons for delay in finalizing the proposals pending 
with them. 
 
 
 
 
 38

 
6. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the repres entatives of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment for giving valuable information to the Committee o n the 
Bill and expressing their views in a candid manner. 
  
 A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 39

          ANNEXURE - V 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL J USTICE AND EMPO WERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 23 rd  
NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room 
`C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                             PRESENT 
 
                      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora  
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam 
6. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Shri Silvius Condpan 
8. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
9. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
10. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
  
  
 
 
 40
  

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT, REGISTRAR GENERAL OF INDIA AND NATIONAL 
COMMISSION FOR SCHEDULED CASTES 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer   
 
Designation and  Organisation 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Veena Chhotray Secretary, Ministry of  Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
2. Shri V.R. Malhotra  Director, (Scheduled Castes 
Division), Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment  
 
3. Shri D.K. Sikri Registrar General of India and 
Census Commissioner 
 
4. Shri S.K. Sood Secretary, National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes 
 
5. Shri S.S. Sharma  Joint Secretary, National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes 
 
2. At the outset Hon. Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
representatives of the Ministry of So cial Justice and Empowerment, R egistrar 
General of India and the National Commissi on for Scheduled Castes to the sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, she pointed out that at the time of  drafting the “The 
(Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006 processing of only 17 proposals 
had been completed as per the approved modalities.  She expressed surprise over 
the fact that 24 propos als for modification in the List of Schedu led Castes referred 
to the National Commission for Scheduled Ca stes, from the year 1999, 2000 hav e 
not been c leared as yet.  She also pointe d out that 29 propos als referred to the 
Registrar General of India for modification  in the list of Scheduled Castes are still 
pending for clearance.  She enqu ired from the concerned o fficials  the reasons for 
undue delay in clearance of those  proposals. 
 
3.   The Registrar General of India cl arified t he queries  put  forth by Hon’ble  
Chairperson and stated that on receipt of proposals for modification in the list of  
 
 
 41

Scheduled Castes from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, the office 
of the Registrar General of India after  having studied the material furnished by the 
respective State Government conducts it s own anthr opological,  soc iological and 
ethnographic studies in  detail to ascertain whether the cases forwarded by  of the 
State Governments fulfill the laid down crit eria.  As this requ ires detailed study, 
considerable time is involved in the process. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Secretary Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and 
Secretary National Commission for Sched uled Caste s responded to the queries  
put forth by Hon’ble Chairperson and Members. 
 
5. Hon’ble Chairperson then thanked the representatives  of the Ministry of 
Social Jus tice and Empowerment, Regi strar General of India and National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes for gi ving valuable information to the 
Committee on the Bill and expressing their views in a candid manner. 
  
  The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
6. X    X     X        X    X     X   X      X      X 
 
7. X    X     X        X    X     X   X      X      X 
 
 A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 42

 
ANNEXURE-VI 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPO WERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 
14th   DECEMBER, 2006. 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.30 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room 
B Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                           PRESENT  
 
                        Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora  
3. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam 
4. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
5. Shri P.A. Sangma 
6. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
7. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
8. Smt. Usha Verma 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
10. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
11. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
12. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
13. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
 43

 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairpers on welcomed the new Members nominated 
to the Committee.  Therea fter, she apprised the Member s that they were meeting 
to consider and adopt three Draft Reports of the Committee namely, (i) Twentieth 
Report on “The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006” (ii) 
Twenty-first Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee 
on the s ubject “National Backwar d Classes  Finance and Dev elopment 
Corporation” of the Minist ry of Social J ustice and Empowerment and (iii) Twenty-
second Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Seventeent h Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants – 2006-2007 of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
3. The Com mittee first took up the Twentieth Report on “The Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and adopted the same with out 
any amendment. 
 
4. x  x  x    x  x  x   x  x  x   
 
5. x  x  x    x  x  x   x  x  x 
 
6. The Com mittee authorized the Chair person to finalize and present the 
reports on their behalf to the Parliament. 
 
7.  x  x  x    x  x  x   x  x  x 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 44

                                                                                                 APPENDIX – I 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 19501 
                                                    
(CO. 19) 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India, the President, after consultation with the Governors and 
Rajpramukhs of the States concerned, is  pleased to m ake the following Order, 
namely:- 
  
 1. This Order may be called the C onstitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,  
1950. 
  
 2. Subject to the provisions of this Or der, the castes races or tribes or parts 
of, or groups within c astes or tribes spec ified in 2[Parts I to 3[4[5[XXIV]]] of the 
Schedule t o this Order shall, in relati on to the States to  which those Parts 
respectively relate, be deemed to be Schedu led Castes so far as regards member 
thereof resident in the localiti es specified in relation to th em in those Parts of that 
Schedule. 
  
 6[3. Notwithstanding anything c ontained in paragraph 2, no person who 
professes a religion di fferent from the Hindu 7[, the Sikh or the Buddhist] religi on 
shall be deemed to be a member of a Scheduled Caste.] 
  
 8[4. Any reference in t his Order to a Stat e or to a district or other territorial 
division thereof shall be c onstrued as  a r eference to the State, district or other 
territorial division as constituted on the 1st day of May, 1976.] 
 45

 
9[THE SCHEDULE 
Part I – Andhra Pradesh 
1. Adi Andhra 9. 10[ Beda (Budga ) Jangam (in the district 
of Heyd rabad, Ranga Re ddy, 
Mahbubnagar, Adilaba d, Nizam abad, 
Medak, Kari mnagar, Wa rangal, Kham mam 
and Nalgonda)] 
2. Adi Dravida 10. Bindla 
3. Anamuk 11[11. Byagara, Byagari] 
4. Aray Mala  
5. Arundhatiya  
6. Arwa Mala  
7. Bariki  
8. Bavuri  
-------------- 
1. Vide S.R.O. 385, dated 10th August, 1950, published in the Gazette of India, Extra, Pt. 
II, Sec. 3, dated 10th August, 1950. 
2. Subs. by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Lists (Modification) Order, 1956. 
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, sec. 19 and First Sch., for “XXI” (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2000, sec. 19 and Third Sch., for “XXII” (w.e.f. 1-11-2000). 
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2000, sec. 24 and Fifth Sch., for “XXIII” (w.e.f. 9-11-2000). 
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 1956, sec 3 and First Sch., for paragraph 3. 
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 1990, sec.2, for “or the Sikh.” 
8. Subs. by Act 108 of 1976, sec.3 and First Sch., for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 27-7-1977) 
9. Subs. by Act 108 of 1976, sec.3 and First Sch., for the Schedule (w.e.f. 27-7.1977). 
10. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch.I, for entry 9 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
11. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002,sec.2 and Sch. I, for entry 11 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
--------------- 
12. Chachati     36. Mala Dasari 
13. Chalavadi     37. Mala Dasu 
1[14. Chamar, Mochi, Muchi, Chamar-  38. Mala Hannai 
  Ravidas, Chamar-Rahidas]   39. Malajangam 
15.  Chambhar     40. Mala Masti 
16. Chandala     41. Mala Sale, Nethani 
17. Dakkal, Dokkalwar    42. Mala Sanyasi 
18. Dandasi      43. Mang 
19. Dhor      44. Mang Garodi 
 46
20. Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano   45. Manne 

21. Ellamalawar, Yellammalawandlu   46. Mashti 
22. Ghasi, Haddi, Relli, Chanchandi   47. Matangi 
2[23. Godagali, Godagula (in the districts  48. Mehtar 
   of Srikakulam Vizianagram and   49. Mitha Ayyalvar 
   Vishakhapatanam)]    50. Mundala 
24. Godari      51. Paky, Moti, Thoti 
25. Gosangi               5[***] 
26. Holeya      53. Pamidi 
27. Holeya Dasari     54. Panchama, Pariah 
28. Jaggali      55. Relli 
29. Jambuvulu     56. Samgara 
3[30. Kolupulavandlu, Pambala,   57. Samban 
   Pambanda, Pambala]    58. Sapru 
31. Madasi Kuruva, Madari Kuruva   59. Sindhollu, Chindollu 
32. Madiga               6[60. Yatala 
33. Madiga Dasu, Mashteen    61. Valluvan] 
34. Mahar       
4[35. Mala, Mala Ayawaru] 
 
 
PART – II Assam. 
 
1. Bansphor      7 . Jalkeot 
2. Bhuinmali, Mali     8. Jhalo, Malo, Jhalo-Malo 
3. Brittial Bania, Bania    9. Kaibartta, Jaliya 
4. Bhupi, Dhobi     10. Lalbegi 
5. Dugla, Dholi     11. Mahara 
6. Hira      12. Mehtar, Bhangi 
 
1.  Subs. by the Act of 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 14(w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
2.  Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 23  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
3.  Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 30  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
4.  Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 35  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
5. Entry 52 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
6. Ins. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 
13. Muchi, Rishi     15. Patni 
14. Namasudra     16. Sutradhar. 
 
 47

PART III – Bihar 
 
1. Bantar      12. Ghasi 
2. Bauri      13. Halalkhor 
3. Bhogta      14. Hari, Mehtar, Bhangi 
4. Bhuiya       15. Kanjar 
5. Bhumij 1[***]     16. Kurariar 
2[6. Chamar, Mochi, Chamar-Rabidas,  17. Lalbegi 
  Chamar-Ravidas, Chamar-Rohidas,  18. Musahar 
 Charmarkar]     19. Nat 
7.    Chaupal     5[20. Pan, Sawasi, Panr] 
8.    Dabgar      21. Pasi 
3[9.  Dhobi, Rajak]     22. Rajwar 
4[10. Dom, Dhangad, Bansphor,   23. Turi 
   Dharikar, Dhakar, Domra] 
      11.    Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi. 
 
PART IV. – Gujarat 
 
1. Ager        Zampada, Zampda, Rushi, 
2. Bakad, Bant       Valmiki] 
3. Bawa-Dedhi, Dedh-Sadhu   6. Chalvadi, Channayya 
6[4. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi,  7. Chenna Dasar, Holaya Dasar 
    Chamadia, chamar, Chamar-Ravidas,  8. Dangashia 
    Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali,  9. Dhor, Kakkayya, Kankayya 
     Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar,   10. Garmatang 
    Madig. Mochi (in Dangs district and   11. Garoda, Garo 
    Umergoan Taluka of Valsad district only),  12. Halleer 
    Nalia, Telegu Mochi, Kamati  Mochi, Ranigar 13. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar, Halasvar 
    Rohidas, Rohit Samgar]    14. Holar, Valhar 
7[5. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, Malkana, 15. Holaya, Holer 
   Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmiki, Korar, Zadmalli, 16. Lingader 
   Barwashia, Barwasia, Jamphoda   17. Mahar, Taral, Dhegu Megu 
 
1. The words “(excluding North Chhotanagpur and South Chhotanagpur divisions and Santhal 
Parganas district)” omitted by Act 30 of 2000, sec.23 and Fifth Sch. (w.e.f. 15-11-2000). 
2. Subs. by Act of 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 6(w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 9  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 10  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 48

5. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 20  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I for entry 4 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
7. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 5 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 
18. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Dhedh, Vankar,   29. Turi 
      Maru Vankar, Antyaj    30. Turi Barot, Dedh Barot 
19. Mang, Matang, Minimadig   1[31. Balahi, Balai 
20. Mang-Garudi     32. Bhangi, Mehtar 
21. Meghval, Meghwal, Menghvar   33. Chamar 
22. Mukri      34. Chikwa, Chikvi 
23. Nadia, Hadi     35. Koli, Kori 
24. Pasi      36. Kotwal (in Bhind, Dhar, Dewas, 
25. Senva, Shenva, Chenva, Sedma, Rawat        Guna, Gwalior, Indore, Jhabua,  
26. Shemalia           Khargone, Mandsaur, Morena, 
27. Thori            Rajgarh, Ratlam, Shajapur,  
28. Tirgar, Tirbanda           Shivpuri, Ujjain and Vidisha districts).] 
 
                                                           PART V – Haryana 
 
1. Ad Dharmi     18. Gandhila, Gandil Gondola 
 2. Balmikii Chura, Bhangi    19. Kabirpanthi, Julaha 
3. Bangali      20. Khatik 
4. Barar, Burar, Berar    21. Kori, Koli 
5. Batwal      22. Marija, Marecha 
6. Bauria, Bawaria     3[23. Mazhabi, Mazhabi Sikh] 
7. Bazigar      24. Megh 
8. Bhanjra      4[25. Nat, Badi] 
2[9. Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar,   26. Od 
Raigar/Ramdasi, Ravidasi, Balahi,   27. Pasi 
Batoi, Bhatoi, Bhambi, chamar-Rohidas,  28. Perna 
Jatav, Jatava, Mochi, Ramdasa]   29. Pherera 
10. Chanal      30. Sanhai 
11. Dagi      31. Sanhal 
12. Darain      32. Sansi, Bhedkut, Manesh 
13. Deha, Dhaya, Dhea    33. Sansoi 
14. Dhanak      5[34. Sapela, Sapera] 
15. Dhogri, Dhangri, Siggi    35. Sarera 
16. Dunma, Mahasha, Doom   6[36. Sikligar, Bariya] 
17. Gagra      37. Sirkiband. 
 49

1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2002, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 3-6-2002). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 9  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 23  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I for entry 25 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 34 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 36 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 
 
                                                     PART VI – Himachal Pradesh 
 
1. Ad Dharmi     29. Hesi 
2.  Badhi, Nagalu     30. Jogi 
3. Balmiki Bhangi, Chuhra, Chura, Chuhre  31. Julaha, Julahe, Kabirpanthi, Keer 
4. Bandhela     32. Kamoh, Dagoli 
5. Bangali      33. Karoack 
6. Banjara      34. Khatik 
7. Bansi      35. Kori, Koli 
8. Barad      36. Lohar 
9.  Barar, Burar, Berar    37. Marijia, Marecha 
10.  Batwal      38. Mazhabi 
11. Bauria, Bawaria     39. Megh 
12. Bazigar      40. Nat 
13. Bhanjra, Bhanjre    41. Od 
14. Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar, Rajgar,  42. Pasi 
 Ramdasi, Ravidasi, Ramdasia, Mochi  43. Perna 
15. Chanal      44. Phrera, Pherera 
16. Chhimbe Dhobi     45. Rehar, Rehara 
17. Dagi      46. Sanhai 
18. Darain      47. Sanhal 
19. Darai, Daryai     48. Sansi, Bhedkut, Manesh 
20. Daule, Deloe     49. Sansoi 
21. Dhaki, Toori     50. Sapela 
22. Dhanak      51. Sarde, Sarera,Sarare, Siryare, 
23. Dhagori, Dhangri, Siggi    52. Sikligar 
24. Dhogri, Dhangri, Siggi    53. Sipi 
25. Doom, Doomma, Dumna, Dumne, Mahasha 54. Sirkiband 
26. Gagra      55. Teli 
27. Gandhila, Gandil, Gondola   56. Thathiar, Thathera. 
28. Hali      1[57. Barwala] 
 50
 

        2[PART VIA. – Jharkhand 
 
1. Bantar      6. Choupai 
2. Baurri      7. Dabajar 
3. Bhogta      8. Dhobi 
4. Bhuiya      9. Dom, Dhangad 
5. Chamar, Mochi     10. Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi 
 
1. Ins. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sec. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2002, sec. 23 and Fifth Sch. (w.e.f. 15-11-2000). 
 
11. Ghasi      17. Musahar 
12. Halalkhor     18. Nat 
13. Hair, Mehtar, Bhangi    19. Pan, Sawasi 
14. Kanjar      20. Pasi 
15. Kuraiar      21. Rajwar 
16. Lalbegi      22. Turi] 
 
                                                                PART VII. – Karnataka 
 
1. Adi Andhra     2[23.  Bhovi, Od, Odde, Vaddar,  
        Wad dar, Voddar, Woddar] 
2. Adi Dravida 
3. Adi Karnataka     24. Bindla 
4. Adiya (in Coorg district)    25. Byagara 
5. Ager      26. Chakkiliyan 
6. Ajila      27. Chalavadi, Chalvadi, Channayya 
7. Anamuk     28. Chandala 
8. Aray Mala     29. Chenna Dasar, Holaya Dasar 
9. Arunthathiyar     30. Dakkal, dokkalwar 
10. Arwa Mala     31. Dakkaliga 
11. Baira      32. Dhor, Kakkayya, Kankayya 
12. Bakad      33. Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano 
13. vant (in Belgaum, Bijapur, Dharwar  34. Ellamalwar, Yellammalawandlu 
 and North Kanara district)   35. Ganti Chores 
14. Bakuga      36. Garoda, Garo 
15. Balagi      37. Godda 
16. Bandi      38. Gosangi 
1[17. Banjara, Lambani, Lambada, Lambadi,  39. Halleer 
 51
 Lamani, Sugali, Sukali]    40. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar, halasvar 

18. Bathada     41. Handi Jogis 
19. Beda Jangam, Budga Jangam   42. Hasla 
20. Bellara      43. Holar, Valhar 
21. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi,    44. Holaya, Holer, Holeya 
 Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi,    45. Holeya Dasari 
 Balmiki Korar, Zadmalli    46. Jaggali 
22. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi,  47. Jambuvulu 
 Chamadia, Chamar, Chambhar, Chamgar 48. Kadaiyan 
 Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar,  49. Kalladi 
 Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi, Muchi,  50. Kepmaris 
 Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar,  51. Kolupulvandlu 
 Rohidas, Rohit, Samgar    52. Koosa 
 
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I for entry 17 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 23 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 
1[53. Koracha, Korachar]    77. Meghwal, Menghvar 
2[54. Korama, Korava, Koravar]   78.  Moge 
55. Kotegar, Metri     79. Mukri 
56. Kudumban     80. Mundala 
57. Kuravan     81. Nadia, Hadi 
58. Lingader     82. Nalkadaya 
59. Machala     83. Nalakeyava 
60. Madari      84. Nayadi 
61. Madiga      85. Pale 
62. Mahar, Taral, Dhegu Megu   86. Pallan 
63. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Vankar,   87. Pambada 
 Maru-maru-vonkar    88. Panchama 
64. Maila      89. Panniandi 
65. Mala      90. Paaraiyan, Paraya 
66. Mala Dasari     91. Paravan 
67. Mala Hannai     92. Raneyar 
68. Mala Jangam     93. Samagara 
69. Mala Masti     94. Samban 
70. Mala Sale, Netkani    95. Sapari 
71. Mala Sanyasi     96. Sillekyathas 
72. Mang, Matang, Minimadig   97. Sindhollu, Chindollu 
73. Mang Garudi, Mang Garodi   98. Sudugadu Siddha 
74. Manne      99. Thoti 
 52

75. Masthi      100.  Tirgar, Tirbanda 
76. Mavilan`     101.  Valluvan. 
 
                                                                 PART VIII- Kerala 
 
1. Adi Andhra     3[***] 
2. Adi Dravida     10. Bathada 
3. Adi Karnataka     4[*****] 
4. Ajila      5[12. Bharathar (other than Parathar), 
5. Arunthathiyar      Paravan] 
6. Ayyanavar     6[****] 
7. Baira       14. Chakkiliyan 
8. Bakuda      15. Chamar, Muchi 
16. Cha ndala 
 
1. Subs. by Act of 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 53(w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 54  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
3. Entry 9 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I,  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
4. Entry 11 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I,  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
5.. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I for entry 12 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
6. Entry 13 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
 
17. Cheruman     6[37. Mannan, Pathiyan, Perumannan, 
18. Domban      Vannan, Velan] 
1[***]       38. Mavilan 
2[***]               7[39. Moger (other than Mogeyar)] 
2[***]      40. Mundala 
22. Gosangi     41. Nalakeyava 
23. Hasla      42. Nakadaya 
24. Holeya      43. Nayadi 
25. Kadaiyan     8[***] 
2[26. Kakkalan, Kakkan]    45. Pallan 
27. Kalladi      46. Palluvan 
3[28. Kanakkan, Padanna, Padannan]  47. Pambada 
29. Karimpalan     48. Panan 
4[30. Kavara (other than Telugu speaking   9[***] 
 or Tamil speaking Balija, Kavarai,           10[50. Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar, 
 Gavara, Gavarai, Gavarai Naidu,    Sambavan, Sambava, Paraya,  
 Balija Naidu, Gajalu Balija or     Paraiya, Parayar] 
 53
 Valai Chetty]     11[***] 

31. Koosa      11[***] 
32. Kootan, Koodan     11[***] 
33. Kudumban     12[54.  Pulayan, Che ramar, Pulaya, 
Pulayar 
 
 
 
5[34. Kuravan, Sidhanar, Kuravar,     Cherama, Cheraman, Wayanad  
 Kurava, Sidhana]     Pulayan, Matha, Matha Pulayan] 
35. Maila            
36. Malayan [in the areas comprising the   13[***] 
 Malabar district as specified by sub-  56. Puthirai Vannan 
 Section (2) of section 5 of the States  57. Raneva 
 Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956)]  58. Samagara 
       59. Samban 
 
1. Entries 19 to 21 omitted by Act of 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 26  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 28  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 30 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I for entry 34 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I, entry for 37 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
7. Subs. by Act of 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I for entry 39 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
8. Entry 44 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I,  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
9. Entry 49 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I,  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
10. Subs.by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 50  (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
11. Entries 51 to 53 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
12. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I, for entry 54 (w.e.f. 17-12-2002). 
13. Entry 55 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12.2002). 
 
 
1[60.  Semman, Chemman, Chemmar] 
61.  Thandan 
62.   Thoti 
63.   Vallon 
64.   Volluvan 
2[***] 
 
2 [***] 
67. Vetan 
3[68. Vettuvan, Pulaya, Vettuvan (in th e areas 
of erstwhile Cochin State   
only) 
69.  Nerian] 
 54

 
                                                                 PART IX –Madhya Pradesh 
 
1. Audhelia     
2. Bagri, Bagdi  
3. Bahana, Bahana 
4. Balahi, 
5. Audhelia   
6. Barahar  Basod 
7. Bargu nda 
8. Basor, Burud, Ban sor, Banso di, 
Bansphor, Basar 
9. Bedia 
10. Beldar, Sunkar 
11. Bhangi, M ehtar, Bal mikit, Lalb egi, 
Dharkar 
12. Bhanumati 
13. Chadar 
14. Charmar, Chama ri, Bairwa, Bhamb hi, 
Jatav, Mo chi, Reg ar, Nona, Rohid as, 
Ramnami, Satnami, Surjyaba nshi, 
Surjyaramnami, Ahirw ar, C hamar, 
Mangan, Raidas 
15. Chidar 
16. Chikwa, Chikvi 
17. Chitar 
18. Dahait, Dahayat, Dahat 
19. Dewar 
20. Dhanuh 
21. Dhed, Dher 
22. Dhobi (in B hopal, Raise n and Seh ore 
district) 
23. Dohor 
24. Dom, Dumar, Dome, Domar, Doris 
25. Ganda, Gandi 
26. Ghasi, Ghasia 
27. Holiya 
28. Kanjar 
29. Katia, Patharia 
30. Khatik 
31. Koli, Kori 
32. Kotwal (in B hind, Dha r, Dewas, Gu na, 
Gwalior, In dore, Jhabua, Kharg one, 
Mandsaur, More na, Rajgarh, Ratla m, 
Shajapur, Shivpuri, Ujj ain and Vi disha 
districts) 
33. Khangar, Kanera, Mirdha 
34. Kuchbandhia 
35. Kumar (in Chh atarpur, Datia, Panna, 
Rewa, Satn a, Shah dol, Sidhi and 
Tikamgarh districts) 
4[36.Mahar, Mehra, Mehar, Mahara] 
37.Mang, M ang Ga rodi, Mang Ga rudi, 
Dankhani M ang, Ma ng Maha si, Madari, 
Garudi, Radhe Mang  
38. Megh wal 
39. Moghia 
40. Muskha n 
41. Nat, Kalbel ia, Sape ra, Navdi gar, 
Kubutar 
42. Pardhi (in B hind, Dhar, Dewas Gu na, 
Gwazor, Ind ore, Jhab ua, Khargon e, 
Mandsaur, More na, Ra jarh, Ratlam , 
Shajapur, Sh ivpuri, Ujjain  and Vidisha  
districts) 
43. Pasi 
44. Rujjh ar 
45. Sansi, Sansia 
46. Silawat 
47. Zamral 
1[48. Sargaraj 
  
--------------------------------- 
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 60 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 55

2. Entries 65 and 66 omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 68 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 36 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 56

                                                   
                                                           PART X – Maharashtra 
 
1. Anger 
2. Anamu k 
3. Aray Mala 
4. Arwa Mala 
5. Bahna, Bahana 
6. Bakad, Bant 
7. Balahi, Balai 
8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi 
9. Beda, Jangam, Budga Jangam 
10. Bedar  
11. Bhambi, B hambhi, A sadaru, Aso di, 
Chamadia, Chamar, Chamari, Chambhar, 
Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, 
Machigar, Mochi gar, Mada r, Madig, 
Mochi, Tel egu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, 
Ranigar, Rohidas, Nona, Ramnami, Rohit, 
Samgar, Sama gara, Satnami,  
Surjyabanshi, Surjaramnami. 
12. Bhangi, Me htar, Olg ana, Rukhi, Mal kana, 
Halalkhor, Lalbegi, B almiki, Korar, 
Zadmalli 
13. Bindla 
14. Byagara 
15. Chalva di, Channayya 
16. Chenna, Da sar, Holaya  dasar, Holeya 
Dasari 
17. Da kkal, Dokkalwar 
18. Dhor, Kakkayya, Kankayya, Dohor 
19. Dom, Dumar 
20. Ellamalvar, Yellammalawandlu 
21. Gand a, Gandi 
22. Garo da, Garo 
23. gha si, Ghasia 
24. Halle er 
25. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar, Halasvar 
26. Hola r, Valhar 
27. Holaya, Holer, Holeya, Holiya 
--------------------- 
28. Kaikadi (i n Akola, Amra vati, Bhandara,   
Buldana, Nagpur, Wardha and Yavatmal 
districts and Cha ndrapur distri ct, oth er 
than Rajura tahsil) 
29. Katia, patharia 
30. Khangar, Kanera, Mirdha 
31. Khatik, Chikwa, Chikvi 
32. Kolupulvan dlu 
33. Kori 
34. Linga der 
35. Madgi 
36. Madiga 
37. Mahar, Mehra, Taral, Dhegu, Megu 
38. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Vankar, M aru 
Vankar 
39. Mala 
40. Mala Dasari 
41. Mala Hannai 
42. Mala Jangam 
43. Mala Masti 
44. Mala Sale, Netkani 
45. Mala Sanyasi 
46. Mang, Mat ang, Minim adig, Dan khni 
Mang, Ma ng Maha shi, Madari, Ga rudi, 
Radhe Mang 
47. Mang Garodi, Mang Garudi 
48. Manne 
49. Mashti 
50. Meghval, Menghvar 
51. Mitha Ayyalvar 
52. Mukri 
53. Nadi a, Hadi 
54. Pasi 
55. Sansi 
56. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma, Ravat 
57. Sindhollu, Chindollu 
58. Tirga r, Tirbanda 
59. Turi 
1. Ins. By Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17-12-2002).
 57

 
 
                                                         
                                                           PART XI - Manipur 
1. Dhu pi, Dhobi 
2. Lois 
3. Muchi,  Ravidas 
4. Nama sudra 
5. Patni 
6. Sutradh ar 
7. Yaithibi 
 
 
                                                            PART XII-Meghalaya 
1. Bansp hor 
2. Bhuinmali, Mali 
3. Brittial Bania, Bania 
4. Dhu pi, Dhobi 
5. Dugl a, Dholi 
6. Hira 
7. Jal keot 
8. Jahalo, Malo, Jahalo-Malo 
9. Kaibartta, Jaliya 
10. Lalbegi 
11. Mahara 
12. Mehtar, Bhangi 
13. Muchi, Rishi 
14. namasudra 
15. Patni 
16. Sutradhar 
 
 
                                                                 PART XIII-Orissa 
1. Adi Andhra  
1[2. Amant, Amat, Dandachhatra,  
      Majhi] 
2. Audhelia 
3. Audhelia 
4. Badaik 
5. Bagheti, Baghuti 
6. Bajikar 
7. Bari 
8. Bariki 
9. Bas or, Burud 
2[10.Bauri, Buna Bauri, Dasia Bauri] 
11. Bauti 
12. Bavuri 
13. Bedia, Bejia 
14. Beldar 
15. Bhata 
 
16. Bhoi 
17. Chachati 
18. Chakali 
19. Chamar, Mochi, Muchi, Satnami 
20. Chandala 
21. Chandhai Maru 
3[***] 
23. Dandasi 
4[24.Dewar, Dhibara, Keuta, Kaibarta] 
24. Dhanwar 
25. Dhanwar 
26. Dhoba, Dhobi 
27. Dom, Dombo, Duria dom 
28. Dosadha 
29. Ganda 
30. Ghantarghada, Ghantra 
31. Ghasi, Ghasia 
 58

 
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 2(w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 10 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
3. Entry 22 omitted by Act 25 of 2002, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 24 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 
32. Ghogia 
33. Ghusuria 
34. Godagali 
35.  Godari 
36. Godra 
37. Gokha 
38. Gorait, Korait 
39. Haddi, Hadi, Hari 
40. Irika 
41. Jaggali 
1[42. Kandra, Kandara, Kadama] 
43.    Karua 
44.    Katia 
2[45. Kela, Sapua Kela, Nalua Kela, 
Sabakhia Kela, Matia Kela] 
46. Khadala 
47. Kodalo, Khodalo 
48. Kori 
49. Kumm ari 
50. Kurunga 
51. Laban 
52. Laheri 
53. Madari 
54. Madiga 
55. Mahuria 
3[56. Mala, Jhala, Malo, Zala, Malha,  
         Jhola] 
56. Mang 
 
61. Mewar 
62. Mundapotta 
63. Musahar 
64. Nagarchi 
65. nam asudra 
66. Paidi 
67. Painda 
68. Pa midi 
4[69.Pan, Pano, Buna Pana, desua pana] 
70. Pancham a 
71. Panika 
72. Panka 
73. Pantanti 
74. Pap 
75. Pasi 
76. Patial, Patikar, Patratanti, Patua 
77. Rajna 
78. Relli 
79. Sabakhia 
80. Sa masi 
81. Sanei 
82. Sapuri 
83. Sauntia, Santia 
84. Sidhria 
85. Sinduria 
5[86. Siyal, Khajuria] 
87.    Tamadia 
88.    Tamudia 
 59

57. Mang 
58. Mangan 
59. Mehra, Mahar 
60. Mehtar, Bhangi 
 
 
 
89. Tanla 
6[***] 
91. Turi 
92.    Ujia 
93.    Valamiki, Valmiki   
7[94.  Mangali (in Koraput and Kalahandi  
districts. 
95.   Mirgan (in Navrangpur district) 
 
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 42 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 45 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 56 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 69 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I, for entry 86 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
6. Entry 90 omitted by Act 25 of 2002, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 24.5.2002) 
7. Ins. by Act 25 of 2002, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 24.5.2002). 
 60

 
 
                                                             
                                                           PART XIV-PUNJAB 
1. Ad Dharmi 
2. Balmiki, Chura, Bhangi 
3. Bangali 
4. Barar, Burar, Berar 
1[5.      Batwal, Barwala] 
6.  Bauria, Bawaria 
7.  Bazigar 
8.  Bhanjra 
2[9.  Cha mar, Jatia Cha mar, Rehgar, 
Raigar,     Ram dasi, Ravidasi, 
ramdasia, Ra mdasia Sikh, 
Ravidasia, Ravidasia Sikh] 
10.       Chanal 
11. Dagi 
12. Darain 
13. Deha, Dhaya, Dhea 
14. Dhanak 
15. Dhogri, Dhangri, siggi 
16. Dumna, Mahasha, Doom 
17. Gagra 
18. Gandhila, Gandil, Gondola 
 
19. Kabirpanthi, Julaha 
20. Khatik 
21. Kori, Koli 
22. Marija, Marecha 
3[23.    Mazhabi, Mazhabi Sikh] 
24. Megh 
25. Nat 
26. Od 
27. Pasi 
28. Perna 
29. Pherera 
30. Sanhai 
31. Sanhal 
32. Sansi, Bhedkut, Manesh 
33. Sansoi 
34. Sapela 
35. Sarera 
36. Sikligar 
37. Sirkiband 
4[38.   Mochi] 
 
 
 
PART XV. – Rajastjam 
 
1. Adi Dharma 14. Bhangi, Chura, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, 
Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmiki, Valmiki, 
Korar, Zadmalli 
2. Aheri  15 Bidakia 
 61

3. Badi  16. Bola  
4.      Bagri, Bagd                                               17.   Chamar, Bhambhi, Bambhi, Bhambi, Jatia,  
5.       Bairwa, Berwa                                                  Jatav, Jatava, Mochi, Raidas, Rohidas, Regar,     
6.      Bajgar                                                                Raigar, Ramdas, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia,  
7.       Balai                                                                 Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali,  
8.       Bansphor, Banshod                                           Khalpa, Machigai, Mochigar, Majar, Madig,  
9.       Baori                                                                 Telugu, Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, Rohit,  
10.     Bargi, Vargi, Birgi                                            Samgar. 
11.     Bawaria 
12.     Bedia, Beria 
13.     Bhand  
-------------------- 
1.  Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2. and Sch. I, for entry 86 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2002, sec.2 for entry 9 (w.e.f. 24.5.2002). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec.2. and Sch. I, for entry 23 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2002, sec.2 (w.e.f. 24.5.2002). 
 
 
18. Chandal  40. Madari, Bazigar  
19. Dabgar 41. Mahar, Taral, Dhegumegu  
20 Dhanak, Dhanuk 42. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Dheda, Vankar, Maru 
Vankar 
21. Dhankia 43. Majhabi 
22. Dhobi 44. Mang, Matang, Minimadig 
23. Dholi 45. Mang, Garodi, Mang Garudi 
24. Dome, Dom 46. Megh, Meghval, Meghwal, Menghvar 
25. Gandia 47. Mehar 
26. Garancha, Gancha 48. Nat, Nut 
27. Garo, Garura, Gurda, Garoda 49. Pasi 
28. Gavaria 50. Rawal 
29. Godhi 51. Salvi 
 62

30. Jingar 52. Sansi  
31. Kalbelia, Saperia 53. Santia, Satia 
32. Kamad, Kamadia 54. Sarbhangi 
33. Kanjar, Kunjar 55. Sargara 
34. Kapadia Sansi 56. Singiwala 
35. Khangar 57. Thori, Nayak 
36. Khatik  58. Tirgar, Tirbanda 
37. Koli, Kori 59. Turi. 
38. Kooch Band, Kuchband   
39. Koria   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 63

PART XVI.- Tamil Nadu 
 
 
1. Adi Andhra 
2. Adi Drayida 
3. Adi Karnataka 
4. Ajila 
5. Arunthathiyar 
6. Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari 
district and Shnkottah taluk of 
Tirunelveli district) 
7. Baira  
8. Bakuda 
9. Bandi 
10. Bellara 
11. Bharatar (in Kanya kumari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
District) 
12. Chakkiliyan  
13. Chalavadi 
14. Cha mar, Mauchi 
15. Chandala 
16. Cherum an 
17. Devendrakulathan  
18. Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano 
19. Dom ban 
20. Godagali 
21. Godda 
22. Gosangi 
23. Holeya 
24. Jaggali 
25. Jam buvulu 
 
26.     Kadaiyan 
26. Kakkalan (in Kanyakumari district  
and    Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
27. Kalladi 
28. Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris 
district) 
29. Karim palan 
30. Kavara (in Kanyakum ari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
31. Koliyan 
32. Koosa 
33. Kootan, Koodan (in  Kanyakumari 
district and She nkottah taluk of 
Tirunelveli district) 
34. Kudum ban 
35. Kuravan, Sidhanar 
36. Madari 
37. Madiga 
38. Maila 
39. Mala 
40. Mannan (in  Kanyakumari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
41. Mavilan 
42. Moger 
43. Mundala 
44. Nalakeyava 
45. Nayadi 
 64

47. Padannan Padannan (in Kanyakumari  
district and Shenkottah taluk of 
Tirunelveli district) 
48. Pagadai  
49. Pallan 
50. Palluvan 
51. Pa mbada 
52. Panan (in  Kanyakum ari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
53. Pancham a 
54. Pannadi 
55. Panniandi  
56. Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar 
57. Paravan (in  Kanyakumari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
58. Pathiyan (in  Kanyakum ari district 
and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
59. Pulayan, Cheramar 
60. Puthirai Vannan 
61. Raneyar 
 
62. Sa magara 
63. Sa mban 
64. Sapari 
65. Se mman 
66. Thandan (in  Kanyaku mari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
67. Thoti 
68. Tiruvalluvar 
69. Vallon 
70. Valluvan 
71. Vannan (in  Kanyakumari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
72. Vathiriyan 
73. Velan 
74. Vetan (in  Kanyaku mari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
75. Vettiyan 
76. Vettuvan (in  Kanyakumari district and 
Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli 
district) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 65

                                                          
                                                           PART XVII –Tripura 
 
1. Bagdi 
2. Bhui mali 
3. Bhunar 
4. Cha mar, Muchi 
5. Dandasi 
6. Dhenuar 
7. Dhoba 
8. Dum  
9. Ghasi 
10. Gour 
11. Gur 
12. Jalia Kaibarta 
13. Kahar 
14. Kalindi 
15. Kan 
16. Kanda 
17. Kanugh 
18. Keot  
19. Khadit 
20. Kharia 
21. Koch 
22. Koir 
23. Kol 
24. Kora 
25. Kotal 
26. Mahisyadas 
27. Mali 
28. Mehtor 
29. Musahar 
30. Na masudra 
31. Patni 
32. Sabar 
1[33.     Dhuli, Sabdakar, Badyakar] 
1[34.    Natta, Nat] 
 
                                                                 PART XVIII –Uttar Pradesh 
 
1. Agariya 
2. Badhik 
3. Badi 
4. Baheliya 
5. Baiga 
6. Baiswar 
7. Bajaniya 
8. Bajgi 
9. Balahar 
10. Balai 
11. Balm iki 
12. Bangali 
13. Banm anus 
14. Bansphor  
15. Barwar 
16. Basor 
17. Bawariya 
18. Beldar 
19. Beriya 
20. Bhantu 
21. Bhuiya 
22. Bhuyiar 
 66

23. Boria 
24. Chamar, Dhusia, Jhusia, Jatava 
25. Chero 
26. Dabgar 
27.      Dhangar 
28. Dhanuk 
29. Dharkar 
30. Dhobi 
31. Dom  
32. Dom ar 
33. Dusadh 
34. Gharam i 
35. Ghasiya 
36. Gond 
37. Gual 
38. Habura 
39. Hari 
40. Hela 
41. Kalabaz 
42. Kanjar 
43. Kkapariya 
44. Karwal 
 
45.    Khairaha 
46.    Kharwar (excluding Bengansi) 
47.    Khatik  
48.    Khorot 
49.    Kol 
50      Kori 
51.     Korwa 
52.     Lalbegi 
53.     Majhwar 
54.     Mazhabi 
55.     Musahar 
56.     Nat 
57.     Pankha 
58.     Parahiya 
59.     Pasi, Tarmali 
60.      Patari 
61.      Rawat 
62.     Saharya 
63.     Sanaurhiya 
64.      Sansiya 
65.      Shilpkar 
66.      Turaiha 
  
-------------------------- 
1. Ins. By Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 67

                                                            PART XIX – West Bengal 
 
1. Bagdi, Duley 
2. Bahelia 
3. Baiti 
4. Bantar 
5. Bauri 
6. Beldar 
7. Bhogta 
8. Bhui mali 
9. Bhuiya 
10. Bind 
11. Chamar, Charm akar, Mochi, Muchi, 
Rabidas, Ruidas, Rishi 
12. Chaupal 
13. Dabgar 
14. Da mai (Nepali) 
15. Dhoba, Dhobi 
16. Doai 
17. Dom , Dhangad 
18. Dosadh, Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi 
19. Ghashi 
20. Gonrhi 
21. Halalkhor 
1[22. Hari, Mehtar, Mehtor, Bhangi,  
Balmiki] 
23.    Jalia Kaibartta 
24.   Jhalo Malo, Malo 
25.    Kadar 
26.    Kami (Nepali) 
27.    Kandra 
28.    Kanjar 
 
 
29.       Kaora 
30.       Karenga, Koranga Kaur 
31.       Kaur 
32.       Keot, Keyot 
33.       Khaira 
34.       Khatik 
35.       Koch 
36.       Konai 
37.      Konwar 
38.      Kotal 
39.      Kurariar 
40.      lalbegi 
41.      Lohar 
42.      Mahar 
43.      Mal 
44.      Mallah 
45.      Musahar 
46.      Namasudra 
47.      Nat 
48.      Naniya 
49.      Pan, Sawasi 
50.      Paliya 
51.      Pasi 
52.     Patni 
53. Pod, Poundra 
54. Rajbanshi 
55. Rajwar 
56. Sarki(Nepali) 
57. Sunri (excluding Saha) 
58.     Tiyar 
59.     Turi] 
 68

 
 
2[60. Chain (in Malda, Murshidabad, Nadia   
and Dakshin Dinajpur districts] 
------------------------ 
1.         Subs. by Act 25 of 2002, sec. 2  for entry 22 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
2. Ins. By Act 25 of 2002, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 
                        1[PART XX -Mizoram 
1. Bansphor 
2. Bhuinmali or Mali 
3. Brittial-Bania or Bania 
4. Dhupi or Dhobi 
5. Dugla or Dhobi 
6. Hira 
7. Jalkeopt 
8. Jhalo, Malo or Jhalo- Malo 
9. kaibar tta or Jaliya 
10. Lalbegi 
11. Mahara 
12. Mehtar or Bhangi 
13. Muchi or Rishi 
14. Na masudra 
15. Patni 
16. Sutradhar 
 
 
                                                          2[PART XXII – Arunachal Pradesh 
3[***] 
 
                4[PART XXII – Goa 
 
1. Bhangi (Hadi) 
2. Cha mbhar 
3. Mahar 
4. Mahyavanshi (Vankar) 
5. Mang.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 69

 
                                        5[PART XXII -Chhattisgarh 
1. Audhelia 
2. Bagri, Bagdi 
3. Bahna, Bahana 
4. Balahi, Balai       
5. Banchada 
6. Barahar, Basod 
7. Bargunda 
8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, 
Bansphor, Basar 
9. Bedia 
10. Beldar, Sunkar 
11. Bhangi, Mehtar, balm iki, Lalbegi, 
dharkar 
12. Bhanum ati 
13. Chadar 
14. Chamar, Cha mari, Bairwa, 
Bhambhi, Jatav, Mochi, Regar, 
Nona, Rohidas, Ra mnami, 
Satnami, Suryaram nmi, Ahirwar, 
Chamar, Mangan, Raidas 
15. Chidar 
16. Chikwa, Chikvi 
17. Chitar 
18. Dahait, Dahayat,  Dahat 
19. Dewar 
20. Dhanuk 
 
 
21. Dhed, Dher 
22. Dohor 
23. Dom , Dumar, Dome, Dom er, 
Doris 
24. Ganda, Gandi 
25. Ghasi, Ghasia 
26. Holiya 
27. Kanjar 
28. Katia, Patharia 
29. Khatik 
30. Koli, Kori 
31. Khangar, Kanera, Mirdha 
32. Kuchbandhia 
33. Mahar, Mehra, Mehar 
34. Mang, Mang Garodi, Mang 
Garudi, Dankhani Mang, Mang 
Mahasi, Madari, Garudi, radhe 
Mang 
35. Meghwal 
36. Moghia 
37. Muskhan 
38. Nat, Kalbelia, Sapera, Navdigar, 
Kubutar 
39. Pasi 
40. Rajjhar 
41. Sansi, Sansia 
42. Silawat 
43. Zam ral] 
------------------------- 
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1986, sec. 13 and First Sch.  (w.e.f. 20.2.1987). 
2. Ins. by Act 34 of 1986, sec. 13 and First Sch.  (w.e.f. 20.2.1987). 
 70

3. Entries 1 to 16  omitted by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 1987, sec. 19 and First Sch.  (w.e.f. 20.2.1987). 
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 2000, sec. 19 and Third Sch.  (w.e.f. 1.11.2000). 
 
 
 
 
1[PART XXIV -Uttaranchal 
1. Agariy 
2. Badhik 
3. Badi 
4. Baheliya 
5. Baiga 
6. Baiswar 
7. Bajanihya 
8. Bajgi 
9. Balhar 
10. Bala i 
11. Balmik i 
12. Bangali 
13. Banmanus  
14. Bansphor 
15. Barwar 
16. Basor 
17. Bawariy a 
18. Beldar 
19. Beriya 
20. Bhantu 
21. Bhuiya 
22. Bhuyiar 
23. Boria 
24. Chamar, Dhusia, Jhusia,  
Jatava 
25. Chero 
 
33. Dusadh 
34. Dharmi 
35. Dhariya 
36. Gond 
37. Gwal 
38. Habura 
39. Hari 
40. Hela 
41. Kalabaz 
42. Kanjar 
43. Kapariya 
44. Kirwal 
45. Kharaita 
46. Kharwar (excluding Vanwasi) 
47. Khatik 
48. Kharot 
49. Kol 
50. Kori 
51. Korwa 
52. Lalbegi 
53. Majhwar 
54. Mazhabi 
55. Musahar 
56. Nat 
57. Pankha 
58. Parahiya 
 
 71

 
 
26. Dabgar 
27. Dhangar 
28. Dhanuk 
29. Dharkar 
30. Dhobi 
31. Dom 
32. Domar 
 
 
59. Pasi, Tarmali 
60. Patari 
61. Sahariya 
62. Sanaurhiya 
63. Sansiya 
64. Shilpkar 
65. Turaiha] 
 
 72

APPENDIX - II 
 
The CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) 
(UNION TERRITORIES) ORDER, 19511 
(C.O.) 32) 
 
 In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India,  as amended by the Constitut ion (First Am endment) Act,  
1951, the President is pleased to make the following Order, namely:- 
 
1. This Order may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Cas tes) 
2[(Union Territories)] Order, 1951. 
2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, ra ces or tribes or 
parts of, or groups within, cas tes or trib es, specified in 3[Pa rts I to III] of the 
Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the 2[Union territories] to which those 
Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes so far as regard s 
members thereof resident in the localities s pecified in relation to them respectively  
in those Parts of that Schedule. 
 
4[3. Notwithstanding anyt hing cont ained in paragraph 2, no person who 
professes a religion different  from the Hindi 5[the Sikh or the Buddhist] religion 
shall be deemed to be a member of a Scheduled Caste.] 
 
6[4. Any reference in this  Order to a Union territory in Part I of the 
Schedule shall be c onstrued as a reference to  the territory constituted as a Union 
territory as from the first day of November, 1956, any reference to a Union territory 
in part II of the Sc hedule shall be c onstrued as a reference to the t erritory 
constituted as a Union territory in Part III of the Schedule shal l be construed as a 
reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the day appointed 
under clause (b) of section 2 of the G oa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 
1957.] 
 73

 
           1[THE SCHEDULE] 
                                                     PART I –Delhi 
 
 Throughout the Union territory:- 
 
1. Adi Dharmi 
2. Agria 
3. Aheria 
4.     Balai 
5.     Banjara 
6.     Bawaria 
7.     Bazigar 
8.     Bhangi 
9.        Bhil  
10.     Chamar, Chanwar, Chamar,   
           Jatava Jatav Charm, Mochi,   
           Ramdasia, Ravidasi, Raidasi,   
           Rehgarh or Raigar 
11.      Chohra (Sweeper) 
12.      Chuhra (Balmiki) 
13.       Dhanak or Dhanuk 
14.       Dhobi 
15.       Dom 
16.      Gharrami 
17.      Julaha (Weaver) 
18.      Kabirpanthi 
19.      Kachhandha 
 
20.     Kanjar or Giarah 
21.     Khatik  
22.     KoliMadari 
23.     Lalbegi  
24.     Madari 
25.     Mallah 
26.     Mazhabi 
27.     Meghwal 
28.     Naribut 
1[29.  Nat (Rana), Badi] 
30.    Pasi      
31.    Perna 
32.   Sansi or Bhedkut 
33.   Sapera 
34.   Sikligar 
35.   Singiwal or Kalbelia 
36.   Sirkiband 
1. Vide Notification No. C.O. 32, dated 20th September, 1951, published in the 
Gazette of India, Extra, Pt. II, sec. 3, dated 20th September, 1951. 
2. Subs. By the Scheduled castes and Scheduled Tribes Lista (Modification) 
Order, 1956. 
 74

3. Subs. By Act 18 of 1987, sec. 19 and First Sch., for “Parts I to IV” (w.e.f. 30-
5-1987). 
4. Subs. By Act 63 of 1956, sec. 3  
           and Sch. II, for paragraph 3. 
5. Subs. By Act 15 of 1990, sec. 3  
            for “or the Sikh”. 
 
 
2[***] 
3[***] 
                           4[5[PART II] – Chandigarh 
1. Adh Dharmi 
2. Bangali 
3. Barar, Burar or Berar 
4. 6[4. Batwal, Barwala] 
5. Balmiki, chura or Bhangi 
6. Bazigar 
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi 
8. Bhanjra 
9.     Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar,    
        Raigar, Ramdasi or Ravidasi 
10.   Chanal 
11.   Dagi 
12.   Darain 
13.   Dhanak 
 
14.    Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggi 
15.    Dumna, Mahasha or Doom 
16.    Gagra 
17.    Gandhila, or Gandhi Gondola 
18.    Kabirpanthi or Julaha 
19.    Khatik 
20.    Kori or Koli 
21.    Marija or Marecha 
22.    Mazhabi 
23.    Megh 
24.    Nat 
25.    Od 
26.    Pasi 
------------------------- 
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. II, for entry 29 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
2. Part II relating to Himachal Pradesh Omitted by Act 53 of 1970, Sec. 19 and 
Sch. II (w.e.f. 25.1.1971) 
3. Parts III and IV relating to Manipur and Tripura respectively omitted by Act 
81 of 1971, sec. 25 and Sch. III (w.e.f. 27.1.1972) 
4. Added by Act 31 of 1966, sec. 27 and Sch. IX (w.e.f. 1.11.1966) 
5. Part V renumbered as part II by Act 81 of 1971, sec. 25 and Sch. III (w.e.f. 
21.1.1972) 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. II, for entry 4 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 75

 
 
27.   Perna 
28.   Pherera 
29.   Sanhai 
30.   Sanhal 
31.   Sansoi 
 
    32.    Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh 
    33.    Sapela 
    34.    Sarera 
    35.    Sikligar 
    36.    Sirkiband.] 
 
                               1[PART III – Daman and Diu 
 
 Throughout the Union Territory:- 
 
1. Bhangi (Hadi) 
    2[2. Chambhar, Mochi] 
 
 3.   Mahar 
4.    Mahyavanshi (Vankar) 
5.    Mang.] 
---------------------------- 
1. Original Part III relating to Mizoram omitted and Part IV renumbered as Part  
III by Act 3 4 of 1986, sec. 13 and second Sch. (w.e.f. 20.2.1987).  Original 
Part III  relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by Act 69 of 1986, sec.16 and 
Second Sch. (w.e.f. 20.2.1987) and part III in respect of Daman and Diu ins. 
By Act 18 of 1987, sec. 19 and first Sch. (w.e.f. 30.5.1987). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. II, for entry 2 w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
 
 76

 
 
APPENDIX - III 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (JAMMU AND KASHMIR) 
SCHEDULED CASTES ORDER, 19561 
 
(C.O. 52) 
 
  
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India,  the President, afte r consultation with the Sadar-i-Riyasat of 
Jammu and Kashmir,  is pleased to make the following Order, namely:- 
1. This Order may be c alled the Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) 
Scheduled Castes  Order, 1956. 
2.        T his c astes s pecified i n the Sc hedule to this Order shall, for the 
purposes of the constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir: 
Provided that no person, who professes a religion diff erent from the Hindu 
2[, the Sik h or the Buddhis t] religion, shall be deemed to be a member of a 
Scheduled Caste. 
THE SCHEDULE 
1. Barwala 
2. Basith 
3. Batwal 
3[4. Chamar or Ramdasi, Chamar  
Ravidas, Chamar-Rohidas] 
4[5.  Chura, Bhangi, Balmiki, Mehtar] 
   6.  Dhyar 
   5[7.  Doom or Mahasha, Dumana 
 
 
8. Gardi 
9. Jolaha 
10. Megh or Kabirpanthi 
11. Ratal 
12. Saryara 
13. Watal 
 
----------------------- 
1. Vide S.R.O. 3135A, dated 22 nd December, 1956, published in the Gazette 
of India, Extra, Pt. II, Sec. 3, dated 22nd December, 1956. 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1990, sec. 6, for “or the Sikh” (w.e.f. 3.6.1990). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002 sec.2 and Sch III, for entry 4 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002 sec.2 and Sch III, for entry 5 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002 sec.2 and Sch III, for entry 7 (w.e.f. 17.12.2002). 
 77

 
APPENDIX – IV 
THE CONSTITUTION (DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI) 
 SCHEDULED CASTES ORDER, 19621 
(C.O. 64) 
 
 
  
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India,  as amended by the Constitut ion (First Am endment) Act,  
1951, the President is pleased to make the following Order, namely:- 
1. This Order may be called the Co nstitution (Dadra and Nagar Hav eli) 
Scheduled Castes  Order, 1962. 
2.        This castes races or tribes, or parts of, or groups within, castes races 
or tribes specified in the Schedule to this Order Sha ll, for the purposes of the 
Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation  to the Union territory  
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli so far as regards members thereof resident in that 
Union territory: 
Provided that no person, who professes a religion diff erent from the Hindu 
2[, the Sik h or the Buddhis t] religion, shall be deemed to be a member of a 
Scheduled Caste. 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
1. Bhangi 
2. Chamar 
3. Mahar 
3[4.  Mahayavanshi] 
 
---------------------- 
1. Vide G.S.R. 300, dated 30 th June, 1962, publis hed in the Gazette of India,  
Pt. II, Sec. 3, dated 30th June, 1962. 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1990, Sec. 5, for “or the Sikh” (w.e.f. 3.6.1990) 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. IV (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 78

 
APPENDIX - V 
THE CONSTITUTION (PONDICHERRY) 
SCHEDULED CASTES ORDER, 19641 
(C.O. 68) 
 
  
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India,  as amended by the Constitut ion (First Am endment) Act,  
1951, the President is pleased to make the following Order, namely:- 
1. This Order may be c alled the Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled 
Castes  Order, 1964. 
2.        T his castes, races or tri bes, or parts of, or groups within, castes  
races or tribes specified in the Schedule to this Order Shall, for the purposes of the 
Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation  to the Union territory  
of Pondicherry so far as regards members thereof resident in that Union territory: 
Provided that no person, who professes a religion diff erent from the Hindu 
2[, the Sik h or the Buddhis t] religion, shall be deemed to be a member of a 
Scheduled Caste. 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
1. Adi Andhra 
2. Adi Dravida 
3. Chakkiliyan 
4. Jambuvulu 
5. Kuravan 
6. Madiga 
7. Mala, Mala Masti 
8. Paky 
9. Pallan 
10. Parayan, Sambavar 
11. Samban 
12. Thoti 
13. Valluvan 
14. Vetan 
15. Vettiyan 
3[16.  Puthirai Vannan] 
----------------- 
1. Vide G.S.R. 419, dated 5 th March, 1964, publis hed in the Gazette of India, 
Pt.  II, Sec. 3 (i), dated 5th March, 1964. 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1990, Sec. 7, for “or the Sikh” (w.e.f. 3.6.1990) 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 2002, sec. 2 and Sch. V (w.e.f. 17.12.2002) 
 79

APPENDIX - VI 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SIKKIM) 
 SCHEDULED CASTES ORDER, 19781 
 
(C.O. 110) 
 
 
  
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(1) of article 341 of the 
Constitution of India,  as amended by the Constitut ion (First Am endment) Act,  
1951, the President is pleased to make the following Order, namely:- 
1. This Order may be called the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes  
Order, 1978. 
2.        T his castes, races or tri bes, or parts of, or groups within, castes  
races or tri bes specified in the Schedule to  this Order, Shall, for the purposes of  
the Constit ution, be deemed to  be Scheduled Castes  in re lation to the  State of  
Sikkim so far as regards members thereof resident in that State: 
Provided that no person, who professes a religion diff erent from the Hindu 
2[, the Sik h or the Buddhis t] religion, shall be deemed to be a member of a 
Scheduled Caste. 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
1. Damai (Nepali) 
2. Kami (Nepali), Lohar (Nepali) 
3. Majhi (Nepali) 
4. Sarki (Nepali) 
 
------------------------ 
1. Vide G.S.R. 334 (E),  dated 22 nd  March, 1964, published in the G azette of 
India, Extra.,  Pt. II, Sec. 3 (i), dated 22nd June, 19678. 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1990, Sec. 7, for “or the Sikh” (w.e.f. 3.6.1990).    
 
 80

APPENDIX- VII. 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
 
 81
Sl. No.      Para No.                     Recommendations/Observations 
 
1                    2                                               3 
1       2.31 The Committee note that “The Constitution (Scheduled Castes)  
Order (Amendment) Bill, 2006” relates to the amendment  in the 
Scheduled Castes lists of 7 States covering 17 communities.   
The changes proposed are    inclusion of 12   communities as  
synonymous communities; imposition of area restriction for 1 
community, 1 for modificati on and inclusion of 3 new 
communities in the Scheduled Ca stes list .  The Committee 
further note that as per the modalities revised on 2 5, June, 
2002 for deciding claim for inclus ion in, exclusion from and 
other modifications in the or ders specifying Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes  list, all 17 proposals for modification in 
the Scheduled Castes List have been duly processed by the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in consultation with 
the concerned State Government, the Registrar General of  
India and the National Commission for Scheduled Cas tes.  The 
Committee approve the amendments in the Bill in its entirety. 
 
2. 2.32 The Committee note with conc ern that though the test applie d 
for inclusion in the lis t of Scheduled Castes, as stated by the 
Ministry, is “ex treme social , educational and economic  
backwardness arising out of traditional p ractice of 
untouchability, yet the Govern ment have not benchmarked the 
figure des cribing ext reme social, educational a nd economic  
backwardness and have further stat ed that factors like literacy  
rate and per capita income are to be taken as indic ators only 
and not benchmarks. Though the Committee agree with the 
view of the Ministry that the ma in criteria  for inclus ion of a  
community in the Scheduled Castes list is sociological,  
anthropological and ethnographic, which relates to the term  
untouchability yet the Committee are of t he view that in the 
present era of infor mation revolution, the Government should 
have   with them the data highlighting  per capita income as well 
as literacy rate for all communi ties inclu ded in the Scheduled 
Caste list, as well as  of those communities  whic h it plans to 
include in the Scheduled Castes list.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Mini stry not only make available 
with it the data highlig hting literacy rate and per capita income 
but also fix a benchmark fo r deciding extreme social, 
educational and economic back wardness.  By doing so, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the Government would 
be better able to gauge and monitor the social emancipation,  

educational empower ment and ec onomic develo pment of all 
Scheduled Caste communities. 
 
3 2.33 The Committee note with concer n that the Government have 
not given a serious t hought to the ever burgeonin g issue of 
Scheduled Caste migrants and are unhappy with t he present 
situation, which stipulates that a person belonging to Scheduled 
Caste community can avail t he benefits of being a Scheduled 
Caste only in the Stat e of his or igin and not  in the Stat e where 
he migrated to, even though he might have stayed permanently  
at his migrated State for decades.  The Ministry have stated that 
this restriction stems from Arti cle 341 (i) of the constitution, 
which states that a community is State/Union Territory specific.  
The only benefit that a migran t SC can ava il is  that on 
production of the caste certificate of his parents, he or she can 
obtain a caste certificate from the State where they migrated to, 
but cannot avail any  benefits of  being a Schedu led Caste in 
terms of education, employment or any ot her purpos e.   The 
Committee take note the view of t he Ministry that these are the 
provisions of the Constitution which are the restricting factor, yet 
they are of the firm opinion that  keeping in view the prevalent 
ground sit uation, wherein mass migration of population takes  
place from one state to another due to economic factors, a 
change in this policy is paramou nt.  The Committee therefore 
desire that the Government shoul d cons ider the feasibility of  
according benefits to SC migrant s in the State where they have 
migrated to. 
 
4 2.34 The Committee are constrained to note that at the time of 
drafting “The Constitution (Scheduled  Castes) Order 
(Amendment) Bill, 20 06, proce ssing of only 17 propo sals ha d 
been completed as per approved modalities and 53 proposals  
for modification in the list of  Scheduled Castes were pending  
with the office of the Registrar General of India and the National 
Commission for Scheduled Cast es.  Some of these proposals  
are pending with the Registrar G eneral of  India from the year  
1999, 2000 and s o on and wit h th e National Com mission for  
Scheduled Castes from the ye ar 2003, 2005 and 2006. The 
Committee feel that a substantia l amount of time would elapse 
before the Registrar General of  India and National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes clear all t heir pending propos als thus  
enabling the Ministry to draft an other Constitution (Scheduled 
Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill.     The Registrar General of  
India and National Commission for Scheduled Cast es have 
cited the r easons for  delay  be ing due to an in -depth study 
required in deciding whether a community qualifies to be 
included in the Sc heduled Castes list.  The  Committee are not  
at all satisfied at this inordi nate delay  on the part  of the 
 82

 83
Registrar General of India as well as National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes in clearing these proposals and express their 
deep anguish at this sordid state of affairs. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend t hat both the Registrar General 
of India and the National Commission for Scheduled Castes get 
their act together and clear the proposals pending with them 
expeditiously.  The Committee further desire that the 
Government lay down a time frame for the RGI and NCSC to 
give their comments on cases refe rred to them for modification 
in the list of Scheduled Castes  by the Ministry so as to 
overcome this unduly long delay in clearing proposals. 
 
   
   
   
   
 