 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2005-2006) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by  the Government on the R ecommendations/Observations 
contained in the Ninth  Report of the Standing Committee on Soci al Justice 
and Empow erment on the s ubject “W orking of National Minoritie s 
Development and Finance Corporation” (NMDFC) of the  Ministry of Minorit y 
Affairs.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on …3.08.2006….….. 
 
                                Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……3.08.2006………… 
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
18 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2005-2006) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Go vernment on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
on the  sub ject “Working of National Minori ties  Development and Financ e 
Corporation” (NMDFC) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                     
PAGE 
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                 (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….        (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                  1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………               13 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendati ons/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……         26                               
  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..             36 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                43 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 I. List of State Minorities Development and Finance Corporation…     44 
 
II.              State Chan nelising Agencies (SCA) of NMDFC other 
  than Exclusive Minorities Development and Finance 
 Corporation ……………………………………..                     45       
  
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee                            
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 2nd August, 2006…..  47 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                                         
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………               49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri M. Appadurai   
4. Shri Ashok Argal    
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
6. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad   
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal   
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
10. Shri Jual Oram    
11. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon   
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi   
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy  
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj   
15. Dr. R. Senthil    
16. Smt. Pratibha Singh   
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
18. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
19. Smt. Usha Verma    
20. Shri K. Yerrannaidu   
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
21. Shri Silvius Condpan 
22. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
23. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
24. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
25. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
26. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
27. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
28. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
            SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri A.K. Singh           -        Joint Secretary  
 2.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -        Deputy Secretary 
 3.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar   -        Under Secretary 
          4.    Shri Yashpal Sharma  -        Executive Assistant 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eighteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ”Working of 
National  Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC) relating to Ministry 
of Minority  Affairs. 
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
28
th November, 2005.  The Ministry of Minority Affairs furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on  5.4.2006. The Report 
was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on   2
nd August, 2006. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth  Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
August, 2006         Chairperson,  
Sravana, 1928 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
     

REPORT 
CHAPTER -I 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Social Justice and Empowerment  
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Ninth Report of the S tanding 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowe rment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Working of National Minor ities Development and Financ e 
Corporation”(NMDFC) relating to the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
1.2 The Ninth Report was presented to Lok  Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 28 November, 2005.   It contained 29 rec ommendations.  Replies of Government 
in respect of all the r ecommendations have been examined and are categorised as 
under:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been a ccepted by the 
Government: 
 Sl.  Nos. 6, 7, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29. 
(Total 12   - Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not des ire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
Sl.  Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 16, 22 and 23. 
(Total 10 - Chapter III) 
 
 1

(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respec t of which  replies of  the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon 
by the Committee in Chapter I: 
Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 10, 13, 21  and 27.  
(Total 6 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respec t of which replies of  the 
Government are interim in nature: 
  Sl. Nos.   18. 
 (Total 1  - Chapter V)  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes o n the recom mendations 
contained in Ch apter-I and final act ion taken  notes in  respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may  be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in an y case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the Government  
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Data on persons of minority community below double the Poverty Line 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 1, Para No. 1.13) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted with s urprise that the Ministry had so far not got 
conducted any survey to identify the actual  number of potential be neficiaries i.e. the 
minority people liv ing below d ouble the poverty line whic h is the basis  of their  
operations. The reason forwarded that it was not possible for the Ministry to conduct  
 2

such survey in view of the massi ve administrative and financial implications was not 
convincing at all. The Committee had strongly felt that in the absence of accurate 
data of persons below double the pover ty line among the notified minority  
community the basic  objective of Corpor ation i.e. ec onomic development of poor 
sections of minority community woul d not be achieved. The Committee, had 
therefore, recommended that a survey to find out the exact number of persons below 
double the poverty line in each minority community be got conducted either through 
Planning Commission or Nati onal Sample Survey  Organi zation (NSSO) so that 
exact num ber of right  kind of  beneficiaries  could be i dentified and comprehensive 
economic developmental schemes for the we lfare of minority pe rsons living below 
double the poverty line could be formulat ed and tar gets in physical and financial 
terms be achieved expeditiously.  The Committee had also rec ommended that the 
Ministry should set up a Statistical Da ta Collecting Cell to collect and updat e 
authentic data concerning minorities. The steps taken and progress made in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee within three months time. 
 
1.6 The Ministry, in their action taken note have stated that they have requested 
the Planning Commission and National Sample Survey Organization to c onduct a 
survey to find out the number of persons  living below double t he poverty line of 
different minority groups.  A new Ministry of Minority Affairs has been created  by 
Government and a s uitable statistical c ell would be set up as soon as personnel 
become available to the Ministry. 
 3

 
1.7 The Committee are not satisfied with the repl y of the Government that 
they h ave requested the Planning Co mmission and National Sample Surve y 
Organisation (NSSO) to conduct a survey  to find out the number of persons 
living below  double the povert y line of  different minority  groups.  The 
Committee  are con strained to note that even after more than ten years of the 
establishment of the NMDFC,  which implements the w elfare schemes for the 
target groups among minorit y communi ty, the Government did not c onduct 
any survey to find out the number of persons below double the   povert y line 
in each minority  communit y.  Even n ow they  have sim ply requ ested the 
Planning Commission and NSSO to c onduct such survey. The Committee,  
therefore strongly reiterate their earlie r recommendation and request that the 
Planning Commission and NSSO  should be pur sued to conduct the survey 
expeditiously to find out the e xact number of persons living below  double the 
poverty line in each minority communit y so that  the number of right kind of 
beneficiaries could be identified and comprehensive economic developmental 
schemes for their w elfare could be fo rmulated and implemented in a time  
bound manner.  The Committ ee hope that the ne wly created Ministr y of  
Minority Affairs would set up a Statistical Data Coll ecting Cell to collect and  
update authentic data concerning minorities at the earliest. 
 4

B. Survey to assess the impact of welfare schemes of NMDFC 
 
Recommendation ( Sl.  No. 2, Para No. 1.14) 
 
1.8 The Com mittee had further noted wit h dismay the casual r eply of the 
Government relating to the number of per sons who have crossed below double the 
poverty line mark as a result of av ailing the financial as sistance from the 
Corporation, that sinc e income generating assets are created under the schemes it 
is presumed that it help the beneficiaries  in augmenting their in come. The M inistry 
has bluntly replied that no survey has  been undertaken in this regard. The 
Committee had expressed their anguish on t he way in whic h the Minist ry have 
stated about its non-performanc e. It should be the basic obli gation of the Ministry to 
gauge precisely the impact of the spending of the scarce public money for economic 
emancipation of the weaker sections of minorities. T he Comm ittee had, therefore, 
strongly desired that a survey s hould als o be conducted to as sess the number of 
beneficiaries who have crossed below doubl e the poverty line mark and convey the 
findings thereof to the Committee so that the impact of the welfare schemes being 
implemented for the economic  developm ent of mi norities could be as sessed 
properly. 
1.9 In their action taken notes the Minist ry have stated that National Minoritie s 
Development & F inance Corporation (NMD FC) will engage a suitable, qualified 
agency to conduct a survey and assess the impact of this programme.   
 5

 
1.10 The Com mittee had desired that a survey  should be conducted t o 
assess the number  of benef iciaries w ho have crossed b elow double the 
poverty line mark as a result of availi ng the financial assistance from the 
Corporation so that the impact of the welfare schemes being implemented for 
the economic development of minorities could be assessed.  The Ministr y in 
their reply have stat ed that NMDFC w ill engage a suitable qualified agency to 
conduct a survey  and assess the impa ct of this programme.  The Committee 
desire that a suitable agency , to conduct the survey  about  the number of 
beneficiaries w ho have actual ly been b enefited by various w elfare schemes 
and thereby crossed below double the pover ty line and also to assess impact 
of the programme, w ill be engaged by  the Cor poration s oon, as it w ould 
enable it to modify  the futur e progr ammes/policies for the w elfare of the 
targeted groups accordingly. 
 
C.  Authorised Share Capital 
Recommendation Sl.  No. 10 Para No. 2.8) 
 
1.11 The Com mittee had been appraised that  the authorized shar e capital of 
NMDFC has been increased from  Rs. 500 crore to Rs. 650 crore. The share of  
Government of India has been increased  from 60% to 65% and the share of 
individuals has been reduced from 14% to  9%. The Committee had however, noted 
with concern that a large num ber of States have n ot contributed their shar e to the 
share capital of NMDFC due to financial constraints and t here is nil contribution on 
the part of groups / individuals which results in lesser allocation of funds to the  
 6

States for the welfare schemes for uplif tment of minorities. T he Committee had 
therefore, recommended that  the State Governments may be persuaded vigorously  
to bear their responsibility of contributing their share to the equity of NMDFC and get 
their full share from the Co rporation so that financial assistance could be made 
available to the minority community to the maximum extent. The Committee had also 
desired that the minority organiz ations / gr oups / individua ls may be persuaded to 
contribute their share in the authorized share capital of NMDFC. 
 
1.12 In their action taken note furnished to  the Committee the Ministry have stated 
that National Minorities Development & Finance Corpor ation has been regularly  
persuading to public  to invest  in its e quity.  However, National Minorities 
Development & Finance Cor poration will make a concer ted attempt to persuade 
individuals, and groups to contribute to its equity.  
 
1.13 The Com mittee are not convinced w ith the repl y of the Ministry  that 
National Minorities Develop ment & Fina nce Co rporation has been regularl y 
persuading the public to invest in its e quity and will make a concerted attempt 
to persuade individuals and groups to contribute to its equity.  The Committee 
had noted w ith concern that a large number of States are not  able to 
contribute their share to the share cap ital of NMDFC due to their financial 
constraints and there w as nil contribut ion on the part of groups/individuals  
which result into lesser allocation of f unds for Minority Welfare Schemes. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their ear lier recommendation that the Ministr y 
should persuade the State Governments in the right earnest to bear their  
 7

responsibility and contribute their share to the share capital of NMDFC so that 
they co uld avail financial assistance to  the maximum extent.  The minorit y 
organizations / groups / individuals ma y also be persuaded emphatically  t o 
contribute their shar e to the authorized share capital of NMDFC so th at they 
could get the maximum financial assistance from the Corporation. 
 
D. Term Loan Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 13, Para No. 3.36) 
 
1.14 The Committee were not happy  to note th at statewise allocation of funds to 
States like Haryana, Maharashtra, Mizora m, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh hav e been 
reduced c onsiderably during the last thre e years. T he reason put forth by the 
Ministry was that the allocations were based on the performance of respective SCAs 
during the last year with regard t o drawal of funds, their utilizat ion, repayment etc. 
The Committee were not convinced with the arguments that those SCAs which were 
not able to  draw and utilize fun ds get lesse r allocation in the suc ceeding years as 
the ultimate losers were the persons liv ing below pov erty line. The Committee had 
therefore recommended that Mini stry should allocate suffici ent funds to the States  
for effective implementation of minority welfare schemes so that beneficiaries do not 
suffer for want of funds. The Committee had fu rther desired that the Central Minister 
should conduct periodical meetings with th e State Ministers to review and monitor 
the imple mentation and also ut ilization of funds given to  the States for various  
minority welfare schemes.  
 8

 
1.15 In their action taken note furnish ed to the Committee, the Government hav e 
stated that the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been conducting 
periodic review meeting with the State Governments at various levels, including 
annual conference of State Secretaries dealing with Minority Welfare.  Now, Ministry 
of Minority Affairs will attempt to strengt hen the monitoring mecha nism as soon as 
adequate personnel become available.   
 
1.16 The Com mittee had recomm ended that  the Ministr y should allocate 
sufficient funds to t he States for eff ective implementation of minority  welfare 
schemes and the concerned Union Mi nister should conduct periodical 
meetings w ith State Ministers to revi ew and monitor the implementation of 
schemes. The Com mittee are not satisfied w ith the stereotyp e repl y of the 
Ministry that they  have been conduct ing periodic revie w meeting w ith the  
State Governments at various levels,  including annual con ference of State  
Secretaries dealing with Minority Welfare.  The Committee feel that due to non-
performance and lack of initiatives, the SCAs do  not fully  utilize the funds 
allocated for the minority  welfare schemes which results in lesser allocations 
in the su cceeding years.  T hus, the ul timate looser remains the target 
beneficiaries. In the opinion of th e Committee a thorough anal ysis of the 
present monitoring mechanism of vari ous welfare schemes being und ertaken 
by the Ministr y should be done.  The  Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that sufficient funds should be allocated to   
States   and   ensure  that   funds  allocated   as  such  under   various   welfare  
 9

schemes are full y utilized so that flow  of funds may  continue y ear after year.  
The Committee also  desire that the concerned Union Minister should conduct 
periodical meetings w ith the State Ministers to review and monitor the  
implementation and also utilization of funds allocated to States under various 
schemes.  
 
E. Procedure for Availing Financial Assistance 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 21, Para No. 3.44) 
 
1.17 The Com mittee had recommended that the Corporation s hould evolve a 
common platform for computerization of acti vities of SCAs and NGOs and assist in 
development of unif orm website for al l SCAs and NGOs working for the 
implementation of minority welfare schemes. 
 
1.18 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated 
that NMDFC has already launched its ow n webs ite. As far as the SCAs are 
concerned, they are being reimbursed expenses for making their websites as well as 
computerizing their offices. 
Some States like Andhra Pradesh and  West Bengal have already set up their 
websites. 
 
1.19 The Com mittee have been  info rmed that as far as the SCAs are 
concerned, they are being reimbursed expenses for making their w ebsites as 
well as computerizing their offices.  The Committee express their concern as 
only  two States  viz  Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal have so far set up their  
 10

websities.  The Committee, therefor e, urge the Ministry to expedite 
computerization of  the activit ies o f SCAs/NGOs working f or the 
implementation of minority welfare schemes and also persuade other States to 
set up their own websites at the earliest.   
 
 
F. Awareness Generation Programmes  
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 27, Para No. 5.7) 
1.20 The Committee had noted that organizi ng awareness camps were essential 
publicity measures for gener ating awareness among the beneficiaries about the 
measures being undertaken by the Corporat ion for the welfare of minorities and 
promoting the activities of  SCAs. No doubt the Governm ent had t aken initiative b y 
conducting awarenes s camps in various par ts of the country. B ut, the Committee 
were of the opinion that public ity of t he Corporation’s welfare schemes should be 
undertaken more vigorously through electroni c media like T V, Radio Channels  and 
publishing advertisements in  newspapers in  local la nguages. The br ochures /  
pamphlets giving details of the schemes should be distributed at Talukas / Gram  
Panchayats levels for the benefit of benef iciaries. The Committee had als o desired 
that the SCAs and non-government organizations should take initiative by organizing 
‘Samwad Programmes’ frequently in all the Districts / Talukas to interact with the 
beneficiaries, hear their grievanc es and take remedial measures . The Committee 
hoped that these steps would certainly he lp in promoting and implementing the 
schemes of NMDFC more effectively. 
 
 11

1.21 In their action taken note, the Minist ry have stated that National Minorities 
Development & Finance Corporation is unde rtaking publicity measures through the 
electronic media and publishing in the newspapers / magazines / pamphlets from 
time to time. 
 
1.22 The Com mittee observe that  no con crete steps have been taken to 
distribute the brochures/pamphlets  at Talukas/Gram Panchayats levels  to the 
beneficiaries.  The M inistry in t heir action taken repl y have si mply stated that 
NMDFC is undertaking publicit y measur es through the electronic media and 
publishing in the new spapers/magazines/pamphlets from tim e to time.  In the 
opinion of the Co mmittee unless the St ate Ch annelising Agencies/NGOs 
directly interact with the beneficiaries at Talukas/Gram Panchayats levels, they 
will not be successful in generating awareness among the beneficiaries to the 
desired extent.  The committee, therefor e, reiterate  that  State Channelising  
Agencies/NGOs should distribute brochures/pamphlets   in local langu ages at 
Talukas/Gram Panchay ats levels and also organize  ‘Samw ad Programmes’ 
frequently in all the Districts / Talukas so that poor minority beneficiaries, who 
are living below  double the povert y line and do not know  about the various 
welfare schemes, could avail the benefits of schemes. 
 12

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 6, Para No. 1.31) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that Gr ants-in-aid is given in the form of interest free 
loan to NGOs for formation of Self Help  Groups having minority members and micro 
credit is given to the existing Minority Self Help Grou ps irrespective of the fact that 
they have been promoted out of NMDFC fi nancial assistance or otherwise. The 
release of  funds depend upon the proposal s received. However, it has been 
observed that in Gujarat no NGO proposal  was sanctioned during the year 2003-04. 
Similar is the case of Haryana, Kerala, Manipur and Uttaranchal. In general it can be 
said that s ome NGOs dealing with minoritie s are not active in some States. The 
Committee also find that as NGOs were no t having sufficient exclusive Minority Self  
Help Groups, the rel ease of funds / Grants-in-aid has declined considerably. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the NGOs of proven identity may be encouraged to 
form Minority Self Help Groups, send proposals for sanction of loan and disburse the 
loans to the minorities benefic iaries for various inc ome generating activities. The 
Committee also des ire that in  States where the perform ance of State Channelis ing 
 13

Agencies are not satisfactory, the NMDFC welfare schemes may also be carried out 
through NGOs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 National Minorities Development & Finance Corporation has been advised to 
act as per the recommendation,  after ident ifying NGOs of impeccable credentials  
and proven track record. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 7, Para No. 1.32) 
2.3 The Committee find that the State C hannelising Agencies are competent to 
sanction a loan upto Rs. 50,000 only whereas the maximum loan limit is Rs. 5 lakhs. 
As a res ult the State Chann elising Agencies have  to refe r the loan applic ations / 
proposals of more than Rs. 50,000/- to the Corporation for sanction which results in 
undue delay and makes the procedure cumbersome and lengthy. It discourages the 
enterprising youth who fulfill the other criteria for availing s uch loans. T he logic  
forwarded by the Ministry that better coor dination is being ensured through frequent 
visits by the officials of NM DFC is not justified as they too cannot sanction the lo an 
beyond Rs. 50,000/- on the spot. Therefor e, the Committee des ire that State 
Channelising Agencies shoul d be empowered to sanction the loan upto Rs. 2.00 
lakhs. The Committee also recommend t hat for proper coordination and for  
sanctioning loan beyond Rs. 2.00 lakhs separate Regional Offices for Northern, 
Southern, Western and Easter n regions in the country may be establish ed at the 
 14

earliest. The necessary required sta ff for the Regional Offices may be got  
sanctioned and posted there to carry out the work smoothly. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 NMDFC has already increased the sanctioning power of SCAs for unit cost of 
project from Rs. 50,000.00 to Rs. 1.00 lak h. Beyond Rs. 1.00 lakh to Rs. 5.00 lakhs,  
the SCA is required to send a model schem e for one time approval. Once approval 
is given for  a particular project, the same is applicable for that type of scheme.  In 
view of the above, expansion of field netwo rk of National Minorities Development & 
Finance Corporation does not appear to be necessary. Besides, it would increas e 
the cost of funds of the National Minorities Development & Finance Corporation and 
make its schemes less attractive to the eligible category.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 14, Para No. 3.37) 
 
2.5 The Committee are constrained to note that Margin Money Loan Scheme has 
not been s uccessful and the be neficiaries are not avai ling loan under the scheme 
due to inherent problems. T he beneficiaries under the schem e have to interact with 
two agencies i.e. the banks and the SCAs which the benefic iary find cumbersome. 
From the financia l year 1997-98 till n ow, except in 19 98-99, no SCA has a vailed of 
the Margin Money Loan. The Committee fu rther note that similar as sistance 
available t o the beneficiaries under Te rm Loan Scheme. Thus, the Corporation is 
actively c onsidering winding up of this  Scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the existing scheme may be replaced by introducing a new scheme 
 15

exclusively for women and phys ically handicapped persons liv ing below double the 
poverty line in minority community to devel op self-reliance by facilitating easy credit 
to the beneficiaries for setting up viable econ omic activities. Under the Scheme loan 
upto Rs. 25,000/- may be made available to the beneficiaries at a comparatively low 
rate of interest on easy installm ents and the scheme may be implemented through 
Self Help Groups / NGOs in the States. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 NMDFC has already  a scheme viz, Mi cro Financing, primarily focused at 
women be neficiaries with lo wer rate of in terest on loans upto Rs. 25,000/-.  The 
Margin money scheme has not been succ essful and nobody is av ailing this scheme 
at present..  National Minorities  Deve lopment & Finance Co rporation has been 
advised to wind up this scheme.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 15, Para No. 3.38) 
 
2.7 The Committee find that Micro Financ ing Scheme envisages micro credit to 
the poorest among the poor through selec ted NGOs of proven bonafide and their  
network of Self Help Groups to ensure quick delivery of l oan at the doorsteps of the 
beneficiaries with a c onstant follow up. Also financial assistanc e in the f orm of 
Interest Free Loan is  provided t o NGOs for promotion of Self  Help  Groups. Th e 
maximum amount of loan under the Interest Free Loan Scheme is Rs. 2.15 lakhs for 
promotion of 50 SHGs comprising of about 1000 members. The Committee als o 
note that Grants-in-aid given to NGOs for promotion of SHGs has considerably been 
 16

reduced from Rs. 21.7 lakhs in 2001-02 to Rs. 5.18 lakhs and Rs . 7.08 lakhs during 
the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively . As t he NGOs were not having 
sufficient exclusive minority Self Help Gr oups, interest free loan has been availed of 
by NGOs in 13 States only so far. The Committee recommend that the NGOs in all 
the States may be encouraged to send proposals for interest free loan for promoting 
Self Help Groups in their respective Stat es so that the benefits of Micro F inancing 
Schemes could reach to the poorest of poor beneficiaries in minority community. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 NMDFC has launched the Micro Financ ing Scheme in the year  1998. At that 
time, minority self help groups were not avail able. Therefore, scheme of interest free 
loan for promotion of minority self help groups was introduced. Over a period of time, 
sufficient number of minorit y self help groups, promoted under various programmes 
of the Govt. of India have been available. Therefore, sufficient number of minority 
self help groups are now available for providing micro finance. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 17, Para No. 3.40) 
 
2.9 The Committee find that Mahila Samri dhi Yojana has been introd uced by the 
Corporation during the year  2002-03 linking Micro-credi t with training to women 
formed into Self Help Groups in the trades such as tailoring,  cutting & embroidery or  
 17

any other women friendly trade. The Scheme is mainly implemented through NGOs. 
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that only 320 women beneficiaries 
have been trained under t he sc heme and 5 Self He lp Groups have b een formed 
after getting training so fa r. Besides, the scheme has been im plemented in eight  
States only. Consideri ng that under the Mahila  Samridhi Yojana women 
beneficiaries get training in wom en friendl y trades followed by micro-credit to the 
women members of Self Help Groups, the Committee recommend that necessary  
measures may be taken to popularize the scheme through print and electronic 
media and implement the Scheme in all the States / UTs so that a large number of 
women could avail the benefit of the scheme and get micro-credit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 NMDFC will make efforts to popularize the scheme so that a larger number of 
women can avail the benefits of the scheme. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
 
 18

Recommendation (Sl.  No. 19, Para No. 3.42) 
2.11 The Committee find that for taking l oan the beneficiaries have to go through 
several procedural for malities like submission of proposals for lo an, executing loan 
agreement deed, mortgage deed for the fi xed a ssets, arrangement of security of  
loan etc. Also for availing loan of more than Rs. 50,000/- sanction from the 
headquarters is required. For completion of  all these formalities procedural dela y 
occurs and the beneficiaries have to spend a lot of time and energy. In the opinion of 
the Committee, for a scheme to succeed loan has to be sanc tioned as f ast as 
possible. The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that procedure fo r sanction of loan 
may be simplified and Zonal Offices of the Co rporation may be established in all the 
States with powers to sanction loan of more than Rs. 50,000/-. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 To expedite loan sanc tion, National Minorities Development  & Financ e 
Corporation  (NMDFC) has already increa sed the sanctioning power of the SCAs  
from Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 1.00 lakh. Besides, NMDFC is planning to prepare a shelf of 
project profiles, based on which SCAs ’ would sanction loans to beneficiaries. As the 
sanctioning power has  been incr eased for the State Channelising Agencies, it may 
not be necessary to have Zonal Offices in States.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 20, Para No. 3.43) 
2.13 The Committee note that State Channelisin g Agencies insist for guarantee of 
loan exceeding Rs. 10,000/- fr om a Government servant. Al so collateral security on 
account of property can be provided by the loanee or by his guarantor. However, the 
 19

Committee find that the beneficiaries face a great difficulty in arranging guarantee for 
availing the loan. Therefore,  to obviate the difficulties of the beneficiaries, the 
Committee strongly recommend that guarant ee from income tax payee may also be 
accepted by the Corporation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Ministry agrees to this proposal and suitable directions will be give n to 
the SCAs by the NMDFC. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 24, Para No. 4.14) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that in some States repayment of loan by SCAs from the 
beneficiaries is below 50%. Inspite of the fact several steps have been taken by the 
Government to recover the loan, the pos ition seems to have not improved. The 
Committee desire that while disbursing l oans to the benefic iaries SCAs should 
invariably issue repayment schedule to the benefic iaries. Als o Loan Recovery  
Saptah / Loan Rec overy Andolan should be organized regularly by the State 
Channelising Agencies once in three mont hs and defaulters may be persuaded to 
repay the outstanding instalments early. The beneficiaries who pay the loans in time 
should be given rebat e in interest on loan in stalments. The States  should also be 
persuaded to gear up its recovery machi nery and strict action should be taken 
against the defaulters. 
 
 20

Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Ministry agrees t o the recommendat ions and nec essary instructions will 
be issued to the respective SCAs by the NMDFC. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 25, Para No. 4.15) 
 
2.17 The Committee also note that  there is  no provis ion of exempting loan of 
beneficiaries in cas e of causalities lik e death of the beneficiary  due to illness or 
accident or losses  due to natur al calamiti es. The Committee feel that in case of  
death of the beneficiary the fa mily is  put to great diffi culty and repayment of loan 
becomes doubtful. The Com mittee, ther efore, recommend that a Contingency  
Reserve Fund may be created by the National Co rporation to provide relief in such 
cases by waiving of loans given to the beneficiaries. The SCAs may also be required 
to contribute a nominal amount to the Contingency Reserve Fund. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Ministry agrees  with the reco mmendation and action will be taken 
accordingly by the NMDFC. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 21

 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 26, Para No. 4.16) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that a large s egment of minoritie s are engaged in craft  
activities. The craftsmen manufacture a lot of articles. However, the weakest link for 
the minority craftsmen is marketing. The Committee feel that the ‘marketing’ of 
products manufactured by craftsmen needs a very careful look as they cannot create 
a market of their own f or their products. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
for providing marketing support to benefic iaries, NMDFC in coll aboration with State 
Channelising Agencies, Stat e level  Handicraft and hand loom Corporations and 
other should take necessary steps to crate markets for their products. The 
Committee feel that if the local beneficiaries are linked to the cooperatives existing in 
the localities or the places where the community marketing is organized, it can prove 
very useful for them. Financ ial assistanc e and training should also be given to 
craftsmen for design development, skill upgradation and quality control so that their 
products could meet the international standards and their products could find a place 
in global market. The Committee also re commend that ample opportunities should 
be provided for participation of craftsmen i n national as well as internation al fairs, 
exhibitions and buyers-sellers meets so that  they could display  their artifacts and 
products in a bigger way and find a good market for their products. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20 The Minist ry agree with the recomm endations of the  Standing Committee. 
While mak ing the annual alloc ations, ever y SCA is being alloc ated targets for 
organization of market exhibitions. NMDFC already participates in a large number o f 
 22

national, international & State level exhibitions wh ere minority craftsmen ar e 
encouraged to sell their products. NMDF C has an ongoing scheme for marketing 
support, design dev elopment support of the artisans. The National Minorities 
Development & Finance Corporation is being advised to further strengthen its efforts 
regarding marketing. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 28, Para No. 5.8) 
 
2.21 The Committee are constrained to note that NMDFC reviews the performance 
of SCAs by way of periodical reports re ceived form SCAs but reports from some 
SCAs are not received in time resulting in delay in disbursement of loans. Also some 
shortcomings like delay in acquiring of assets, quality of beneficiaries , 
misappropriation of funds et c. are generally f ound during the inspections. The 
Committee also find that ev aluation study of NMDFC pr ogramme was c onducted in 
2000-01 through India Social Institute, New Delhi. Recently a study titled “Evaluation 
of Micro Financ ing Scheme of National Minorities Development and Finance 
Corporation of the beneficiari es of Muslim minorities in Sout h India” has been 
assigned to Noble Social and Educatio nal Societ y, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh.  
However, the Committee is of the opinion t hat monitoring of the schemes of NMDFC 
is done in a piecem eal manner and not r egularly. The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that a  Monitoring Committee may be set up in the Ministry to monitor 
the implementation of welfare schemes in a mor e concentrated and focused 
manner. The Ministry should also strengt hen its  monitoring mechanism  at both 
 23

Central as well as State levels and s hould send the inspecti on teams frequently to 
see how far the welfare schemes are bei ng implem ented particularly in minority 
concentrated and remote areas. The Moni toring Committee meetings sh ould be 
conducted regularly to look  into the problems being fac ed by the beneficiaries and 
SCAs in implementation of the schemes  and take remedial measures. The 
Committee hope that evaluation study being ass igned to Noble Soc ial and 
Educational Society, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh may be completed soon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22 The Ministry accepts the recomm endation that evaluation of programmes 
should be systematic and monito ring should be regular and focused.  This will be 
done as soon as the new Ministry gets adequate personnel.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 29, Para No. 5.9) 
 
2.23 The Committee also recommend that t he Ministry should develop a software 
and make available details of beneficiaries, their addresse s, amount of loan given, 
purpose for which the loan is sanctioned etc . on the internet for information and use 
of beneficiaries and others.  
 
 24

Reply of the Government 
2.24 The National Minorities Develo pment & Finance Corporation has been 
advised to take steps to develop such a data bank  and put it on the website t o 
improve transparency of its operation.  This will be done in a phased manner.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
 
 
 25

CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 3, Para No. 1.15) 
3.1 The Committee find that at present families having annual income of less than 
Rs. 40,000 in rural areas and Rs. 55,000 in urban areas are categorized as belo w 
the poverty line. The poverty line criter ia was revised during the year 2000-2001. 
The poverty line criteria is based on cons umption level in rural as well as urban 
areas. The Committee als o note that the M inistry have not given any s uggestion to 
the Planning Commission for further revi sing the poverty line limit, reasons being 
that funding and not the inc ome ceiling ar e the major constraints in expanding the 
activities of the Corporation. The  Committee do not  agree with this plea of the 
Government. Keeping in view  the rising price index and higher cost of liv ing, the 
Committee recommend that the poverty line crit eria in rural areas as we ll as urban 
areas may be further revised and more funds  be made available to the Corporation 
so that maximum number of persons in minority community could get the benefit of  
welfare schemes.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 As and when the need arises due to rise in price index and higher cost of 
living, the Planning Commission undertakes a re vision of the poverty line.  The las t 
 26

poverty line was revised during the year 2 000-01.   A  reference will be made to the 
Planning Commission. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 4, Para No. 1.29) 
 
3.3 The Committee find that State Channe lising Agencies are the main link s 
between t he benefic iaries and the Corp oration. These agencies hav e been 
conferred with the res ponsibility to identific ation of beneficiaries,  seeking s anctions, 
receiving funds and ultimately disbursing  them to the benefic iaries. The Committee 
however, are constrained to note that so me State Channelisin g Agencies are not  
utilizing the full amount of funds d isbursed to them because of work structure of the  
SCAs. Also some st ates like Arunachal  Pradesh and Goa hav e not nominated the 
State Channelising Agencies so far. The Committee further note that the 
recommendation of the Minority  Commission for setting up a separate Commission  
in each St ate have not been fully implement ed. There are some States like Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Him achal Prad esh etc. where there ar e Minorities Development 
Corporations which are active as Stat e Channelising Agencies whereas in  States 
like Assam it is  not functional though the Corporation exists there. The Committee 
are not happy with this situation. Since the S CAs are the mai n li nks betw een the 
beneficiary and the Corporation and their objec tive is to make funds available for 
upliftment of the poor minor ity beneficiaries, the Commi ttee recommend that the 
work structure of the SCAs should be strengthened and some norms  should be laid  
 27

down to staffing system in the SCAs. The State Channelising Agencies may be 
permitted to create their own infrastructure, recruit their own sta ff and some officials 
of the SCAs be deputed in each district to carry out their designa ted task effectively 
and efficiently. For this purpose funds to m eet the expenditure could be provided by 
the Center as well as State Governments in a proportionate manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 National Minorities Development & Finance Corpor ation (NMDFC) has been 
advised to seek appropriate appr ovals to engage a suitable consultant to wor k out 
an ideal deliv ery mechanism and suitable staffing  structure for the  state 
channelising agencies. 
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 5, Para No. 1.30) 
 
3.5 The Committee also desire that the Ministry should pursue vigorously with the 
State Governments to nominat e State Channelis ing Agencies in States where the y 
do not exist. Instead of working on adhoc  basis through other Corp orations in some 
States, the Committee also desired that the State Governments may be pursued to 
implement the recommendati on of the Minority Commissi on regarding set ting up of  
the Minority Development Corporation in their respective States. 
 28

Reply of the Government 
3.6 Nearly all major States have set up St ate Minority Development Corporation.  
A list is enclosed.  Kerala  does not have a Minority Deve lopment Corporation, but it 
has three channelising agencies that are functioning satisfactorily. 
 
3.7 As far as States that are not having a channelising agencies, it is for the State 
Govt. to take a dec ision in this r egard.  So me of the State Govts. might not find it  
viable to set up a corporation in view of the small s ize and population of the eligible 
minority beneficiaries.    The States which have not s et up such corporations have 
been advised suitably.   
 
3.8 Some States like Goa have declined to set up a corporation or see k 
assistance from  the National Minorities Development & Finance Corporation as they 
are of the opinion that their minority populat ion is alr eady at par with the majority 
community.  List of St ate Minorities Dev elopment & Finance Co rporation and State 
Channelising Agency (SCA) of NMDFC are enclosed in Annexure-I and Annexure-II. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 8,  Para No. 1.33) 
 
3.9 The Committee express its serious conc ern over the fact that the Managing 
Directors of State Channelis ing Agen cies who are deput ed by the State 
Governments are frequently transferred as  it leads to interruption in the 
implementation of NMDFC prog rammes. Also staff of va rious SCAs are br ought on 
deputation from other organizations and are frequently withdrawn by their respective 
departments.  It is also found  that Managing Directors in some States get  additional 
 29

 charge of the Channelis ing Agencies and t hus they c ould not take interest to the 
required extent resulting in unsatisfac tory functioning of State Channelis ing 
Agencies. The Com mittee, t herefore, desire that the Mi nistry should tak e up the 
matter with the State Governments to refr ain from frequent transfer of respective 
Managing Directors and other staff of State Chan nelising Agencies and ensure that 
the Managing Directors  are posted to SCAs on full time basis having fixed term.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.10 The transfer and posting of staff of  State Channelising Agencies is the 
prerogative of the respective State Govt.  However, the Ministry would request the 
State Governments to avoid fr equent transfer of officers  managing SCAs  and give 
them security of tenure for effective functioning of its agencies. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 9, Para No. 1.34) 
 
3.11 The Committee also find that the sanc tioned staff strength of NMDFC is  69 
whereas only 34 pos ts have been filled. T he reason given by the Ministry  for not  
filling up the vacant posts in view of austeri ty measures is not convinc ing in view of  
the mandate and expanding activiti es of the Corporation. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Mi nistry should take up the matter of recruitment of 
sanctioned staff of N MDFC with the Ministry of Finance ur gently to ensure smooth 
 30

functioning of the Corporation and effect ive implem entation of minority welfare 
schemes.  
Reply of the Government 
 
3.12 The Minist ry will e xamine the above pr oposal in c onsultation with  the   
Ministry of Finance. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 11 Para No. 2.9) 
 
3.13 The Committee find that the budgetary allocation to NMDFC was Rs. 24.00 
Crore during the year 2002-2003 which was reduced to Rs. 17.16 crore during 2003-
2004 at RE stage. T hough the BE for the year 2004- 2005 has been ra ised to Rs.  
71.29 crore, the allocation for the year 2005-06 has been made Rs. 19.60 crore only. 
Considering economic and dev elopmental activities  of the Cor poration and also 
keeping in view the large number of pot ential beneficiaries  in the minority 
community, the Committee, feel that the b udgetary allocation to the Corporation is 
awfully les s. The Committee,  therefore, recommend that  the funds alloc ated to 
NMDFC may be enhanced s ubstantially to enab le the Corporation to implement its 
schemes effectively and also t o further ex pand its activities for the welfare of 
minorities. 
 31

 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.14 The Centr al Govt. released 73.65 crores in the y ear 2004-05 and the 
budgetary alloc ation is Rs. 25.00 crores in  2005-06. The budget for the next ye ar 
2006-07 is  18.29 crores. Thoug h a demand for Rs. 57 crores  for equity  support 
during 2006-07 was made by t he Ministry the budget provision is Rs. 18.29 crores 
only.  The appropriate authorities are being requested to enhance the equity to meet 
the strategic requirement of NMDFC. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 12, Para No. 3.35) 
 
3.15 The Committee note that the main activity of NMDFC is to provide Term Loan 
to the beneficiaries through State Channelis ing Agencies. The Corporation gives  
need based loans to beneficiaries upto Rs. 5 lakhs. However, the Committee is  
constrained to note t hat the number of beneficiaries who got loan upto Rs . 5 lakh is  
negligible. The main reason for not getting loan of Rs. 5 lakhs is that the State 
Channelising Agencies do not encourage peop le to go beyond Rs. 50,000/- as for 
projects above that limit they have to go to headquarters. The reason c ited by t he 
Ministry is that a person who is below double the poverty line normally does not think 
in terms of taking a loan of Rs. 5 lakh is not  convincing at all. In the opinion of the 
Committee there may be some enterprising youths in the minority community who 
fulfill the criteria laid down for availing loan upto Rs. 5 lakhs. They should not only be 
 32

encouraged but also be given some incentive to avail of this facility so that they may 
set up their own ventures and cross the figure of the double below the poverty line.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.16 As has been mentioned earlier, sanc tion limit of SCAs has alr eady been 
increased from Rs. 50,000.00 to Rs. 1.00 lakh . NMDFC will mak e further efforts to 
encourage enterprising applicants from minorities to ta ke higher quantum of loans  
for bigger projects. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 16 Para No. 3.39) 
 
3.17 The Committee note that Revolving Fund  Scheme is provided to r eputed and 
well established NGOs under Micro Financ ing Schem e having overall repayment 
period of 36 months. The Committee further note that so far only three NGOs from 
Andhra Pr adesh, Maharashtra and Tam il Nadu ha ve been c overed under the 
Scheme. Keeping in view t he f act that the Scheme has been fairly successful in 
reaching to the beneficiaries and helping t hem to get loans quick ly, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to pursue the remainin g States /UTs to encourage the eligible 
NGOs to send propos als for availing loan u nder the scheme so that the benefits of 
the scheme could reach the target groups. 
 33

 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.18 NMDFC has been adv ised to make efforts to inv ite applications from eligible 
NGOs in all the states under this programme. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 22 Para No. 4.12) 
 
3.19 The Com mittee note with serious conc ern that NMDFC provides loans to 
SCAs / NGOs between 1%  to 3% per  a nnum for its various welfare sc hemes, 
whereas 5% to 6% is charged from benefic iaries, thus cornering away 3% as 
establishment / infrastructure charges. It may be true that the rate of interest 
charged by NMDFC is lower than the comm ercial banks but the Committee strongly 
feel that the extra interest charged by t he SCAs/ NGOs from the beneficiaries in the 
name of administrative charges is note just ified. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that in order to boo st the income generating acti vities of the minorities, 
the rate of interest being charged from the benefic iaries on NMDFC loan may be 
reduced and State Government s should come forward to bear establishment / 
infrastructure expenses of their respective SCAs/ NGOs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.20 Efforts are being made to persuade the St ate Govts. to come forward to bear 
the establishment / infrastructure expenditure of the respective SCAs. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 34

 
Recommendation Sl.  No. 23 Para No. 4.13) 
 
3.21 The Com mittee also find that SC As are required to pay one percent  
guarantee commission for obtaini ng guarantee from the Stat e Governments. Thus, 
only 2% remains with the SCAs  which is no t sufficient to meet their establishment 
and other  expenses. Also some times SCAs  find it d ifficult to get  State guarantee 
which causes delays in getting loan from NMDFC and disbursing it to beneficiaries in 
time. The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that State Governments may be 
requested not to charge any guarantee c ommission from t he SCAs so t hat their 
administrative expenditure c ould be met effectively and de lay in getting funds from  
the NMDFC could be avoided.  
Reply of the Government 
 
3.22 State Govts. are being persuaded to waive / reduce the commission for issue 
of Government guarantee. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 35

CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER- I 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 1, Para No. 1.13) 
 
4.1 The Com mittee note with surprise t hat the Ministry has so far not got 
conducted any survey to identify the actual  number of potential b eneficiaries i.e. the 
minority people liv ing below d ouble the poverty line whic h is the basis  of their  
operations. The reason forwarde d that it is not possible for the M inistry to c onduct 
such survey in view of the massive admin istrative and financial implications  is no t 
convincing at all. The Committee strongly feel that in the absence of accurate data of 
persons below double the poverty line am ong the notified minority community the 
basic objective of Corporation i.e. ec onomic development of poor sections of 
minorities community would not be achieved. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that a survey to find out the exac t number of persons below double the poverty line 
in each minority community be got conduc ted either through Planning Com mission 
or National Sample Survey Organization ( NSSO) so that exact nu mber of right kind 
of beneficiaries could be identified and comprehensive economic developmental 
schemes for the welf are of minority pers ons liv ing below double the poverty line 
could be formulated and targets in physical and financial terms be achiev ed 
expeditiously. The Committee al so recommends  that the Ministry should set up a 
Statistical Data Collecti ng Cell to collect and update authentic da ta concerning 
 36

minorities. The steps taken and progress made in this regard may be communicated 
to the Committee within three months time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Ministry has requested the Pl anning Commission and National Sample 
Survey Organization to conduct a survey to  find out the number of persons living 
below double the poverty line of different minority groups.  A new Ministry of Minority 
Affairs has been created by Government and a suitable statistical cell would be set 
up as soon as personnel become available to the Ministry. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 2, Para No. 1.14) 
 
4.3 The Committee further note with dismay  the casual reply of the Government 
relating to the number of persons who hav e crossed below double the pov erty line 
mark as a result of av ailing the financial as sistance from the Corp oration, that since 
income generating assets are created under t he schemes it is presumed that it help 
the beneficiaries in augmenting their income. The Ministry has bluntly replied that no 
survey has been undertaken in this regar d. The Committee expr esses their anguish 
on the way in which the Ministry have stated about its non-performance. It should be 
the basic obligation of  the Ministry to gauge precisely the impact of the spending of  
the scarce public m oney for economic emanc ipation of the weak er sections of 
 37

minorities. The Committee, ther efore, strongly desire that  a survey should also be 
conducted to assess   the number of benef iciaries who have crossed below double 
the poverty line mark and convey the finding s thereof to the Co mmittee so that the 
impact of the welfare schemes being implemented for the economic development of 
minorities could be assessed properly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 National Minorities Development & F inance Corporation (NMDFC) will 
engage a suitable, qua lified agency to conduct a surv ey and assess the impact of 
this programme.   
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 10, Para No. 2.8) 
 
4.5 The Com mittee have been appraised that  the authorized share capital of 
NMDFC has been increased from  Rs. 500 crore to Rs. 650 crore. The share of  
Government of Indian has been increas ed from 60% to 65% and the share of  
individuals has been r educed from 14% to 9%. The Committee, however, note with 
concern that a large number of States have not contributed their share to the shar e 
capital of NMDFC due to financial constraints and there is nil contribution on the part 
of groups / individuals which results in lesser allocation  of funds to the States for the 
 38

 welfare schemes for upliftment of minorities. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the State Governments may be persuaded vigorously to bear their responsibility 
of contributing their share to  the equity of NMDFC and get  their full share from the 
Corporation so that financ ial as sistance could be made available to the minority 
community to the maximum extent. The Committee also des ire that the minority  
organizations / groups / individuals may be persuaded to contribute their share in the 
authorized share capital of NMDFC. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 National M inorities Development & Finance Corporation has been regularly  
persuading to public  to invest  in its e quity.  However, National Minorities 
Development & Finance Cor poration will make a concer ted attempt to persuade 
individuals, and groups to contribute to its equity.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 13, Para No. 3.36) 
4.7 The Committee are not happy  to note that  statewise allocation of funds t o 
States like Haryana, Maharashtra, Mizora m, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh hav e been 
 39

reduced c onsiderably during the last thre e years. T he reason put forth by the 
Ministry is that the allocations are bas ed on the performance of respective SCAs  
during the last year with regard t o drawal of funds, their utilizat ion, repayment etc. 
The Committee are not convinced with the arguments that those SCAs which are not 
able to draw and utilize funds get lesser al location in the succeeding years as the 
ultimate losers are the persons  living be low poverty line. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that Ministry should allocate s ufficient funds to the States for effective 
implementation of minority we lfare schemes so that benef iciaries do not suffer for 
want of funds. The Committee further desire that the Central Minister should conduct 
periodical meetings with the State Mi nisters to review and monit or the 
implementation and also utilizat ion of funds given to the States for various minority 
welfare schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been conducting 
periodic review meeting with the State Govts. at various levels, including annual 
conference of State Secretar ies dealing with Minority Welf are.  Now, Ministry of 
Minority Affairs will at tempt to strengthen the monitoring mecha nism as soon as 
adequate personnel become available.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 40

 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 21, Para No. 3.44) 
 
4.9 The Com mittee also recommend that  the Corporation should evolve a 
common platform for computerization of acti vities of SCAs and NGOs and assist in 
development of unif orm website for al l SCAs and NGOs working for the 
implementation of minority welfare schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.10 NMDFC has already  launched its own website. As far as the SCAs are 
concerned, they are being reimbursed expenses for making their websites as well as 
computerizing their offices. 
Some States like Andhra Pradesh and  West Bengal have already set up their 
websites. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 27, Para No. 5.7) 
 
4.11 The Committee note that organiz ing awareness camps are e ssential publicity 
measures for generating awareness among the beneficiaries about the measure s 
being undertaken by the Corporation for t he welfare of minoritie s and promoting t he 
activities of SCAs. No doubt the Governm ent has taken initiative by conducting 
 41

awareness camps in various parts of th e country. But, the Committee is of the 
opinion that publicity of the Corporation’ s welfare schemes should be undertaken 
more vigorously through electronic media lik e TA, Radio Channels   and publis hing 
advertisements in newspapers in local la nguages. The brochures / pamphlets giving 
details of the schemes should be distributed at Talukas / Gram Panchayats levels for 
the benefit of beneficiaries. The Committee also des ire that the SCAs and non-
government organizations should take initiative by organizing ‘Samwad 
Programmes’ frequently in all the Districts / Talukas to interact with the beneficiaries, 
hear their grievances and take remedial measures. T he Committee hope that these 
steps will certainly h elp in pro moting and impleme nting the schemes of NMDFC 
more effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.12 National Minorities De velopment & Finance Corp oration is undertaking 
publicity measures through the electronic m edia and publishing in the newspapers / 
magazines / pamphlets from time to time. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 42

CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No. 18, Para No. 3.41) 
5.1 The Com mittee appreciate the initiati ve t aken by the NMDFC for providing 
vocational training to the per sons belonging to minority co mmunity leading to their 
employment or self-employment. In the opinion of the Committee, training needs are 
of different kind  – mo tivational, skill-or iented, entrepreneurial and  those ge ared at  
marketing. A large number of minority beneficiaries ar e unskilled, lack knowledge 
and motivation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while  imparting training 
such aspects should be taken c are of so t hat the persons gettin g training under the 
scheme could develop their skill and k nowledge in specified tr ades. The Committee 
also recommend that the Vocational Traini ng Schools for the targeted groups may  
be establis hed in various parts  of the country particularl y in minority concentrated 
districts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 NMDFC has been insisting upon entre preneurial inputs in all voc ational 
training sp onsored by the SCAs/ NGOs. Inst itutions will be id entified for imparting  
specific training in the minority concentrated districts (MCD’s). 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs No. 12-5/2006 dated 05.04.2006) 
 
 
 
New Delhi:     SUMIT RA MAHAJAN,  
August, 2006         Chairperso n, 
Sravana, 1928 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 43

ANNEXURE-I 
 
LIST OF STATE MINORITIES DEVELOPMENT & FINANCE CORPORATION 
 
Sl. No. STATES   CHANNELISING AGENCY 
 
1. H imachal Pradesh  : H.P. Minorities Finance and  
Development Corporation 
 
2. Maharashtra   :  Maulana Azad Minorities  
Financial Development  
Corporation 
 
3. Tamil Nadu   :  Tamil Nadu Minorities Economic 
      Developme nt Corporation 
 
4. Rajasthan   :  Rajasthan Minorities Finance and  
      Developme nt Corporation 
 
5. Trupura   : Tripura Minorities Co-operative 
Development Corporation 
 
6. Assam    :  Assam Minority Development  
      Corporation 
 
7. Gujarat   :  Gujarat Minorities Finance and  
      Developme nt Corporation 
 
8. West Bengal   :  West Bengal Minorities Development 
and Finance  Corporation 
 
9. Andhra Pradesh  :  Andhra Pradesh State Minorities  
      Developme nt Finance Corporation 
 
10. Bihar    :  Bihar State Minority Finance  
Corporation 
 
11. Uttar Pradesh   :  U.P. Minorities Finance and  
Development Corporation 
 
12. Karnataka   :  Karnataka Minorities Development 
      Corporation 
 44

ANNEXURE-II 
 
STATE CHANNELISING AGENCIES (SCAs) OF NMDFC OTHER THAN EXCLUSIVE 
MINORITIES DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCE CORPORATIONS 
 
 
Sl. No  States     Channelising Agencies 
 
1. Chandigarh    : Chandigarh Scheduled Castes  
Scheduled Tribes Finance & 
Development Corporation 
 
2. Chhatisgarh    : Chhatisgarh State Antyavasyee  
Cooperative Finance and development 
Corporation 
 
3. Delhi     : Delhi Scheduled Castes Scheduled 
Tribes Finance and Development  
Corporation 
 
4. Haryana    : Haryana Backward Classes & Economic 
       Weaker Section Kalyan Nigam 
 
5. Jammu & Kashmir   :  A.  J & K SC/ST & Backward Classes 
       Developme nt Corporation 
 
       B.  J & K Women Development  
Corporation 
 
6. Jharkhand    : Jharkhand State Scheduled Tribes 
       Cooperative  Development Corporation 
 
7. Kerala     : A.  Kerala State Backward Classes 
       Developme nt Corporation 
 
       B.  Kerala State Women Development 
       Corporation 
     
       C.  Kerala State Cooperative Federation  
       For Fisheries Development Corporation 
 
8. Madhya Pradesh   : A.  M.P. Backward Classes & Minorities 
       Finance and Development Corporation 
        
       B .  M.P. Hastshilp Vikas Nigam 
 
 
9. Manipur    : Directorate For Minorities & other  
Backward Classes   
 
10. Meghalaya*    : Meghalaya Industrial Development 
Corporation 
 45

 
 
11. Mizoram    : A.  Mizoram Cooperative Apex Bank 
 
       B.  Zoram Industrial Development 
       Corporation 
 
12. Nagaland    : A.  Nagaland Industrial Development 
       Corporation 
 
       B.  Nagaland Handloom & Handicraft 
       Developme nt Corporation 
 
13. Orissa      : Orissa State SCs/STs Finance and  
       Developme nt Corporation 
 
 
14. Pondicherry    : Pondicherry Backward Classes  
       Developme nt Corporation 
 
15. Punjab     : Punjab Backward Classes Land  
       Developme nt and Finance Corporation 
 
16. Uttranchal    : Uttranchal Multipurpose Finance & 
Development Corporation 
 46

ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENT H SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 2ND  AUGUST, 2006 
 
 
 The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 1525 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai   
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad   
4. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
5. Shri Rameshwar Oraon  
6. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
7. Smt. Pratibha Singh   
8. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
9. Smt. Usha Verma    
  
 
MEMBERS 
       RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Silvius Condpan 
11. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
12. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
13. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  Under Secretary 
 
Contd….2/- 
 47

 
–2 – 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson we lcomed the Members to the sitting of  
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Eighteenth Report on 
the Action taken by the Government  on the recommendations/observation s 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on the subj ect “Working of Nationa l 
Minorities Development and Fi nance Corporation” (NMDFC ) of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs and adopted the same without any amendment. 
 
 3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report and present 
the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 48

 49
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
               T o t a l    P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendati ons            29 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which  
have been accepted by the Government:           12       41.37% 
(Sl.  Nos. 6, 7, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 24, 25,  
26, 28 and 29)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which            10       34.48% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Sl.  Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 16, 22 and 23) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in               6       20.68% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee: 
  (Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 10, 13, 21  and 27) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in              1        3.44% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Sl. Nos.   18) 
 