 
TWENTY- NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
 AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment on Demands for Grants 2007 -2008) of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on  04.03.2008 
 
                            Laid in Rajya Sabha on         04.03.2008 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
     December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 

 
 
29 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on Demands 
for Grants for the year 2007 -2008 of the Ministry of Social Justice a nd 
Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                    
     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………                       
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………               
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………………                       
 1 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been  
 accepted  By the Government…………………………              
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee  
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  
Government………………………………………. ..                                          
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which 
  replies of the Government have not been accepted   
 and have been commented  upon by the Committee  
 in Chapter-I ….……………………………………..              
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government are interim in nature……                
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on 14 December, 2007.  ……       
                                                                    
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     
recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………     
                                                                    
              

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2007-2008) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque*   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
 4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
 6. Shri Hari Bhau Jawale 
 7. Shri Bhai Lal 
 8. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
9. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
10. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
11. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
12. Shri Jual Oram 
13. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
14. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma 
16. Dr. R. Senthil 
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
20. Smt. Usha Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
          RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24.       Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25.       Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27.       Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28.       Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29.       Shri Veer Singh 
30.       Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqualification from the 
Membership of the 14th Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker on 27 January, 2008.       

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
   1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -    Additional Secretary 
 2.   Shri Ashok Sarin            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -   Director 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Deputy Secretary 
           5.   Shri Vanlalruata                  -         Executive Officer 

 
 
 
 
          
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Twenty-ninth Report on the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants – 2007-08 relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 . 
 
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on April 28, 2007 and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on May 3, 2007.  The Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on August  13, 2007. The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on December 14, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Commi ttee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2007        Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
 Empowerment. 

 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants 2007 -08 relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
1.2 The Twenty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th April, 2007 
and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2007.  It contained 19 recommendations.  
Replies of the Government in respect of all the recommendations have been 
received and categories as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepte d by the 
Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.10, 4.29, 4.39, 5.4, 6.6 and 6.7 
 
 (Total 6 – Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.11, 4.18, 4.32 and 6.5. 
 
 (Total 4 – Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon 
by the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
 Paragraph Nos.3.13, 3.14, 4.19, 4.30 and 4.38. 
 
 (Total 5 – Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1.4, 3.12, 4.20 and 4.31. 
 
 (Total 4- Chapter V) 
 

 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action notes on the recommendations 
contained in chapter – I and final replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter – V of the Report may be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will  now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comment. 
 
A. Entrepreneurship Development Programme for Scheduled Castes 
  
 Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No.3.13) 
 
1.5 In the above mentioned paragraph the Co mmittee had noted that the Ministry 
did not set up any agency for promotion of entrepreneurship and training of 
Scheduled Castes.  However, National Scheduled Castes Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSFDC) and National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Dev elopment 
Corporation (NSKFDC) provide credit facilities to SC beneficiaries and also arrange 
training for their skill development wherever possible.  The Committee had felt that 
adequate attention has not been given towards entrepreneurship development for  
Scheduled Castes and in particular the SC youth which is very imperative.  In view 
of the present era of globalization, the Committee had urged the Ministry to focus 
their attention towards entrepreneurship development programmes by revamping 
existing pro grammes or by formulating new schemes during the course of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan.  In this regard, the active participation of all States/UTs 
may also be sought.  
 
1.6 In their reply, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have stated 
that Na tional Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) 
conduct skill upgradation training programmes for educated unemployed Scheduled 
Caste youth in potential trade through reputed Govt./Semi -Govt. /Autonomous 
institutions.  Along with skill component of the programme, the trainees are imparted 
sufficient inputs in project formulation and marketing. Similarly National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) is implementing skill 
upgradation training programme and entrepr eneurship development programme on 

 
the basis of cent percent grants for the courses period from one month to maximum 
six months.  
 
1.7 The Committee regret to observe that the Ministry have not responded 
to the specific recommendation of the Committee that  the Ministry should 
focus their attention towards entrepreneurship development programmes by 
revamping existing programmes or by formulating new training schemes 
during the course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The Ministry in their reply 
have simply st ated that the National Scheduled Castes Finance and 
Development Corporation conducts skill upgradation training programmes for 
educated Scheduled Castes youth in potential trade through reputed 
Government/Semi-Government/Autonomous institutions and Nationa l Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) is 
implementing skill upgradation training programme for courses period from 
one month to six months.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply as 
the training programmes being conducte d by National Scheduled Castes 
Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) and National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) are not 
considered need based as per the changed requirement and do not seem to be 
sufficient for overall development of Scheduled Castes.  Instead, thrust needs 
to be given for promotion of entrepreneurship and job oriented training 
programmes for SC youths for developing their technical and professional 
skills so that they could get gainful employment and a ttain economic self 
reliance.  The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and 

 
urge the Ministry to focus their attention towards entrepreneurship 
development programmes by formulating new schemes for SC youths for the 
development of th eir entrepreneurial skills and help them to actively 
participate in the growing economy.  
 
B. General Performance of the Ministry 
 Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para No.3.14) 
 
1.8 The Committee in para 3.14 of the original Report had observed that the 
nomenclature of Ministry of Welfare has been changed to Ministry of Social Justice 
& Empowerment with the aim to come out with a vision of keeping the elements of 
social justice and empowerment into account.  Although they have initiated schemes 
but they lack in p roper perspective for the overall empowerment of the weaker 
sections of the society.  The Committee were of the view that schemes launched / to 
be launched by the Ministry should be comprehensive in nature which should aim for 
social and financial upliftment of the status of the weaker sections and to bring them 
at par with other communities in a dignified manner to ensure social justice.  The 
Committee, had expressed hope that the Ministry would keep this in view while 
formulating and implementing its various schemes. 
 
1.9 In their action taken note the Ministry have stated that the 
observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
1.10 The Committee had expressed their concern that the schemes initiated 
by the Ministry are lacking in proper pers pective for overall empowerment of 
the weaker sections of the society.  The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
the schemes of the Ministry should be comprehensive in nature to ensure 
social and financial upliftment of the targeted sections so that they  could be 
brought at par with other communities in a dignified manner.  The response of 
the Ministry to the concern expressed by the Committee is not upto the 
expectation as the Ministry have simply noted this particular observation of 
the Committee.  The Committee feel that the Ministry should formulate some 
action plan either by revamping the existing schemes or by formulating new 

 
comprehensive schemes for overall development of weaker sections of the 
society expeditiously.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to come up 
with a roadmap by making its schemes more comprehensive in nature so that 
social and financial upliftment of the weaker sections of society could be 
ensured at a faster pace.  Action taken in this regard should have been 
initiated and communicated to the Committee. 
 
C. Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan 
 (SCSP). 
  Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No. 4.19) 
 
1.11 The Committee, in paragraph No. 4.19, had expressed their serious concern 
that during 2006 -07, out  of the 27 States/UTs availing SCA to SCSP funds, 18 
States had not reported the flow of funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to 
SCSP.   Out of the 8 States/UTs that had allocated funds from their Annual State 
Plan Outlay to SCSP only Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, U.P. and West Bengal have adhered 
to the prescribed norms and allocated funds for SCSP from their Annual State Plan 
Outlay in proportion to the percentage of their SC population.  The Committee were 
not at all satisfied with this state of affairs. The  Committee, therefore, had 
recommended that all States/UTs availing SCA to SCSP funds be persuaded in the 
right earnest to allocate funds in proportion to their SC population, so as to get the 
entitled SCA share from the Centre for the benefit of SC Population. 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their reply, have stated 
that the Ministry addresses the States/UTs to earmark funds towards Scheduled 
Castes Sub Plan in proportion to SC population of the State so as to enable them to 
get their due share of Special Central Assistance funds.  .  Due to the efforts, the 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan allocation has been enhanced from 11.49% in 2002 -
2003 to 12.29% in 2005 -06. The Planning Commission has also issued guidelines 
followed by a letter from this Ministry in June 2006. 
 
1.13 As per the prescribed guidelines all States/UTs availing Special Central 
Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) are required to 
allocate funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to Scheduled Castes 
Component Plan in proportion to the percentage of their SC population.  The 

 
Committee had, therefore, recommended to pursue all States availing SCA to 
SCSP funds in proportion to their SC population so as to get their rightful 
share of Special Central Assistance funds.  Yet, only 4 States/UTs have 
allocated funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to SCSP as per the 
prescribed norms.  The Ministry in their reply have stated that it was due to 
their efforts, the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan allocation has been enhanc ed 
from 11.49% in 2002-03 to 12.29% in 2005 -06.  The Committee are not satisfied 
with the reply of the Ministry as the percentage of allocation of funds is far 
below the percentage of Scheduled Castes in States which as per the 2001 
census stands at 16.23%.  The Committee are also constrained to find that out 
of the 27 States/UTs availing SCA to SCSP funds 18 States/UTs have not 
reported flow of funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to SCSP.     This is 
indicative of lack of commitment and poor monitori ng of the scheme by the 
Ministry as they have failed to impress upon all States/UTs to adhere to the 
prescribed guidelines.  Keeping in view the economic condition of the SCs the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that all States/UTs availing  
SCA to SCSP funds be persuaded in the right earnest to allocate funds in 
proportion to their SC population, so that they could get their entitled SCA 
share from the Centre.  
 
D. Post-Matric and Pre -Matric Scholarship to students belonging to 
 Scheduled Castes. 
  
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.30) 

 
1.14 The Committee in para 4.30 of the original Report had found that the drop out 
rate of SC students was higher than general category students and the reason for 
the same was both social and economic.  The Committee had also observed that the 
existing Pre-Matric Scholarship for SC students was meant only for the children of 
parents engaged in unclean occupations.  Keeping in view the higher drop -out rate 
of SC students at Pre -matric level, the importance  of scholarships at Pre -matric 
stage was more crucial.   In order to check the drop out rate of SC students, 
particularly at Pre -metric stage, the Committee were of the firm opinion that a 
scheme of Pre -metric scholarship for all SC students with 100 per c ent funding by 
Central Government wouldl help in checking their drop -out rate.  The Committee, 
had desired that the Government may introduce Pre -matric Scholarship scheme for 
SC students with 100% central funds as it will motivate and facilitate the SC students 
to successfully cross the Pre-Metric stage. 
 
1.15 In their reply, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have stated 
that under the scheme of grant -in-aid to Voluntary Organizations working for SCs, 
financial assistance is provided for settin g up of crèches and primary schools.  
Besides, under certain other schemes of the Govt. such as Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas there is a focus on providing access to quality education to girls 
predominantly belonging to SCs, STs, OBCs & Minorities.  However, the observation 
of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
1.16 The Committee express their dismay over the vague reply of the 
Ministry wherein they have stated that under the scheme of grant -in-aid to 
Voluntary Organizations working for Scheduled Castes, financ ial assistance is 
provided for setting up of crèches and primary schools.  Besides, under 
certain other schemes of the Government such as Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas there is a focus on providing access to quality education to girls 
predominantly bel onging to SCs, STs, OBCs and Minorities.  However, the 
Committee are of the firm view that pre -matirc scholarship scheme for SC 
students would have a far reaching impact on the future of the SC students 
who owing to their financial hardships and other soci al barriers find it very 
difficult to cross over the crucial stage of passing through the matriculation 

 
stage.  The Pre -matic scheme for SC students would also check the high 
dropout rate of the SC students at matriculation level.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Government to 
introduce ‘Pre -matric scholarship scheme for SC students with 100 percent 
central funding as it will motivate and facilitate the SC students to 
successfully cross the crucial Pre-Matric stage.  
 
E. Hostels for SC Boys and Girls. 
 
 Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para No. 4.38) 
 
1.17 The Committee, had noted with concern that during Tenth Five Year Plan 
(2002-07) out of the sanctioned 574 hostels for SC boys, only 157 hostels had been 
completed.  Similarly out of the sanctioned 741 hostels for SC Girls, only 113 had 
been completed.  Further, the Ministry had not given any satisfactory reason for the 
non-completion of those hostels.  They had simply stated that land for construction 
of hostels wa s provided by the States and as per the current guidelines a State 
Government was allowed five years for construction of a hostel.  The Ministry were 
stated to have proposed for changing the funding pattern of hostels for SC Girls to 
100% from the Centre.  The Committee had viewed that a very positive step which 
would enable speedy construction of hostels for SC Girls.  The Committee had felt 
that the Ministry should also take up the issue of changing the funding pattern of 
hostels for SC Boys to 100% central funding with the Planning Commission. 
 
1.18 In their action taken note the Ministry have stated that they have  been writing 
to the State Governments for timely completion of construction of SC Girls and Boys 
Hostels.  The issue had also been discussed i n the earlier annual conferences of 
Welfare Secretaries and will be put up this year again.  The existing scheme of 
Hostel for SC girls is being revised due to the fact that the females among the SC 
groups suffer from triple jeopardy of being handicapped b y social barriers, gender 
bias and low literacy.   
 
 
1.19 The Committee had observed that Ministry had proposed for changing 
the funding pattern of hostels for SC girls to 100% from the Centre and had 
recommended that the Ministry should also take up the i ssue of changing the 
funding pattern of hostels for SC boys to 100% central funding with the 

 
Planning Commission.  The Ministry in their reply have stated that the existing 
scheme of hostels for SC girls is being revised due to the fact that the female 
among SC groups suffer from the triple jeopardy of being handicapped by 
social barriers, gender bias and low literacy.  While appreciating the gesture of 
the Ministry for changing the funding pattern for hostels for SC girls, the 
Committee feel that construct ion of hostels for SC boys is equally important 
as it would ameliorate the difficulties being faced by SC students in pursuing 
their education.  Moreover, the States also find it difficult to provide their 50% 
matching share for the scheme.  The Committee,  therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation to take up the issue of changing the funding pattern 
of hostels for SC boys to 100% central funding with the Planning Commission  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BYTHE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.10) 
 
 
2.1 The Committee note that BE of Rs. 1333.07 crores (Plan) for the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment was reduced to Rs. 1237.34 crores at RE stage 
during the year 2004 -05. Even this reduced estimate was not utilized during 2004 -
05.  Again in 2005 -06 there was underutilization of the earmarked funds.  Late 
receipt of proposals, inspection reports and utilization certificates from the 
States/UTs are stated by the Ministry to be the main reasons  for under utilization of 
funds.  The position has improved in 2006 -07 where the Ministry have been able to 
utilize about 99.30% of RE. The Committee, desire that the Ministry should continue 
their efforts for full utilization of funds during the coming years. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated 
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10 Para No. 4.29) 
 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that due to revision of income ceiling from 
Rs. 45000/ - to Rs. 1.00 lakh w.e.f. 1.4.2003 and large number of SC students 
seeking admission in professional courses run by recognized institutions, the 
number of beneficiaries under the sc heme of Post -Matric Scholarship (PMS) has 
increased.  Consequently, the requirement of funds for PMS scheme has jumped 
from Rs. 265 cores in 2003 -04 to Rs. 1058.33 crores for 2006 -07.  Though, the 
Ministry by way of re -appropriation from savings in other s chemes of the Ministry 
was able to allocate an additional amount of Rs. 88.02 crores to the sanctioned 
allocation of Rs. 440.00 crores, yet there was an unmet demand of Rs. 532.30 
crores in the year 2006 -07 under this scheme.  The Committee feel that the M inistry 
need to enhance the budgetary allocation for this scheme.  Further the matter may 
also be taken up with the Planning Commission in this regard, so that large number 
of SC students could avail the benefits of the scheme.  

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 Out of unmet demand of Rs. 532.30 crore for the year 2006 -07,an amount of 
Rs.101.83crore has been released to States/UTs. For release of balance amount 
necessary action has already been initiated. The budget allocation for the scheme of 
Post-matric Sch olarship for Scheduled Caste students for the year 2007 -08 is Rs. 
625 crore. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15 Para No. 4.39) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the ex isting scheme of hostels for SC Boys and 
Girls is under revision / modification. The Committee is in full agreement with the 
proposed modification in the existing scheme, specifically with the proposal that 
duration of construction of hostels for boys and girls be reduced to 2 years from the 
existing 5 years as in the view of the Committee the period of 5 years for 
construction of a hostel is too long.  At the same time they would like the Ministry to 
ensure completion of hostels within the prescribed perio d of two years.  The 
Committee hope that the existing scheme would be revised soon and desire that 
hostels be sanctioned in the close vicinity of educational institutions keeping in view 
important factors like concentration of SC population, literacy rate,  etc.  In view of 
the Committee, if properly implemented, the proposed modifications would go a long 
way in making the scheme of hostels for SC Boys and Girls a very meaningful step 
in striving for the overall educational development and social and economi c 
emancipation of the present generation of SC population.  Progress achieved in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 Duration of construction of hostels has been reduced from the existing 5 
years to 2 years in t he revised scheme to remove undue delay involved in 
completion of hostels.  This is a demand driven scheme and the State Governments 
are expected to keep in view factors like concentration of SC population, literacy 
position of the area etc. 
 
( Ministry of  Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated 
13 August  2007). 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 Para No. 5.4) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the allocation of funds under Plan Expenditure for 
the Other Backward Classes are not sufficient to m eet the demands of the States 
under the schemes of Pre -matric, Post -matric Scholarships and Hostels for OBCs 
and thus, funds for these schemes have been made available by re -appropriation 
from other schemes of the Ministry.  The Committee are not at all sa tisfied with the 
situation and feel that by reappropriating funds from other schemes, it would put 
those schemes at disadvantage.  Keeping in view the large population of the Other 
Backward Classes, and their relative economic and educational backwardness,  the 
Committee urge the Government to be more careful while projecting estimates at BE 
stage itself.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to take up the matter with the 
Planning Commission for a quantum enhancement in the budgetary allocation for 
the Plan schemes of the OBC Division during the course of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The proposal for providing higher allocation under the OBC Schemes during 
the XIth Five Year Plan has been submitted to the Planning Commission. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18 Para No. 6.6) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that only five States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Delhi are taking about 55 per cent of the annual release for 
various Disability Welfare schemes. The Committee agree with the Ministry that the 
main challenge confronting them is to make the grants more evenly spread and also 
to encourage NGOs to go to areas where t hey have not reached so far. The 
Committee, however, note with surprise that in spite of being fully aware of the 
shortcomings in the system, the Ministry have not taken any rectifying measures so 
far. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure that the voluntary 
organizations are encouraged to work for the schemes for disabled persons in other 
States/UTs also and thus ensure a more equitable distribution of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
2.10 The Ministry has noted the disparities in the distr ibution of the funds among 
the States.  A need has been felt to gradually rectify the imbalances that occurred 
due to concentration of NGOs in some areas, while resulting in several other areas 
remained unserved. In order to address problem of regional imb alance in terms of 
funding NGOs, notional allocation of funds has been made in 2007 -08 for each 
State/UT; taking into-account the disabled population and the existing trend of grants 
released to each of the State/UT While notional allocation has been made to allocate 
funds to States/UTs in proportion of their disabled population, it has also been kept 
in mind that States/NGOs getting grant more than notional allocation should not be 
drastically affected, and that  the imbalance should be rectified gradually , allowing 
the existing NGOs adequate time to become more self -reliant. The State 
Governments / UT Admns. have been advised that, while formulating 
recommendations for funding to NGOs, priority should be accorded to service 
deficient areas. 
 
(Ministry of S ocial Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19 Para No. 6.7) 
 
2.11 The Committee also note that the Government have signed the United 
Nations Convention on Rights of persons with Disability which has created certain 
economic and social obligations on the Government of India.  The Committee hope 
that the guidelines contained in the U.N. Convention would be implemented 
sincerely and effectively. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 Observations of the Committee would be adhered to. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para No. 3.11) 
 
3.1 The Committee also note as against an outlay of Rs. 2450.00 crores asked 
for by the Ministry for its schemes during the year 2007-08 the Planning Commission 
has allocated only Rs. 2001.00 crores.  Th e Ministry have stated that allocation is 
decided by the Planning Commission as per availability of Gross Budgetary support 
and inter-sectoral priorities.  The Ministry have admitted that this reduction is likely to 
affect adversely the targets/achievement s in major schemes relating to Welfare of 
Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and Persons with Disabilities.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry would take up this issue with the Planning 
Commission and pursue for additional funds through supplement ary grants to 
ensure that the adverse affects likely to be caused by shortage of funds is negated. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Ministry have already initiated action as per Department of Expenditure 
O.M. No.1(3)/PF.II/2001 dated May29,2007 to obtain  orders of the competent 
authority for continuation of the schemes in the XIth Plan with appropriate 
modifications revision of rates wherever deemed necessary. After this exercise is 
over and the final shape of schemes is known, additional funds would be s ought, if 
necessary.  
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated 
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 4.18) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled 
Castes Sub Plan (SC SP) is a Central Sector Scheme, wherein all the funding is 
provided by the Central Government.   The allocation of SCA to SCSP amounts to 
nearly 40% of funds allocated to the Scheduled Castes Division.  During the year 
2006-07, the SCA funds released by the Ministry was Rs. 459.15 crores out of which 
only Rs. 244.24 crores was utilized which in percentage terms is only 53%, an 
abysmally low figure of utilization.  The reasons for such a low utilization of funds 
under the scheme have not been intimated to th e Committee.  The Committee 

 
desire that the reasons for under -utilization of funds may be identified with a view to 
taking corrective remedial action in this connection at the earliest.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should impres s upon the States/UTs 
availing SCA funds to utilize them fully to ensure effective implementation of this 
pivotal scheme and furnish utilization certificates on time.     
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 Out of the Rupees 459.15 crores, Rs. 264.74 crore was released between 
December 2006 and March 2007.  According to the provisions of the Fiscal 
Responsibility Budget Management (FRBM) Act, the utilization certificates are to be 
furnished within a period of 12 months.  As per progress reports received from 
States/UTs upto 31 st July, 2007.  An amount of Rs. 354.26 crore had been utilized.  
The Ministry has taken up the matter with the State Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations to ensure expeditious utilization of funds.  
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 4.32) 
 
3.5 The Committee feel that SC students who mostly come from comparatively 
very poor family background are not able to pay the fees charged for private seat or 
payment seat in private/unaided institutions which is much higher than the fees 
charged in Government institutions.  Keeping in view the overall development of SC 
students, the Committee urge the Government to consider reimbursement of full 
tuition fees being charged by private/unaided institutions, so that SC students could 
continue higher studies at par with general category students. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 As per scheme the scholars are paid enrolment/registration, tuition, ga mes, 
union, library, magazine, medical examination fee and such other fees compulsorily 
payable to the institution or University/Board.  Compulsory non -refundable fee 
charged by recognized institutions for recognized courses can be fully reimbursed as 
per the fee structure approved by the competent State/Central Government 
authority. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17 Para No. 6.5) 
 
3.7 The Committee note with serious concern that BE for the Disability Division 
have constantly been reduced at RE stage and actual expenditure during the last 
three years is also far from satisfactory.  The reasons put forth by the Ministry that 
until the inspection report and utili zation certificate are received, second installment 
is not released to the NGOs running various schemes under Disability Division is not 
convincing.  The Committee, desire that the process of obtaining the inspection 
reports as well as utilization certific ates from the concerned States/UTs be 
streamlined so as to make it less time consuming and thereby ensuring that the 
second installment is released well in time to ensure optimum utilization of funds and 
to save the beneficiaries from suffering on account of procedural wrangles.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.8 Upto 2006-07 first installment of the grant was released on ad-hoc basis to an 
organization and the final grant was to be released only after the receipt of 
recommendation from the State Government.  However, funds could not be released 
in time in some cases due to non -receipt of recommendations or receipt of 
recommendations at the fag end of the financial year or due to non -receipt of 
utilization certificates/audited accounts and other relevant paper s in time from the 
NGOs.In order to streamline the procedure of releasing the grants to the 
organizations, new procedure has been devised for releasing grants to NGO in a 
single installment.  The ministry has communicated notional State -wise allocation of 
funds to the States/UTs in respect of schemes for funding NGOs for submission of 
consolidated recommendations.  To facilitate timely decisions at their level, the 
States/UTs have been advised to constitute multi disciplinary Grant in aid 
committees for exa mining the proposals for grant to support Voluntary 
Organizations.  It is expected that the new procedure would help in ensuring 
optimum utilization of funds. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.13) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Ministry does not set up any agency for 
promotion of entrepreneurship and training of Scheduled Castes.  However, National 
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) and National 
Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKF DC) provide credit 
facilities to SC beneficiaries and also arrange training for their skill development 
wherever possible.  The Committee feel that adequate attention has not been given 
towards entrepreneurship development for Scheduled Castes and in parti cular the 
SC youth which is very imperative.  In view of the present era of globalization, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to focus their attention towards entrepreneurship 
development programmes by revamping existing programmes or by formulating new 
schemes during the course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  In this regard, the active 
participation of all States/UTs may also be sought.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 National Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) 
conduct skill upgradation training programmes for educated unemployed Scheduled 
Caste youth in potential trade through reputed Govt./Semi -Govt. /Autonomous 
institutions.  Along with skill component of the programme, the trainees are imparted 
sufficient inputs in project formul ation and marketing. Similarly National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) is implementing skill 
upgradation training programme and entrepreneurship development programme on 
the basis of cent percent grants for the courses perio d from one month to maximum 
six months. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.14) 
 
4.3 The Committee understands that the nomenclature of Ministry of Welfare has 
been changed to Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment with the aim to come out 
with a vision of keeping the elements of social justice and empowerment into 
account.  A lthough they have initiated schemes but they lack in proper perspective 
for the overall empowerment of the weaker sections of the society.  The Committee 
are of the view that schemes launched / to be launched by the Ministry should be 
comprehensive in natu re which should aim for social and financial upliftment of the 
status of the weaker sections and to bring them at par with other communities in a 
dignified manner to ensure social justice.  The Committee, hope that the Ministry 
would keep this in view while formulating and implementing its various schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 The observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
.   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No. 4.19) 
 
4.5 The Committee express their serious concern that during 2006 -07, out of the 
27 States/UTs availing SCA to SCSP funds, 18 States have n ot reported the flow of 
funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to SCSP.   Out of the 8 States/UTs that 
have allocated funds from their Annual State Plan Outlay to SCSP only Gujarat, 
Tamil Nadu, U.P. and West Bengal have adhered to the prescribed norms a nd 
allocated funds for SCSP from their Annual State Plan Outlay in proportion to the 
percentage of their SC population.  The Committee are not at all satisfied with this 
state of affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all States/UTs availing 
SCA to SCSP funds be persuaded in the right earnest to allocate founds in 
proportion to their SC population, so as to get the entitled SCA share from the 
Centre for the benefit of SC Population. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
4.6 The Ministry addresses the State s/UTs to earmark funds towards Scheduled 
Castes Sub Plan in proportion to SC population of the State so as to enable them to 
get their due share of Special Central Assistance funds.  .  Due to the efforts, the 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan allocation has been enhanced from 11.49% in 2002 -
2003 to 12.29% in 2005 -06. The Planning Commission has also issued guidelines 
followed by a letter from this Ministry in June 2006 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS) PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 Para No. 4.30) 
 
4.7 The Committee find that the drop out rate of SC students is higher than 
general category students and the reason for the sa me is both social and economic.  
The Committee also observe that the existing Pre -Matric Scholarship for SC 
students is meant only for the children of parents engaged in unclean occupations.  
Keeping in view the higher drop -out rate of SC students at Pre -matric level, the 
importance of scholarships at Pre -matric stage is more crucial.   In order to check 
the drop out rate of SC students, particularly at Pre -metric stage, the Committee are 
of the firm opinion that a scheme of Pre -metric scholarship for all S C students with 
100 per cent funding by Central Government will help in checking their drop -out rate.  
The Committee, desire that the Government may introduce Pre -matric Scholarship 
scheme for SC students with 100% central funds as it will motivate and fac ilitate the 
SC students to successfully cross the Pre-Metric stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 Under the scheme of grant-in-aid to Voluntary Organisations working for SCs, 
financial assistance is provided for setting up of crèches and primary schools..  
Besides, under certain other schemes of the Govt. such as Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas there is a focus on providing access to quality education to girls 
predominantly belonging to SCs, STs, OBCs & Minorities.  However, the observation 
of the Committee has been noted. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14 Para No. 4.38) 
 
4.9 The Committee note with concern that during Tenth Five Year Plan (2002 -07) 
out of the sanctioned 574 hostels for SC boys, only 157 hostels have been 
completed.  Similarly out of the sanctioned 741 hostels for SC Girls, only 113 have 
been completed.  Further, the Ministry have not given any satisfactory reason for the 
non-completion of these hostels.  They have simply stated that land for construction 
of hostels is provided by the States and as per the current guidelines a State 
Government is allowed five years for construction of a hostel.  The Ministry are 
stated to have proposed for changing the funding pattern of hostels for SC Girls to 
100% from the Centre.  The Committee views this a very positive step which would 
enable speedy construction of hostels for SC Gi rls.  The Committee feel that the 
Ministry should also take up the issue of changing the funding pattern of hostels for 
SC Boys to 100% central funding with the Planning Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.10 The Ministry have been writing to the State  Govts. for timely completion of 
construction of SC Girls and Boys Hostels.  The issue had also been discussed in 
the earlier annual conferences of Welfare Secretaries and will be put up this year 
again.  The existing scheme of Hostel for SC girls is being  revised due to the fact 
that the females among the SC groups suffer from triple jeopardy of being 
handicapped by social barriers, gender bias and low literacy.   
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.4) 
 
5.1 Sixteenth R eport of the Committee on Demands for Grants, 2006 -07 of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment was presented to Parliament on 16 
May, 2006.  Although the Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry, 
the Committee regret to observe that  as per Direction 73A of ‘Directions by the 
Speaker’ necessary statement in the House regarding the status of implementation 
of recommendations contained in the original Report has not been made.  While 
deprecating this inordinate delay, the Committee desi re that requisite action in this 
connection should be taken expeditiously, by the Ministry. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 A statement regarding the status of implementation of recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee would be mad e in the Monsoon 
Session of the Parliament. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS) PREM dated 
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.12) 
 
5.3 The Committee note with satisfaction that after constant persuasi ons by the 
Committee the Ministry propose to change the funding pattern of some schemes like 
Hostels for Scheduled Castes Girls, Pre -Matric Scholarships for children of those 
engaged in unclean occupation and Pre -Matric Scholarships for Other Backward 
Classes from the present 50 -50% to a 100% centrally funded scheme.   It is 
pertinent to note in this regard that majority of the States/UTs find it difficult to 
release funds as per their matching share of 50% funding for the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes which in turn hampers the progress of the schemes.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that more and more Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
should also be considered for converting to Central Sector Schemes. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 The observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated  
13 August 2007). 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 9 Para No. 4.20) 
 
5.5 The Committee take note of the fact that the Planning Commission has 
issued gui delines for formulation, implementation and monitoring of Scheduled 
Caste Sub Plan to Central Ministries in December, 2006 which require them to 
earmark funds under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan in proportion to SC population of 
the country.  As per their guidelines a nodal dedicated unit of SC & ST in the Ministry 
is to ensure timely release of funds and follow up the implementation of the 
schemes.  The Committee are of the view that if these guidelines are implemented 
properly, it will have a far reaching imp act on the economic and social well being of 
the SC people.  The Committee, therefore, desire that these guidelines should be 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 The Ministry will take up the matter with the Planning Commission  and 
Central Ministries. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.31) 
 
5.7 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have no data of the 
drop out rate of SC students availing benefit under the scheme of scholarship.  This 
reflects lack of concern for the welfare of SC students on the part of the 
Government.  The Committee feel that this data can be easily got from the 
institutions concerned whe re the students take admission and also from the 
respective States/UTs, as the money from the Centre is disbursed to the States/UTs, 
for the scheme.    The Committee also express their concern that reasons 
responsible for higher drop-out rate, as confessed by the Ministry, are economic and 

 
social.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should obtain the 
data of students availing this scheme as well as the drop out rate of students from 
the various States/UTs without any further delay so that  qualitative aspect of the 
scheme could be assessed and necessary modifications, if needed be carried. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.8 The scheme of Post -matric Scholarship for Scheduled Caste students is 
being implemented through States/UTs.  All the Stat es/UTs were requested in April 
2007 to furnish data on drop out rate of SC students availing the benefit of the 
scheme during the last five years, stream -wise and measures taken or proposed to 
be taken to reduce the drop out rate during the course of the 1 1th Five Year Plan.  In 
response to Ministry’s letter only few States have responded.  As per information 
received from the States no data was available with them.  Data is being collected 
by the States. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -1/2007(PS)PREM dated      
13 August 2007). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:            SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
14 December, 2007              Chairperson, 
 23 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)    Standing Committee on Social 
              Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2007. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
3. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
4. Shri Bhai Lal 
5. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
7. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
8. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
10. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
MEMBERS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Veer Singh 
16. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Saxena   - Director 
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider 
and adopted the following Draft Reports of the Committee. 
 
 
(i)  Draft Twenty-  ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report 
on Demands For Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
(ii)  Draft    Thirtieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
(iii) Draft Thirty -first Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendat ions contained in the Twenty -sixth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
 
(iv) Draft Thirty -second Report on the subject “Voluntary Organisations 
Engaged in Implementing Integrated Programme for Welfare of Older 
Persons” pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Twenty Ninth, Report 
without any amendment. 
 
4.  XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX.  
 
5. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
  
6. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
7. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these draft Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

 
  
   
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE T WENTY FOURTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA). 
 
 
    
 
  Total  Percentage  
 
I 
 
Total number of Recommendations 
 
19 
 
 
II 
 
Observations / Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government; 
(Para Nos. 3.10, 4.29, 4.39, 5.4, 6.6 and 
6.7) 
 
  6 
 
31.58% 
 
III 
 
Observations / Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government: 
(Para Nos. 3.11, 4.18, 4.32 and 6.5) 
 
  4 
 
21.05% 
 
IV 
 
Observations / Re commendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter I: (Para Nos. 3.13, 
3.14, 4.19, 4.30 and 4.38) 
 
  5 
 
26.32% 
 
V 
 
Observations / Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: (Para 
Nos. 1.4, 3.12, 4.20 and 4.31) 
 
  4 
 
21.05% 
 