  
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the  Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment  on Demands for Grants -2007-2008 of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.03.2008 
 
                           Laid in Rajya Sabha on        04.03.2008 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
    December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
30 

  
 
 
30 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2007-2008) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Obse rvations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on 
Demands for Grants for the year 2007 -2008 of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
 

  
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                    
      
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………..                  
 
 
INTRODUCTION …….…………………………………………………….      
 
 
 
CHA[TER - I 
       Report………………………………………………………………                         
 
     CHAPTER II  
  
 Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………                      
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire  
 to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government………………          
  
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..         
   
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                
  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee                         
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 14 December, 2007.             
               
       
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     
recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………     
                

  
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIALJUSTICE  AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2007-2008) 
 
 Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
   MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
 4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
 6. Shri Hari Bhau Jawale 
 7. Shri Bhai Lal 
 8. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
9. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
10. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
11. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
12. Shri Jual Oram 
13. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
14. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma 
16. Dr. R. Senthil 
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
20. Smt. Usha Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
           RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24.       Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25.       Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27.       Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28.       Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29.       Shri Veer Singh 
30.       Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
__________________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqualification from 
the Membership of the 14th Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker on 27 January, 2008. 
 
 
           
 
 

  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
   1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -    Additional Secretary 
 2.   Shri Ashok Sarin            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -   Director 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Deputy Secretary 
            5.   Shri Yash Pal Sharma        -         Executive Assistant 

  
 
 
          
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report on the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants – 2007-08 relatin g to the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
 . 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th April, 2007 
and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2007.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recomme ndations contained 
in that Report on 10 th August, 2007. The Report was considered and adopted by 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held 
on 14th December, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the  recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2007        Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
 Empowerment. 
     

  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Governm ent on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants-2007-08 relating to  Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th April, 2007 
and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2007.  It contained 22 
recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the recommendations 
have been received and are categorized as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the  
Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 3.19, 3.21, 3.53, 3.67, 3.77, 3.86 and 3.109 
 
(Total 7 – Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
Paragraph Nos. 3.20, 3.42, 3.52, 3.65, 3.78, 3.87 and 3.95 
 
(Total 7 – Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented 
upon by the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 3.23, 3.25, 3.43 and 3.66  
(Total 4 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature.  
Paragraph Nos. 1.4, 3.22, 3.24 and 3.41 
(Total 4 – Chapter V) 

  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that actio n taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final replies in respect of  the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
1.4  The committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Funding pattern of Centrally Sponsored Schemes like ‘Ashram 
Schools in Tribal Sub Plan Areas’ and ‘Construct ion of Boys and 
Girls Hostels’ 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No.3.23) 
1.5 The Committee had noted with concern that the proposal of the Ministry to 
change the funding pattern of Centrally Sponsored Schemes like ‘Ashram 
Schools in Tribal Sub Plan Areas’ and ‘Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels’ 
from 50:50 to 100% funding by Centre during the Eleventh Five Year Plan had 
not been agreed to by the Planning Commission. The reasons for non -approval 
of their proposal by the Planning Commission had not been i ntimated to the 
Committee.  The Committee had desired that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter vigorously and impress upon the Planning Commission the seriousness of 
the financial  difficulties being faced by the States in providing their 50% 
matching share  so that the aforesaid schemes could be funded 100% by Centre. 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In their reply, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have stated that the schemes of 
“Ashram Schools in Tribal Sub Plan Areas” and “Construction of Boys and Girls 

  
 
Hostels” have been reviewed and EFC proposals are under process with some 
modifications in the schemes and funding pattern. In the case of Ashram 
Schools, 100% Central assistance has been proposed in the naxal affected 
States and in the case of other States, t he existing pattern of 50:50 would 
continue. 
As regards the scheme of Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels, as 
proposed by Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs has also proposed 100% funding for girls’ hostels. In the case of Boys 
Hostels, 100% funding has been proposed in naxal -affected States while in the 
remaining States, the existing pattern of 50:50 would be continued. 
 
1.7 The Committee had earlier observed that the Ministry’s proposal to 
change the funding pattern of  centrally sponsored schemes like ‘Ashram 
Schools in Tribal Sub -Plan Areas’ and ‘Construction of Boys and Girls 
Hostels from 50:50 to 100% funding by Center had not been agreed to by 
the Planning Commission.  However, in view of the financial difficulties 
being faced by the States in providing matching share, the Committee had 
desired that the Ministry should pursue with the Planning Commission for 
changing the funding pattern of the above said schemes to 100% by the 
Centre.  The Ministry in their reply hav e stated that the above schemes 
have been reviewed by them and in case of ‘Ashram Schools’ there is 
proposal for 100% central assistance in naxal affected States and for other 
States the existing pattern of 50:50 would continue.  Further, 100% funding 
has been proposed for construction of girls hostels and in case of boys 

  
 
hostels, 100% funding has been proposed in naxal affected States while in 
remaining States the existing pattern of 50:50 would continue.  The 
Committee have not been indicated whether the Ministry approached the 
Planning Commission in this regard as was recommended by them in their 
original Report. Considering the economic and educational backwardness 
in tribal areas and also financial difficulties of States in providing matching 
share by them, the Committee do not agree with the above proposal of the 
Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge upon the Ministry to take up the proposal of providing 100% 
central assistance under the schemes ‘Ashram Sch ools in Tribal Sub -Plan 
Areas’ and ‘Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels’ not only in naxal 
affected areas but also in all the tribal areas.  The Committee desire that 
Ministry should take up the matter with the Planning Commission with a 
view to ensuring 100% Central Assistance for the aforesaid Schemes. 
 
B. Entrepreneurship development programmes for educated and 
unemployed ST youths 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8,  Para No.3.25) 
1.8 The Committee in para 3.25 of the original Report had noted that the 
prerogative of identifying training activities including programmes for the ST 
youths was that of the State Government and that the type and manner of 
training programmes to be given to STs for entrepreneurship was looked after by 
the   National Scheduled Tribe s Finance and Development Corporation, a Public 
Sector Undertaking of the Ministry.   The training programmes being conducted 

  
 
for the tribals were of general nature and did not help to develop entrepreneurial 
skills among educated and unemployed ST youths.   The Committee had desired 
that in this era of globalization and rapid influx of information technology, the 
Government should create avenues for the educated and unemployed ST youths 
to develop their entrepreneurial skills which would enable them to get  
employment as well as inspire them to participate actively in the growing 
economy.  The Committee had also recommended the Ministry to focus their 
attention towards entrepreneurship development programmes through revamping 
of existing programmes or creati on of a new scheme during the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan by  incorporating latest advancements made in the technology and the 
economy.  For this, they should work in close coordination with State 
Governments and National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Developme nt 
Corporation. 
Reply of the Government 
1.9 The Ministry, in their reply have stated that National Scheduled Tribes 
Finance and Development Corporation (NSTFDC) provides financial assistance 
through the State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) nominated by the r espective 
Ministries/ State Governments for the economic development of Scheduled 
Tribes who are having annual family income upto Double the Poverty line Limit 
(Target Group). The NSTFDC provides Grant to the SCAs for imparting training 
for Skill and Entre preneurship Development of the Target Group for self -
employment/ employment only for the programmes assisted by NSTFDC and the 
corporation is not connected in any manner with the other training programmes 

  
 
of GOI/ State Governments. However, all efforts are  being made by NSTFDC in 
providing the need based training to the Target Group of NSTFDC. 
There are programmes/ schemes being implemented for developing 
entrepreneurial skills for ST youths. Vocational Courses for STs are also in 
vogue under the existing s cheme of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, namely, 
“Vocational Training Centers in Tribal Areas”.  
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has noted the Committee’s advise regarding 
creation of a new scheme during the Eleventh Five Year Plan on 
entrepreneurship development. 
 
1.10 The Committee are concerned to note that National Scheduled Tribes 
Finance and Development Corporation provides Grant to the State 
Channelising Agencies for imparting training for skill and entrepreneurship 
development of the target Group for  self-employment/ employment only for 
its assisted programmes and corporation is not connected in any manner 
with the other training programmes of Government of India/State 
Governments.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry that t he corporation do not assist in any way for other training 
programmes of Government of India/State Governments. The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that other training programmes being conducted by 
the Government of India/State Governments may equally be  important for 
developing the professional skills and generating employment avenues 
particularly among ST youths.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
NSTFDC should also assist scheduled tribe youths in getting need based 

  
 
training under the programme s being run by Government of India/State 
Governments.  Apart from this, there should be close coordination & 
cooperation with these  agencies of Centre & State Governments to ensure 
effective training programmes and to avoid overlapping of certain 
components thereof. 
     The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should focus their attention towards entrepreneurship 
development programmes and formulate a new scheme during the 
Eleventh Five year Plan by incorporating latest advancements made in the 
information technology and the economy.  
 
C. Development of Forest Villages 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 3.43) 
1.11 The Committee had noted that for the programme of ‘Development of 
Forest Villages’, introduced in 2005 -06, Rs. 450 crores had been provided in the 
Tenth Five Year Plan as a one time measure.  The total number of forest villages 
covered during 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 was 2347 and Rs. 41277.95 lakhs had 
been released for the same.  During 2007 -08, an amount of Rs. 15 0 crores had 
been earmarked towards the development of the forest villages. However, the 
Committee had expressed concern over the fact that proposals for the 
development of forest villages had not been received from 86 forest villages in 
the States of Assa m, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Uttar 
Pradesh.   The Committee had not been intimated about the reasons for non 
submission of proposals by the States.  The Committee had desired that sincere 

  
 
efforts should be made to cover the remaining 86  forest villages at the earliest 
and had urged the Ministry to pursue with those States to send their proposals 
early. The Committee had also desired that developmental activities in the 2347 
forest villages, for which funds had been released earlier, shou ld be monitored 
effectively and properly. 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated that as on 01.08.2007, 
the Ministry has released Rs. 459.25 crore for development of 2338 forest 
villages spread over 11 States in t he country, out of a total of 2474 villages. 
Proposals have been received from U.P. for 2 more villages which is under 
consideration. As per feedback received from State Governments and the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests, proposals not received from the  remaining 86 
villages could be attributed to reasons like villages falling in protected areas, 
migration of population from the village, etc. However, the Ministry is actively 
pursuing with the State Governments in the matter. 
Regarding the activities in the villages for which funds have been 
released, State Governments have been advised to furnish progress reports. The 
Ministry of Environment & Forests is also being requested to take necessary 
action in the matter. 
 
1.13 The Committee, in their recommenda tion, had expressed concern 
over the fact that proposals for development had not been received from 86 
forest villages in Assam, Chattishgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and 
Uttar Pradesh and had recommended to make sincere efforts to cover the 

  
 
remaining 86 forest villages at the earliest and pursue with those states to 
send their proposals early.  The Ministry, in their reply, have stated that the 
proposals not received from the remaining 86 villages could be attributed 
to reasons like villages falling in  protected areas, migration of population 
from the village, etc.  The Committee are not convinced by this  argument 
of the Ministry which clearly indicates total inaction on their part in inviting 
proposals from these 86 Forest Villages.  The Committee fee l that  in the 
absence of concrete proposals from the State Governments for 
development of forest villages, the development activities can not be 
initiated.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that the Ministry should vigorous ly pursue with the remaining  States so 
that they send the proposals expeditiously, complete in all respects, for 
carrying out developmental activities in these 86 Forest Villages also.  
Further, in the 2347 Forest villages for which funds have already bee n 
released, the Ministry ought  to monitor effectively the proper utilisation of 
funds released.  
 
 
D. Grants-in-aid to Tribal Research Institutes 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 3.66) 
 
1.14 The Committee in para 3.66 of the Original Report had note d that the 
Ministry had been releasing grants -in-aid to 18 Tribal Research Institutes 
engaged in the work of providing planning inputs to the State Governments; 

  
 
conducting research and evaluation studies; collection of data; setting up of tribal 
museum for exhibiting tribal artifacts etc. Proposals for setting up new TRIs had 
been received from the States of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim but 
they were either incomplete or not in accordance with the norms of the scheme.  
The funds released to the A ndaman & Nicobar Administration for setting up 
Tribal Research Institute at Port Blair during 2002 -03 had been revalidated 
during the financial year 2006-07 as Tribal Research Institute could not be set up 
there.  The Committee had expressed concern that u ndue delay had occurred in 
setting up Tribal Research Institutes  in the States/UT of Uttarakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Sikkim and Andaman & Nicobar Islands and urged the Ministry to take 
up the matter with the concerned State Governments/UT Administration at t he 
highest level, assist and guide the State Government in rectifying the 
shortcomings in the proposals etc so that the proposed Tribal Research Institutes 
were set up at the earliest in those States. 
Reply of the Government 
1.15 In their action  taken not e the Ministry have stated that to set up Tribal 
Research Institutes at the earliest in the States of Uttarakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Sikkim, the Ministry has written letters to the respective State 
Governments on 11 th April, 2007 to submit their proposal s with State Budgetary 
Provisions for the year 2007 -08. The concerned States have been reminded 
again to furnish the required details. 
In the Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a Tribal Research Institute has been 
set up and an amount of Rs.29.50 lakh has been released for the year 2006-07. 
 

  
 
1.16 The Committee express their dismay over the fact that the proposals 
received for setting up Tribal Research Institutes in Uttarakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Sikkim were either incomplete or not in accordance with the 
norms of the schemes resulting in inordinate delay in setting up the Tribal 
Research Institutes in these states.  The Committee also express their 
displeasure that the concerned State Governments have not yet responded 
to the communication sent by the Central Min istry in this regard in April, 
2007.  This is yet another instance wherein neither  the States submitted 
their proposals nor the Ministry made sincere efforts to procure the same 
from the concerned State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate th eir earlier   recommendation and urge the Government to take 
up the matter of setting up Tribal Research Institutes in Uttarakhand, 
Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim at the level of Union Minister for Tribal 
Affairs with the respective Chief Ministers.   
 

  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.19) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that out of Rs. 6478.72 crore allocated by the 
Planning Commission during the Tenth Five Year Plan, the expendi ture incurred 
was Rs. 5992.15 crore under Plan Schemes of the Ministry leading to shortfall of 
Rs. 486.57 crore.  The expenditure incurred under Non -Plan i.e.  Rs. 38.87 crore 
out of the BE of Rs. 52.06 crore is also not satisfactory.  The Committee regret  to 
observe that an amount of Rs. 486.57 crore, which could have been fruitfully 
utilized for the welfare and development of the Scheduled Tribes could not be 
utilized. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should evolve 
an effective mechan ism of implementation of schemes, minimize procedural 
delays and ensure optimum utilization of funds allocated by the Planning 
Commission during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The correct figures relating to shortfall in the Plan Expenditure are given 
below (figures are upto 4th place of decimal). 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Exp. Shortfall 
w.r.t. BE 
Shortfall  
w.r.t. RE 
2002-03 1090.00  1012.00  1005.1034  84.8966  6.8966 
2003-04 1087.00 900.00 893.9045 193.0955 6.0955 

  
 
2004-05 1146.00 1069.45 1053.064 92.9360 16.3860 
2005-06 1498.82 1398.82 1391.9532 106.8668 6.8668 
2006-07* 1656.90 1652.68 1648.1408 8.7592 4.5392 
Total 6478.72 6032.95 5992.1659 486.5541 40.7841 
*  figures for this year are provisional. 
 
It would be s een from the above table that the shortfall in the expenditure was 
mainly during the year 2003 -04 of the 10 th Five Year Plan.  During that year, the 
expenditure was less than 90%. The Ministry took stock of the situation with a 
view to ensure optimum utili zation of allocated funds. The efforts made by the 
Ministry bore fruit and the expenditure picked up during the subsequent years 
and it reached 99.47% in the last year of the 10 th Five Year Plan. The Ministry 
proposes to continue its efforts to ensure full  utilization of the allocated funds 
during all the five years of the 11th Five Year Plan also. The utilization of funds by 
State Governments has a direct impact on the fund utilization by the Ministry. 
The correct figures relating to the shortfall in the Non Plan Expenditure are 
given below (figures are upto the 4th place of decimal). 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Exp. Shortfall 
w.r.t. BE 
Shortfall  
w.r.t. RE 
2002-03 6.38  6.39 5.8511 0.5289 0.5389 
2003-04 10.70 11.30 **7.2694 3.4306 4.0306 
2004-05 13.005 12.4952 9.6688 3.3362 2.8264 

  
 
Year BE RE Exp. Shortfall 
w.r.t. BE 
Shortfall  
w.r.t. RE 
2005-06 10.92 10.35 7.9788 2.9412 2.3712 
2006-07* 10.56 10.42 8.2848 2.2752 2.1352 
Total 51.5650 50.9552 39.0529 12.5121 11.9023 
           
*   Figures for this year are provisional 
** This is the reconciled figure whereas the figure of Rs.7.0871 was provisional 
figure. 
It would be seen from the above that the expenditure is nearly 80% of B.E.  This 
should be considered to be adequate because Ministry of Finance has issued 
several economy instructions from time to time asking all Ministries to contain the 
non plan expenditure. 
In addition, the Ministry has already adopted decentralized procedure since 
2005-06 and a Multi Disciplinary State Level Committee was constituted in each 
State/UT. All the States have adopted this syste m except Bihar. The State Level 
Committee is required to identify the service deficient tribal areas and accordingly 
scrutinize the proposals submitted by voluntary organizations and recommend 
them on merit in an order of priority. The Ministry makes effor ts right from 
beginning of the financial year that the meetings of the various State Committees 
are held in time and the proposals are received in the Ministry by first quarter of 
the financial year. This system has worked successfully for the last two years and 
procedural delays have been cut down considerably. Thus with the help of State 
Committees, Ministry is in position to identify the tribal areas which are deficient 

  
 
in various services and also the functioning of NGOs have come under 
supervision. 
Further, from the current financial year, the Ministry is further simplifying the 
procedure for application and prescribing a checklist/ time schedule of 
documents to be submitted apart from strengthening monitoring systems. 
The mechanism for obtaining utiliz ation certificates, inviting proposals seeking 
release of funds, etc. is continuously being streamlined. Wide publicity is also 
being given to the schemes of this Ministry. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 3.21) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that some of the States are finding it difficult to send 
the utilization certificates of funds released by the Ministry in previous years.  
Under the scheme of ‘Development of Primitive Tribal Groups’, States like 
Rajasthan, Kerala, Manipur and Tamil Nadu have not furnished the utilization 
certificates upto 2004 -05 while Assam is yet to furnish the utilization certificates 
under the scheme of Coaching and Allied. The utilization certificates in respect o f 
the grants released during the year 2005 -06 are also due on 1 st April, 2007.  
Keeping in view the fact that release of fresh funds is linked to receipt of 
utilization certificates in respect of funds released in previous years, the 
Committee  urge the Mi nistry to strictly monitor the  utilization of funds by the 
States and ensure timely submission of Utilization Certificates by them. For this, 
the Ministry should maintain close   coordination with the States at appropriate 
levels. The Committee also desir e that the Ministry should make vigorous efforts 

  
 
to ensure that physical and financial quarterly progress reports of projects are 
received on a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs insists that the Utilization Certifica tes which 
have already fallen due, according to the provisions of the FRBM Act, are 
obtained before any new proposals for release of funds is considered. This 
insistence itself acts as a strong mechanism for monitoring the Utilization 
Certificates of the f unds released in the previous years. The Divisions in the 
Ministry are maintaining close coordination with the State Governments at the 
appropriate level, through contacts, letters, telephones, etc., to quicken this 
process. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No.3.53)  
2.5 The Committee note that though the number of beneficiaries covered 
under the component of ‘Up -gradation of Merit of ST Students’ has increased 
from 303 in 2004 -05 to 658 during 2005 -06 and 1167 students are expected to 
be benefited during 2006 -07, yet the target fixed yearly i.e.  1480 students has 
not been achieved for the last three years.  The reason attributed by the Ministry 
is non receipt of proposals/complete p roposals from various State 
Governments/UT administrations.  The Committee desire that concrete steps 
should be taken to improve the performance of the scheme and urge the Ministry 
to vigorously pursue the States/UTs to send proposals, complete in all resp ects 
for the scheme right from the beginning of the financial year. 

  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 In the beginning of each financial year all State Governments/UT 
Administrations are addressed to send complete proposals under the Scheme of 
‘Up-gradation of Merit of ST students’ in time. All State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been impressed upon to publicize the scheme so that a 
greater number of Tribal students may avail of the benefits of the scheme. In 
addition, during the course of bi -annual meetin g of State 
Secretaries/Commissioners of Tribal Welfare/Development Departments of 
States held in February, 2007 it was again emphasized that they should avail the 
benefits of the scheme and send complete proposals on time.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation  (Sl No. 16, Para 3.67) 
2.7 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry are considering 
their earlier recommendation to restructure the TRIs and change the funding 
pattern from 50% Centra l share to 100%. However, the Committee are 
constrained to find that the functioning /performance of the TRIs are not 
monitored or evaluated regularly by the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the 
performance of TRIs should be monitored and evaluated reg ularly and hope that 
the Ministry would strengthen the TRIs in terms of manpower and financial 
resources through a provision of 100% Central funding at the earliest. 

  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Efforts will be made to obtain progress reports periodically for t he TRI 
Scheme from the State Governments. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No.3.77) 
2.9 The Committee note that efforts are made by the Ministry to assess the 
performance of NGOs th rough spot inspections of the projects run by them.  
However, the Ministry are unable to provide the details of spot inspections 
carried out during 2006 -07 and are relying on the State Governments to submit 
the inspection report along with the proposal of the NGOs for their consideration 
every year.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism in coordination with State Governments and the 
performance of NGOs should be strictly monitored and regular inspections 
carried out by the officials of the Ministry as well as concerned State Government 
authorities to the maximum extent possible.   
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The directives of the Committee have been noted and efforts are being 
made to further strengthen the monit oring mechanism in coordination with the 
State Governments. As already mentioned in response to Para 3.20, annual 
inspection report from District Collector/authorities is mandatory for NGO 
proposals. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 

  
 
Recommendation  (Sl No. 19, Para No. 3.86) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that the Ministry have sanctioned a number of 
Hostels for ST Boys and Girls but no specific time period has been stipulated for 
completion of the hostels.  The Ministry s eems to be satisfied with releasing its 
50% share without keeping a track on the progress and achievement regarding 
construction of the hostels.  The Committee would like to draw the attention of 
the Ministry to the fact that the Ministry of Social Justice  and Empowerment, 
which is also implementing the same scheme for SC Boys and Girls, have 
specified a time frame of five years for completion of the hostels sanctioned by 
them which is now proposed to be reduced to two years.  The Committee, 
therefore, reco mmend that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should also fix a time 
limit, preferably two years from the date of release of Central assistance for 
completion of the Boys and Girls Hostels so that State Governments/UT 
Administrations would act expeditiously an d in right earnest and ensure that the 
sanctioned hostels are completed in time.  Steps taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 Ministry of Tribal Affairs is also making a provision in the revised 
guidelines of Boys/Girls hostels scheme to fix a maximum time limit of 5 years for 
completion of the hostels. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 

  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22,  Para No.3.109) 
2.13 The Committee appreciate the steps t aken by Tribal Cooperative 
Marketing Development Federation of India Limited to reorient its activities and 
shift the focus from direct trading activities to marketing development of tribal 
products/produce with the purpose of curtailing the losses incurre d by it earlier. 
Under the detailed roadmap, awaiting the approval of the competent authority, 
important sectors like retail marketing of tribal products, MFP marketing 
development, vocational training, skill up gradation and capacity building of MFP 
gatherers etc. have been covered. Keeping in view the fact that TRIFED has 
been suffering heavy losses when its focus was on procurement of Minor Forest 
Produce and Surplus Agricultural Produce rather than on marketing 
development, the Committee are of the opin ion that TRIFED has taken a step in 
the right direction by confining itself mainly to marketing of tribal handicrafts, 
handlooms and other natural products and undertaking developmental projects 
connected with their skill up gradation and income generation .  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to get the proposed roadmap prepared by TRIFED, 
approved by the competent authority expeditiously and ensure that it is properly 
implemented at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The proposal for modifying the Central Sector Scheme of ‘Price Support to 
TRIFED’ to ‘Grants -in-Aid to TRIFED for Market Development of Tribal 
Products/Produce’ was discussed and approved with some modifications in the 
Appraisal Committee meeting held on 24.4.2007 under  Chairpersonship of 

  
 
Secretary (TA). Presently, action is in process for obtaining of approval of 
authorities at appropriate levels as per the laid-down procedures.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.3.20) 
3.1 The Committee note with concern that Planning Commission has scaled 
down the budget proposal of the Ministry from Rs. 2468.56 crore to Rs. 1719.71 
crore for the Annual Plan 2007 -08 which is a mere 3.79% increase over the 
corresponding figure of 2006 -07 i.e. Rs. 1656.90 crore.  This implies that the 
amount in real terms during the current year has com e down if inflation is taken 
into consideration.  This decline is inexplicable as some new schemes like 
National Institute of Tribal Affairs(NITA), Institutes of Excellence/Top Class 
Education, National Overseas Scholarship Scheme, National Tribal Affairs 
Awards, Centers of Excellence  and Habitat/Hamlet development of Primitive 
Tribal Groups have also been launched. Obviously, the funds provided in the 
budget are not adequate to address the  gigantic stature of the backwardness of 
the Scheduled Tribes and the Committee, therefore, express their serious 
concern as to  how the Ministry will be able to implement the new schemes as 
well as the existing ones effectively in the absence of adequate funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the  matter with the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance again so that its budgetary allocation for 
2007-08 is augmented at RE stage and implementation of programmes for the 
welfare and development of the tribal people do not suffer due to paucity of 
funds. 

  
 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the funds released for various tribal welfare schemes 
are fully utilized during the year.  There should not be any diversion of funds and  
implementation status of schemes needs to be regularly monitored by the 
Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 In view of the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter is 
being taken up with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
requesting them to allocate additional funds to this Ministry. 
The mechanism followed to ensure proper utilization of funds is as under: 
(i) The provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
(FRBM)    Act are strictly followed; 
(ii) Utilization Certificate s are insisted upon as a pre -requisite for further 
release   of funds; 
(iii) Periodic progress reports regarding the status of implementation of 
schemes are obtained; 
(iv) Central Government Officers undertake on the spot visits to the States/ 
Union Territories for a scertaining the progress of implementation of 
various schemes/ programmes of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs; 
(v) Meetings/ Conferences are convened at the Central level with State 
Ministers and State Secretaries in charge of Tribal Welfare and 
Development Depa rtments in the States to ensure timely submission of 
proposals, speed up of implementation of the schemes/ programmes, and 
reviewing the physical and financial progress; 

  
 
(vi) At the State and field level, bodies like the Tribes Advisory Council, 
Project Impleme ntation Committees of ITDPs and Panchayat Samities 
also monitor timely spending of funds and effective implementation of the 
schemes/ programmes. 
In respect of NGOs, the annual inspection report from District Collector/ 
authorities is also mandatory. 
No report of diversion of funds has come to the notice of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 3.42) 
3.3 The Committee note that the Ministry have been pr oactively advocating 
the need for an effective Tribal Sub -plan component (8% for Central 
Ministries/Departments and in proportion to their ST population in respect of 
States) and that the Planning Commission has also issued orders to this effect.  
The Comm ittee note with concern that various Ministries have not found it 
feasible to earmark separate allocation for the Scheduled Tribes.  Though the 
Ministry have rightly taken up this issue with the Planning Commission, the 
Committee are of the view that a foc used attention towards the development of 
STs is possible only if the States and Central Ministries earmark the TSP 
component separately and utilize the same in consultation with the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs, which is the nodal Ministry for overall polic y, planning and 
coordination of programmes for development of the Scheduled Tribes.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter with the 

  
 
Planning Commission and concerned States/Central Ministries/Departments so 
that the TS P component i.e. 8% for Central Ministries/Departments and in 
proportion to ST population in respective States are put in a separate budget 
head, which is made non -divertible and non -lapsable for implementation of 
schemes for the Scheduled Tribes, in a mor e focused and integrated manner. If 
need be, the matter may be brought to the notice of Cabinet Secretariat who may 
be requested to pursue with the defaulting Central Ministries.   The matter may 
also be taken up at the highest level with the States.   
Reply of the Government 
3.4 The Ministry specifically do not have any mandate to formulate any policy 
guidelines for implementation of TSP through various Central Government 
Ministries. The Planning Commission has issued guidelines for both formulation 
and im plementation of TSP by the Central Government Ministries as also 
preparation of schemes/ programmes by the State Governments. They have also 
issued orders for States to earmark funds under a separate Budget Head. The 
Planning Commission has set up a Tripar tite Committee consisting of 
representatives of Planning Commission, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and concerned 
Ministries. The Tripartite Committee in consultation with each concerned Ministry 
will identify the programme/ scheme projects benefiting STs.   
This Ministry in the interest of the Tribals is taking the support of the guidelines 
issued by the Planning Commission for implementation of Tribal Sub Plan 
strategy in the States as also the Central Government Ministries functioning with 
Social Welfare as a mandate. However, this Ministry has no role to play in 
enforcing TSP; the Planning Commission, which approves the Budget outlay 

  
 
annually for the Central Government Ministries as also the State Governments, is 
in a position to enforce TSP. However, on the  basis of the recommendation of 
the Committee, this Ministry has written to all the concerned Central Ministries/ 
Departments for abiding by the TSP guidelines. 
The matter is being actively pursued with the State Governments regularly by this 
Ministry and many of the States have begun to comply with the requirements of 
TSP. 
The States have been urged from time to time to place the entire TSP funds (at 
least in equal proportion to the population of Scheduled Tribes in the States) in a 
“single budget head” an d place under the administrative control of the Tribal 
Development/ Welfare Department of the State Government for integrated and 
focused planning and implementation of projects/ scheme to improve the socio -
economic conditions of STs and to bring them at p ar with the rest of the 
population. Many of the States have done so. 
The Central Ministries have also been requested from time to time to utilize at 
least 8% of their budget for the welfare and development of Scheduled Tribes. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 3.52) 
3.5 The Committee note that under the scheme of Post Matric Scholarships,  
Planning Commission has approved Rs. 202.99 crores for the year 2007 -08 at 
the BE stage out of Rs. 225 crores proposed by the Ministry to cover 9.17 lakh 
students whereas Rs. 255.04 crores were released during 2006 -07 for about 7.9 
lakh beneficiaries.  The Committee would like to be informed as to how with the 

  
 
reduced allocation more students wou ld be covered under the scholarships.  
Keeping in view the fact that the Ministry proposes to cover 9.17 lakh 
beneficiaries during the year 2007 -08, the Committee express apprehension that 
the implementation of this important scheme of providing financial assistance to 
the Scheduled Tribe students would be hampered due to paucity of funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to review the requirement of funds under 
the scheme again and approach the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance 
for more allocations. 
Reply of the Government 
3.6 The scheme of Post Matric Scholarship for Scheduled Tribes is 
administered by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and implemented by the State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations, which have a committed 
liability to meet part of the cost.  The Government of India gives 100% central 
assistance over and above this committed liability. The level of committed liability 
of respective State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations is equivalent to 
the level of ac tual expenditure incurred by them under the scheme during the 
terminal year of the last Five Year Plan. As far as the North Eastern States are 
concerned, since 2006-07 was the terminal year of the Tenth Five Year Plan, the 
actual expenditure incurred by th e State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations during 2006-07 will be their committed liability for all the years of 
the Eleventh  Five Year Plan. Accordingly, the actual expenditure during 2006 -07 
incurred by the State Government/UT Administratio n has become their 
respective committed liability for 2007-08. 

  
 
The Committee has rightly noted that Planning Commission has approved 
Rs.202.99 crores for the year 2007 -08 to cover 9.17 lakh students whereas 
Rs.255.04 crores were released during 2006 -07 for about 7.9 lakh beneficiaries. 
In this connection, it is mentioned that as the committed liability on the part of 
State Governments/UT Administrations will be higher during 2007 -08, based on 
actual expenditure for 2006 -07, the central share is, therefore, expected to be 
less during 2007 -08 and as such more number of beneficiaries will be covered 
with lower budget allocation.   
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 3.65) 
3.7 The Committee note that under the scheme of Research Information and 
Mass Education, Tribal Festivals and Others, there is always a shortfall in the 
expenditure during the last three years.  The reasons for the shortfall are stated 
to be non -receipt of  revised do cuments from grantee; non -receipt of Bills from 
DAVP and Prasar Bharati, non receipt of Utilization Certificates and proposals 
from States etc.  Besides, components of the scheme like Construction of Adivasi 
Bhavan and Promotion of Tribal Culture are still  non-starters.  The Committee 
take a serious view of this situation of non -performance on the part of the 
Government and desire that the Ministry should take urgent and concrete 
measures to minimize procedural delays and streamline its delivery mechanism 
for effective implementation of schemes for the welfare and development of the 
Scheduled Tribes.  The Ministry should make serious efforts to develop their 
culture and language also. 

  
 
Reply of the Government 
3.8 The scheme Promotion of Tribal Culture was not  operationalised as it is 
similar to the scheme of Organization of Tribal Festival. The Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs has, time and again, requested the Ministry of Urban Development to allot 
the land for construction of Adivasi Bhavan. Entire provision for c onstruction of 
Adivasi Bhavan remained unutilized due to non -availability of land. However, 
more efforts will be made for minimizing the delay. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 3.78) 
3.9 The Committee find that the Ministry have adopted a decentralized 
procedure for receipt, identification, scrutiny and sanction of proposals from 
NGOs.  The project proposals for service deficient tribal areas need to be 
recommended by multidisc iplinary `State Committee for Voluntary Efforts’ for 
each State.  However, the Committee note with concern that the State Level 
Committee has not been constituted in U.P. and Bihar so far.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the States o f U.P. and Bihar to constitute 
the State level Committee at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
3.10 With continuous efforts of the Ministry, Government of Uttar Pradesh has 
constituted the Multidisciplinary State Level Committee.  Bihar is yet to follow. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
 

  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 3.87) 
3.11 The Committee note  that under the Scheme of ‘Construction of Hostels 
for ST Boys and Girls’, expenditure is shared on a 50:50 mat ching basis by the 
Centre and the State Governments while the responsibility for maintenance of 
the hostels lies with concerned States/UTs.  The Committee have been informed 
that State Governments are finding it difficult to provide funds for maintaining t he 
hostels and thus maintenance of hostels remains neglected.  The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should persuade the concerned State Governments to 
bear the maintenance costs of hostels. 
Reply of the Government 
3.12 The responsibility for maintenance of hostels lies with the concerned State 
Governments/UT Administrations as there is no provision in the scheme for 
giving funds for maintenance. As States/UTs are finding it difficult to provide 
funds for maintaining the hostels, the Ministry of Tribal Aff airs has addressed all 
States/UTs to explore the possibility of using funds available under Grants under 
Article 275(1) of the Constitution and through National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) in districts covered under the programme for this 
purpose. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 3.95) 
3.13 The Committee note that the scheme of Educational Complex in Low 
Literacy Pockets is being revised in order to have a more focus ed approach to 
improve literacy among tribal girls in districts where there is significant tribal 
population and female tribal literacy is below the national level of 35%. The 

  
 
Committee further note that the Ministry have revised the list of identified low  
literacy districts using two parameters viz, percentage of tribal population and ST 
female literacy rate and propose to implement the revised scheme during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan as per the revised list of identified districts.  The 
Committee appreci ate the efforts being made by the Ministry to make the 
scheme more effective and focused towards improvement of literacy among tribal 
girls and urge them to finalize the revised scheme at the earliest and implement 
the same right  from the beginning of the financial year 2007-08. 
Reply of the Government 
3.14 EFC note was circulated in April 2007 and now a date for EFC meeting 
from Ministry of Finance is being obtained. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
  

  
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION/ OBERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No.3.23) 
4.1 The Committee also note with concern that the propos al of the Ministry to 
change the funding pattern of Centrally Sponsored Schemes like ‘Ashram 
Schools in Tribal Sub Plan Areas’ and ‘Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels’ 
from 50:50 to 100% funding by Centre during the Eleventh Five Year Plan has 
not been agreed to by the Planning Commission. The reasons for non -approval 
of their proposal by the Planning Commission have not been intimated to the 
Committee.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should pursue the matter 
vigorously and impress upon the Plan ning Commission the seriousness of the 
financial  difficulties being faced by the States in providing their 50% matching 
share  so that the aforesaid schemes could be funded 100% by Centre. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The schemes of “Ashram Schools in Trib al Sub Plan Areas” and 
“Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels” have been reviewed and EFC proposals 
are under process with some modifications in the schemes and funding pattern. 
In the case of Ashram Schools, 100% Central assistance has been proposed in 
the naxal affected States and in the case of other States, the existing pattern of 
50:50 would continue. 
As regards the scheme of Construction of Boys and Girls Hostels, as proposed 
by Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  has 

  
 
also proposed 100% funding for girls’ hostels. In the case of Boys Hostels, 100% 
funding has been proposed in naxal -affected States while in the remaining 
States, the existing pattern of 50:50 would be continued. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8,  Para No.3.25) 
4.3 The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the prerogative of 
identifying training activities including programmes for the ST youths is that of the 
State Government and that the type and manner of training programmes to be 
given to STs for entrepreneurship is looked after by the   National Scheduled 
Tribes Finance and Development Corporation, w hich is a Public Sector 
Undertaking of the Ministry.   The training programmes being conducted for the 
tribals are of general nature and do not help develop entrepreneurial skills among 
educated and unemployed ST youths.  The Committee desire that in this era of 
globalization and rapid influx of information technology, the Government should 
create avenues for the educated and unemployed ST youths to develop their 
entrepreneurial skills which will enable them to get  employment as well as 
inspire them to participate actively in the growing economy.  The Committee, also 
recommend the Ministry to focus their attention towards entrepreneurship 
development programmes through revamping of existing programmes or creation 
of a new scheme during the Eleventh Five Yea r Plan by  incorporating latest 
advancements made in the technology and the economy.  For this, they should 

  
 
work in close coordination with State Governments and National Scheduled 
Tribes Finance and Development Corporation. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSTFDC) provides financial assistance through the State Channelising 
Agencies (SCAs) nominated by the respective Ministries/ State Governments for 
the economic development of Scheduled Tribes who are having annual family 
income upto Double the Poverty line Limit (Target Group). The NSTFDC 
provides Grant to the SCAs for imparting training for Skill and Entrepreneurship 
Development of the Target Group for self -employment/ employment only for the 
programmes assisted by NSTFDC and the corporation is not connected in any 
manner with the other training programmes of GOI/ State Governments. 
However, all efforts are being made by NSTFDC in providing the need based 
training to the Target Group of NSTFDC. 
There are programmes/ schemes being implemented for developing 
entrepreneurial skills for ST youths. Vocational Courses for STs are also in 
vogue under the existing scheme of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, namely, 
“Vocational Training Centers in Tribal Areas”.  
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has noted the Committee’s advise regarding 
creation of a new scheme during the Eleventh Five Year Plan on 
entrepreneurship development. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11,  Para No. 3.43) 
4.5 The Committee note that for the programme of ‘Development of Forest 
Villages’, introduced in 2005-06, Rs. 450 crores have been provided in the Tenth 
Five Year Plan as a one time measure.  The total number of forest villages 
covered during 2005-06 and 2006-07 is 2347 and Rs. 41277.95 lakhs have been 
released for the same.  During 2007 -08, an amount of Rs. 150 crores have been 
earmarked towards the  development of the forest villages. However, the 
Committee express concern over the fact that proposals for the development of 
forest villages have not been received from 86 forest villages in the States of 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand  and Uttar Pradesh.   The 
Committee have not been intimated about the reasons for non submission of 
proposals by the States.  The Committee desire that sincere efforts should be 
made to cover the remaining 86 forest villages at the earliest and urge the 
Ministry to pursue with those States to send their proposals early. The 
Committee also desire that developmental activities in the 2347 forest villages, 
for which funds have been released earlier, should be monitored effectively and 
properly. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 As on 01.08.07, the Ministry has released for Rs. 459.25 crore for 
development of 2338 forest villages spread over 11 States in the country, out of a 
total of 2474 villages. Proposals have been received from U.P. for 2 more 
villages which is u nder consideration. As per feedback received from State 
Governments and the Ministry of Environment & Forests, proposals not received 
from the remaining 86 villages could be attributed to reasons like villages falling 

  
 
in protected areas, migration of popul ation from the village, etc. However, the 
Ministry is actively pursuing with the State Governments in the matter. 
Regarding the activities in the villages for which funds have been released, State 
Governments have been advised to furnish progress reports. The Ministry of 
Environment & Forests is also being requested to take necessary action in the 
matter. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 3.66) 
4.7 The Committee note that the Ministry have been releasing grants -in-aids 
to 18 Tribal Research Institutes engaged in the work of providing planning inputs 
to the State Governments; conducting research and evaluation studies; collection 
of data; setting up of tribal museum for exhibiting tribal artifacts etc. Proposals for 
setting up new TRIs have been received from the States of Uttarakhand, Jammu 
& Kashmir and Sikkim but they were either incomplete or not in acco rdance with 
the norms of the scheme.  The funds released to the Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration for setting up TRI at Port Blair during 2002 -03 have been 
revalidated during the financial year 2006 -07  as TRI could not be set up there.  
The Committee expre ss concern that undue delay has occurred in setting up 
TRIs in the States/UT of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Sikkim and Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands and urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the concerned 
State Governments/UT Administration at the hig hest level, assist and guide the 

  
 
State Government in rectifying the shortcomings in the proposals etc so that the 
proposed TRIs are set up at the earliest in those States. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 To set up TRIs at the earliest in the States of Uttarakh and, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Sikkim, the Ministry has written letters to the respective State 
Governments on 11 th April, 2007 to submit their proposals with State Budgetary 
Provisions for the year 2007 -08. The concerned States have been reminded 
again to furnish the required details. 
In the Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a TRI has been set up and an amount of 
Rs.29.50 lakh has been released for the year 2006-07. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16  of Chapter-I of the Report) 

  
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.4) 
5.1 Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Gran ts, 2006 -07 
was presented to Parliament on 16 May, 2006.  Although the Action Taken Notes 
have been received from the Ministry, the Committee regret to observe that as 
per Direction 73A of `Directions by the Speaker’ necessary statement in the 
House regarding the status of implementation of recommendations contained in 
the original Report has not been made.  While deprecating this inordinate delay, 
the Committee desire that requisite action in this connection should be taken 
expeditiously by the Ministry.   
Reply of the Government 
5.2 Consequent on the adjournment of Parliament sine die on 17 th May 2007, 
the Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs could not make the statement under 
Direction 73A of the “Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha”. The same will be 
made in the forthcoming session of Parliament.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.22) 
5.3 The Committee note that though the Ministry have undertaken the process 
of review of Centra lly Sponsored Schemes to ensure implementation of modified 
schemes from 2007 -08 onwards, yet they are still in the process of carrying out 
modifications in the schemes for implementation.  The reasons for the delay in 

  
 
modifying the schemes has not been con veyed by the Ministry.  The Committee 
feel that the Ministry have made inordinate   delay in finalizing the modifications 
to be incorporated in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to finalize all the modifications i n the Centrally 
sponsored Schemes  at the earliest so that they could be implemented 
effectively.   
Reply of the Government 
5.4 All the Centrally Sponsored schemes of the Ministry are under review and 
are to be finalized shortly as per procedure laid down for EFCs/SFCs. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.24) 
5.5 The Committee have been given to understand that formulating a 
quantifiable tribal development index specially for the tribals has found mention in 
the draft National Tribal Policy of the Ministry.  The Ministry propose to put 
certain issues such as land restored to STs, policy changes by State 
Governments to empower Gram Sabhas in scheduled areas, control and access 
of STs over forest and natural resources, improvement in infant mortality rate etc.  
in the Tribal Development Index.  The Committee hope that with such an index, it 
would be feasible to monitor the welfare and development of the tribals and 
therefore, urge the Ministry to finalize the proposed draft  National Tribal Policy  
at the earliest.   

  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The Draft National Tribal Policy has already been prepared and was 
placed before Cabinet for approval on 31.5.2007. The Cabinet has referred the  
Policy to Group of Ministers for discussion and also with a direction to harmonize 
the Draft National Tribal Policy with the Rehabilitation Policy of Ministry of Rural 
Development. A meeting of GoM is expected to take place shortly.. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9,Para No. 3.41) 
5.7 Though one of the features of the guidelines regarding utilization of funds 
under the scheme of Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan is support to 
the tribal population below the poverty line, yet the Ministry have no information 
about the number of ST families/individuals assisted to cross the poverty line.  
The Ministry have explained this by saying that due to lack of adequate 
manpower in the Minis try, intensive monitoring of schemes like Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan is not possible and accordingly, details of BPL 
families are also not maintained. Information has now been sought from the State 
Governments about the number of ST fami lies/individuals assisted under the 
scheme.  The Committee are surprised that even after working on this scheme 
for more than two decades, the Ministry are still ignorant about the number of ST 
families living below the poverty line and those who were assi sted under the 
scheme of Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan so far. This clearly 
indicates lack of concern and commitment on the part of the Government.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry would now obtain the data of ST 

  
 
families/individuals l iving below poverty line as well as the number of  ST 
families/individuals assisted so far under the scheme of  Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan by exploring all possible avenues so that realistic 
action plan could be prepared to assist them during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 SCA to TSP is a programme designed to assist the State Governments/ 
UTs which are categorized as TSP States so that the States/ UTs are able to 
formulate specific projects for alleviation of p overty in tribal areas. The funding of 
SCA to TSP is meant to augment the plan activities of the State Government for 
the purpose of employment -cum-income generation and infrastructure incidental 
thereto, both family-based and Self Help Groups/ community based. Crossing the 
poverty line is dependent on many factors and assistance under SCA to TSP is 
only one step of the Government towards this.  
However, the State Governments have been requested to furnish the requisite 
information vide Ministry’s letter dated 09.04.2007. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/02/2007-PC & V dated 10.08.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2007        Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
                                                                                   Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 

  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2007. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
3. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
4. Shri Bhai Lal 
5. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
7. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
8. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
10. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
MEMBERS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Veer Singh 
16. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Saxena   - Director 
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

  
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consi der 
and adopted the following Draft Reports of the Committee. 
 
 
(i)  Draft Twenty- ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth 
Report on Demands For Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of S ocial 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
(ii)  Draft    Thirtieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
(iii)  Draft Thi rty-first Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs.  
 
(iv)  Draft Thirty -second Report on the subject “Voluntary Organisations 
Engaged in Implementing Integrated Programme for Welfare of Older 
Persons” pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
 
3. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
4.  Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirtieth Report 
without any amendment. 
 
5. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
  
6. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
  
7. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these draft Reports 
and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   TWENTY-FIFTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
          Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations      22 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations which         7  31.81% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 3.19, 3.21, 3.53, 3.67,  
3.77 3.86 and 3.109)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which        7  31.81% 
     the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Paragraph Nos. 3.20, 3.42, 3.52, 3.65,  
3.78, 3.87 and 3.95) 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in        4  18.18% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 3.23, 3.25, 3.43 and 3.66 ) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in      4  18.18% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.4, 3.22, 3.24 and 3.41) 
 
 