 
 5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants-2004-2005 of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
     FIFTH REPORT 
          
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.3.2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha 22.3.2005 
 
 
            
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)

CONTENTS 
 
      
      
      
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted  and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter I  
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature 
 
      A N N E X U R E S  
ANNEXURE I List of States that have opened separate Budget head 
of Account 
  
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
held on 18 March, 2005 
 
APPENDIX Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2004-2005) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan- CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok   Sabha 
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai  
3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
10. Shri Jual Oram 
11. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
15. Shri R. Senthil 
16. Shri Mohd. Shahid 
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
20. Smt. Usha Verma  
21. Shri K. Yerrannaidu  
 
Rajya   Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal  
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24. Shri R.S. Gavai 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
27. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
29. Smt. Savita Sharda 
30. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
31. Shri Veer Singh 
 
          SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri P.D.T. Achary      -    Secretary 
                2.    Dr. (Smt.) P.K.  Sandhu           -    Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Saxena     -    Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri Bhupesh Kumar      -    Under Secretary 
          5.   Shri Vanlalruata    - Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing  Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Fifth Report  on the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants-2004-2005 relating to  Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 
August, 2004.  The Ministry of Social Just ice and Empowerment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 17 
December, 2004. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 18 March, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First   Report of th e Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.  
 
4. For the facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
18 March, 2005         C h a i r p e r s o n ,  
27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
 
      REPORT 
         
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the First Report of 
the Standing Committee on So cial Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 relating 
to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
1.2 The First  Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2004.   It contained 19 
recommendations.  Replies of Gove rnment in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are categorised as 
under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 Sl.  Nos.  2, 6, 9, 10, 11 and 19. 
 
(Total 6  - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government: 
Sl.  Nos. 5, 15 and 17. 
 
(Total 3 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the Committee in Chapter 
I: 
Sl. Nos.  1, 3, 8 and 18.  
 
(Total 4 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature: 
  Sl. Nos. 4, 7, 12, 13, 14 and 16. 
  
(Total 6  - Chapter V)  
 
 

 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken  notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
A. General Performance of the Ministry :  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para 2.7) 
  
1.5 The Committee had noted with concern that during 2003-04, the 
Ministry’s Budget Estimate was Rs.1410 crore which was reduced to Rs.1250 
crore at the Revised Estimate stage, a nd out of this reduced budget the Ministry 
could spend only Rs.1182.26 crore.  The Committee had been apprised of 
various reasons for reduction of funds at RE stage and even less spending, such 
as the Ministry of Finance making the revised estimates on the basis of 
expenditure level upto 30
th September, late receipt of proposals and utilization 
certificates from State Governments and NGOs resulting in utilization of funds 
to the extent of only 30-35%, non-utili zation due to pendency of schemes for 
revision for years, unspent balance with institutes due to non-filling of posts, 
non-approval of awareness generation sch emes, etc.  Keeping in view the 
significance of the mandate of the Ministry, i.e. the upliftement of the most 
disadvantaged, marginalized and vulner able sections of the society, the 
Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry should gear up its 
implementation and monitoring mach inery and conduct periodic review 
meetings with the State Governments/implementing agencies and impress upon 
them to fully utilize the fund allocated under various schemes. 
 
 
1.6 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their action 
taken note have stated that it held meetings with Secretaries of States/UTs 
dealing with Social Welfare in 2002-03 and 2004-05 . During these meetings, 

they have been requested to send the complete proposals alongwith 
utilization certificates of previous releases. 
 
 
1.7 The Committee are not at all satisfied  with the stereotyped reply of the 
Ministry. The Committee are concerned to note that the same situation has been 
continuing for years, which has resulted in  the Ministry of Finance resorting to 
drastic cuts of BE at RE  stage. Apart from this, the underutilization of the funds 
year after year has caused serious concern to the Committee. Every year the 
Committee remind the Ministry to gear up its implementing and monitoring 
machinery and to impress upon the States/U Ts to furnish utilization certificates 
in time and fully utilize the sanctione d funds. But the Committee has observed 
that no tangible and positive result has been achieved so far, which has proved 
detrimental to the interest of the marginalized and vulnerable sections of our 
society.  In the opinion of the Committee a thorough analysis of the present 
monitoring mechanism of various welf are schemes being undertaken by the 
Ministry should be done. The Committee, therefore, re iterate earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should gear up its monitoring and 
implementing machinery to ensure that all States/UTs not only furnish their 
utilization certificates on time, but also ensure full utilization of the sanctioned 
funds. The Committee desire that the matt er be pursued with all the States/UTs 
at the highest level vigorously and in all earnest.  
 
 
 
B. Special Central Assi stance (SCA) to Special Component Plan (SCP): 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 3.12) 
 
1.8 The Committee had noted with serious concern that during 2003-04 
some States/UTs with sizeable SC population had not allocated funds as per laid 
down guidelines;  (Andhra Pradesh –SC population 16.20%, SCP outlay 7.39%,; 
Bihar – SC population 15.70% SCP outlay Nil; Haryana – SC population 
19.30%, SCP outlay-Nil; Karnataka – SC population 16.20%’ SCP outlay Nil; 
Madhya Pradesh – SC population 15.20%, SCP outlay 7.07%; Punjab SC 
population 28.90%, SCP outlay  Nil; and West Bengal SC population 23% SCP 
outlay 7.01%.)  Keeping in view the fact that percentage of SC population was 

the basic criteria for allocation of funds by the Central and the State 
Governments, the Committee had expressed their dismay at that abysmal scenario 
and had desired that the State Governme nts be persuaded in right earnest to 
allocate funds as per their SC population, so as to get the entitled Special Central 
Assistance (SCA) share from the Centre. 
  
1.9 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
stated that the Special Central Assistan ce (SCA) is released to the States/UTs 
implementing Special component Plan (SCP) giving weightage to Scheduled 
Castes population of the States/ UTs (40%), relative backwardness of the States/ 
UTs (10%), percentage of SC families in the States/UT covered by composite 
economic development programmes in the plans to enable them to cross the 
poverty line (25%) and flow of funds to Special Component Plan out of the 
Annual Plan as compared to the SC population percentage in the States/UTs 
(25%).  The Ministry have further stated that with a view to assisting the SC 
families living below the poverty line in an integrated manner and providing the 
required forward and backward linkages for various economic activities in a 
viable manner, 27 State Governments/UT Administrations having sizeable SC 
population were requested to formulate pr ojects for utilization of Special Central 
Assistance in critical areas requiring in tervention to bridge the gaps. The 
States/UTs are persuaded regularly through meetings and reminders to adhere to 
the norms laid down for SCP allocation/expenditure. 
 
1.10 The Committee express its deep concern to the fact that though 
the Ministry have been persuading the States/UTs regularly through 
meetings and reminders to adhere to the prescribed norms laid down 
for SCP allocation/expenditure, yet some States with sizeable SC 
population have not allocated funds for their SCP in proportion to their 
SC population. The main thrust of the scheme of SCA to SCP is to 
ensure that SC families are able to cross the below the poverty line 
figure. As per the criteria, 25% of allocation of SCA funds is made by 
the Ministry keeping in mind the flow of funds to the SCP out of the 
Annual Plan in proportion to the SC population percentage in the 
States/UTs. Consequently, if the States/UTs do not adhere to these 

norms, their SCA share is commensurately reduced which adversely 
affects the Welfare measures of the targeted beneficiaries. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that all States/UTs be persuaded in the right earnest to allocate funds as per 
their SC population, so as to get the entitled Special Central Assistance (SCA) 
share from the Centre and the benefits of this scheme could percolate 
down to the lowest level.  
 
 
C.  Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Special Component Plan (SCP): 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para 3.17) 
 
1.11 The Committee further observed, as mentioned already, that funds were 
not being utilized properly by States/NGOs and they were not furnishing the 
Utilisation Certificates in time.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that 
the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment should furnish the details of 
funds allotted under the schemes meant for the welfare of SC population and 
non–utilisation of the same by the St ate Governments/NGOs to the public 
representatives of the area to act as watchdogs and to monitor the functioning of 
the schemes properly. 
 
 
1.12 The Ministry in their reply have stated that it releases funds to State 
Governments/ Union Territory Administrations including schemes meant for 
welfare of SC population.  State Governments/ UT Administrations furnish 
utilization of funds released under particular schemes for the State as a whole.  
District-wise allocation/ releases/utilization of funds are not maintained at the 
Ministry level.  The Ministry will conti nue with the existing approach to pursue 
State Governments/UT Administrations to furnish utilization certificate of 
previous releases.  In view of the position explained above it is not practically 
possible to furnish information to the public representatives of the area in respect 
of utilization of funds by the State Governments/UT Administrations for each 
district for all the schemes.     
In case of non-governmental organiza tions second instalment of grant 
during the year is released only afte r the Ministry has received utilization 

certificate along with audited statement of expenditure.  The Ministry has 
already placed list of voluntary organizations released grant for each year district 
wise on the web site of the Ministry (www.socialjustice.nic.in).  
 
1.13 The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that they had placed the 
list of Voluntary Organizations released grants for each year district-wise on the 
website of the Ministry. However, the details of funds allotted under the schemes 
meant for the welfare of the SC population and non-utilisation of the same by the 
State Governments/UT Admini strations is not available. The Committee are of 
the view that this vital information shoul d also be made available on website of 
the Ministry to ensure transparency and efficient implementation of the schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Mini stry to display the details of funds 
sanctioned to each State and UT, as well as the status of utilization of funds on 
an yearly basis on the website of the Ministry, so that the public representatives 
of the States/UTs and alert citizens may monitor the progress of the schemes and 
also impress their respective State Governments/UT Administrations to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds.  
 
D. Rehabilitation Council Of India (RCI)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para 6.6) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted with concern that for giving training to about 
18.49 million disabled persons in the country only 20000 professionals (out of 
the total 24000 professionals) were engaged in teaching/training of persons with 
disabilities. The requirement of professiona ls who give training to the disabled 
for their rehabilitation, as per 1996 RCI report, was assessed to be 3,62,300 for 
only 10% of the total disabled population in the 9 th Plan. The Committee had 
noted with dismay that the number of professionals available for 
training/rehabilitation of the disabled i.e.20000 was too inadequate in view of the 
total number of disabled persons i. e. 18.49 million. The Committee had 

therefore, strongly recommended that the Government should take urgent 
measures to ensure availability of optimum number of professionals for 
imparting training to the disabled as per established norms. 
 
1.15 In their Action taken reply, the Mini stry have stated that steps are also 
being taken to encourage various private institutions to take up training 
programmes to meet the requirement. 
 
1.16 The Committee is perturbed at th e casual way of the reply of the 
Government. The Committee are deeply concerned and feel that lack of adequate 
number of trained professionals would seriously jeopardize and hamper the 
rehabilitation programme of the disabled  people thereby delaying their proper 
assimilation into society. The Committee therefore, once again urge the 
Government to ensure availability of optimum number of professionals for 
imparting training to the disabled as pe r established norms and herein, they can 
involve the private sector too. 

 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para 2.8) 
 
 
2.1 The Committee had noted that the b udgetary allocation of the Ministry 
was reduced every year at RE stage. Th e Committee had been apprised that the 
basis of reduction at RE stage is the pace of expenditure upto 30 th September, 
which is only 30% to 35%. The Committee had further noted that most of the 
schemes of the Ministry are implemented by the State Governments and NGOs 
The State Governments are not able to submit their proposals along with their 
utilization certificates in time, which results in slow pace of expenditure and 
reduction at RE stage. In the opinion of the Committee most of the 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry relate to development and welfare of the 
marginalized sections including Scheduled Castes, OBCs, Minorities and the 
disabled. The Committee had, therefore,  desired that keeping in view the 
practical difficulty of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and the 
interest of the weaker sections, the Mini stry of Finance should be persuaded to 
take a lenient view and avoid drastic cuts at RE stage in allocations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Upto September, 2004,  the Ministry had spent Rs.616.66 crore (41.33%) 
against an allocation of Rs. 1492 crore wh ich was the highest in the last eight 
years for the same period. A letter has also been written to the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of expenditure conveying the expenditure level up to 
September 2004 and requesting that RE be maintained at the level of BE. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM 
dated 8th December, 2004)  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para 3.15) 
 
2.3 Similarly, the Committee had recommended on many occasions during 
the last few years that in order to avoid diversion of SCA funds for other 
purposes, the States/UTs should maintain separate accounts of SCA funds, but it 

was reported that only 19 States have so far opened separate budget heads for 
SCA funds.  Further, the Ministry does not have the names of the defaulting 
States/UTs, which is very strange.  The Committee were extremely disappointed 
and express their concern over this issu e.  The Committee strongly reiterated 
their earlier recommendation of opening up of a separate budget head of account 
of SCA funds by all States/UTs, so as to avoid diversion of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 A list of States that have opened Separate Budget Head and have 
furnished the details of the head is enclosed (
Annexure).  Remaining States have 
been reminded. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para 3.18) 
 
2.5 The Committee were constrained to note that a large number of potential 
beneficiaries for whose welfare the Mini stry have formulated various schemes 
are unable to avail the benefits thereof as they are not even aware of the 
existence of those schemes.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Ministry should take effective steps in creating full awareness about the 
various schemes all over the Country.  To meet this objective the Ministry 
should utilise the services of the audio-visual media, the print media and the 
village Panchayats. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The recommendation has been noted. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para 3.22) 
 
2.7 The Committee had noted with concern that the Ministry had drastically 
revised allocation of funds for the scheme of ‘Upgradation of Merit for Scheduled 
Caste students’ in anticipation of the replacement of the existing scheme with a 
new scheme namely “Merit Based Scholarship and Assistance to Meritorious SC 

students for studying in residential p ublic schools/premier institutions.” The 
Committee were extremely disappointed and expressed their strong concern over 
the fact that the Ministry had not been able to finalize their proposed modification 
in this scheme for the last two financial years due to procedural wrangles which 
have hampered the progress of this scheme.  Keeping in view the pivotal role of 
this scheme in shaping up of the acad emic future of the SC students, the 
Committee strongly recommended that the Ministry thrash out the modalities of 
this new scheme with the concerned au thority at the earliest, so that the 
bottlenecks holding the implementation of this scheme  
are overcome and the revised scheme can be implemented at the earliest. Further, 
the Committee had opined that implementation of the scheme in its present form 
should not be stopped until the scheme is  fully revised and approved by the 
competent authority. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The existing scheme of “ Upgradation of merit of Scheduled Caste 
Students ” is being continued in its present form. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empow erment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM 
dated 8th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para 3.25) 
 
2.9 The Committee had noted that there were separate schemes for providing 
Hostel facilities to SC boys and girls and the Government is proposing to modify 
the existing scheme to provide for ‘Sanga ti Hostel’ jointly to students belonging 
to SCs, OBCs and Minority Communities for ensuring and enhancing such 
facilities and for integrating the weaker sections within the mainstream of society. 
The Committee had desired that while integrating the scheme, the Scheduled 
Caste students particularly Scheduled Cast e girl students, should not be deprived 
of their legitimate share of number of seats in hostels.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The allocation of seats will be SC-45%, OBC-25%, Minority-10% 
Physically Challenged-3% (in tune w ith the current DOPT guidelines) and 
General Categoty-20% in order to bring the students into the mainstream  

 
of development. The concerned State Gove rnment/University will have to ensure 
allotment of seats on this basis. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para 7.2) 
 
2.11 The Committee had noted that the number of older persons who need 
State support for their care and protection was increasing year after year due to 
general improvement in health and their life expectancy.  The Committee 
observed that there are large number of senior citizens who are not getting 
adequate State support for their care and protection whereas the government 
could not fully utilize even the meager budgetary provisions made for the 
purpose. The Committee had desired that the exact number of older persons may 
be assessed urgently and proper awaren ess about the Government schemes for 
their care and protection may be created to  enable them to avail the benefit under 
the scheme.  The performance of the NGO s engaged in this scheme should be 
strictly monitored. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 As per Census of India, 1991 the persons above 60+ in 1991 were 5.66 
crore. The size of population above 60 y ears of age in 2001 is yet to be made 
available by Census of India. The Ministry has been regularly monitoring 
physical performance of Old Age Homes, Day Care Centers and Mobile 
Medicare units being run by NGOs with the financial support of the Ministry.  
During 2003-04 the Ministry deputed its officers for inspection of 170 voluntary 
organizations implementing the programmes.  Efforts will also be made to further 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE      COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para 3.14) 
 
3.1 The Committee had further noted th at the SCA funds allocated during 
2003-04 were lying unused with some State Governments like Bihar (Rs. 1237.53 
lakh, Goa (Rs. 13.55 lakh), Jharkhand (R s. 2117.13 lakh), Kerala (Rs. 712.44 
lakh) and Punjab (Rs. 2084.62 lakh).  Th e Committee were disappointed to note 
that despite several written requests from the Ministry, State Governments had 
not furnished the utilisation certificates so far.  This clearly indicated that these 
State Governments were not fulfilling their commitment and obligation towards 
the poor SC beneficiaries and even the f unds being provided by the Centre were 
not being utilised for their upliftment.  The Committee were of the opinion that 
the matter should be taken up with the concerned State Governments at the 
highest level.  The progress achieved may be conveyed to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The matter is being taken up with the State Governments at the level of 
Chief Secretaries. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM 
dated 8
th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para 5.5) 
 
3.3 The Committee had noted that there was an overwhelming response to 
the educational schemes of the Foundation from all over the country. The 
Foundation had started some more schemes for the benefit of the weaker and 
vulnerable sections of the minorities like Maulana Azad National Scholarship for 
Meritorious Girl Students, Maulana Azad  Sadbhavna Kendra and training to girls 
in the trade of cutting and tailoring, Tex tile Designing, Arts & Crafts, etc. The 
Committee appreciate that the Foundation is providing useful services to the 
minorities. However, it was a matter of serious concern to the Committee that the 
required financial support to the Founda tion, is not coming forward from the 

Government. The remaining part of the approved corpus of Rs. 100 crore i.e. Rs. 
30 crore have not yet been released to it, and instead grant equivalent to interest 
i.e. Rs. 3.75 crore has been released. The Committee had therefore, desired that 
the matter may be vigorously pursued with the Planning Commission and the 
Corpus Fund may be enhanced, so that the schemes of the Foundation do not 
suffer for want of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 As per the decision taken by the Planning Commission, based on a ZBB 
exercise the scheme of MAEF is to be weeded out after completion of its corpus 
fund to Rs. 100 crore. Last year, the Ministry was allocated Rs. 30 crore for this 
purpose, which was reduced to Rs. 20.32 crore at RE stage. Although the SFC 
meeting was held on 29.1.2004, the case coul d not be finalized with the Finance 
Ministry. In 2004-05 a token provision of Rs. 1 crore has been made. The balance 
allocation of Rs. 29 crores is to be released in the current year out of savings as 
suggested by the Planning Commission.  
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para 6.4) 
 
3.5 The Committee had noted that the National Commission for Persons with 
Disabilities (NCPD) had been established in February 2004 and that the 
budgetary allocation under the Non-Plan side is only to the tune of Rs. 1.44 crore. 
In the opinion of the Committee this meag er allocation was woefully inadequate 
in view of the significance and ambit of its mandate. The Committee had 
therefore, desired that the budgetary allocation for the Commission should be 
suitably enhanced so as to ensure effective functioning of the Commission. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 The National Commission for Pers ons with Disabilities has been wound 
up through Government of India Resolution notified on20th October 2004. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON BY THE 
COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER I  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para 2.7) 
 
4.1 The Committee had noted with concern that during 2003-04, the 
Ministry’s Budget Estimate was Rs.1410 crore which was reduced to Rs.1250 
crore at the Revised Estimate stage, and out of this reduced budget the Ministry 
could spend only Rs.1182.26 crore.  The Committee had been apprised of various 
reasons for reduction of funds at RE stage and even less spending, such as the 
Ministry of Finance making the revised estimates on the basis of expenditure 
level upto 30
th September, late receipt of proposals and utilization certificates 
from State Governments and NGOs resulting in  utilization of funds to the extent 
of only 30-35%, non-utilization due to pendency of schemes for revision for 
years, unspent balance with institutes due to non-filling of posts, non-approval of 
awareness generation schemes, etc.  Keeping in view the significance of the 
mandate of the Ministry, i.e. the upliftement of the most disadvantaged, 
marginalized and vulnerable sections of the society, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that the Ministry should gear up its implementation and monitoring 
machinery and conduct periodic review meetings with the State 
Governments/implementing agencies and im press upon them to fully utilize the 
fund allocated under various schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 In 2002-2003 and 2004-05, meetings of States/UT Administrations 
Secretaries dealing with Social Welfare were held.  During these meetings they 
have been requested to send the complete proposals alongwith utilization 
certificates of previous releases. 
 (Ministry of Social Justice & Empow erment O.M. No.1 -4/2004(PS) PREM 
dated 8th December, 2004) 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para 3.12) 
 
4.3 The Committee had noted with serious concern that during 2003-04 
some States/UTs with siz eable population have not allocated funds as per laid 
down guidelines;  (Andhra Pradesh –SC population 16.20%, SCP outlay 7.39%,; 
Bihar – SC population 15.70% SCP outlay Nil; Haryana – SC population 
19.30%, SCP outlay-Nil; Karnataka – SC population 16.20%’ SCP outlay Nil; 
Madhya Pradesh – SC population 15.20%, SCP outlay 7.07%; Punjab SC 
population 28.90%, SCP outlay  Nil; and West Bengal SC population 23% SCP 
outlay 7.01%.)  Keeping in view the fact that percentage of SC population is the 
basic criteria for allocation of funds by the Central and the State Governments, 
the Committee expressed their dismay at this abysmal scenario and desired that 
the State Governments be persuaded in right earnest to allocate funds as per their 
SC population, so as to get the entitled Special Central Assi stance (SCA) share 
from the Centre. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 Special Central Assistance (SCA) is released to the States/UTs 
implementing Special Component Plan (SCP) giving weightage to Scheduled 
Castes population of the States/ UTs (40%), relative backwardness of the States/ 
UTs (10%), percentage of SC families in the States/UT covered by composite 
economic development programmes in the plans to enable them to cross the 
poverty line (25%) and flow of funds to Special Component Plan out of the 
Annual Plan as compared to the SC population percentage in the States/UTs 
(25%).   
With a view to assisting the SC famili es living below the poverty line in an 
integrated manner and providing the requi red forward and backward linkages for 
various economic activities in a viable manner, 27 State Governments/UT 
Administrations having sizeable SC population were requested to formulate 
projects for utilization of Special Central Assistance in critical areas requiring 
intervention to bridge the gaps. The States/UTs are persuaded regularly through 
meetings and reminders to adhere  to the norms laid down for SCP 
allocation/expenditure. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para 3.17) 
 
4.5 The Committee further observed, as mentioned already, that funds are 
not being utilised properly by States/NGOs and they are not furnishing the 
Utilisation Certificates in time.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment shall furnish the details of funds 
allotted under the schemes meant for the welfare of SC population and non–
utilisation of the same by the State Governments/NGOs to the public 
representatives of the area to act as watchdogs and to monitor the functioning of 
the schemes properly. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 The Ministry releases funds to State Governments/ Union Territory 
Administrations including schemes meant for welfare of SC population.  State 
Governments/ UT Administrations furn ish utilization of funds released under 
particular schemes for the State as a whole.  District-wise allocation/ 
releases/utilization of funds are not maintained at the Ministry level.  The 
Ministry will continue with the existing approach to pursue State 
Governments/UT Administrations to furnish utilization certificate of previous 
releases.  In view of the position explained above it is not practically possible to 
furnish information to the public represen tatives of the area in respect of 
utilization of funds by the State Governments/UT Administrations for each 
district for all the schemes.     
In case of non-governmental organiza tions second instalment of grant 
during the year is released only after the Ministry has received utilization 
certificate along with audited statement of expenditure.  The Ministry has already 
placed list of voluntary organizations released grant for each year district wise on 
the web site of the Ministry (www.socialjustice.nic.in).  
 
Comments of the Committee 

(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para 6.6) 
 
4.7 The Committee had noted with concern that for giving training to about 
18.49 million disabled persons in the country only 20000 professionals (out of the 
total 24000 professionals) are engaged in teaching/training of persons with 
disabilities. The requirement of professionals who give training to the disabled 
for their rehabilitation, as per1996 RCI re port, was assessed to be 3,62,300 for 
only 10% of the total disabled population in the 9
th Plan. The Committee had 
noted with dismay that the number of professionals available for 
training/rehabilitation of the disabled i.e.20000  is too inadequate in view of the 
total number of disabled persons i.e. 18.49 million. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the Governme nt should take urgent measures to 
ensure availability of optimum number of professionals for imparting training to 
the disabled as per established norms. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 Steps are also being taken to enco urage various private institutions to 
take up training programmes to meet the requirement. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 3.13) 
 
5.1 The Committee had noted that the Central Standing Tripartite Committee 
set up by the Planning Commission in 1999 had grouped all the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government  of India into three categories based 
upon the feasibility of earmarking funds under SCP and TSP.  In category –III 30 
Ministries/Departments have been grouped which are service oriented and also 
have activities of divisible nature.  In its 30
th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) the Committee had recommended that out of the 30 
Ministries/Departments only 14 had formulated their Special Component Plan 
and the remaining 16 Ministries/Departme nts were to be persuaded by the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for doing the same.  Unfortunately 
no progress has been made in this re gard.  Therefore, the Committee took a 
serious note and strongly reiterated thei r earlier recommendation made in this 
regard.  The Committee also further recommended that the Planning Commission 
should not approve the Annual Plans of the Ministries, which have not yet 
formulated the SCP for SCs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.2 The Special Component Plan at the Central Government level involves 
participation of Central Government Ministries/Departments in formulating 
specific plans for the SCs as part of Annual Plans of respective 
Ministries/Departments.  Those Ministri es/Departments, which have not so far 
formulated Specific Plans for SCs in their Annual Plans, consultations were held 
with them on 21
st September, 2004 to do so.  The recommendation of the 
Committee has also been forwarded to  the Planning Commission for further 
action at their level. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 
 
 

      Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para 3.16)  
 
5.3 The Committee had noted the recommendation of the National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes that th e cultivable land should be distributed 
amongst the landless SC women from SCA funds. The land purchase scheme has 
been adopted in Karnataka, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu for the upliftment of SC 
women. The Committee had therefore recommended that the Ministry should 
impress upon the other States to adopt this model, as it would lead to the socio-
economic emancipation of SC women by making them self-reliant. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 All the States/UTs have already been asked to prepare proposals on the 
lines of the scheme of the Government of Karnataka. However, the land purchase 
scheme model specifically will be taken up with the other States/UTs. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para 4.3) 
 
5.5 The Committee had noted with dismay that the National Backward 
Classes Finance and Development Corporation (NBCFDC) provides funds to 
State Channelising Agencies @ 3%, 2% and 1% interest  respectively  for various 
schemes, whereas, the  SCAs are charging interest on the same @6%, 5% and 4% 
respectively from the beneficiaries. Thus, the SCAs are cornering away a sizeable 
share of interest by levying 3% as service charges. The Committee observed that 
this rate of interest is too high  particularly in view of the current global scenario 
of falling interest rate and the poor fi nancial condition of the beneficiaries. 
Besides, the Committee were of the str ong view that the State Governments/UTs 
and SCAs are equally responsible and most have an equal commitment to 
contribute for the welfare of the OBCs . The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommended that the rate of interest charged by the SCAs should be rationalized 
and the State Governments/UTs should provide funds to their Channelising 
Agencies  for building  up their infrastructure. 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 Like any other financial institutions under the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment, the NBCFDC also provides service charges to the SCAs for 
proper implementation of NBCFDC schemes at the grass-root level. The service 
charges are kept at 3%. The service charges are to be utilized by the SCAs for the 
purpose of: - 
Identification of eligible beneficiaries and their verification; Disbursement of 
loan, Recovery of loan from beneficiar ies, Monitoring of the implementation of 
schemes at the grass-root level. Followi ng the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment, the Ministry has also requested 
the State Governments/UT Admns. on 17-08-2004   to reimburse some of the 
expenditure  incurred by the SCAs as they also have an equal 
obligation/commitment towards welfare of OBCs.  It has been emphasized that if 
the States/UTs share some of the burden of the SCAs, then the service charges 
can be reduced considerably and the poor  people belonging to OBCs will not be 
put to much hardship. The response from the State Governments is awaited. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8
th December, 2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 4.4) 
 
5.7 The Committee had noted that the State Governments/UT 
Administrations had been requested to conduct surveys of OBCs living below the 
poverty line in their respective States/UTs, but only five States/UTs i.e. Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Tripura, Chandigarh and Dadra and Nagar Haveli have furnished the 
information about the number of OBC families living below the poverty line. The 
Committee, therefore, once again recommended that the Ministry should take up 
the matter at the highest level with the remaining States/UTs to collect the 
necessary data so that welfare schemes for OBCs   may be formulated as per their 
requirements and also budgetary allocations could be accordingly enhanced. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8  The Ministry has been constantly  pursuing the matter with the defaulting 
State Governments/UT Administrations. Barring State Governments of Mizoram 
and Arunachal Pradesh where there are no OBCs, no response has been received 

from remaining State Govts/UT Admns. The defaulting State Governments/UT 
Admns. have  been reminded again on 15-09-2004 to intimate  the action taken 
for conducting the survey of OBCs living below the poverty line. 
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
  
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para 5.3) 
 
5.9 The Committee had noted that keeping in view the percentage of 
minorities’ population and their backwardness, particularly of the Muslims, being 
extreme, the budgetary allocation is very meager The Committee also observed 
that there are very few welfare schemes formulated for the minorities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended th at more welfare schemes may be 
formulated for these sections of the society on the pattern of schemes in existence 
for the welfare of SCs and OBCs and the budgetary allocations be suitably 
enhanced.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 The Government has decided to set up a National Commission to 
recommend measures for welfare of socially and economically backward sections 
among religious and linguistic minorities including reservation in education and 
Government employment. The Commission will submit its Report in a period of 
six months.  The Government will consider its recommendations in due course.  
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para 6.2) 
 
5.11 The Committee had noted that the ceiling of Rs. 6,000/- on the aids and 
appliances is meager in view of rise in pr ice index and the fact that the objective 
of the scheme is to reduce the impact of  locomotor, visual and other disabilities 
of serious impairment on the most vul nerable disabled persons. The Committee, 
therefore, desired that the Ministry should convince the Planning  Commission 
and Ministry of Finance about the need to increase the income ceiling as also the 

ceiling on the  cost of appliances to assist the needy physically handicapped 
persons.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 The Ministry is continuing its effo rts and the scheme is at advanced stage 
of revision.  
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1-4/2004(PS) PREM dated 
8th December, 2004) 
 
 
New Delhi;      SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
18 March, 2005      C h a i r p e r s o n ,  
27 Phalguna, 1926(Saka) Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
    
 
 
 
 

         A N N E X U R E  –  I  
 
 
LIST OF STATES THAT HAVE OPENED SEPARATE BUDGET HEAD OF ACCOUNT 
FOR SCA 
(As on 2.11.2004) 
Sl.No. States/UTs SCA -Budget Head of A/c No. 
 
1 Madhya Pradesh SC Welfare 2225-01-277-4691 
 
2 Tripura 2225-01-800-33-31-33 under demand No. 20 
 
3. Punjab Matter is being taken up with the Finance Deptt. 
 
4. Uttaranchal  2225-01-0106 
 
5. 
 
Goa 2225-01-793 
 
6. Jharkhand 2225-01-0607 
 
7. Rajasthan 2225-01-793 
 
8. Karnataka 2225-01-793-0-00-State Sector 
2225-01-197-01-02-District sector 
 
9. Pondicherry 2225-01-789(12) 
 
10. Chandigarh 2225-793 
 
11. Gujarat 2225-01-793 
 
12. U.P. 1601-03-80-8001 
 
13. Manipur 2225-01-793 

 
14. Delhi 2225-C-1-C-1 (1)(7) 
 
14. Delhi 2225-C-1-C-1 (1)(7) 
 
15. Bihar 2225-01-0602 
 
16 Maharashtra 2225-01(01) Mahatma Phule BC Dev.Corp 
(2225-0225 
2225-01(02) Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 
Board (2225 0234) 
2225-01(04) Sant Rohidas Leather & Charmakar Dev. 
Corp.(2225 0252 
2225-01(06) Lokshahir Annabhau Dev. Corp. (2225 0272) 
17. Andhra Pradesh 2225-01-MH, 102 ECO Dev. – GH-10 CSS SH (15) SCA to 
SCP – 310/312 
18. Kerala  2225-01-793-99 S C A to S C P 
19. Sikkim 2225-01-01-793 S C A to S C P 
20. Orissa 2225-01-793 S C A 
21. Himachal 
Pradesh 
2225-01-001-A00S Dte. Of SCs 
22. Chattisgarh Demand No.15-64 
23. Haryana 2225-01-793 (Special Central Assistance) 
24. Assam 2225-793-818-09-SCA 
 

         
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING ON THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 18TH MARCH, 2005. 
 
  
The Committee met from 14.00 hrs. to 15.15 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M.Gaikwad 
5. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
6. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
7. Dr. R. Senthil 
8. Mohd. Sahid Akhlaque 
9. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
10. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
SECRETARIAT 
   
  1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. XX   XX   XX    
 
3. XX   XX   XX    
 
4. XX   XX   XX    
5. XX   XX   XX    

 
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Fifth Report on ‘Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
First Report of the Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for the year 2004-
05’ and adopted the same without any amendment. 
 
7. XX   XX   XX    
 
8. The Committee authorized the Chai rperson to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
9. The Committee then placed on record their deep appreciation and thanks 
to the officers and staff of the Lok Sabha Secretariat for their hard work and 
valuable assistance rendered by them to facilitate the work of the Committee in 
preparing their draft Reports within the limited time. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE FIRST 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
 
        T o t a l   P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations  19 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which  
have been accepted by the Government 6  31.57% 
(Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 9, 10,11 and 19) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 3  15.78% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
       in view of the Government’s replies 
  (Sl. Nos. 5, 15 and 17) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in   4  21.05% 
  respect of which the Government’s  
  replies have not been accepted by the 
  Committee and which requires  
  Reiteration 
  (Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 8 and 18) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in  6  31.57% 
  respect of which final replies of 
  Government are interim in nature 
  (Sl. No. 4, 7, 12, 13, 14 and 16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 