   28 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
        (2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR 
CITIZENS BILL, 2007 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2007/ Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

      
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR 
CITIZENS BILL, 2007.  
 
 
 
 TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
    
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.09.2007 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2007/ Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 
      
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
             
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………..                
 
 
INTRODUCTION………………….. 
 
REPORT  ………………………      
 
 
       ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior   
 Citizens Bill, 2007                                  
                                            
ANNEXURE II 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee  
 held on  17 May, 2007.                   
 
ANNEXURE III 
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee  
 held on  8 June, 2007.      
 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee 
  held on  17 July, 2007.       
 
ANNEXURE V 
 
Minutes of the first Sitting of the Committee held on  
 31st August, 2007.      
 
     
APPENDIX 
 
 Statement of Observations/Recommendations         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
      (2007-2008) 
 
 
  Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
6. Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain* 
7. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
8. Shri Bhai Lal 
9. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
10. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
11. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
12. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
13. Shri Jual Oram  
14. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
15. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
16. Shri P.A. Sangma   
17. Dr. R. Senthil  
18. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
20. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
21. Smt. Usha Verma    
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma  
23. Shri Silvius Condpan 
24. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
_______________________________________________________________________  
*    Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.8.2007 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Saxena  - Director 
4. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Km. M. Tunglut  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Com mittee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit  the Report on their behalf present this   
Twenty-eighth Report of the Committee  on  ‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Bill, 2007’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 20 March, 2007   and was referred to the 
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27 April, 2007   under Rule 331E (b) of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report. 
 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill from Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, who also briefed them at their 
sitting held on 17 May, 2007. 
 
4. Written suggestions/memoranda were received from (i) Dr. P.V. Ramamurthi, Hony. 
Director, Centre for Research on Ageing, Deptt. of Psycology, Sri Venkateswara University, 
Tirupati; (ii) Shri Raman Bhai Shah, President, All India Senior Citizens Conf ederation, Pune; 
(iii) Mrs. Vidya Ben Shah, President, Senior Citizens Service Forum, New Delhi; (iv) Mr. N.L. 
Kumar President, Age Care India, New Delhi; (v) Dr.  Ruchika Kuba, School of Health Science ,  
IGNOU; (vi) Prof. Anand Kumar, Centre for Social S ciences, School of Social Sciences J.N.U., 
New Camps, New Delhi. 
 
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 8 th June, 2007 heard the views of  above non -
official experts/NGOs on the Bill. 
  
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Social Jus tice and Empowerment 
on 17 July, 2007.  The representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) were also present in the meeting. 
 
7. The Committee considered  and adopted  the Draft Report on “The Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill, 2007” at their sitting held on 31st August, 2007.  
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment, representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department), non -official experts/NGOs concerned with the subject for their cooperation in 
placing before them their considered views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for 
furnishing written notes and information that the Committee had desired  in connection with the 
examination of the Bill. 
 
9. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations  of 
the Committee have been  printed  in bold letters  in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
      
New Delhi;   SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
31 August, 2007    Chairperson, 
9 Bhadrapada, 1929(Saka) Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
          
1.1 The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill, 2007 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 20 March, 2007 an d has been referred by Hon’ble Speaker to 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment for examination and report on 
27 April, 2007.  The objective of the Bill is to provide for more effective provisions for the 
maintenance and welfare of Paren ts and Senior Citizens guaranteed and recognized under 
the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  The most 
important provision of the Bill is to make the maintenance of parents by their family as a 
legal right. 
 
1.2 The Bill proposes to provide for: 
(a) appropriate mechanism to be set up to provide need-based  
 maintenance to the parents and senior citizens 
  
 (b) providing better medical facilities to senior citizens 
  
 (c) for institutionalization of a suitable mechanism for `protection of   
 life and property of older persons 
  
 (d) setting up of old age homes in every district 
 
Need for the legislation: 
 
1.3 The Ministry have informed the Committee that there has been a steady rise in the 
population of older persons in I ndia, as is evident from the fact that in 1951, the number of 
older persons above 60 years was only 2 crore which increased to 5.7 crore in 1991 and 7.6 
crore in 2001.  The improvement in the intake of nutrition and medicine and treatment has 
brought about an appreciable increase in life expectancy.  The life expectancy, which was 
around 29 years in 1947, has increased manifold and now stands closer to 63 years.  
Projection studies indicate that the number of 60+ in India will increase to 10 crore in 2013 
and to almost double or 19.8 crore in 2030. 
 

1.4. The traditional norms and values of the Indian society laid stress on showing respect 
and providing care for the aged.  The aged members of the family were normally cared for 
by the family itself.  However, in recent times, society is witnessing a gradual but definite 
withering of the joint family system, as a result of which a large number of parents are not 
being maintained by their children, as was the normal social practice.  Consequently, the 
elders are now exposed to emotional neglect and to lack of physical and financial support.  
They  are facing a lot of problems in the absence of adequate social security. 
 
1.5 The Committee have further been informed that with their dwindling financial resources 
and weakening health, parents are often being perceived as burden, even while living within 
the family.  Many older persons are now living with spouse and without children, while many 
persons, specially widowed women are forced to spend their twilight years al one.  This clearly 
reveals that ageing has became a major social challenge and financial support, care and 
treatment are required for the older persons.  Unfortunately, the time has come when the 
moral obligation of children to look after their parents in their old age has to be backed by a 
legal obligation. 
 
 
 
1.6 During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment stated - 
 “ It is an established fact that family is the most desired environment for senior 
citizens/parents to lead a life of security, care and dignity.  Keeping in view of 
this fact and to ensure that the children perform its moral obligation towards 
their parents, the proposed legislation aims to create an enabling mechanism 
for the older persons to claim need-based maintenance from their children.” 
 
1.7. The Ministry have informed that even though a provision already exists under the 
Criminal Procedure Code 1973 (Section 125) for maintenance of parents, the procedure of 
going through the Court is both time consuming an d cumbersome in addition to being 

expensive.  Hence, there is a need to bring in a legislation, which will make the claim for 
maintenance simpler, speedier and inexpensive. 
 
1.8 Explaining the major difference between the section 125 of Cr P.C. and the proposed 
legislation and the advantages of the maintenance provision of the Bill over section 125 of 
Cr. P.C., the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment stated during evidence 
as under:- 
 ”Only a Magistrate orders the claim for maintenance whe reas under the 
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Tribunal headed by the SDM will 
decide the case.  Proceedings under Cr. P.C are time consuming whereas the 
same will be disposed of in a time bound manner of 90 days by the proposed 
Tribunals.  For  claiming maintenance under Cr. P.C, advocates participate in 
the proceedings and hence it is costly for a person who is not in a position to 
finance his case, whereas in case of the proposed legislation, the participation 
of the advocates is barred from the proceedings of the Tribunal. 
 
In addition, the main focus of the legislation is to first resolve the disputes and 
differences between parents and children amicably by referring the case to a 
Conciliation Officer.  In case of failure of these efforts onl y, the Tribunal will 
take action.  There is no such provision under Cr. P.C 125. 
 
Unlike the restrictive definition of parents in Cr. P.C. a broad definition of 
parents and children have been included in the proposed Bill to cover 
grandparents, grandchildr en, adopted step and even relatives/anyone who 
inherit the property of the senior citizens. 
 
Under Cr. P.C., only an affected parent can file a case for maintenance.  Under 
the proposed legislation, in addition to the parent, his representatives/NGOs 
authorized by the parents can file application for claiming maintenance.  
Tribunal can also take suo -motu cognizance and initiate proceedings of the 
case. 
 
Maintenance award under Cr. P.C. has to go through all the normal channels of 
appeal as prescribed under the law.  However, in the proposed legislation, only 
one appeal is allowed before the appellate authority, i.e. District Magistrate.  
The disposal of the appeal is also time bound.  The proposed legislation also 
contains a penal provision of imprisonment t o the children for a term that can 
be extended upto a period of three months for neglect and abandonment of 
their parents. 
 
Thus, it is evident from all this that the proposed legislation provides a 
mechanism for claiming maintenance in a time bound and co st effective 
manner and as such, has an advantage over the Section 125 of Cr. P.C.  
Further, the legislation also contains comprehensive provisions for welfare of 
senior citizens such as providing health, security, shelter, protection of life and 
property.  Over and above this, the proposed legislation also contains a 

provision, which enables the parents who transfer their property to their 
children or anybody on the condition of providing maintenance to them, to 
revoke such transfer on its failure.” 
  
1.9 Clause 23(1) enables the senior citizen/parent who have transferred by way of gift or 
otherwise, his/her property, subject to the condition that the transferee shall provide the 
basic amenities and basic physical needs to the transferor and if such transfe ree refuses or 
fails to meet the above stated stipulation, the said transfer of property shall be deemed to 
have been made by fraud or coercion or under undue influence and shall, at the option of the 
transferor be declared void by the Tribunal.  It has al so been provided in the legislation 
through clause 5(2) that the Tribunal may, during pendency of the proceedings regarding 
maintenance, order such children or relative to pay monthly interim maintenance to such 
senior citizen/parent.    
1.10 As per the view of a non-official expert, the bill in its present form will meet the needs 
of parents and senior citizens belonging to educated families, propertied classes and big city 
population.  There is a need to broaden the approach of the Bill so that the parent s and 
senior citizens belonging to the poor classes, smaller towns and illiterate and semi -illiterate 
background may also be helped.  He further stated that if we encourage public private 
partnership by engaging NGOs, community organizations and corporate sectors for this 
programme, it will become cost-effective for the Government. 
 
Benefits of the Legislation 
 
1.11 Recognizing that the family is the most desired environment for senior citizen/parent 
to lead a life  of security, care and dignity and to ensure that the progeny performs its moral 
obligation towards their parents who may otherwise be left uncared for and destitute in their 
old age, the proposed legislation aims to ensure that maintenance of older persons by their 
family will be a matter of righ t for the parents.  The proposed legislation also aims to create 
an enabling mechanism for the older persons to claim need -based maintenance from their 

children.  The State of Himachal Pradesh had already enacted such a legislation called the 
“Himachal Pra desh Maintenance of Parents and Dependents Act, 2001.”  The proposed 
legislation draws heavily on this Act, as far as the Maintenance of  Parents is concerned. 
 
1.12  The Ministry have further stated that even after legally providing for maintenance by 
lineal descendants, the need for Old Age Homes exists for the care and protection of the 
indigent older persons.   This is because some older persons may be without any family 
support or their children may all be settled abroad, or they may not be able to liv e amicably 
with their children for any reason.  The Bill, therefore, provides for the setting -up of old age 
homes, at accessible places, by the State Governments in a phased manner beginning with 
at least one in each district (or more than one,) to accommo date in such homes a minimum 
of 150 indigent beneficiaries. 
 
1.13. An increasing number of older persons who are economically self- sufficient, are 
living alone voluntarily or involuntarily.  These people are increasingly  becoming soft 
targets of anti soc ial elements and as such there is a need to ensure that they are provided 
with a suitable mechanism for protection of  their lives and property.  Under clause 21 the 
Bill envisages to provide for the institutionalization of a suitable mechanism by the Stat e 
Governments for protection of life and property of older persons. 
 
1.14 The major cause of anxiety in old age is deteriorating health condition coupled with 
dwindling financial position.  There is a need for good affordable health services.  Therefore, 
provisions to provide better medical facilities to older persons have been incorporated in the 
proposed legislation.   

Consultation with the Non-Government Organizations/Experts: 
 
1.15 The Ministry have stated that they had consulted the leading NGOs, expe rts, and 
organizations of senior citizens on the proposed legislation.  Most of them welcomed the 
proposed legislation.  Their views/suggestions were duly considered at the time of 
formulating the proposed legislation.  Further, the National Council on Old er Persons also 
endorsed the salient features of the proposed legislation in its meeting held on 20.9.2005. 
 
1.16 Accordingly, a legislation for the welfare of the Parents and Senior Citizens in 
pursuance of the provisions of Article 41 read with Entry 23 of the Concurrent List (Schedule 
VIII) of the Constitution of India has been formulated and introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
20.3.2007. 
 
1.17 The Committee also interacted with some non -official experts and representatives of 
NGOs concerned with the subject on 8 June 2007 and obtained comments of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment on the their suggestions for amendments received by the 
Committee. 
 
1.18 On a suggestion received to define the word ‘Welfare’ in clause 2 of the Bill, the 
Ministry stated that the meaning of welfare is very generalized.  Besides maintenance, the Bill 
seeks to address only the specific issues of establishment of Old Age Homes, Medical care of 
Senior Citizen and measures for protection of their life and property.  These ha ve been 
covered in Chapter III, IV and V of the Bill separately.  In view of this, the term ‘welfare’ has 
not been defined.  
 
  

1.19 The Committee note that the Union Government have brought out a Bill for the 
maintenance and welfare of parents and senior  citizens.  The Committee, however 
observe that though the Government have incorporated the term ‘welfare’ in the title of 
the Bill, yet no efforts have been made to define the term in Clause 2 of the Bill.  
Keeping in view the fact that welfare is a gener alized term and Clause 2 being the 
Definition Clause of the Bill, the Committee desire that the scope and extent of the term 
‘welfare’ in relation to the proposed legislation, should be specifically defined under 
Clause 2 of the Bill.  The Committee, there fore, recommend that in Chapter I, clause 2, 
add sub clause ‘k’ ‘welfare’ means provision of food, health care, recreation centres 
and other amenities necessary for the well being of the senior citizens.  In addition to 
thrust on legal action for maintenan ce, focus should be given in the proposed 
legislation on the welfare for parents and senior citizens.  
 
1.20 The Committee also note that as per the provisions of the proposed legislation, 
all actions related to its implementation are intended to be taken only by the State 
Governments.  Clause 1(3) of the Bill states that it shall come into force in a State on 
such date as the State Government, may provide, by notification in the Official 
Gazette.   Further, Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Union Governme nt to give 
directions to the State Governments to carryout execution of the proposed legislation.  
The Committee are of the opinion that although onus for implementation of the 
proposed legislation is laid on the State Governments, no time frame has been 
stipulated in the Bill for the States to implement it.  The Committee, expect the 
Government to play a proactive role in the implementation of the proposed legislation 
by the State Governments in a time bound manner so that parents and senior citizens 
are accorded proper maintenance and adequate welfare measures are undertaken for 
their care and protection.  The Committee also feel that the Government cannot 
absolve themselves of the responsibility to provide due maintenance and care to 

parents and senior ci tizens and limit their role only to issue of directives to the State 
Governments.  The Committee therefore, desire that the role of the Union 
Government, to ensure maintenance and welfare of the parents and senior citizens, 
should also be defined specifica lly in the Bill.  To make the services for old age 
people cost effective, involvement of private sector, community organizations and 
corporate sector may also be explored. 
 

I. Clause 1 of the Bill - Extent and Application of the Act. 
 
1.21 In Clause 1(2) of the Bill, the extent and application of the Act has been  stipulated as 
under: 
 
“It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and it applies also 
to citizens of India outside India.” 
 
  
1.22 During evidence, the Committee point ed out that the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Bill is more in the nature of a social legislation and mainly deals 
with family issues. Moreover, it is applicable even to those citizens of India living abroad.  
Therefore, the words “ except Jammu and Kashmir” could be omitted.  Thereupon, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment responded as under: 
  
“XXXX This is just in deference to a special reference under our Constitution for 
the State of J&K.  But I would like to  submit before the Committee that the State 
of J&K has been fully kept involved in our consultative process.  We have 
received their views and comments and in fact, they have communicated to the 
Government of India that they have no objection to the enactm ent of the Central 
legislation and they will themselves draft a Bill on that line.” 
 
1.23 The representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice clarified the position as under: 
“This present legislation is related to entry 23 of the Concurrent List which says 
`social security, social insurance, employment and unemployment’.  This entry is 
further subject to the Constitution – Applications to J&K order 1954.  In fact, 
prima facie there is no bar to annexe it.  This is a very good suggestion”. “ We 
will consider it.”  
 

1.24 The Committee note that as per the provisions of ‘The Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill, 2007’, the Act, when enforced shall be 
applicable to the whole of India as well as to the citizens of India living abroad e xcept 
in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  The Committee find no justification in excluding 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the ambit of the proposed legislation as it deals 
with social and family issues.  During evidence the representative of the Minis try of 
Law and Justice also clarified that the proposed legislation is related to Entry 23 of 
the Concurrent List which provides for ‘social security, social insurance, employment 
and unemployment’.  Further, according to them ‘Prima facie there is no bar to annexe 
it’.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Clause 1(2) of the Bill should be 
amended to bring within its ambit the State of Jammu and Kashmir also so that the 
benefits of the proposed legislation could be enjoyed by parents and senior citizen s 
living in that State.  
 

II. Clause 5 of the Bill - Application for Maintenance. 
 
1.25 Clause 5 (4) of the Bill stipulates as under: 
 
“An application filed under sub -section(2) for the monthly allowance, for the 
maintenance and expenses for proceeding sh all, as far as possible be disposed 
of within ninety days from the date of the service of notice of the application to 
such person.” 
 
 
1.26 The Committee note that the Bill has been formulated to address the need to have 
simple, inexpensive and speedy prov isions to claim maintenance by parents.  However a 
time limit of `as far as possible’ ninety days has been prescribed in the Bill to dispose of an 
application filed under the Act. 
  
1.27 The comments of the Ministry were sought regarding deletion of the phrase ‘as far as 
possible’ in the above Clause.  The Ministry have stated that a time limit of a maximum 90 
days has been stipulated for final disposal of a maintenance claim.  However, there may be 
such cases where it may not be practically possible to con clude the proceedings 
meaningfully within that time frame.  Keeping in view such eventualities, the phrase ‘as far 
as possible’ has been included. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.28 Clause 5 (4) of the Bill stipulates that an application filed under sub -section (2) 
for the monthly allowance, for the maintenance and expenses for proceeding shall, as 

far as possible be disposed of within ninety days from the date of the service of notice 
of the application to such person. The Committee are not convinced with the reason 
given by the  Government in their reply that the phrase ‘as far as possible’  has been 
included in Clause 5(4) of the Bill to resolve successfully the eventuality where it may 
not be practically possible to dispose of an application for maintenance within ninety 
days fr om the date the notice of the application was served to a person.  The 
Committee feel that the very purpose of the Bill to provide simple, inexpensive and 
speedy mechanism to claim maintenance by parents may be mitigated as the 
provision can be misused to unjustifiably delay the disposing of the maintenance 
claims.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the phrase ‘as far as possible’ be 
deleted from Clause 5(4) of the Bill.  Instead after the words application to such 
persons it may be added that ‘In ex ceptional circumstances, one time extension for a 
maximum period of 90 days may be considered for disposal of the proceedings by the 
Tribunal’. 
 

III. Clause 7 and 15 of the Bill - Constitution of Tribunals and Appellate  Tribunals. 
 
1.29 Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Tribunals: 
 
(1)The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for each 
Sub-division one or more Tribunals as may be specified in the notification for the purpose of 
adjudicating and deciding upon the order for maintenance under section 5. 
 
(2)The Tribunal shall be presided over by an officer not below the rank of Sub -Divisional 
Officer of a State. 
 
(3)Where two or more Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government may, by 
general or special order, regulate the distribution of business among them. 
 
1.30 The Bill also provides for the constitution of Appellate Tribunals in Clause 15 as 
under: 
 
(1)The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one 
Appellate Tribunal for each district to hear the appeal against the order of the Tribunal. 
 
(2)The Appellate Tribunal shall be presided over by an officer not below the rank of District 
Magistrate. 
 
1.31 The Ministry have stated in their Financial Memorandu m that since the Bill proposes 
to utilize the existing machinery of the State Government, there would not be any additional 
expenditure. 
 
1.32 When enquired whether the State Governments would be able to implement the 
proposed Act effectively with their ex isting machinery, the Ministry responded that the State 
Governments have been consulted on the issue and are expected to implement the 
provisions of the Act effectively with their existing machinery. 
 
1.33 The Committee desired to know what additional fina ncial measures would be taken 
by the Central Government to make available more funds to State Governments, if required 
by them, for effective implementation of various provisions of the Bill.  The Ministry, have 
informed the Committee that the presiding of ficer of the Tribunal and the Appellate authority 

would perform their duties in addition to their regular responsibilities.  The existing 
infrastructure like office premises of the SDO designated as head of the Tribunal and that of 
the District Magistrate will also service as the offices of the Tribunals and the Appellate 
Authority. 
 
1.34  On being asked whether a provision could be incorporated in the Bill to make States 
accountable for enforcing the provisions of the proposed Act and whether a time limit for 
setting up the Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals could be prescribed in the Bill, the Ministry 
informed that as soon as a State Government adopts the Act, it will become the 
responsibility of the State Governments to implement its provisions which may include 
setting up of the necessary infrastructure and facilities. 
 

1.35 The Committee note that in the proposed legislation, the Government have not 
made any provision to financially assist the State Governments to constitute 
Tribunals for adjudicating and deciding upon the order for maintenance and Appellate 
Tribunals to hear the appeal against the order of the Tribunals.  The Government have 
informed that the States are expected to implement the provisions of the Bill 
effectively with their existing mac hinery.  The Committee however feel that the States 
may not be able to cope up with the increased workload and responsibility with the 
existing machinery and would require more funds for infrastructural facilities in 
setting up the Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that grants -in-aid be given to the State Governments for setting up 
Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals and for creation of related infrastructure so that 
effective implementation of the Bill does not suffer due to lack of funds. 
 
1.36 The Committee are constrained to note that no time limit has been stipulated in 
the proposed legislation for setting up Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals by the State 
Governments.  In order to make the States more accountable and  to ensure early 
implementation of the provisions of the Bill, the Committee desire that the 
Government should stipulate a time period, preferably six months for setting up the 
Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals from the date the Act comes into force. 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. Clause 19 of the Bill - Establishment of Old Age Homes 
  
1.37 Clause 19 of Bill provides for the establishment of Old Age Homes as  under:- 
(1)The State Government may establish and maintain such number of  old age homes at 
accessible places, as it may  deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginning with at least 
one in each district to  accommodate in such homes a minimum of one hundred fifty senior 
citizens who are indigent. 

 
(2)The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management of old age home s, 
including the standards and various types of  services to be provided by them which 
are necessary for medical care and means of entertainment to the inhabitants of such 
homes. 
 
 
1.38 The Committee desired to know whether the senior citizens living below  poverty line 
will be given preference in getting admission in old age homes wherein the Ministry informed 
that since the old age homes are meant for the destitute older persons, it can be inferred that 
the senior citizens living below poverty line will have priority in getting the benefits. 
 
1.39 On being asked whether the Central Government will be contributing any funds 
towards the establishment and maintenance of old age homes under the Act, the Ministry 
have informed that they are in the process of con verting the existing ‘Non -Plan Scheme’ of 
providing financial assistance to Panchayati Raj Institutions/voluntary Organizations/Self 
Help Groups for Construction of Old Age Homes/Multi Service Centres for older persons into 
a ‘Plan Scheme’ with enhanced bu dgetary provisions and flexibility.  The new Scheme 
proposes to sanction grant -in aid to State Governments for Construction of Old Age 
Homes/Multi Service Centres.  The scheme is in the initial stages of formulation and the 
details are being worked out.  F urther, the Central Government will also continue to provide 
assistance for maintenance of old age homes under its existing Scheme of Integrated 
Programme for Older Persons. 
 
1.40 During evidence the Secretary of the Ministry stated that the old age homes,  which 
are already there in the country run by the voluntary sector and supported by the Ministry 
through grant-in-aid, should be more formalized and more systematized and more uniformly 
spread through out the country.  She further stated that State Govern ment should make a 
scheme for management of old age homes. 
 

1.41 During evidence it was also suggested to construct Old Age Homes near orphanages 
as the orphan children who do not have parents can be cared under their guidance.  They 
can be benefited by that.  It can be a joint venture with orphanages and old age homes.  The 
Secretary responded and said that they would consider it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.42  The Committee note that establishment of old age homes for senior citizens 
who are indigent, in every district of the State, is one of the objectives of the proposed 
legislation.  However, no provision has been made to provide funds for the 
establishment and maintenance of old age homes.  The Government have informed 
that they are in the process of formulating a new scheme to sanction grants-in-aid to 
State Governments for construction of old age homes/multi service centres.  The 
Government would also continue to provide assistance for maintenance of old age 
homes under its existing scheme of `Integrated Programme for  Older Persons’. The 
Committee however feel that since establishment of old age homes is stipulated in the 
proposed legislation, the Government should make adequate provision for grants -in-
aid to the State Governments for establishing and maintaining old a ge homes in the 
proposed legislation itself, for which suitable amendment in the proposed legislation 
may be made.   The Committee also urge upon the Government to formulate a long 
term plan to establish adequate number of well maintained Old Age Homes thr ough 

out the country at the earliest so that maximum number of deserving and destitute 
senior citizens could be accommodated in such Homes.  
 
1.43 Clause 19 (2) of Chapter III of the Bill provides for provision for ‘means of 
entertainment’ for the inmates of old age homes.  The Committee, desire that  
provision for facilities for setting up ‘Recreation Centres’ for senior citizens living in 
the old age homes should also be incorporated in the proposed legislation to create 
an atmosphere where the senior cit izens would be able to relax and rejuvenate 
physically and mentally.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the words 
‘Recreation Centres’ should be suitably inserted in Clause 19(2) of the Bill. 
 
1.44 The Committee also desire that as part of their wel fare programme for senior 
citizens, State Governments should set up old age homes close to orphanages so that 
the young children are brought under the guidance and experience of the aged 
persons and both would benefit from interacting with each other and a lso 
psychologically compliment each other.  The Committee urge the Government to 
issue necessary directions to the State Governments for consideration and 
implementation in this regard.   
 

V. Clause 20 of the Bill - Provisions for Medical Care of Senior Citizens 
 
1 .45 Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the medical care of senior citizens as under: 
 
(1) The State Government shall ensure that- 
 
 (i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the  Government shall 
provide beds for all senior citizens as far as possible;  
  
 
 (ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens; 
 
 (iii) facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases is expanded for 
senior citizens; 
 
 (iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing is expanded; 
 
 (v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital duly headed 
by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care. 
 
 
1.46 The Ministry have stated that the existing infrastructure of the Stat es will be utilized 
for the above mentioned purpose.  The Committee enquired whether the States, with their 
limited resources will be able to provide the facilities envisaged in the Bill and whether the 
requirement of funds for provision of better medical facilities and security to the senior 
citizens living alone in their own homes could be prescribed / stipulated in the proposed Act.  
The Ministry have responded that many of the provisions in respect of medical facilities to 
senior citizens like providing  beds, separate queues do not require significant additional 
infrastructure.  The other provisions are part of regular up -gradation of facilities and 
improvement of medical technology, which can be, by and large, taken care of within the 
available sources. 
1.47 In response to another query relating to ensuring that a certain number of beds are 
earmarked for senior citizens in Government hospitals, the Ministry have stated that 
earmarking certain number of beds may result in non -availability of those beds to  other 
patients in cases, where there are not enough elderly patients requiring beds. 

1.48 In response to question relating to making a provision of ‘Group Health Insurance for 
Senior Citizens’ the Ministry have stated that Government Hospitals generally t reat the poor 
patients free of cost.  Insurance coverage is mostly required in critical illness and at places 
where adequately equipped Government hospitals are not available.  The Ministry have 
further stated that Group Health Insurance is a subject whose  dimensions and parameters 
are entirely different from that of a social legislation.  Therefore, the subject cannot be 
holistically covered within the compass of the proposed legislation.   
  
1.49 In this regard the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice an d Empowerment stated 
during evidence: 
  
“Efforts are being made in that direction and the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority, which is the regulator in this field has already constituted 
an expert committee on health insurance for senior citize ns and they are 
deliberating on various issues. The Ministry of Social Justice is in regular touch 
with them and in fact this issue was raised in the last meeting of the National 
Council of Older Persons. They have come in our Council and the Joint 
Secretary is also attending their meetings. These are some of the measures 
which are being taken separately.  I am aware that this does not address the 
issue of the group insurance which means that there should be a share from the 
public exchequer and although, t his only takes care of the individual health 
insurance, there is certainly a need and we keep it in mind. We take due note of 
it. “ 
 
1.50 In this context, the Committee considered the suggestions received from Non -official 
experts stating that a percentage  of income tax or special surcharge be used to form a 
corpus for geriatrics/senior citizens at national level.  Also national level training institute for 
geriatrics should be started.  
 

 
1.51 The Committee note that the Government have not made any inroa d so far in 
the field of group health insurance for senior citizens though the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority, which is the regulator in the field, has 
constituted an Expert Committee on health insurance for senior citizens.  The 
Committee do not agree with the views of the Government that insurance coverage is 
mostly required in critical illness and at places where adequately equipped hospitals 
are not available.  They are also not inclined to agree to the Government view that 
Group Health Insurance is a subject whose dimensions and parameters are entirely 
different from that of social legislation.   The Committee are of the firm view that for 
the benefit of senior citizens, particularly belonging to poor families with dwindling 
financial position and those suffering from chronic diseases or having deteriorating 
health conditions, the Government have to broaden their approach and introduce 
group health insurance for their welfare.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
under clause 20 of t he Bill, insert ‘sub -clause vi’ as follows “All senior citizens to be 
covered under Group Health Insurance.” 
  
1.52 The Committee observe that in rural areas it is difficult for older persons to get 
proper medical treatment for their ailments due to variou s reasons.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to examine the feasibility of making mandatory 
provision in the Bill for the doctors working in hospitals to conduct medical camps in 
various parts of the country, especially in rural and far flung areas, to take care of 
medical needs of older persons.  The Committee further recommend that private 
hospitals, getting concessional land or other facilities from the Government, may also 
give concession towards consultation and treatment to the older persons. 
 
Protection of life and Property of Senior Citizen 

 
1.53 Clause 21 and 22 provide for protection of life and property of senior citizens as 
under:- 
 
21: The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that- 
(i) the provisions of this Act are g iven wide publicity through public media including the 
television, radio and the print, at regular intervals; 
 
(ii) the Central Government and State Government officers, including police officer and 
the members of the Judicial service, are given periodic s ensitization and awareness training 
on the issues relating to this Act; 
 
(iii) effective co-ordination between the services provided by the concerned Ministries or 
Departments dealing with law, home -affairs, health and welfare to address the issues 
relating to welfare of the senior citizens and periodical review of the same is conducted. 
 
22 (2): The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan for providing 
protection of life and property of senior citizens. 
 
1.54 Keeping in view the fact t hat vulnerable senior citizens have become soft targets for 
criminal elements especially in cities the Committee enquired how the Central Government 
would be able to play a more substantial and active role to protect the life and property of the 
senior cit izens.  The Ministry in their written reply have stated that Protection of life and 
property basically pertains to Law and Order, which is a State subject.  Therefore, it has 
been provided under Section 22(2) that the State Government shall prescribe a 
comprehensive action plan for providing protection of life and property of senior citizen.  
Further, section 31 provides that the State Governments may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Act.  Therefore, this issue can be comprehensively addresse d by the State 
Governments at the time of framing rules.  If any directions/guidance in this matter is 
considered necessary in the course of implementation of the legislation, an enabling 
provision has already been included vide section 30 of the Bill, whi ch empowers the Central 
Government to give such directions to State Governments for carrying out the execution of 
the provisions of this Bill.  

 

 1.55 As per Clause 22(2) of the Bill, the onus for preparing a comprehensive action 
plan for protection of life and property of senior citizens has been laid upon the State 
Governments.  The role of the Union Government is limited only to give 
direction/guidance to State Governments.    Keeping in view the current scenario of 
law and order and eroding sense of mo rality, the Committee recommend that more 
concrete, effective and mandatory provisions, to protect the life and property of the 
senior citizens, who become soft targets of criminal elements in their old age, should 
be made in the Bill.  The Committee also desire that a provision should be made in the 
Bill to guarantee the right to residence of the parents in the house, even if constructed 
by their son from his personal earnings as it would ensure protection of their life.  
Although protection of life and property basically pertains to law and order which is a 
State subject, yet State Governments can be asked to take some measures like 
establishment of Senior Citizens Service and Information Centres in each district, to 
provide information on the services/con cessions available to the senior citizens, for 
registration of senior citizens with respective police station, periodic visits by NGOs 
etc.  The Committee recommend that these measures should be incorporated  in the 
Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII Social Security for the Senior Citizens 
 
1.56 The Committee observed that though the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Bill, 2007 has been prepared with the specific purpose of maintenance and 

welfare of parents and senior citizens, however, provisions for so cial security measures like 
‘Group Insurance and Old Age  Pension’ have not been made in the Bill. 
 
1.57 When enquired whether the above mentioned proposals could be incorporated in the 
Bill, the Ministry have informed that the National Old Age Pension Sch eme was transferred 
to the State Governments with effect from the financial year 2002 -03.  However, neither the 
age for eligibility nor the amount of pension is uniform over different State Governments.  In 
order to ensure uniformity in implementation of t he scheme across the country, a provision 
was initially proposed in the legislation, which required the State Governments to provide 
financial security to all the senior citizens living below poverty line. 
 
1.58  However, in deference to the suggestion of the Department of Expenditure to de-link 
the issue from the Bill, it has been decided to drop the provisions relating to Old Age 
Pension from the proposed legislation.   The grounds of the suggestion of the Department of 
Expenditure has been stated to be t hat it will lead to creation of statutory rights with serious 
and uncertain financial implications. The Committee have been further informed that the 
Central share of Old Age Pension has since been increased from Rs. 75/ - per person per 
month to Rs. 200/ - per person per month.  The State Governments have been asked to 
make matching contribution to the old age pension amount.  The number of beneficiaries as 
well as the budgetary allocation of the scheme are being increased progressively every year, 
thereby expanding the coverage of old age pension scheme.  
 
1.59 During evidence, the Secretary explained the reasons for not incorporating old age 
pension in the Bill : 
“On the issue of old age pension, it is not that the Government of India is not 
aware of it or is not trying to play more and more active role in it, but then in the 
consultative process a decision has been taken that it should not be made a 
statutory obligation. It is a policy of the Government of India and State 

Governments, but a conscious decisi on has been taken by the Government not 
to make it a statutory obligation.” 
 
1.60 The Secretary also drew attention of the Committee towards provisions of Article 41 
of the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of India.  It mentions, ‘w ithin the 
limits of its economic capacity and development, the State shall make effective provisions for 
public assistance’.  She continued to state that the Government are playing an active role in 
old age pension together with the State Governments but a view has been taken not to make 
it a statutory provision.  There -upon the Committee pointed out that there is no role of the 
State Governments and direction is given to them (State Governments).  The Committee 
expressed their disagreement on view of the M inistry that- Pension bill can only be brought 
by the State Government. 
 
  
 
1.61 The Committee note with concern that one of the most important means of 
social security for senior citizens i.e., old age pension has been left out of the ambit of 
‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill, 2007’.  The reason 
advanced by the Government that a conscious decision has been taken not to make it 
a statutory obligation as it will lead to serious and uncertain financial implications 
does not carry any weight taking into consideration the larger objective of welfare of 
the older persons.  It is pertinent to note that State Governments are implementing 
Old Age Pension Scheme in their respective States but the amount of pension and the 
age / other criteria for eligibility are not uniform among the States.  Therefore, in order 
to ensure that senior citizens are provided financial security, the Committee urge 
upon the Government to play a proactive role by making it statutory obligation on the 
part of the State Governments to disburse uniform and adequate old age pension to 
the senior citizens. 

IX. Role of NGOs 
 
1.62 The Committee note that there is no provision in the Bill about the role of NGOs for 
implementation of the proposed Act and enquired abou t the measures proposed to be taken 
to make the Registered Voluntary organizations accountable and protect the rights and 
interests of the physically incapable senior citizens.  The Ministry, in their reply have 
informed that the State Governments are acco untable for enforcing the provisions of the Bill 
and to protect the rights and interests of the physically incapable.  The NGOs are expected 
to take voluntary initiation by spreading awareness among the public in general and senior 
citizens in particular, about the provisions of the Act.  They will also assist the parents/senior 
citizens in filing applications before the Tribunals. The Ministry has further stated that the 
activities of NGOs are essentially voluntary in nature and vary in development from St ate to 
State and even within the same State, in different areas. Hence, creation of any 
mandatory/statutory obligations on the part of NGOs has not been considered appropriate. 
 
1.63 The Committee also find that there is no provision in the Bill to cater t o the 
psychological and emotional needs of the senior citizens, particularly those above the age of 
70 and widowed women. 
 
1.64 The Committee note with concern that no provision has been made in the Bill 
to provide emotional and psychological support and c are to the senior citizens, 
particularly those above the age of seventy and widowed women. This group of senior 
citizens often spend their twilight years lonely, in a state of negligence and 
deprivation.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Governmen t should make 
provision for setting up Help line, Counseling Centres etc. to cater to the emotional 
needs of the most vulnerable amongst the senior citizens and widowed women. 
 
 
 

 
 
               Smt. SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
  NEW DELHI;               Chairperson, 
31  August, 2007            Standing Committee on Social  
9 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)                         Justice and Empowerment.  
    
       
 