 
 
TWELFTH REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventh 
Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants
-
2005
-
2006 of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
            Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.2.2006
 
 
                       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.2.2006
 
 
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI
 
         

 
 
 
 
12
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendation
s/Observations contained in the Seventh 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment relating to Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants
-
2005
-
2006.
 
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
NEW DELHI
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            (iii)
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
Report…
……………………………………                    1    
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been            
accepted by the Government………………………      11
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/Observations which the 
 
                                    Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply…………………………………       25
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of
 
                                   which replies o
f Government have not been 
 
                                   accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration……………………………………………       27
 
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 
                              
      which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature……………………………………………….        33
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
Minutes of the ninth sitting of the Standing
 
                                   Committee on Social Justice and
 
                    
               Empowerment held on 17 January 2006………..
 
  37
 
 
 
APPENDIX
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………. 
 
  39
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMIT
TEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
(2005
-
2006
)
 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
-
CHAIRPERSON
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.
 
Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque
 
 
 
3.
 
Shri M. Appadurai
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Ashok Argal
 
 
 
 
5.
 
Shri Mahaveer Bhagora
 
 
 
6.
 
Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
 
 
 
7.
 
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
 
 
 
8.
 
Shri Kailas
h Meghwal
 
 
 
9.
 
Shri Rupchand Murmu
 
 
 
10.
 
Shri Jual Oram
 
 
 
 
11.
 
Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
 
 
 
12.
 
Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
 
 
 
13.
 
Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
 
 
14.
 
Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj
 
 
 
15.
 
Dr. R. Senthil
 
 
 
 
16.
 
Smt. Pratibha Singh
 
 
 
17.
 
Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya
 
 
18.
 
Smt. Krishna Tirath
 
 
 
19.
 
Smt. Usha Ver
ma
 
 
 
 
20.
 
Shri K. Yerrainnaidu
 
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
21.
 
Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal
 
22.
 
Shri Silvius Condpan
 
23.
 
Shri R.S. Gavai
 
24.
 
Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao
 
25.
 
Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee
 
26.
 
Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal
 
27.
 
Shri Ram Narayan Sahu
 
28.
 
Shri Tarlochan Singh
 
29.
 
Shri Veer Singh
 
 
 
 
   
      
 
 
 SECRETARIAT
 
        
 
 
1.    Shri John Joseph        
-
 
Secretary
 
 
 
 
2.    Shri A.K. Singh
 
 
-
        Joint Secretary
 
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena 
 
-
         Deputy Secretary
 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar   
-
        Under Secretary
 
       
 
 
 
5.   Shri Vanlalrua
ta
 
 
-
        Committee Officer
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twelfth Report on the action taken b
y 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
-
2005
-
2006 
relating to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
 
 
2.
 
The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 21 April, 2005.  The Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 12 Septembe
r, 2005. The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 17 January, 2006.
 
 
3.
 
An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventh   Report
 of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
is given in 
Appendix.
 
 
4.
 
For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
5.
 
The Committee pl
ace on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
 
 
17 January, 2006 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairperson,
 
27 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
Sta
nding Committee on 
 
Social Justice and  
Empowerment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT
 
        
 
CHAPTER 
-
I
 
 
 
1.1
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contain
ed in the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2005
-
2006 relating to 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
1.2
 
The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21 April, 2005.   It contained 24 recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: 
 
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the
 
Government:
 
 Sl.  Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 20, 22 and 24.
 
 
(Total 12   
-
 Chapter II)
 
         
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
 
Sl.  Nos. 2 and 21.
 
 
(Total 2
 
-
 Chapter III)
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented 
upon by the Committee in Chapter I:
 
Sl. Nos.  5, 7,10, 13, 16 and 19. 
 
 
(Total 6 
-
 Chapter IV)
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommend
ations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature:
 
 
 
Sl. Nos. 3, 17, 18 and 23.
 
 
 
(Total 4  
-
 Chapter V) 
 

 
 
 
1.3
 
The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter
-
 I and final acti
on taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter
-
 V of the Report may 
be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three 
months of the presentation of the Report.
 
 
1.4
 
The Committee will now deal with the action 
taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments.
 
 
 
A.
 
General Performance of the Ministry
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para 2.16)
 
1.5
 
The Committee had noted that majority of the Schemes of the Ministry are 
Centrally sponsored Schemes
 and hence implementation lies with the state 
Governments.  The Committee were, however, of the opinion that the Ministry 
was accountable for the funds disbursed by them in order to ensure that they are 
utilized  properly for the purpose for which they are
 allotted.  The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the Ministry should set
-
up a central Monitoring 
cell to oversee the progress of implementation of its Schemes.  The Committee 
had further recommended that a three
-
tier monitoring mechanism at Villa
ge level, 
District level and State level should be evolved involving the local administration, 
District Administration and State Governments.
 
 
1.6
 
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their action taken 
note have stated that it releases Centr
al assistance to States/UTs under 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  The utilization of this assistance is regularly 
monitored by the Programme Divisions of the Ministry.  However, monitoring at 
the village, district and state level is the responsibility of the
 State Government.
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.7
 
The Committee had opined that the Ministry was accountable for the 
funds disbursed by them in order to ensure that they were utilized properly 
for the purpose for which they were allotted.  Therefore, the Committee had 
recommended
 that the Ministry should set up a Central Monitoring Cell to 
oversee the progress of implementation of its schemes.  The Ministry 
should also evolve a three
-
tier monitoring mechanism at Village, District 
and State levels involving the local administration
, District administration 
and State Governments.  The Ministry in their reply have stated that 
utilization of assistance is regularly
 
monitored
 
by the Programme 
Divisions. However, monitoring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes at 
Village/District/State Level i
s the responsibility of the State Government.  
The Committee are not at all satisfied with the reply of the Government.  
The Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry should set up a Central 
Monitoring Cell exclusively to oversee the progress of imp
lementation of 
its schemes. The Central Monitoring Cell may also co
-
ordinate with the 
monitoring units of the States/UTs.  The Committee, therefore reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should set
-
up a Central 
Monitoring Cell as such mec
hanism would go a long way in effective 
implementation of the Schemes from the grass root level onwards by 
ensuring optimum and timely utilization of funds resulting in ameliorating 
the conditions of the vulnerable sections of our society.  The Committee 
f
urther reiterate that the Ministry actively pursue with the States/UTs for 
setting up a three tier monitoring mechanism at Village/District/State Level 
at the earliest.
 

 
 
B.
 
Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Special Component Plan (SCP)
 
 
Scheduled Castes 
Division
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7 Para No. 3.12)
 
 
 
1.8
 
The Committee had expressed serious concern that some States were not 
following the guidelines laid down by the Ministry with regard to allocating funds 
under SCP in proportion to their scheduled ca
stes population.  The States’ outlay 
under SCP was only 11.01% and 12.68% during the years 2002
-
03 and 2003
-
04, 
which was much below the average Scheduled Castes population in the country.  
The Ministry had stated that States get proportionate allocation o
f SCA based on 
their SCP allocation as per the SC population in those States and if they did not 
follow the guidelines their share got reduced proportionately.  Keeping in view the 
welfare of the targeted people, the Committee strongly recommended that the
 
Ministry should impress upon all the 27 States/UTs availing SCA to SCP funds to 
make allocation under their SCP in proportion to their SC population and get their 
share of SCA funds on time.
 
1.9
 
In their action taken notes the Ministry have stated that al
l State Welfare 
Secretaries dealing with Scheduled Castes Development have been requested 
on 6.5.2005 to initiate necessary action on the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee.
 
1.10
 
The Committee had expressed their dismay at the stereotyped reply 
of t
he Ministry that all State Welfare Secretaries dealing with Scheduled 
Castes Development have been requested to initiate necessary action on 
the recommendations of the Standing Committee.  The Committee are of 
the view that the guideline of the Ministry wi
th regard to allocating funds 

 
 
under SCP in proportion to Scheduled Castes population of the States is of 
vital importance in ensuring socio
-
economic development of SC population 
and as such necessary steps should be taken by the Central Government 
to   mak
e the State Governments   comply with the guideline instead of 
merely requesting the State Welfare Sectaries to initiate necessary action 
in this regard.  The Committee strongly feel that this matter should be 
taken up at the level of the Union Minister fo
r Social Justice and 
Empowerment with the respective Chief Ministers.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry should 
impress upon all the 27 States/UTs availing SCA to SCP funds to make 
allocation under their SCP
 in proportion to their SC population and get their 
share of SCA funds on time.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para 3.15)
 
 
1.11
 
The Committee had noted that the allocation of SCA to SCP amounts to 
nearly 44% of funds allocated to the Scheduled Castes Division.
  In the year 
2004
-
05 the SCA funds released by the Ministry was Rs. 23226.12 lakh and the 
utilization till 31.12.2004 was only Rs. 12669 lakh, which in percentage terms 
was only 55%, an abysmally low figure of utilization. The Committee, therefore, 
had st
rongly recommended that the Government should impress upon the 
States/UTs, availing SCA funds, to furnish utilization certificates on time to 
ensure timely release of the second installment of SCA funds and to utilize them 
fully to ensure effective impleme
ntation of this Scheme.
 

 
 
 
 
1.12
 
In their action taken note furnished to 
the Committee, the Ministry have stated that 
all
 State Welfare Secretaries dealing with 
Scheduled Castes Development have been 
requested on 6.5.2005 to initiate necessary 
action on the
 recommendations of the 
Standing Committee.
 
 
1.13
 
The Committee note with regret that the Ministry have not acted 
upon the recommendation of the Committee in right earnest.  The 
Committee had found that the allocation of Special Central Assistance to 
Speci
al Component Plan amounts to nearly 44.1% of funds allocated to the 
Scheduled Castes Division. In the year 2004
-
05 the SCA funds released by 
the Ministry was Rs. 23226.12 lakhs and utilization was only Rs. 12669.09 
lakh till 31.12.2004 which in terms of pe
rcentage was only 55%. The 
Ministry convened only one meeting of State Welfare secretaries dealing 
with Scheduled Castes Development, to impress upon them to furnish 
utilization certificates on time to ensure timely release of subsequent 
installment for ef
fective implementation of this scheme.  Keeping in view 
that the main  thrust of the scheme of SCA to SCP is to ensure that SC 
families are able to cross the below the poverty line figure. The Committee 
again recommend the Ministry to vigorously pursue wit
h the States/UT 
Governments to furnish utilization certificates on time to ensure timely 
release of the second installment of  SCP funds and to ensure effective 
implementation of this important scheme.  
 

 
 
C.
 
Scheme for Pre
-
Matric Scholarship for the Childr
en of those engaged 
in Unclean Occupations
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 3.29)
 
1.14
 
The Committee  had noted with regret that the government has not taken 
up in 2001 the census of the people engaged in unclean jobs.  In the absence of 
such vital data the
 details regarding the literacy rate of those people and the 
details of the students who availed benefits under the scheme were not available 
with the Government.  The Committee was also surprised to note that the 
Ministry was not maintaining even the succ
ess/drop out rate under the scheme.  
The Committee felt that the government was not serious towards its commitment 
for the upliftment of this marginalized section.  The Committee, therefore, had 
strongly recommended the Ministry to vigorously pursue with t
he competent 
authority to conduct a survey of this section of the society and also to take the 
necessary steps for obtaining the data of their literacy rate and the drop out rate 
so that adequate funds may be allocated for their educational upliftment thro
ugh 
pre
-
matric scholarships scheme and realistic plans may be formulated for their 
over all advancement.
 
1.15
 
In
 
their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
stated that all 
States/UTs are being addressed to take necessary steps to
 
conduct a survey about the literacy rate of this section of the society and obtain 
the data of their literacy and dropout rate under the Scheme.
 
 
1.16
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government  
that all States/UTs are being addresse
d to take necessary steps to conduct 
a survey on the literacy rate of the people engaged in unclean jobs as well 
as the data of their dropout rate under this scheme.  The Committee 
express their serious concern that the Government did not undertake any 
stu
dy on the people engaged in unclean occupation during the 2001 
census, and even after the lapse of a further period of four years, no work 
has been done in this regard by the Central Government. The Committee, 
therefore strongly reiterate their earlier rec
ommendation that the Ministry 
should vigorously pursue with the States/UTs 
 

 
 
to conduct the surveys about the literacy rate of this section of society and 
obtain the data of their literacy and drop out rate under the scheme within a 
definite time frame so 
as to ensure their educational upliftment.  The 
Committee further desire that Action taken in this regard be communicated 
to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
D.
 
Minorities Division
-
 General
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16,  Para 4.3)
 
1.17
 
The Committee were pert
urbed to note that the budgetary allocation for 
the Minorities who constitute 18% of the total population was Rs. 77.97 crore out 
of which expenditure of only Rs. 44.5 crore was incurred.  For the year 2005
-
06 
budgetary allocation was Rs. 56.15 crore.  The
 Committee had felt that the 
Government was not serious towards its commitment for the welfare of minorities 
as the present allocation is woefully inadequate.  Keeping in view the economic 
and educational backwardness of minorities, the Committee had urged
 the 
Ministry to take up the matter with the Planning Commission for enhancement in 
budgetary allocation for the minority division.  The Committee felt that the 
minority community was not fully aware of the various schemes formulated by the 
Government for 
their welfare and upliftment.  The Committee, therefore, had 
desired that the Government should take initiative for generating awareness 
among minorities by distributing pamphlets  and displaying hoardings at different 
public places, in English, Hindi and 
other regional languages, giving details of the 
Schemes meant for them at Panchayat level.
 
 
1.18
 
In
 
their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
stated that 
they have already been publicizing the schemes and programmes 
through Elec
tronic, Print and Outdoor Media to spread information on the 
schemes and programmes of the Government for the welfare of minorities.  
Moreover, the National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation 
(NMDFC) organizes Awareness camps through its State 
Channelising Agencies 
for creating awareness among the target groups about its schemes.  During 
2004
-
05 a total of 145 awareness camps were organized by NMDFC at various 
places in the country.
 

 
 
 
1.19
 
Keeping in view the economic and educational backwardness
 of 
minorities, the Committee had urged the Ministry to take up the matter with 
the Planning Commission for enhancement in budgetary allocation for the 
minority division.
  
The Committee express their serious concern on the 
oversight on the part of the Gove
rnment on this important aspect in their 
action taken note, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have 
not furnished any action proposed to be taken by them to take up the issue 
of enhancing the budgetary allocation for the Minorities Division wit
h the 
Planning Commission.  The Committee take a serious note of this and 
therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation to take up the 
matter with the Planning Commission for enhancement of the Budgetary 
allocation for the Minority Division  s
o that Government’s commitment for 
the welfare of minorities could be fulfilled. 
 
 
E.
 
Scheme for development of Urban Wakf Properties
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19 Para No. 4.16)
 
 
1.20
 
The Committee were constrained to note that out of 10,556 wakf 
propertie
s which are under illegal possession/encroachment, during the last three 
years, the Ministry have no information regarding the restoration of these wakf 
properties from illegal occupants.  The Committee viewed the situation very 
seriously and recommended t
hat an effective mechanism should be evolved to 
check encroachment of wakf properties.  The Committee also 
had
 recommended 
that all the wakf properties which 
had
 been illegally encroached, transferred, 
mortgaged, leased or sold should be retrieved by takin
g legal action against their 
occupants.
 
 

 
 
1.21
 
In
 
their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of 
Social Justice and Empowerment 
have stated that the
 matter has been taken up 
with the Chief Secretaries of the States/Administrations to ta
ke the appropriate 
action in the matter on 20
th
 June, 2005.
 
 
1.22
 
The Committee note with concern that no concrete action has been 
taken by the Government to restore all the Wakf properties which have 
been illegally encroached, transferred, mortgaged, leas
ed or sold during 
the last three years.  The Committee have not been informed about the 
legal action taken against the illegal occupants.  The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the State authorities at the 
highest level and
 make all out efforts to persuade all State/UTs to initiate 
legal action against the illegal occupants of Wakf properties and ensure 
that they are restored to their lawful owners.  The progress achieved in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee a
t the earliest.
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
-
II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para 2.12)
 
2.1
 
The Committee were constrained to note that this year too the budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry for the ye
ar 2004
-
05 has been pruned at RE stage from 
Rs. 1942 crore to Rs. 1350 crore, a cut of Rs. 142/
-
 crore, and the actual 
expenditure incurred during the year was to the tune of Rs. 1223.81 crore.  The 
main reason for less utilization attributed by the Minist
ry was non
-
receipt of 
utilization certificates as well as fresh proposals from the States in time.  It was 
also stated that the Ministry usually gets utilization certificates and fresh 
proposals in the last quarter of the year.  However, the Committee had 
found that 
as a result of efforts made by them during the year utilization certificates of 
previous years had been obtained from State Governments/UTs and the Ministry 
was expected to utilize the funds allocated to them during the year.  The 
Committee was 
of the opinion that it is financial prudence to incur the allocated 
expenditure in such a manner that it is evenly distributed and fully utilized during 
a financial year.  The Committee, had therefore, strongly recommended that the 
Ministry should organize
 periodical meetings with the representatives of all the 
States Governments/UT Administrations and impress upon them to submit the 
proposals at the beginning of the year and also furnish utilization certificates in 
time so that the allocated funds could be
 fully utilized and reduction in their 
allocation at RE stage is avoided.  The Committee was of the firm opinion that 
timely submission of proposals and release of funds for the various welfare 
schemes of the Ministry would help in a big way the down
-
trodd
en and 
vulnerable sections of the society and also in effective implementation of the 
schemes of the Ministry.
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
During 2004
-
05 a meeting of States/UTs Social Welfare Secretaries was 
held on 10.8.2004 and 11.8.2004 to discuss revi
ve of implementation of welfare 
schemes of the Ministry.  During these meetings they have been requested to 
send the complete proposal alongwith utilization certificates of previous releases.  
In the 2004
-
05 the Plan expenditure of the Ministry was Rs. 134
5.91 crore 
(99.70%) against the RE OF Rs. 1350 crore.
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September 2005]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para 2.15)
 
2.2
 
The Committee were pleased to note that consequent to
 the efforts of the 
Ministry, the Five Schemes which the Planning commission was ready to transfer 
to the States, the Ministry have been able to retain all but one.  The reasons cited 
by the Planning Commission for transferring these Schemes to the State 
G
overnments were that these Schemes are implemented by the State 
governments and the budgetary allocations are not very large for these 
Schemes.  The Committee were also aware that some of the States/UTs find it 
difficult to provide even their matching shar
e for the Schemes, and are not able 
to furnish their utilization certificates on time.  In order to ensure that these 
Schemes remain under the purview of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, the Committee strongly recommended that the Ministry s
hould 
not only ensure that these Schemes remain under the purview of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should not only ensure that adequate budgetary allocations are made for 
these Schemes.  
The Committee were also aware that some of the States/UTs 
find it difficult to provide even their matching share for the Schemes, and are not 
able to furnish their utilization certificates on time.  In order to ensure that these 
Schemes remain under the pu
rview of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, the Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry 
should not only ensure that adequate budgetary allocations are made for these 
Schemes, but also State Governments/UT Administrations be impres
sed upon to 

 
 
furnish their utilization Certificates as well as fresh proposals on time for the 
effective implementation of these Schemes, which are pivotal for the upliftment of 
marginalized sections of our society.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Out of five sche
mes to be transferred to the States the Planning 
Commission had agreed to transfer the scheme of Employment of handicapped 
only to States and retain the following four schemes in the Ministry.  The 
Planning Commission has approved and allocated funds by re
-
appropriation 
under these schemes for the current year and the matter of re
-
appropriation of 
funds under these schemes has been taken up with Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure for their concurrence.  The details of funds allocated 
under these
 four schemes are given below:
-
 
                                                                                                     Rs. in crore
 
S.No.
 
Name of 
the Scheme
 
Funds allocated
 
1.
 
Pre
-
Matric Scholarship for children of those 
engaged in unclean o
ccupation
 
16.00
 
2.
 
Hostels for SC and OBC boys and girls
 
61.00
 
3.
 
Coaching & Allied scheme for weaker sections 
including SCs, OBCs and Minorities
 
  8.00
 
4.
 
Scheme for prevention & control of Juvenile Social 
Maladjustment
 
22.69
 
 
During 2004
-
05 a meeting
 of States/UTs Social Welfare Secretaries was held on 
10.8.2004 and 11.8.2004 to review implementation of welfare schemes of the 
Ministry.  During these meetings they have been requested to send the complete 
proposal alongwith utilization certificates of p
revious releases.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para 2.17)
 
2.3 The Committee had found that the Planning Commission provides budgetary 
allocation
 to the Ministry who allocate funds either in the form of Grants
-
in
-
aid or 
loans to various States/Union Territories for implementation of various welfare 
schemes formulated for the upliftment of targeted sections of our Society i.e. the 
Scheduled Castes a
nd Scheduled Tribes, OBCs, minorities, disabled persons, 
children in need of care, victims of drug abuse etc.  However, it was been 
observed that the welfare schemes are not properly implemented and funds 
allocated to the States for implementation of these
 schemes are not fully utilized 
by them.  The main reason attributed for not implementing these schemes and 
low utilization of funds were non receipt of adequate number of proposals from 
the States in time, delay in completion of projects, non
-
receipt of u
tilization 
certificates from the Channelising agencies/NGOs etc.  Also some States do not 
provide their matching share which results in delay in releasing subsequent 
Installments.  It was also stated that the implementation of centrally sponsored 
schemes i
s the responsibility of States Governments.  However, it is found that 
the State Governments are unable to fulfill their commitment to the desired 
extent due to financial constraints.  The Committee felt that neither the 
concerned Ministry nor the State Go
vernments are serious enough as it lacks 
effective mechanism to monitor and evaluate the proper implementation of the 
schemes in States/UTs which results in not achieving the desired results of 
upliftment of the disadvantageous sections of the society.  Th
e Committee had 
expressed their deep anguish at this state of affairs.  Keeping in view the 
mandate of the Ministry for the upliftment of SC/STs, minorities, etc.,  the 
Committee had desired that the Ministry should impress upon the Planning 
commission to 
take a pro
-
active role in this regard.  The Planning Commission 
may convene meeting of Chief Ministers of all the States to take stock of 
implementation of the schemes before finalizing the annual plans and allocating 
funds and impress upon them to impleme
nt the Centrally Sponsored Welfare 
Schemes in their States effectively.  The Committee also desired that the 
Planning Commission should persuade the State Government to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds, timely submission of new proposals and effective 
i
mplementation and monitoring of all welfare schemes in their respective States 

 
 
so that the benefits of the schemes could reach the disadvantaged and 
marginalized sections of the Central Government, the amount so sanctioned 
should be placed with the respect
ive Board or Corporation as against their 
Schemes for utilization.  The Ministry and the Planning Commission should also 
ensure that funds that are allocated for different schemes of the States are 
utilized for their respective schemes and not diverted.
 
 
R
eply of the Government
 
 
The Recommendation of the Standing Committee were sent to the 
Planning Commission on 15
th
 July 2005 to take needful action.  In reply to our 
O.M. the Planning Commission on 2.8.2005 informed that they convene meeting 
of Chief Minist
ers of all the States to finalize the Annual Plans and Five year 
Plans of the state Governments for various sectors.  In a continuing process, 
Working Groups have also been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
concerned Adviser to discuss the sector
-
wise 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes are 
being assessed and also impress upon the State Government to optimally utilize 
the plan allocation especially under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Besides, as 
a follow up measures, the Planning commission has mechanism for reg
ular 
monitoring and review of implementation of programmes of the State 
Governments through Quarterly Performance Review meeting in the Planning 
Commission.
 
 
Central assistance is released to States/UTs under Special Central 
Assistance (SCA) to Special Com
ponent Plan (SCP) as an additive for socio
-
economic development of Scheduled Castes.  Under this scheme State level 
Scheduled Castes Development Corporations and other agencies submit their 
proposals to their respective State Government/UT Administration t
o meet 
subsidy out of funds to be made available to financial institutions.  Financial 
institutions further extend credit facilities to the beneficiaries.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 Septem
ber, 2005]
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para 3.13)
 
 
2.5
 
The Committee had noted with concern that in spite of implementation of 
welfare schemes for the Scheduled Castes for more than five decades the 
reduction in the incidence of poverty among Scheduled Cas
tes particularly in 
urban areas, is much less as compared to general populating.  Therefore, the 
Committee were of the view that the government should rise to meet its 
commitment of upliftment of the disadvantaged SC population and allocate more 
funds for 
the schemes formulated for their welfare and persuade the State 
Governments also to allocate more funds out of their total plan outlay to the 
State Component Plan and ensure eradication of poverty among them.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The recommendations o
f the Committee were taken up with 
State/Governments/UT Administrations and the Planning commission on 
6.5.2005 for taking necessary action on allocating more funds on schemes for 
welfare of disadvantaged Scheduled Castes population.  Planning Commission 
v
ide their letter No. M
-
13055/1/2002/BC dated 9.6.2005 have informed that they 
have mechanism for regular monitoring and review of implementation of Special 
Component Plan (SCP).  The proposals of the State for the Five Year Plan and 
Annual Plan are examine
d in detail including the performance of the concerned 
State.  Deficiencies, if any, are brought to the notice of the State in the Working 
Group discussion and suggestions are made for appropriate action by the State.  
The Working Group advise the State Go
vernment to impress upon the line 
Departments to allocate funds under SCP in proportion to the SC population.
 
 
The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment also monitors the 
implementation of Special Component Plan (SCP).  The proposals of the State 
for th
e Five Year Plan and Annual Plan are examined in detail including the 
performance of the concerned State.  Deficiencies, if any, are brought to the 
notice of the State in the working Group discussion and suggestions are made 
for appropriate action by the S
tate.  The Working Group advise the State 
government to impress upon the line Departments to allocate funds under SCP 
in proportion to the SC population.
 

 
 
 
The Ministry of Social Justice & empowerment also monitors the 
implementation of Special component Pl
an (SCP) by States at regular intervals 
and impress upon the State Governments for adequate allocation under SCP.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Par
a 3.14)
 
2.6
 
The Committee had noted that even after two decades of operation of this 
scheme, only 16 Ministries/Departments, out of the 30 have formulated special 
Component Plan for SCs whereas 14 Ministries/Departments have not yet 
formulated SCP for SCs.
  The Committee had strongly recommend that the 
remaining Ministries/Departments, grouped under category
-
 
III which are service 
oriented and whose activities are of divisible nature, should be persuaded by the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for
 formulating not only the Special 
Component Plan, but also ensuring its effective implementation and monitoring.  
The Committee had desired that the Planning Commission be apprised of this 
situation to ensure compliance of the same by the remaining 
Ministr
ies/Departments.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The Planning Commission has been requested on 6.5.2005 to initiate 
necessary action on the recommendations of the Standing Committee.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol
. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para 3.27)
 
2.7
 
The Committee had observed that the people engaged in unclean 
occupations are grossly marginalized sections of our society and the most 
disadvantaged among the under privileged.  
Education being the most powerful 
equipment in upliftment of the marginalized people, the significance of ‘Pre
-
matric Scholarship Scheme’ increases manifold as it plays a pivotal role in 
shaping the destiny of the children whose parents are engaged in uncl
ean 

 
 
occupation  traditionally.  The Committee had noted with concern that during the 
last three years, the Budget Estimates under this scheme have been 
consecutively reduced at Revised Estimate stage.  In 2002
-
03 and 2004
-
05 an 
expenditure of Rs. 5.13 cror
e out of Rs. 12.50 crore and Rs. 7.64 crore out of 
Rs. 10.00 crore (BE Rs. 16.00 crore) respectively was incurred.  The Committee 
had also noted with dismay that during 2004
-
05 there was insufficient demand 
for funds from the States/UTs compelling the Mini
stry to recommend 
recommended reducing demand for funds from the States/UTs compelling the 
Ministry to recommend reducing the outlay at RE stage to avoid surrender of 
funds at the fag end of the year.  The Committee, therefore, had recommended 
that keeping
 in view the significant role this scheme plays in upliftment of the 
most disadvantaged sections of our society, the Ministry should strongly plead 
their case before the Planning Commission for higher allocation of funds for 
effective implementation of the
 scheme.  The Committee had also desired that 
the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments/UTs, who have equal 
commitment for their upliftment, to effectively implement the scheme, ensure full 
utilization of the funds and submit proposals at the 
beginning of the year so that 
the desired results could be achieved.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry has already written a letter to all the States/UTs on 28
th
 April, 
2005 requesting them to ensure effective implementation of the scheme and 
furnish 
a comprehensive proposal seeking financial assistance under the scheme 
for the year 2005
-
06 covering all eligible beneficiaries.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation
 (Sl.No. 12, Para 3.28)
 
2.8
 
The Committee had further noted with concern that the Planning 
Commission has proposed to transfer the scheme to States/UTs w.e.f.  the 
financial year 2005
-
06.  The Committee fully endorsed the views of the Ministry 
that it is a
pprehended that the financial constraints with the State Governments 
would adversely affect the  implementation of the scheme and the State Finance 

 
 
Department may not be able to obtain additional resources, when required, since 
many States have not been pr
oviding matching share resulting in reduction in 
central matching share also.  Therefore, the Committee had strongly desired that 
the scheme should not be transferred to the States.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The Planning Commission has since decided not to 
transfer the scheme to 
the State.  As such the Ministry has retained the scheme.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para 3.37)
 
2.9
 
The Committee had ex
pressed their concern over the fact that the 
Scheduled Caste students who are already financially not sound have to pay 
higher fee when they take admission in 
managerial/professional/engineering/medical courses.  Some colleges even 
charge fee as high as Rs
. 25000/
-
 to 50,000/
-
.  The Committee found that with 
the present budget, the Ministry is not in a position to pay the fee of the payment 
seats or even management seats.  They are managing only ten percent with their 
limited budget.  However, the Committee
 noted that the Government would be 
able to reimburse the fee component fully subject to an evaluation study. The 
Committee felt that in case the fee component part for admission of Scheduled 
Caste students in the professional courses under managerial quot
a is taken care 
of satisfactorily, it can play a crucial role in their socio
-
economic advancement.  
The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended that the budgetary 
allocations of the Ministry under the head Post Matric Scholarship Scheme 
should be su
bstantially enhanced so that fees paid by Scheduled Caste students 
for entry into professional courses, particularly under managerial seats, could be 
fully reimbursed to them.  The Committee also had desired that an evaluation 
study should be conducted in 
this regard urgently.  The Committee also felt that 
some guidelines should be formulated by the Government about the quantum of 
fee to be charged by the private colleges particularly for professional courses. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The  matter regarding
 increasing the allocation for the Post Matric 
Scholarship Scheme and an assessment of the increase in expenditure on the 
scheme due to hike in the fee in profession course is being considered by the 
Committee of officers of the Ministry of Social Justice 
& Empowerment and 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary 
(SJ&E).  Meanwhile, keeping in view the overall increase in the expenditure level 
of the scheme the Ministry has proposed mobilizing an additional amount of Rs. 
390
 crore  by way of supplementary grant and the Planning Commission has 
been approached to approve the same. Several evaluation studies had been done, 
on the basis of which revision of the scheme has been done with effect from 2003
-
04.  Advice of the Committ
ee for another evaluation study has been noted for 
compliance.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para 3.43)
 
2.10
 
The Committee had noted with serious
 concern that the Government had 
not paid any heed to its recommendation contained in its First Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (2004
-
005) wherein, the Committee had expressed their extreme disappointment and 
voiced their strong concern over the fact that the Ministry had not been able to 
finalize the proposed modifications in this scheme for the last 2 years, while at 
the same time drastically reducing the allocation of funds for this scheme.  The 
Committee ha
d noted that during the years 2003
-
04 and 2004
-
05, actual 
expenditure incurred under the scheme is very low and budgetary allocation i.e. 
Rs. 0.01 crore for the year 2005
-
06 is a token one.  This had resulted in the 
number of potential beneficiaries of thi
s scheme going down drastically.  The 
reasons attributed by the Ministry for low allocation of funds was that they 
received very few proposals from the States.  The Committee also found that the 
existing scheme of upgradation of Merit of SC students is bei
ng replaced by the 

 
 
new scheme “Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Merit based scholarship and 
Assistance to students benefiting to Scheduled Castes for studying in reputed 
public schools/Premier Institutions.  Keeping in mind the pivotal role played by 
such a s
cheme in shaping the destiny of the Scheduled Caste children, the 
Committee had hoped that the new scheme would be implemented soon and 
adequate budgetary allocations would be made under the scheme to ensure that 
remedial and special coaching for SC studen
ts are arranged to prepare them for 
competitive examinations for entry into professional courses.  The Committee 
also had desired that until the new scheme is made fully operational, the existing 
one should continue to operate for which adequate funds may 
be assured for the 
eligible students.  The Government should also pursue with the State 
Governments to submit adequate proposals, and the scheme should be 
evaluated at the earliest.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
While the new scheme is being reformulated in the
 context of declaration 
of Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2005
-
06, the original scheme of 
Upgradation of Merit is continuing to be implemented.  All the State 
Governments have been requested to take up the scheme and to timely and their 
proposals.
 
R
egarding revision of the scheme, an EFC Memorandum has been 
formulated and shall be soon circulated to the Planning Commission etc. for their 
appraisal and allocation of funds required
.
 
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) 
PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 20, Para 5.3)
 
2.11
 
The Committee were concerned to note that in order to get disability 
Certificates, disabled persons have to approach Government hospitals but in 
many cases, doctors are c
harging exorbitant amounts for issuing the Certificates.  
In order to obviate the difficulties faced by disabled persons, the Committee felt 
that the procedure for issuing ‘disability certificates’ should be simplified and no 

 
 
cost should be involved for ob
taining the Certificate. The Committee, therefore, 
had recommended that the Ministry should evolve guidelines to ensure that 
disability certificates are issued to the disabled students at the time of completion 
of their schooling along with their School Le
aving Certificates are issued to the 
disabled students at the time of completion of their schooling along with their 
School Leaving Certificate or as and when required.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has developed 
the 
following guidelines for issue of disability certificate to the persons with 
disabilities;
 
A.
 
For simplification of the procedures for issue of disability certificate:
 
(i)
 
Particular day(s) in a week/month for issue of certificates may be 
fixed.
 
(ii)
 
Camps may be 
held for issuing disability certificate at the 
taluka/block level 
 
(iii)
 
Camps with other programmes such as rural development and 
poverty alleviation may be linked up.
 
(iv)
 
Specific time frame may be prescribed for issue of disability 
certificate may be given.
 
(v)
 
Diffi
culties are being faced in issue of disability certificate for 
persons with mental retardation due to non
-
availability of 
psychiatrist/clinical psychologist/paediatrician in the Medical Board.  
Private practitioners of repute may be co
-
opted in the Medical
 
Board.
 
(vi)
 
No fee should be charged from the persons with disabilities;
 
 
B.
 
Issue of disability certificate to students with disabilities;
 
 
(i)
 
The responsibility for arranging the issue of the certificate has to be 
of the principals/headmasters of the schools.
 
(ii)
 
On t
he written request of school authorities, the District medical 
Board should visit the school for evaluation of the disability of the 

 
 
student and issue certificate as per the notified guidelines and 
format of certificate
 
(iii)
 
In cases the Medical Board is of the
 view that the evaluation of 
disability of a particular student can be done only after carrying out  
certain tests with the equipments available in the district Hospital 
and therefore the Student should brought to the Hospital, the 
school authority shall m
ake arrangement for the visit.  The 
expenditure will be borne by the Education Department of the State 
Government/UT Administration.
 
(iv)
 
The certificate may be issued before completion of the schooling of 
the disabled student along with their School Leaving Ce
rtificate or 
as and when required.
 
These guidelines were sent to the chief Secretaries of the States/UTs vide 
Secretary (SJ&E)’s d.o. letter dated 27.5.2005 (Copy enclosed) with the request 
to adopt the same suitably by the State Government/UT they were fu
rther 
requested to issue necessary instructions to the Departments of health and 
Education for issue of necessary guidelines for implementation of the 
recommendation.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) date
d 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 22, Para 5.9)
 
2.12 
 
The Committee had noted that in case of disabled persons whose monthly 
income is below Rs. 5,000, no amount is charged for the costs of aids and 
appliances whereas 50 per cent of the amoun
t is met by ALIMCO or any other 
implementing agency under ADIP Scheme of the government of India.  The 
Committee had further noted that a proposal for increasing the income eligibility 
ceilings under ADIP Scheme is awaiting approval of CCEA.  Considering t
hat the 
cost of living has increased considerably, the Committee had desired that the 
proposal for increasing the income eligibility ceilings be cleared at the earliest so 
that the amount charged from the disabled persons for various aids and 
appliances re
main within their reach.
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The scheme has been revised with effect from 1.4.2005.  The income limit for 
eligibility for aids/appliances has been enhanced for 100% concession to Rs. 
6500/
-
 per month as against earlier Rs. 5000/
-
 per m
onth.  Similarly the income 
limit for 50% concession has been raised to Rs. 10000/
-
 per month from earlier 
Rs. 80000/
-
 per month.  It has also been decided that the motorized tricycles for 
persons with locomotors disability and software for visually handic
apped 
persons using computers, which may cost more than Rs. 6000/
-
 be permitted.  
The extent of the subsidy, however, would be Rs. 6000/
-
 only.
 
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) 
PREM (Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 24, Para 6.6)
 
2.13
 
The Committee were pleased to be apprised of the fact that the 
Government of India in collaboration with the United Nations Office on drugs and 
Crime conducted the ‘National Survey on the extent, Pattern and Tre
nds of Drug 
Abuse in India.  The Committee were alarmed at the outcome of this study as it 
hinted that this malaise is afflicting the younger generation of our society due to 
peer pressure, economic stress and the lack of knowledge of the ill
-
effects of 
in
toxicants.  In view of the perceived susceptibility of the younger generation to 
alcoholism and substance abuse, the Committee had desired that the Ministry 
would take urgent steps   to revise the existing Scheme of Prevention for 
Alcoholism and Substance/
Drugs abuse, as proposed at the earliest to ensure 
that through counseling and proper awareness generation our youth are able to 
have a clear picture of the dangers of such intoxicants and thus stay away from 
it.  In this regard, the cooperation of the Min
istries of Health and Family Welfare 
and Human Resources Development may also be sought.
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Inter Ministerial meetings pertaining to substance a abuse by students 
were held on 21
st
 December, 2004 and 29
th
 June, 2005 to take stock of t
he issue of 
imparting education on drugs to the youth in the larger context and workout 
modalities for disseminating relevant information both in the class room and 
outside to young people as well as their parents, keeping in view that the youth 
are more v
ulnerable to slopping into the habit of drug abuse.  The meetings were 
attended by the representatives of Ministry of health, Department of Elementary 
Education, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and Information and 
Broadcasting.  The IEC material
 bringing out the ill effects of drug abuse on the 
youth is under final stage of drafting
.
 
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) 
PREM (Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER
-
III
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH TH
E COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para 2.13)
 
3.1
 
The Committee had noted that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry for 
the year 2005
-
06 is Rs. 1533.70 crore, an enhancement of only Rs.41.70
 crore 
as compared to the allocation of Rs. 1492 crore for the year 2004
-
05.  
Considering the increasing number of persons in disadvantaged and the 
marginalized sections of the society such as Scheduled Castes, OBCs, minorities 
and persons with disabilitie
s and also induction of new schemes by the Ministry, 
the increased hike in outlay was negligible.  Therefore, to fulfill the mandate of 
the Ministry of working towards the upliftment of the marginalized sections of our 
society, as well their integration wi
th mainstream society; the Committee had 
strongly recommended that the Ministry should impress upon the Planning 
Commission to ensure a substantial hike in Budget Outlay for the year 2005
-
06.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Pursuant to the guidelines of the Plan
ning Commission the Ministry had 
initially proposed the annual plan outlay of Rs. 1671.05 crore for 2005
-
06, an 
increase of Rs. 179.05 crore (12%) over the budget provision of Rs. 1492.00 
crore for the year 2004
-
05.  However, the annual plan 2005
-
06 outlay
 of the 
Ministry was fixed by the Planning commission at the level of Rs. 1533.70 crore 
only. The Ministry will again impress upon them at RE stage for additional 
allocation of funds to the Ministry.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2
005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.21, Para 5.5)
 
3.2
 
The Committee had noted that the Ministry had provided an allocation of 
Rs. 1 crore for setting up the “National institute for the Multiple Handicapped” 
during the
 year 2004
-
05.  However, no funds have been released upto 31 
December, 2004 due to non
-
setting up of the Institute.  The Committee further 
had noted that the proposal to set up the National Institute for Multiple Disabilities 
at Chennai had now been cleare
d by the CCEA.  Keeping in view the fact that 
setting up of the Institute had already been delayed, the Committee had urged 
the Ministry to make all out efforts so that the National Institute is set up and 
become operational at the earliest for providing r
ehabilitation services to the 
people with multiple disabilities under one roof.  The Committee had desired that 
Regional Institutes for Multiple Disabilities be set up on other parts of the country 
also.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
3.4
 
The National Institute 
for Multiple Handicapped, Chennai has been set up 
on 29.3.2005.  The Institute is providing the following services: 
-
 Family Cottage 
persons, Parent Trai8ning Programmes, Orientation to Grassroot workers.  The 
requirement of Regional Centers will be assess
ed after the Institute becomes 
functional in full swing.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER
-
IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAV
E NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRES REITERATION  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para 2.16)
 
4.1
 
The Committee had noted that majority of the Schemes by the Ministry are 
Centrally sponsored Schemes and hence implementation lies with the state
 
Governments.  The Committee were, however, of the opinion that the Ministry is 
accountable for the funds disbursed by them in order to ensure that they are 
utilized  properly for the purpose for which they are allotted.  The Committee, 
therefore, had reco
mmended that the Ministry should set
-
up a central Monitoring 
cell to oversee the progress of implementation of its Schemes.  The Committee 
had further recommended that a three
-
tier monitoring mechanism at Village level, 
District level and State level shoul
d be evolved involving the local administration, 
District Administration and State Governments.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.2
 
The Ministry releases Central assistance to States/UTs under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes.  The utilization of this assistance is re
gularly monitored by 
the Programme Divisions.  However, monitoring at the village, district and state 
level is the responsibility of the State Government.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 December, 2
005]
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report)
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para 3.12)
 
4.3
 
The Committee expressed their serious concern that some States were 
not following the Guidelines laid down by the  Ministry with reg
ard to allocating 
funds under SCP in proportion to their Scheduled Castes population.  The State 
outlay under SCP is only 11.01% and 12.68% during the years 2002
-
03 and 
2003
-
04 which is much below the average Scheduled Castes population in the 
country.  Th
e Ministry had stated that States get proportionate allocation of SCA 
based on their SCP allocation as per the SC population in these States and if 
they do not follow the guidelines their share gets reduced proportionately.  
Keeping in view the welfare of 
the targeted people, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that the Ministry should impress upon all the 27 States/UTs   SCA 
to SCP  funds to make allocation under their SCP in proportion to their SC 
population and get their share of  SCA funds on time.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.5
 
All State welfare Secretaries dealing with Scheduled Castes Development 
have been requested on 6.5.2005 to initiate necessary action on the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee.
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
O.M. No.
-
1
-
1/ 2005(PS) PREM 
(Vol. III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para 3.15)
 
4.6
 
The Committee had noted that the allocation of SCA to SCP amounts to 
nearly 44% of funds allocated to the Scheduled Castes division.  In the year 
20
04
-
05 the SCA funds released by the Ministry was Rs. 23226.12 lakh and the 
utilization till 31.12.2004 was only Rs. 12669 lakh, which in percentage terms is 
only 55%, an abysmally low figure of utilization. The Committee, therefore had 
strongly recommended
 that the Government should impress upon the 
States/UTs, availing SCA funds, to furnish utilization certificates on time to 
ensure timely release of the second installment of SCA funds and to utilize them 
fully to ensure effective implementation of this Sc
heme.
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.7
 
All State welfare Secretaries dealing 
with Scheduled Castes Development have 
been requested on 6.5.2005 to initiate 
necessary action on the recommendations of 
the Standing Committee.
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerm
ent O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 December, 2005]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 3.29)
 
4.8
 
The Committee had noted with regret that the government has not taken 
up in 2001 the census of the people engaged in unclean jobs.  In the absence of 
such vital data the details regarding the literacy rate of these people and the 
details of the students who availed benefits under the scheme are not available 
with the Governm
ent.  The Committee was also surprised to note that the 
Ministry was not maintaining even the success/drop out rate under the scheme.  
The Committee 
had
 felt that the Government is not serious towards its 
commitment for the upliftment of this marginalized 
section.  The Committee, 
therefore, 
had
 strongly recommended the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the 
competent authority to conduct a survey of this section of the society and also to 
take the necessary steps for obtaining the data of their literacy rat
e and the drop 
out rate so that adequate funds may be allocated for their educational upliftment 
through pre
-
matric scholarships scheme and realistic plans may be formulated 
for their over all advancement.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.9
 
The States/UTs are be
ing addressed to take necessary steps to conduct a 
survey about the literacy rate of this section of the society and obtain the data of 
their literacy and dropout rate under the Scheme.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (
Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 December, 2005]
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16,  Para 4.3)
 
4.10
 
The Committee were perturbed to note that the budgetary allocation for 
the Minorities who constitute 
18% of the total population was Rs. 77.97 crore out 
of which expenditure of only Rs. 44.5 crore was incurred.  For the year 2005
-
06 
budgetary allocation is Rs. 56.15 crore.  The Committee felt that the Government 
was not serious towards its commitment for 
the welfare of minorities as the 
present allocation is woefully inadequate.  Keeping in view the economic and 
educational backwardness of minorities, the Committee had urged the Ministry to 
take up the matter with the Planning Commission for enhancement in
 budgetary 
allocation for the minority division.  The Committee felt that the minority 
community was not fully aware of the various schemes formulated by the 
Government for their welfare and upliftment.  The Committee, therefore, had 
desired that the Gover
nment should take initiative for generating awareness 
among minorities by distributing pamphlets  and displaying hoardings at different 
public places, in English, Hindi and other regional languages, giving details of the 
Schemes meant for them at Panchayat
 level.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.11
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has already been publicizing 
the schemes and programmes through Electronic, Print and Outdoor Media to 
spread information on the schemes and programmes of the Government for t
he 
welfare of minorities.  Moreover, the National Minorities Development and 
Finance Corporation (NMDFC) organizes Awareness camps through its State 
Channelising Agencies for creating awareness among the target groups about its 
schemes.  During 200405 a to
tal of 145 awareness camps were organized by 
NMDFC at various places in the country.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 December, 2005]
 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter I of 
the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19,  Para 4.16)
 
4.12
 
The Committee were constrained to note that out of 10,556 wakf 
properties which are under illegal possession/encroachment, during the last three 
years, the Ministry have no information regarding the r
estoration of these wakf 
properties from illegal occupants.  The Committee viewed the situation very 
seriously and recommend that an effective mechanism should be evolved to 
check encroachment of wakf properties.  The Committee 
had
 also recommended 
that al
l the wakf properties which have been illegally encroached, transferred, 
mortgaged, leased or sold should re retrieved by taking legal action against their 
occupants.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.13
 
The matter has been taken up with the Chief secretaries of 
the 
States/Administrations to take the appropriate action in the matter on 20
th
 June, 
2005.
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 December, 2005]
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter
 I of the Report)
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER
-
V
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 2.14)
 
5.1
 
The Committee were pleased to be apprised of the initiative taken by the 
Government 
with regards to the upliftment of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in the Private Sector.  The Committee had noted that a group 
of Ministers is already looking into this aspect.  The Committee would, however, 
like to be apprised of the latest posi
tion in this regard.
 
.
 
Reply of the Government
 
5.2
 
The Group of Ministers set up by the 
Government to initiate a dialogue with the 
industry to see how best the Private Sector 
can fulfill the aspirations of the youth 
belonging to Scheduled Castes and 
Schedu
led Tribes held its fourth meeting on 
23
rd
  June, 2005.  In the meeting, it was 
decided to seek legal opinion as to whether a 
Central law can be enacted to provide for 
reservation in the private sector under the 
existing provisions of the constitution.
 
 
[M
inistry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para 4.14)
 
5.3
 
The Committee had noted with concern that the Central Wakf Council had 
extended loan for 114 projects 
to the State Wakf Boards but only 67 projects 
have been completed so far. The Committee had further noted that this is one of 
the non
-
plan schemes of the Ministry where projects are directly funded by the 

 
 
Central Government for construction or reconstructi
on of commercially viable 
wakf properties. The Committee understood the significance of these schemes 
and that without proper development of wakf properties, the Wakf Boards would 
not become a viable entity and continue to be a liability on the State 
Gover
nments on one way or the other. The Committee, therefore, had strongly 
recommended that concerted efforts should be made to execute these schemes 
as per schedule and in case of default, all out efforts should be made to recover 
the funds from such Wakf Boa
rds early.
 
.
 
Reply of the Government
 
5.4
 
The matter has been taken up with the Secretary, Central Wakf Council, 
New Delhi to take appropriate action in the matter on 20
th
 June, 2005.
 
 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (
Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para 4.15)
 
5.5
 
The Committee had noted that the survey of wakf properties is an 
important pre
-
requisite to enable the Wakf Boards to exercise power, control and 
supervision over the individu
al wakf properties. From the information furnished by 
the Ministry, the Committee observed that survey has been completed in respect 
of Himachal Pradesh and survey report is awaited in cases of Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep. Some of t
he States have not yet 
started the survey and in some cases the survey work of wakf properties is very 
slow. The Committee had felt that unless the Government have an authentic data 
of wakf properties, they will not be able to chalk out a proper plan for t
heir 
development. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the State 
Governments be persuaded to complete the survey work of urban wakf 
properties expeditiously and the progress achieved in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.
 
.
 

 
 
 
Reply 
of the Government
 
5.6
 
The matter has been taken up with the Chief Secretaries of the 
States/Administrations to take appropriate action in the matter on 20
th
 June, 
2005.
 
 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) PREM (Vol. 
III) date
d 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para 6.5)
 
5.7
 
The Committee had noted with deep concern that though the Scheme for 
Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse has been going on for 
years, yet the Ministry have no authentic dat
a to show whether the number of 
drug addiction cases in the country are increasing or decreasing. The Ministry 
had, however, furnished a statement showing the number of drug abuse cases 
registered during the year 2002
-
03 to September 2004. The Committee ha
d 
failed to understand the rationale behind the two contradictory statements made 
of the Ministry and desired that a nation wide survey be conducted to collect the 
authentic data of alcoholics and drug addicts in the country so that the impact of 
the Schem
e could be evaluated and comprehensive action plan formulated for its 
eradication and also for treatment and subsequent rehabilitation of drug addicts.
 
.
 
Reply of the Government
 
5.8
 
It is clarified that two statements were prepared on the basis of informat
ion 
gathered from NGOs funded by the Ministry only. These NGOs registered 
number of drug addicts in the last three years as follows:
-
 261877 cases in 2002
-
03, 194165 in 2003
-
04 and 70104 in 2004
-
05 {Upto September 2004]. 
 
 
A Nation wide survey was carried 
out between 2000 and November 2001 
on the sample basis and results arrived at have been reported in the report of the 
National Survey 
–
 The extent, pattern and trends of drug abuse in India.
 
 
All the State Governments/ UT Administrations have been requeste
d on 
February 8, 2005 to conduct survey on the extent, pattern and trends of drug 
abuse in their area and findings be sent to the Ministry within 6 months. Reports 
are still awaited from them.
 

 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment O.M. No.1
-
1/2005(PS) 
PREM (Vol. 
III) dated 5
th
 September, 2005]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                        
                                       
NEW DELHI                                  
                         
       
SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
 
   
 
17 January  2006 
                                                               Chairperson,
 
    27  Pausa, 1927 (Saka)                                             Standing
 Committee on                              
 
                                       
                                                      Social Justice and  
 
                                                                                                  Empowerment                                                                        
                                          
 

 
 
ANNEXURE.
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 17
TH
 JANUARY, 2006
 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 15.45 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
 
 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
2.
 
Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque
 
3.
 
Shri M. Appadurai
 
4.
 
Shri Ashok Argal
 
5.
 
Shri Mahaveer Bhagora
 
6.
 
Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
 
7.
 
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
 
8.
 
Shri Kailash Meghwal
 
9.
 
Shri R
upchand Murmu
 
10.
 
Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj
 
11.
 
Smt. Pratibha Singh
 
12.
 
Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya
 
13.
 
Smt. Usha Verma
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
14.
 
Shri Silvius Condpan
 
15.
 
Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao
 
16.
 
Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal
 
17.
 
Shri Ram Narayan Sahu
 
18.
 
Shri Tarlochan Singh
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri A.K Singh
 
       
-
 
  
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri R.K. Saxena
 
       
-
 
 
 
Deputy Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri Bhupesh Kumar      
-
 
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson apprised the Members that they were meeting 
to consider and adopt three Dr
aft Reports of the Committee. 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee then took up the draft Twelfth Report on the Action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Seventh Report  of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants 2005
-
06 of the Ministry
 of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and adopted the same without any amendment.
 
 
4.
 
****
 
 
 
 
*****
 
 
 
 
*****
 
5.
 
****
 
 
 
 
*****
 
 
 
 
*****
 
 
6.
 
The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to Parliament on their behalf.
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned
.
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Total
 
 
   
Percen
tage
 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of Recommendations
 
     24
 
 
II.
 
Recommendations/Observations which 
 
have been accepted by the Government
 
:    12
 
 
      50%
 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11,12,14, 15, 20, 22 
 
and 24)
 
 
III.
 
Recommendations/Observations which
 
      2
 
 
       
8.33%
 
 
 
the Committee do not desire to pursue
 
 
 
in view of the replies of the Government:
 
 
 
(Sl. Nos. 2 and 21)
 
 
IV.
 
Recommendations/Observations in 
 
      6
 
 
      25%
 
 
 
respect of which replies of the 
 
Government 
 
have not been accepted 
 
and have been co
mmented upon by 
 
the Committee:
 
 
 
(Sl. Nos. 5, 7, 10, 13, 16 and 19)
 
 
V.
 
Recommendations/Observations in
 
      4
 
 
      16.67%
 
 
 
respect of which replies of the 
 
 
 
Government are interim in nature:
 
 
 
(Sl. No. 3, 17, 18 and 23)
 
 
 
 