 1
 
 
 6 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment on Demands for Grants-2004-2005 of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.3.2005 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
               March, 2005/ Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 

 2
CONTENTS 
 
      
      
      
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………           
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………          
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  
Government………………………………………….                                     
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the Committee in Chapter 
I……………………………………………………..          
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature…..                       
 
ANNEXURE Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
 held on 18 March,  2005………….…. 
 
APPENDIX Analysis of the action taken by Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)…………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2004-2005) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai  
3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
9. Shri  Rupchand Murmu  
10. Shri Jual Oram 
11. Shri Rameshwar Oraon  
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy  
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj  
15. Shri R. Senthil  
16. Shri Mohd. Shahid  
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath  
20. Smt. Usha Verma  
21. Shri K. Yerrannaidu  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal  
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24. Shri R.S. Gavai 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
27. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
29. Smt. Savita Sharda 
30. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
31. Shri Veer Singh 
 
 
            SECRETARIAT 

 4
         
  1.    Shri P.D.T Achary .   -     Secretary  
  2.    Dr.(Smt) P.K Sandhu  - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -  Under Secretary  
          5.   Km. M. Tunglut  - Sr. Executive Assistant 

 5
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing  Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Sixth Report  on the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants-2004-2005 relating to Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 18 August, 2004.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 2 
December, 2004. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 18 March, 
2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second   Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their a ppreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
18 March, 2005        C h a i r p e r s o n ,  
27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
       
        
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations containe d  i n  t h e  S e c o n d  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Standing Committee on Social Justice  and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 re lating to the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2004.   It contained 15 recommendations.  
Replies of Government in respect of  all the recommendations have been 
examined and are categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  1, 4, 9, 12, 14  and 15. 
 
(Total 6  -  Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  2, 10  and 13. 
 
(Total 3 -  Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by  the Committee in Chapter 
I: 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.  3, 6, 7 and 8.  
 
(Total 4 -  Chapter IV) 
 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Sl. Nos.  5  and 11. 
  
(Total 2  -  Chapter V)  
 

 7
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken  notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not la ter than three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
A. SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSISTAN CE TO TRIBAL  SUB – PLAN 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 2.23)  
 
1.5 The Committee had noted with regret that States like Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Kerala, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal and Assam have not been allocating funds for 
Tribal Sub-Plan during the last several year s.  In some of the States, the rate of 
flow of TSP was less than the population pe rcentage of STs in the States.  The 
Committee had further noted that only 17 Central Ministries/Departments have 
segregated their Plan outlays for TSP.  The Committee had opined that a focused 
approach towards the development of ST s is possible only if the States and 
Central Ministries earmarked the TSP co mponent separately and implement the 
same in consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, which is the nodal 
Ministry for overall policy, planning and coordination of programmes of 
development of the Scheduled Tribes.  The Committee, had therefore, urged the 
Ministry to pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and concerned 
States/Central Ministries/Departments to earmark funds for TSP at least in 
proportion to the population percentage of STs in the case of the States and 8% of 
the total budget in the case of Central Ministries/Departments.  
 
1.6 In their action taken note furnishe d to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs have stated that they have been pursuing the matter with the State 
Governments for earmarking of TSP funds at least proportionate  to the tribal 
population of the State and also with Centra l Ministries to earmark at least 8% of 
their plan allocation as TSP componen t.  The Planning Commission vide order 
dated 4.8.2004 had constituted a Task Group on development of SCs/STs.  The 
Task Group had further set up 4 Sub-Groups to examine implementation of some 
selected Agenda items of National Common Minimum Programme.  One of the 
Sub-Groups (Sub-Group 4) headed by Secretary, Tribal Affairs was entrusted to 
look into various aspects of Scheduled  Tribes.  The Sub-Group has already 
submitted its report to the Planning Comm ission with regard to earmarking of 
fund for tribal areas.  The recommendation of the Sub-Group is: 
 
“Pooling of TSP component availabl e with Central Ministries as non-
divisible and non-lapsable funds has to be ensured.  For instance, the 
pooled funds of Rs. 5,322 crore worked out for 2004-05 available as TSP 

 8
component with various Central Minist ries could be used in a concerted 
manner to provide the basic facilities, instead of each Ministry/Department 
working in isolation which does not cr eate any measurable impact on the 
ground.  Once the pooled funds and th e State TSP funds are used, the 
Government would be able to impr ove the education, health, drinking 
water and nutrition levels as first prio rity.  We could th en tackle housing, 
roads and irrigation facilities, so that conspicuous dent is made in a given 
frame work of time.” 
 
 
1.7 The reply of the Ministry that they have been pursuing the State 
Governments to earmark TSP funds at l east in proportion to the tribal population 
in the States and 8% of their plan alloca tion in the case of Central Ministries is 
not satisfactory as no progress has been re ported in this regard .  However, one of 
the Sub-Groups constituted by the Pla nning Commission in August, 2004 had 
recommended pooling of TSP component ava ilable with Central Ministries as 
once the pooled funds and State TSP funds are used, the Government would be 
able to improve the education, health, drinking water and nutrition level of the 
Scheduled Tribes. The Committee had also  recommended, in th eir earlier Report 
on Demands for Grants (2002-2003),  that the TSP component should be put in a 
separate major Head to be operated in consultation with  the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs so that an integrated and conve rgent approach could be made for the 
development of the tribals. The Committ ee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to st ep up their efforts to persuade the 
States and Central Ministries to make available funds for TSP, at least in 
proportion to the population  percentage of STs in the States and 8% of the plan 
allocation in the case of Central Ministri es which may be pooled under a separate 

 9
head and operated in consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs so that a 
remarkable dent is made in the development of the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
B. DIRECT RELEASE OF FUND S TO INTEGRAT ED TRIBAL 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS (ITDPs)/INTEGRATED TRIBAL 
DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES (ITDAs) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 2.26) 
 
1.8 The Committee had noted that from  the year 2003-2004, the Ministry had 
started earmarking funds for each of th e ITDPs/ITDAs and States had been 
requested to implement programmes accord ingly in each of the ITDPs/ITDAs.  
However, in order to ensure that benefits of the allocations percolate to the tribals 
living in remote  and hilly areas, the Co mmittee were of the view  that funds 
should be released to ITDPs/ITDAs direc tly on the pattern of District Rural 
Development Agencies (DRDAs) under the Mi nistry of Rural Development.  The 
Committee, had therefore urged the Mini stry to pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for early concurrence. 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their action taken note have stated that 
they had requested concurrence from th e Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission, for direct release of funds to  the ITDPs/ITDAs but the proposal was 
not agreed to. However, the issue will again be taken up for reconsideration. 
 
 
1.10 The Committee note with d eep regret that the Ministry of Finance and the 
Planning Commission had not concurred to the request of the Ministry for direct 
release of funds to the ITDPs/ITDAs as  is done in the case of DRDAs under the 
Ministry of Rural Development. In order to ensure that the benefits of huge 
allocations made every year percolate to  the tribals living in hilly and remote 
areas, the Committee are of th e firm opinion that funds should be channelised to 
the lowest level i.e. the grass root field agencies and direct release of funds to 
ITDPs/ITDAs would facilitate this process. The Committ ee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to  strongly take up the issu e with the Ministry of Finance and the 
Planning Commission again for concurrence.   

 10
 
C. HOSTEL FACILITIES FO R ST BOYS AND GIRLS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7, Para 2.34) 
 
1.11 The Committee had noted that the Ministry had been releasing funds to 
States/UTs/institutions for construction of Boys and Girls Hostels every year but 
many of the hostels sanctioned since 2001-2002 were still under various stages of 
construction.  The Committee had been informed that the time-limit for 
construction of the hostels was a maximum of  five years from the date of release 
of Central assistance.  Keeping in view the fact that delay in construction work 
was leading to high escalation in costs besi des depriving the tribal students of the 
benefits, the Committee had desired that  the States/UTs/institutions should be 
persuaded to ensure that all construction works were completed at the earliest and 
the maximum limit of five years for construction of the hostel was strictly adhered 
to by them. 
 
1.12 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated that it is specifically menti oned in sanction orders  that the escalation 
cost of construction due to delay in construction work will be borne  by the State 
Governments/UT Administrations themselves. Further, it is also mentioned in the 
sanction orders that hostels may be completed in earliest possible time.  In spite of 
this, State Governments fail to complete the works timely probably due to delayed 
mobilization of their 50% share. The matter is also discussed in the review 
meetings convened in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs every year with the 
Secretaries of the State G overnments and it is emphasized that hostels sanctioned 
to State Governments should be completed in earliest possible time.   
 
 
 

 11
 
 
1.13 The Committee are not satis fied with the reply of the Ministry that State 
Governments/UT Administrati ons have failed to complete construction of Boys 
and Girls Hostels for STs sanctioned by the Ministry within the maximum limit of 
five years due to delay in mobilization of their 50% share. The Committee view 
the situation seriously and desire that St ates/UTs should not be allowed to shirk 
their responsibilities of providing their ma tching share in the case of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes like `Boys and Girls Hostels for STs, etc. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the matter at regular intervals with  the 
highest State Government Authorities and impress u pon them to complete 
construction of all the Hostels sanctioned at the earliest or at  least within the 
maximum limit of five years from the date of release of central assistance.    
 
D. MAINTENANCE OF HOSTELS  
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.35) 
1.14 The Committee had noted that the maintenance of hostels was the 
responsibility of the concerned States/UTs and for that purpose, funds had to be 
utilized out of their own annual plan s.  The Committee, had opined that a 
substantial amount would be involved as  recurring expenditure for maintaining 
and running the hostels.  The States/UTs were not giving proper attention to the 
maintenance of hostels.  The Committee, therefore, had recommended that while 
revising the scheme some amount might  be earmarked under the scheme for 
maintenance of the hostels to enable the State Governments and UT 
Administrations to run the hostels effectively. 
 
1.15 In their action taken note the Ministry has stated that it has been noted for 
compliance at the stage of revision of th e Scheme of Boys/Girls Hostels for STs 
in near future. 
 
 

 12
1.16 During their on the spot visit to some States, the Committee had observed 
that the hostels there were in worst condition and in stark negligence.  There were 
no facilities of proper bedding, furniture and the quality of food served there was 
very poor.  In the reply, th e Ministry have stated th at the recommendation of the 
Committee has been noted for compliance at  the stage of revision of the scheme 
in near future.  The Committee are not satis fied with the reply of the Ministry.  
The Committee are of the view  that the matter of prope r maintenance of hostels 
warrants urgent attention and the situat ion cannot be left in uncertainty.  
Considering the lack of basic facilitie s and poor maintenance of hostels, the 
Committee desire that the Scheme of Boys /Girls Hostels for STs should be taken 
up on urgent basis and while revising  the scheme, some amount might be 
earmarked for proper maintenance of th e hostels for ensuring basic facilities 
there. 
 
 

 13
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para 2.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that over th e years the budgetary allocations 
of the Ministry had always been redu ced at the Revised Estimate stage, 
which resulted in less funds for the upliftment of the poor tribals.  During 
the year 2003-04, the budgetary allocati on has been reduced from Rs. 1087 
crore to Rs. 900 crore.  The Committee are well aware that cuts in 
budgetary allocations are effected by  the Ministry of Finance at the 
Revised Estimate stage based on the expenditure incurred during the first 
six months of the financial year on pro 
rata basis.  However, keeping in 
view the specific needs of the tribals living in the remote and inaccessible 
areas, the Committee desire that funds for development of the tribals 
should not undergo any reduction during the year.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue  the Ministry of Finance to take a 
lenient view in the matter so that drastic cut is avoided at the Revised 
Estimate stage for effective implementation of schemes for the welfare and 
development of the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2   During the year, the Ministry had made all out efforts not only to 
avoid cuts at R.E. stage but has also sought additional funds.  As per 
decision taken in the Pre-Budget meet ing with Secretary (Expenditure) on 
9 November 2004, there would be no cut for the year 2004-05 at R.E Stage 
considering the good expenditure performance. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 2.24) 
 
 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that though the scheme of SCA 
to TSP, starting from the Fifth Five Year Plan specifically aims at 
increasing the income of ST familie s living below the poverty line, no 
assessment has been made about the exact number of ST families who 

 14
have crossed the poverty line.  Fixati on of targets for assisting the ST 
families/Self Help Groups/Community based workers has also been left 
to the State Governments.  Keeping in  view the fact that a sizeable chunk 
of the budgetary allocation of the Ministry is for SCA to TSP and that over 
the years, nearly 100% utilization of RE allocation had always taken place, 
the Committee desire that monitoring and evaluation of the scheme 
should be conducted to assess the impact of the scheme on the tribals and 
determine the number of  ST families who have actually crossed the 
poverty line.  This may be entrusted with the Planning Commission or a 
designated agency appointed at the earliest.
 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The Ministry has already entrusted the Planning Commission’s 
Program Evaluation Organization to evaluate the schemes of SCA to TSP 
and Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para 2.46) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the scheme of Village Grain Banks had 
been launched during the year 1996-1997 with the main objective of 
providing safeguard against the non-ava ilability of food grains in remote 
tribal areas.  During the Tenth Five Year Plan, the scheme was proposed to 
be revised by extending it to all endemic drought and migration prone 
areas and is now in the process of finalization as a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme.  Keeping in view the fact th at enough and complete proposals 
have not come from the States du ring the year 2003-2004 on the existing 
scheme, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should spruce up its 
coordination with the States/UTs an d ensure that the scheme is made 
more fruitful as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The recommendation of the Comm ittee has been noted.  However, 
all the States have been requested to  send their complete proposals along 
with the Utilisation Certificates for the grants already released to them at 
the beginning of the financial year.  Thereafter the defaulting States are 
continuously reminded to send their proposal. Besides, the Ministry calls 
for meetings of the Tribal Welfare Secr etaries at Delhi from time to time 
and requests them to expedite their proposals.  So far as the revised 

 15
Scheme is concerned, the State govern ments have been requested to send 
their comments/approval regarding sh aring of transportation cost on 
50:50 basis. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para 2.55) 
 
2.7 The Committee express deep concern over the irregularities noticed 
in the disbursement of scholarships to  the ST students in the States of 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Prad esh during the year 2001-2002.  In 
Madhya Pradesh, an amount of Rs. 1,67,19,827 have been disbursed 
illegally to 30 institutions while two bogus colleges have drawn an 
amount of Rs. 20,54,540 in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  The Committee 
view the situation seriously and urge the Ministry to ensure that such 
irregularities in the disbursement of scholarships do not recur in future.  
State Governments and UT Administrations may be persuaded to observe 
strict monitoring over the sanction and withdrawal of scholarships on a 
regular basis.  Action taken in this  regard may be communicated to the 
Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 All the State Governments/UT Administrations have been advised 
regarding strict monitoring in sanc tioning and withdrawal of the Post 
Matric Scholarships to institutions so that any irregularity may be avoided 
and transparency in sanctioning of th e scholarships may be ensured.  The 
responsibility of disbursement of the scholarships on time and as per the 
provisions of the scheme and monitoring of the financial and procedural 
correctness, however, lies with the State Governments. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 2.64) 
 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the National Overseas Scholarships 
Scheme for Scheduled Tribes has been under revision since the year 2001 
but so far the continuation/renewal of  the scheme has not been finalized.  

 16
The Committee are unhappy to note th at abnormal delay has occurred in 
the finalization of the scheme and express their serious concern that only 5 
candidates have been sent abroad during the last five years.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the Ministry should finalise the 
revised scheme without further delay and till such time, the benefits of the 
existing scheme should continue to the ST students. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The scheme has now been revised an d the process of notification is 
on. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 2.70) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that the Mi nistry have been carrying out 
inspections of each project of NGOs on an annual basis and have also  
inspected some organizations on random basis. A few of the organizations 
have been blacklisted due to their poor performance. The Committee also 
desire that while carrying out inspecti ons the Ministry should ensure that 
NGOs working in plain areas are not re gistered as working in tribal areas. 
The Committee further desire that wh enever funds are released to NGOs 
for some projects, the concerned public representatives should be 
informed so that he may monitor the progress of work of the project. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The observation has been noted for compliance. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 

 17
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para 2.7) 
 
3.1 The Committee note with concern that grants were not released to 
the States of Madhya Pradesh, Hima chal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Bihar, 
Kerala and Uttaranchal under various schemes due to non-submission of 
utilisation certificates which reflects poor monitoring and coordination of 
the Ministry with the States.  The Ministry have contended that they could 
not conduct extensive tours as is done by the Rural Development Ministry 
as they have the strength of only 69 Personnel excluding Group ‘D’ Staff.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should approach 
the concerned Ministry/Department s for sanction and posting of 
adequate staff so that efficient monito ring of schemes could be carried out 
and the benefits of the huge allocations made every year percolate to the 
poor tribal people living in remote and hilly areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Ministry has been strengthened during 2004-05 with the posting of 
two new Deputy Secretaries and one Under Secretary besides promoting 
two Under Secretary level officers of the Ministry to the level of Deputy 
Secretary but there remains acute shortage of staff at lower levels.  With 
the posting of these officers, it is e xpected that monitoring mechanism in 
the Ministry would be strengthened. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para 2.47) 
 
3.3 The Committee are concerned to note that the rate of interest on 
loan under the Grain Bank Scheme is very high i.e. 5% for the period up to 
3 months and 10% beyond that and up to 6 months.  In the event of non-
payment beyond six months the membersh ip of the individual is liable to 
lapse.  Keeping in view the fact that the borrowers belong to the poorest of 

 18
the poor in the Society, the Committ ee desire that only minimal rate of 
interest should be charged from th e beneficiaries. The Committee, further, 
recommended that the period of repaym ent of the loan may also be made 
more flexible so that the poor tribals are not harassed by the authorities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 The matter has already been taken into account while revising the 
existing Grain Bank Scheme.  It has already been provided in the revised 
scheme that the interest “to be charged will be in the form of similar grain 
taken on loan and will be decided by the Committee or SHG (Self Help 
Group) such that it is self sustaini ng”.  Thus the revised Scheme has left 
the issue open to the beneficiary gr oups to decide about the rate of 
interest. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para 2.56) 
 
3.5 The Committee note that though the Scheme of Pre-Matric 
Scholarships is being implemented in the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, no such scheme is being implemented for the Scheduled 
Tribe students.  The stand of the Minist ry is that primary education is the 
responsibility of the State Governments.  The Committee, however, feel 
that in the absence of Pre-Matric  scholarships for Scheduled Tribe 
students, it is difficult for them to go for higher education and hence the 
Post-Matric scholarships also beco me meaningless.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the matter should be examined thoroughly and 
the Scheme of Pre-Matric scholarships be introduced. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 The Scheme of Pre-Matric Scho larships being implemented by 
Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment is an occupation-based 
scheme under which scholarships is paid to students whose parents are 
engaged in unclean occupations i.e. scavenging, tanning and flaying.  This 
Pre-Matric Scheme covers all the categories like SCs, STs & OBCs etc.  This 
scheme is not implemented only for SC students but for all the categories 
whose parents are engaged in unclean occupations. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 

 19
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND 
HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER I  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 2.23) 
 
4.1 The Committee regret to note th at States like Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Kerala, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal and Assam have not been allocating 
funds for Tribal Sub-Plan during the la st several years.  In some of the 
States, the rate of flow of TSP is less than the population percentage of STs 
in the States.  The Committee furth er note that only 17 Central 
Ministries/Departments have segregated  their Plan outlays for TSP.  In 
the opinion of the Committee, a focused approach towards the 
development of STs is possible only if  the States and Central Ministries 
earmark the TSP component separately and implement the same in 
consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, which is the nodal 
Ministry for overall policy, planning and coordination of programmes of 
development of the Scheduled Tribes. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to pursue the matter wi th the Planning Commission and 
concerned States/Central Ministries /Departments to earmark funds for 
TSP at least in proportion to the popu lation percentage of STs in the case 
of the States and 8% of the Tota l budget in the case of Central 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Ministry has been pursuing the matter with the State 
Governments for earmarking of TSP fun ds at least proportionate to the 
tribal population of the State and also  with Central Ministries to earmark 
at least 8% of their plan allocation  as TSP component.  The Planning 
Commission vide order dated 4.8.2004 had constituted a Task Group on 
development of SCs/STs. The Task Group had further set up 4 Sub-
Groups to examine implementation of  some selected Agenda items of 
National Common Minimum Programme.  One of the Sub-Groups (Sub-
Group 4) headed by Secretary, Tribal Affairs was entrusted to look into 
various aspects of Scheduled Trib es.  The Sub-Group has already 
submitted its report to the Planning Commission with regard to 
earmarking of fund for tribal areas.  The recommendation of the Sub-
Group is: 

 20
 
“Pooling of TSP component availabl e with Central Ministries as 
non-divisible and non-lapsable funds has to be ensured.  For 
instance, the pooled funds of Rs. 5,322 crore worked out for 2004-05 
available as TSP component with various Central Ministries could 
be used in a concerted manner to provide the basic facilities, 
instead of each Ministry/Department working in isolation which 
does not create any measurable impact on the ground.  Once the 
pooled funds and the State TSP funds are used, the Government 
would be able to improve the education, health, drinking water and 
nutrition levels as first priority.  We could then tackle housing, 
roads and irrigation facilities so th at conspicuous dent is made in a 
given frame work of time.” 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.7  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 2.26) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that from the year 2003-2004, the Ministry 
have started earmarking funds for ea ch of the ITDPs/ITDAs and States 
have been requested to implement programmes accordingly in each of the 
ITDPs/ITDAs.  However, in order to ensure that benefits of the 
allocations percolated to the tribals living in remote and hilly areas, the 
Committee are of the view that funds should be released to ITDPs/ITDAs 
directly on the pattern of DRDAs under the Ministry of Rural 
Development.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for early 
concurrence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 The Ministry had requested for co ncurrence from the Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission fo r direct release of funds to the 
ITDAs/ITDPs, but the proposal was not agreed to.  However, the issue 
will again be taken up for reconsideration. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 

 21
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.10  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7,  Para 2.34) 
 
4.5 The Committee note that the Minist ry have been releasing funds to 
States/UTs/Institutions for construction of Boys and Girls Hostels every 
year but many of the hostels sanc tioned since 2001-2002 are still under 
various stages of construction.  The Committee have been informed that 
the time-limit for construction of th e hostels is a maximum of five years 
from the date of release of central assistance.  Keeping in view the fact that 
delay in construction work is leading to high escalation in costs besides 
depriving the tribal students of the be nefits, the Committee desire that the 
States/UTs/Institutions should be  persuaded to ensure that all 
construction work are completed at the earliest and the maximum limit of 
five years for construction of the hostel is strictly adhered to by them. 
   
 Reply of the  Government 
 
4.6 It is specifically mentioned in sa nction orders that the escalation 
cost of construction due to delay in construction work will be borne by the 
State Governments/UT Administrations themselves. Further, it is also 
mentioned in  the sanction orders that hostels may be completed in 
earliest possible time.  In spite of th is, State Governments fail to complete 
the works timely probably due to delayed mobilization of their 50% share. 
The matter is also discussed in th e review meetings convened in the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs every year with the Secretaries of the State 
Governments and it is emphasized that hostels sanctioned to State 
Governments should be completed in earliest possible time.   
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.13  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

 22
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para 2.35) 
 
4.7 The Committee further note that the maintenance of hostels is the 
responsibility of the concerned States/UTs and for that purpose funds 
have to be utilized out of their own a nnual plans.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, a substantial amount will be involved as recurring 
expenditure for maintaining and running  the hostels. Th e States/UTs are 
not giving proper attention to the maintenance of hostels.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that while revi sing the scheme some amount may 
be earmarked under the scheme for maintenance of the hostels to enable 
the State Governments and UT admi nistrations to run the hostels 
effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 Noted for compliance at the stage of revision of the Scheme of 
Boys/Girls Hostels for STs in near future. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.16  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

 23
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT  OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 2.25) 
 
5.1 The Committee also note that  though there has been an 
improvement in terms of human deve lopment indices of the Scheduled 
Tribes, many of them are still liv ing below the poverty line.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the Ministry should coordinate 
with the concerned Central Ministri es/Departments in order to address 
the main area of concern pertaining to the upliftment of STs, i.e. 
improvement of HDI and focus their programmes on priority sectors like 
education, health, drinking wate r, agriculture, self-employment 
opportunities, rights of the tribals in forests, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The Ministry had been sanctioning the projects covering focus areas 
as indicated by the Committee under various schemes of the Ministry but 
this constitutes only a tiny segment of total funds being spent by 
Government of India through variou s Ministries and State Governments 
plan funds.  Though the Ministry had been pursuing with the Central 
Ministries and State Governments for proportionate allocation of their 
plan funds for TSP areas but only a little success has been achieved.  The 
recommendation of Sub-Group 4 of th e Task Group constituted by the 
Planning Commission vide their orders dated 4.8.2004 as referred to in 
Reply to para 2.23, if accepted by Gove rnment of India will certainly raise 
the Human Development Indices (HDI ) level in respect of Scheduled 
Tribes. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para 2.54) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee note with concern that funds allocated under Post-
Matric Scholarships for Scheduled Tribe students have not been adequate.  

 24
Moreover, the maintenance allowance applicable under the scheme has 
been revised from Rs. 235 to 740 per month for hostellers and from Rs. 140 
to Rs. 330 per month for day scholars  and the income ceiling under the 
scheme has been enhanced up to Rs. 1 lakhs from April, 2003.  The 
Committee feel that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 65.49 crore for 2004-
2005 should be enhanced to meet the requirement of ST students pursuing 
post matriculation courses.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should take up with the Planning Commission and Ministry 
of Finance the case for grant of addition al funds at the earliest so that the 
poor ST students are not deprived of the benefits of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 The Ministry has requested the Planning Commission for 
additional allotment of funds under the Scheme of Post Matric 
Scholarships for ST students in view of increase in various provisions 
under the scheme. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 16015/2/04 PC & V Vol. IV  dated 
2.12.2004) 
 
  
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
18 March,  2005        C h a i r p e r s o n  
       27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Social   Justice and 
Empowerment  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 25
 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING ON THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 18TH MARCH, 2005. 
 
 The Committee met from 14.00 hrs. to 15.15 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M.Gaikwad 
5. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
6. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
7. Dr. R. Senthil 
8. Mohd. Sahid Akhlaque 
9. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
10. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
SECRETARIAT 
   
  1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 26
2. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
3. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
4. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
5. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
6. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
7. The Committee then took up the draft Sixth Report on ‘Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants of  the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
for the year 2004-05’ and adopted the same without any amendment. 
 
8. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports 
and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
9. The Committee then placed on reco rd their deep appreciation and 
thanks to the officers and staff of th e Lok Sabha Secretariat for their hard 
work and valuable assistance rendered by them to facilitate the work of the 
Committee in preparing their draft Reports within the limited time. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 27
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE SECOND 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
        T o t a l   P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations  15   
 
II. Recommendations/Observati ons which  6    40%  
have been accepted by the Government   
(Sl. Nos. 1, 4,  9, 12, 14, and 15) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 3    20% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government 
  (Sl. Nos. 2, 10 and 13) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observa tions in   4    26.67% 
  respect of which rep lies of the Government  
  have not been accepted and have been  
commented upon by the Committee  
  (Sl. Nos. 3, 6 , 7 and 8) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in  2   13.33% 
  respect of which final replies of 
  Government are interim in nature 
  (Sl. Nos. 5 and 11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 28
 