 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
 AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observa tions contained 
in the Fifteenth Rep ort of the  Standing Committe e on Soci al Justice and 
Empowerment on t he subjec t “National Backward Classes Finance  and  
Development Corporation” of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on18.12.2006 
 
                                Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2006 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by  the Government on the R ecommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empow erment on the subject “National Backw ard Classe s 
Finance and Development Corporation” of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment . 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                     
PAGE 
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                 (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….        (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                  1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………               17-22  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendati ons/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……      23-24                        
  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..          25-31    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                 32-35 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 I. Details of   State-wise & Scheme wise coverage of Beneficiaries 
 Inception upto 31st March, 2006             36-37 
   
  
 II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee     38-39                        
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on  
14th December, 2006.              
  
 
         
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     40                          
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………       
            

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2006-2007) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
 4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Longanathan Ganesan 
6. Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain 
7. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
8. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
9. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
10. Shri  Rupchand Murmu 
11. Shri Jual Oram 
12. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
13. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
14. Shri P. A. Sangma 
15. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
17. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
18. Smt. Usha Verma 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
 
           RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24.       Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25.       Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27.       Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28.       Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29.       Shri Veer Singh 
30.       Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
         
   1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -    Additional  Secretary 
 2.   Shri A.K. Singh            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -   Deputy Secretary 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Under Secretary 
           5.   Shri Yashpal Sharma        -         Executive Assistant 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised by the Co mmittee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty-First Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation” relating to the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment . 
 . 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16
th   May, 2006.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 13 th October, 
2006. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 14
th December, 2006. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth  Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2006        Chairperson,  
23 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
     

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowe rment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “National Backward Classes Fin ance and Developmen t Corporation” 
relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
1.2 The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16
th May, 2006.  It contained 19 recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the re commendations have been examined and are 
categorized as under: 
 
 
  
(i)  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government (Sl. Nos. 3, 7, 10, 16, 
17 and 18). 
(Total 6 – Chapter II) 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government (SL. Nos. 5 and 8). 
(Total 2 – Chapter III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Governm ent have not been accepted 
and have been commented upon in Chapter-I (SL. 
Nos. 1, 4, 6, 9, 13,14 and15). 
(Total 7 – Chapter IV)   
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 

replies of the Government are interim in nature  (Sl.  
Nos. 2, 11, 12 and 19). 
(Total 4 – Chapter V) 
 
   
1.3 The Co mmittee desire th at action taken not es on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in  
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report ma y 
be furnished to them at the earliest and in an y c ase not later than three 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Com mittee will now deal with the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.  Data on persons of Backward Classes below double the poverty line. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.17)  
 
1.5   The Committee had noted that Nationa l Backward Classes Finance and 
Development Corporation prov ides concessional finance to the m embers of the 
backward classes with annual income le ss than double the poverty line for their 
socio economic development by extending loan for setting up s elf employ ment 
ventures and income generating activi ties.  Howev er, the Committee was  
constrained to find that the Ministry had no data available with them about the 
total population of backward classes and also the num ber of OBC persons liv ing 
below double the poverty line in the country.  In the absence of this vital data the 
Ministry did not fix t argets under its various welfar e schemes for OBCs.  The 
Committee were s urprised to note that the funds allocation was  based on the 
assumption that all States receive f unds proportionate to their OBC populat ion.  
The Committee were also not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that the office 
of the Registrar General of India had turned down their request to conduct 
 2

census of the people who fall under OBC category.  The Committee had strongly 
felt that in the absence of accurate data of backward classes, the basic objec tive 
of the Corporation i. e. economic development of p oor sections of backward 
classes would not be achiev ed.  Th e Committee had therefore, strongly  
recommended that Ministry should vigorous ly pursue with the Registrar General 
of India to conduct a survey of OBCs and the persons liv ing below double the 
poverty line in this category so that the Ministry could prepare its Action Plan so 
that the required amount of funds could be made av ailable to the State 
Governments for effective implementation of NBCFDCs’ various schemes for the 
development of backward classes. 
 
1.6   The Ministry in their action taken note have stated that they have 
requested vide letter No. 20012/21/2004-BCC dated 11 .07.06 the Registrar 
General of  India to r econsider the pr oposal for a s urvey of Other Back ward 
Classes ( OBCs), in view of the observ ations of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice & Empowerment. 
 3

 
1.7 The Com mittee are not satisfied w ith the repl y o f the Government  
that in view  of the observations of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empo werment the Minist ry h ave r equested the Registrar 
General of India to reconsider the pr oposal for a survey of Other Backward 
Classes ( OBCs).  The Committee note w ith dismay  that even after more 
than fourteen years of the establishment of the National Backw ard Classes 
Finance a nd Dev elopment Co rporation (NBCFDC) , the Government have 
not conducted any  survey  to find out  the number of OBC persons living 
below double the povert y  line in the c ountry.  The Committee feel that  in 
the absence of this vital data the Government w ould not be able to m ake 
exact assessment  of funds need ed for effective and successful 
implementation of welfare schemes for OBCs.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly r eiterate their earlier recomme ndation that Registrar General of 
India should be pursued vigorousl y to conduct a survey  of OBCs and the 
persons living below  double the poverty  line in this categor y so that  the 
Ministry could prepare it s Action Plan  rationall y on the basis of factual 
data.   
 The Com mittee understand that BPL Cards are issued i n various 
States to the persons living below  poverty line/below  double the povert y 
line.  Therefore, the Committee also sug gest that the indication of a person  
belonging to OBC m ay be given in the BPL Card itself and on the basi s of 
BPL Card s issued  an upto  date da ta of OBCs living belo w p overty 
line/below double the povert y line can be  obtained from the States/UTs to 
ascertain the exact number of potential OBC beneficiaries. 
 
 4

B. State Channelising Agencies 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para, No 1.30) 
 
1.8   The Committee had noted that St ate Channelising Agencies, who were 
entrusted with the task of identifying and formulating technically feasible and 
financially viable schemes, iden tifying potential beneficiari es and  recovering of 
loans from the benefic iaries, had neither been  equip ped with adequate staff nor 
provided with adequate infras tructure by the Stat e Governments.  The 
Committee also noted that due to poor in frastructure, non-availability of State 
Government guarantee and non -repayment of loans  to the Corporation, SCAs  
had not been able to draw funds from NBCFDC.  T he Committee found that due 
to shortage of staff and in adequate infrastructure in certain State Channelising 
Agencies were not working effectively, se lection of beneficiaries  was very slow 
and disbur sement of loan to the target groups was  v ery less. T he Committee 
were not happy with this grave situation.  Since the State Channelis ing Agencies 
were the main links between the beneficiaries and the Corporation and their main 
objective was to make funds available for upliftment of the poor backward class 
beneficiaries, the Committee had strongly recommended that neces sary 
measures be taken by the Centre and State Governments to improve and 
strengthen the infrastructure of the St ate Channelising Agenc ies.  SCAs should 
be permitted to create their own infrastruc ture, recruit their own staff and some 
officials of the State C hannelising Agencies be deputed in  each district to carry 
out their designated t ask effecti vely and e fficiently.  The Com mittee had also 
recommended that to meet t he expenditure for strengt hening the infrastructure 
and recruiting the required number of staff for the SCAs, adequate funds be 
allocated by the Centre as well as State Governments in a proportionate manner. 
 
1.9   In their action taken notes the Ministry have stated that the National 
Backward Classes Finance and Developm ent Corporation has written to the 
State Governments regarding strengthening of SCAs by State Governments. 
 
 5

1.10 The Com mittee had recommended that to meet the expen diture for 
strengthening the infrastructure and recruiting the required number of staff 
for SCAs,  adequate funds be allocat ed by  centr e as w ell as w ell State 
Governments in a proportionate manner.  But, the Ministr y in their re ply 
have simpl y stated  that they have  w ritten to the State Governments 
regarding strengthening of SCAs b y St ate Governments.  The Com mittee 
are of the firm vie w that unless suffi cient funds are made available to the 
State Channelising Agencies b y the Centre as well as State Governments 
to strengthen their infrastructure, the State Channelising Agencies w ould 
not be able to carry out their designa ted task effectively  and efficientl y.  
The Com mittee, therefore, strongl y reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that adequate funds be allocated  by  the Center as well as State 
Governments in a proportionate manne r so that SCAs could meet the 
expenditure for strengthening the infrastructure and recruiting the required 
number of staff.  
 6

C. Shortage of Staff  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.32) 
 
1.11   The Committee had also found that in  view of expanding activities of  
NBCFDC, more professional manpower was required.   The reason given by the 
Ministry that in view of austerity policy  of Government of India, furthur process 
was not initiated, was  not convincing in view of t he importance of the mandate 
and expanding activit ies of the Corpor ation.  The Committee had, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the Ministry should take up the matter of recruitment  
of adequate number of staff for NBCFDC with the Ministry of Finance urgently so 
that smooth functioning of  the Corporation and ef fective implementation of  
welfare schemes for Backward Classes could be ensured. 
  
1.12   In t heir action taken not e furn ished to the Committee the Ministry have 
stated that NBCFDC proposes to utilize the services of professionals for effective 
implementation of welfare schemes. 
 7

 
 1.13 The Com mittee had recom mended t hat in vie w of ex panding 
activities of the corporation the Mi nistry should  take up the matter of 
recruitment of adequate number of st aff for NBCFDC w ith the Ministr y of  
Finance u rgently.  The Ministr y in their action taken repl y h ave si mply 
stated that NBCFDC proposes  to utiliz e the services of professionals for 
effective implementation of welfare schemes.  The repl y of the Ministr y is 
not  at all satisfactor y  as nothi ng has been m entioned about the steps 
taken so f ar by the NBCFDC t o utilize the services of professionals.  The 
Committee, how ever, desire that sin cere efforts should be made by the 
Government to utilize the services of professionals for effective 
implementation of welfare schemes and  also urge the Ministr y to take up  
the matter of recruitment of adequate number of staff for NBCFDC w ith the 
Ministry of finance expeditiousl y so that smooth functioning of the  
Corporation could be ensured. 
 8

 
D. Swayam Saksham Scheme 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 3.18) 
 
1.14  The Com mittee had found that Swayam Saksham  Scheme had been 
introduced by the Corporation to inculcat e the spirit of se lf confidence among 
professionally educated unemployed youths in backward community through self 
employment to utilis e their wisd om and experience gained through professional 
training and education.  Ho wever, the Commit tee had expresse d their 
displeasure to note that till Februa ry, 2005   State Channelising Agencies of only 
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra had pr ovided the assistanc e to only  57 
unemployed youths under this scheme.  The reason put forth by the Ministry  that 
no separate target was fixed by NBCF DC for the scheme and the SCAs ar e 
required to submit their Annual Action Plan indicating their targets for each 
scheme as per need of the benefic iaries in their States is  not convincing at all.   
Keeping in view the f act that the sc heme had been formulated to inculcat e the 
spirit of self confiden ce among the professionally educated unemployed youth 
belonging to the back ward classes, the Committee had de sired that the Ministry  
should pur sue the remaining St ates/UTs to implement the Swayam Sak sham 
Scheme in their respective States and encourage the State Channelising 
Agencies to send adequate and viable pr oposals for  providing loan so that a 
large num ber of unemployed educated y outh could get  the benefits of the 
scheme. 
 
1.15   In their action taken note, the Ministry have stated that the NBCFDC in 
its endeavour, to provide loans  to the une mployed educated yo uth, advises the 
SCAs from time to time to take-up income generating schemes under NBCFDC 
schemes viz. General Loans, Swayam Saksham, Micro Finance etc. 
 9

 
 
1.16 The Com mittee had taken a note of the fact that the S wayam 
Saksham Scheme w as being implemented onl y in  tw o State s i.e. Andhra 
Pradesh and Maharashtra and onl y 57 unem ployed youth had been 
provided assistance under the scheme.   The Co mmittee, had therefore,  
desired th at the Ministr y sh ould pursu ade the remaining States/UTs to  
implement the S wayam Saksh am Sche me in their respective states and  
encourage the State Channelising Agen cies to send adequ ate and viable 
proposals for prov iding loa n so that a large number of unemploy ed 
educated youth could get the benefits of  the scheme.  The Ministry  in their 
stereotyped repl y  have stated  th at the NBCF DC in its endeavo ur, to 
provide loan to the unemplo yed educat ed youth, advises th e SCAs from  
time to time to ta ke up income  generating schemes under NBCFDC 
schemes viz. general loans, Sw ayam Saksham, Micro Finance etc. w hich is 
not at all convincing. The Committe e, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry  to pursue the remaining States/UTs 
to implement the Sw ayam Saksham Sc heme in their respective States and  
encourage the State Channelising Agen cies to send adequ ate and viable 
proposals for providing loan to a la rge number of unemploy ed educated 
youth.  
 10

 
E. Guarantee on Loan 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 4.18) 
 
1.17  The Committee had also obs erved that SCAs were r equired to pay one 
per cent guarantee commission to the State Governments for obtaining 
guarantee from them.  Thus, only 2% of the interest amount is left with the SCAs  
which is  not sufficient to meet thei r establishm ent/operational and other 
expenses.  Als o sometimes the SCAs  find it difficult t o get the State guar antee 
which causes delay  in getting loan from NBCFDC and disbursing it t o the 
beneficiaries in time.  The Committee had therefore, recommended that State 
Governments may be persuaded not to  charge any guarantee/commission from 
the SCAs f or giving guarant ee for the funds being provi ded to t hem for welfare 
schemes of backward classes so that t heir administrative ex penditure could be 
met effectively and the delay caused in getting funds from the NBCFDC could be 
avoided. 
 
1.18  In their action taken notes the Ministry have stated that the National 
Backward Classes Finance and Developm ent Corporation has written to the 
State Governments not to charge any g uarantee commission from the SCAs for 
giving guarantee. 
 11

 
1.19 The Committee are not convinced w ith the repl y of the Min istry that 
the NBCF DC has w ritten to the Stat e Governments not to charge an y 
guarantee commission from the SCAs for giving guarantee. Nothing has 
been mentioned about the respons e of the  State Governments. The 
Committee had ob served th at SCAs are required to pay  one percent  
guarantee commission to the State Government for obtaining guaran tee 
from them.  Thus, onl y 2 % of the inte rest amount is left w ith the SCAs 
which is not sufficient to meet thei r es tablishment/operational and other 
expenses. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire that the State Governments should be pursued vigorously not to 
charge any guarantee/commission from the SCAs for giving guaran tee for 
the funds being provided to them fo r welfare schemes of backward classes 
so that their administrative expenditu re could be met effectively  and  the 
delay caused in getting funds from the NBCFDC could be avoided. 
 
 12

 
F. Recover y of loans 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 4.19) 
 
1.20 The Committee had found that r ecovery of loan from se veral States was  
very low. State Channelising Agencie s of Andhra Pradesh,  Assam, Bihar,  
Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Prade sh, Maharashtra and  North Eastern 
States, etc. still have  overdues  in crores of rupees to wards the Corporation.  
Though the Corporation gives incentive @ 1-1.5% of inte rest margin to the State 
Channelising Agencies, which is linked to their perfo rmance and has taken some 
steps   to recover the loan, the positi on does not seem to have improved.  The 
Committee had therefore, recommended that  a Recovery Cell m ay be set up in 
all the State Channelising Agencies to gear up and monitor the recovery process  
and defaulting agencies may be persuaded to clear their dues in time. 
 
1.21 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee the Ministry have 
stated that National Ba ckward Classes  Finance and De velopment Corpor ation 
has advised all the St ate Channelising Agencies to set up a ‘Re covery Cell’ to 
monitor the recoveries.  The def aulting SCAs have been further followed up to 
clear their dues in time.  The SCAs of Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir (Women), Madhya Pr adesh (Hasthshilpa), Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan (OBC), Tamil N adu, Pondicherry and Tripur a have s et up separate 
recovery cells. 
 13

 
1.22 The com mittee had recomm ended that a Recover y Cell m ay be set  
up in all the State Channelising Ag encies to gear up and  monitor the 
recovery process and defaulting agencies may be persuaded to clear their 
dues in ti me.  The Ministry  i n their reply have simpl y st ated they have 
advised all the State  Channelising Ag encies to set up a ‘Recovery  Cell’ to 
monitor the recoveri es.  How ever, the Committee express concern th at so 
far onl y 11 States h ave set u p Recover y Cells.  T he Commi ttee view  that 
setting up of a Recovery Cell in States will have a substantial impact on the 
recovery process.The Co mmittee, th erefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry  to pursue the remaining States/UTs 
to set up ‘Recovery Cells’ for speedy recovery and defaulting agencies may 
be persuaded to clear their dues in time. 
 14

 
G. Simplification   of loan disbursement process 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 4.20) 
 
1.23 The Committee had noted t hat the main diffic ulties faced by the 
beneficiaries in getting loan are obtaini ng Gover nment official/collateral 
guarantee, issue of backward c lass certificate, documentation and completion o f 
procedural formalities.  The Committee had desired that necessary steps shou ld 
be taken by the State Channelising Agencie s to simplify the process of loan 
disbursement to avoid inconvenience to the beneficiaries.  Also in order to 
obviate the difficulties being faced by the beneficiaries in securing guarantee of a 
Government official, the Committee had de sired, that the Government should 
consider to constitute a Committee of fi ve responsible and prom inent citizens of  
the area/village and on the recommendat ions of that Committee, the 
beneficiaries may be granted loan. 
 
1.24 In their action taken note, the Mi nistry have stated that the National  
Backward Classes Finance and De velopment Corporation is writing from time to 
time to simplify the procedure for obtai ning the loan by the benefic iaries.  
However, as suggested, further follow-up is being taken. 
 15

 
1.25 The Com mittee had expressed c oncern to the specific problems 
being faced b y the b eneficiaries in ge tting loan, like difficulty in obtaining 
guarantee of Gove rnment official, is sue of backw ard class certificate, 
procedural formation etc.  The Minist ry in their  repl y have mentioned 
nothing about the s pecific steps taken by them to rectify those difficulties.  
The Ministry have gi ven a gen eral and sketch y reply and have stated that 
the Nation al Backw ard Classes Financ e and Development Corporation is 
writing from time to time to simplify the procedure for obtaining the loan by 
beneficiaries.  The Committee are not  convinced w ith the repl y.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate th eir earlier rec ommendation and desire 
that   earl y steps should be taken to simplify  the process of loans 
disbursement to the beneficiaries by the State Channelising Agencies.  The 
Committee also desire that  a Committe e of five responsible and promi nent 
citizens of the area/village  shoul d be constituted   and on the 
recommendations of that Committee,  the beneficiaries may  b e granted 
loan so that the main difficulties faced  by the b eneficiaries in getting loan  
could be taken care of. 
 16

 
CHAPTER –II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No.3, Para No. 1.19) 
 
2.1 The Com mittee also note that the NBCFDC has written to State 
Channelising Agencies to conduct surveys to know the number of beneficiaries   
covered under various  schemes but nothing has been done in  that direction so  
far.  The reason put forth by the Minist ry that SCAs do not hav e requisite staff 
and infrastructure to conduct such surv eys is not convincing.  The Committee 
recommend that the Corporat ion should impress upon t he SCAs to conduct the 
survey to find out the exact number of  beneficiaries covered under various   
schemes of the Corporat ion s o that the impact of  the schemes could be 
assessed properly as it w ould enable the Corporation to fix targets under its 
various schemes and prepare annual action plans accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 As far as coverage of benefic iaries under NBCF DC schemes is 
concerned, the details are available with NBCFDC.   The details of scheme-wise/ 
State-wise coverage of beneficiaries as on 31st March 2006  are at  Annexure – I. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC  
 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 
 
 
 17

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para. No. 2.4) 
 
 2.3 The Committee have been apprised t hat the authorized share capital of 
NBCFDC has been increased f rom Rs.200 crore to Rs.700 cr ore as on 31 st 
August 2004 but the Central Government has contributed only Rs.406.63 crore to 
the share capital of the Co rporation against its author ized share capital.  T he 
Committee find that the budget ary support to NBCF DC was adequate to meet 
the targets of the Co rporation upto the 9 th Plan.  However, during the 10 th Plan 
additional budgetary support would be required to carry out the activities of SCAs 
of NBCF DC in an effectiv e manner and higher  alloca tion of funds  to the 
Corporation could be consider ed if mo re funds are made available t o the 
Ministry.  The Committee, therefor e, recommended that  the Planning 
Commission may be persuaded to alloc ate more funds towards  the authorized 
share capital of NBCFDC early so that the budgetary support to the Corpor ation 
could be enhanced substantially to enable it to implement  its schemes effectively 
and further expand its activities for the welfare of Backward Classes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 During the Tenth Plan, as against an outlay of Rs.75 crore, the Ministry 
has so far released budget ary support of Rs.46.95 c rore to Nat ional Backward 
Classes Finance and Developm ent Corporation upto 31 st March 2006.   For the 
year 2006-07, BE of Rs.22 crore has been provided as compared to Rs.12 crore. 
During the year 2005-06.  The Minist ry would take up the matter during the 
Eleventh plan period after assessing its  requirements as well as stat us of 
utilization of earlier releases. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
   
 
 18

Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No. 3.19) 
 
2.5 The Committee are constrained to note that the number  of students of 
backward classes who availed conc essional loan under Educational Loan 
Scheme for pursuing general/ profession al/technical courses at graduate and 
higher lev els is aby smally low particula rly in Bihar , Goa, Gujarat, Madhy a 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,  Uttar Pradesh and We st Bengal.   The Committee al so 
note that the Educational  Loan Scheme has not been implemented in several 
States, thereby depriving the deservi ng students of backward classes from  
availing of  the concessional loans for pursing higher studies. The Committee 
further observe that the Ministry are not  having up to date information about the 
number of beneficiaries who hav e been granted maximum amount of Education 
loan i.e. Rs. 3 lak h.  The Committee are no t satisfied with this state of affairs.  
The Com mittee, therefore, recommend that all-out efforts should be made to 
popularize the Educ ational Loan Scheme in all the  St ates/UTs so that a large 
number of students from backward classe s, who are below double the pov erty 
line, could get the benefits of the scheme and pursue their higher studies without 
any hindr ance.  The Committee also desire that an upto-date data of  
beneficiaries who have been granted the maximum amount of Loan and also the 
number of women physically im paired and dependent  war wid ows among the 
OBC beneficiaries who have been sancti oned loan under the scheme should be 
maintained by the Corporation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 SCAs have been advised to enlarge the activities  and al so publicise the 
Education Loan Sc heme.  Suggestions  of the Committee regarding data 
collection have been noted. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 19

Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, Para No. 4.21) 
 
2.7  The Committee   note that a larg e segment of backwar d class people are 
engaged in crafts activities.  The Corporat ion provides Project linked training to 
the craft persons and pot ential entrepreneurs for desi gn deve lopment of  their 
traditional crafts etc.  The Com mittee al so note that  the Corporation with its  
meagre finances arrange to par ticipate in the Exhib itions arranged by various  
Departments, i.e. ITPO, Industry Depar tment, Tourism Department, etc.  
However, the Corporation spends on thes e exhibitions from its own resources 
since no separate budgetary  support is re ceived by the Corporation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that sufficient funds should be provided to the 
Corporation to enable it to organize Exhibitions and buyer-seller meets in various 
parts of the country to enable the crafts  persons to display their artifacts and 
products in a bigger way and fend good market for their products. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 Noted for further action. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No 17, Para No. 5.10) 
 
2.9 The Committee note with dis may t hat awareness camps for generating 
awareness among the beneficia ries have not been  organized in many part s of  
the country so far.   Keeping in vi ew the importance of  the mandate of the 
Corporation and the interest of the large number  of potent ial beneficiaries 
involved, the Committee desire that wide publicity of the welfare schemes for 
backward classes should be given by organizing Awareness Camps in all the 
States, particularly in remote and inacc essible areas.  Also, the publicity of  the 
Corporation’s Welfar e Schemes shoul d be undertaken more extens ively and 
vigorously through electronic media like TV/Radio Channels, in vernacular print 
 20

media, by distributing pamphlets  and issu ing advertisements on applications for 
purchasing Railway T ickets, Dis pensary Ca rds and University forms, etc. The 
Committee further desire the Government to issue directions to professional 
institutes like medical coll eges and other institutions which conduct professi onal 
courses like MBA, MCA, etc.  to provide a column in their prospectus that finance 
for pursuing these c ourses is also provi ded to the backward class beneficiaries 
by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment/   NBCFDC  through SCAs of  
respective States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Ministry has taken action on  recommendation of t he Committee and 
so far achieved results in advertising its schemes on Rail way Tickets, Radio/T.V. 
Channels etc.   The Co rporation also have asked the SCAs to conduct 
Awareness Camps. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No.5.11) 
 
2.11   The Committee note that NBCF DC review the performance of SCAs  by  
way of meetings, Monthly and Quarterly Progress Reports and officials of the 
Corporation also undertake field visits to monitor the implementation of welfar e 
scheme.  The Committee further note that SCAs have only a s mall staff at the 
field level and infrastructure of SCAs is very poor.  The Committee feel that due 
to shortage of staff and poor infrastructu re of State Chennelising Agenc ies, they 
are not in a positi on to give ac curate feed back to the Corpor ation and t hus 
effective and proper monitori ng of the implementation of  welfare schemes is  not 
done.  The Committee therefore, recommend that necessary steps may be taken 
to strengthen the State Chan nelising Agencies and ensure that regular feedback  
is received by the Cor poration from them so that proper and effective monitoring 
of the implementation of we lfare schemes could be d one.  The Committee, als o 
 21

recommend that the Ministry should se t up a Monitoring Committee to ensure 
regular and strict monitoring of the implementation of welfare schemes of 
NBCFDC in a more concentrated and focused manner.    Inspection teams of the 
Ministry should be sent frequently to s ee how far the welfare s chemes of the 
Corporation are   implemented.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 In order to strengthen the infrastructure of SCAs, the Corporation provides 
incentives on timely r epayment upto 1.50 % of the recoveries. It helps SCAs in 
strengthening their recovery mechanism. The Corporation also provides publicity 
grant upto Rs.1,00,000/-  p. a. to SCAs for publicizing the NBCF DC schemes in 
local regional languages.   T he Cor poration also provides  assistanc e t o 
undertake staff training of the SCAs.   Entire expenditure on staff training is borne 
by NBCF DC.   Thes e measures help in strengthening the SCAs for bet ter 
implementation of the schemes. As far as  NBCFDC is concerned, further follow-
up is being taken as per suggestions. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 
 22

CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 1.31) 
 
3.1 The Committee  express their serious concern over the fact that the Chie f 
Executives of the State Channelis ing Agencies who are ap pointed by  the 
respective State Governments and the o fficers on deputation from various State 
Cadres are frequently transferred.   The Co mmittee feel that frequent transfers of 
Chief Exec utives and other  officials of State Channe lising Agencies adversely  
affect the implementation of  the NBCF DC Schemes and result in unsatisfac tory 
functioning of the State Channelising Agencies.  T he Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Minist ry should t ake up the matter with State Governments to 
refrain from frequent transfer of respecti ve Chief Executiv es and other Staff 
officers and ensure t hat Chief Executiv es are posted to State Channelis ing 
Agencies on full time basis having fixed term. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Corporation has  written to the State Governments  and also impress 
upon the State Governments from time to time to provide full time MD and avoid 
frequent transfers for smooth functioning of the SCAs. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23

Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.17) 
 
3.3 The Committee note t hat the main acti vity of NBCFDC is to provide Term  
Loans to the beneficiaries through St ate Channelis ing Agencies.  The 
Corporation gives need-based loans to beneficiaries  upto Rs. 5 lakh.  However  
the Committee are constrained to observe that the num ber of beneficiaries  who 
got loan of Rs. 4.00 to Rs. 5.00 lakh during the last five years is only 178 which is 
negligible.   The Committee feel that enterprising youths in the backward 
community, who fulfill the cr iteria laid down for availi ng loan upto Rs. 5 lakh are 
not encour aged or c oming for ward to av ail loan under the scheme.  The 
Committee desire that unemploy ed persons of the bac kward community should 
not only be encouraged but also be given s ome incentive to avail of loans under 
the scheme and set up their own ventures so that they could cross the figure of  
below double the poverty line. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 With the available funds, the Corporation intends to cover large number of 
beneficiaries and ther efore, the State C hannelising Agencies (SCAs) have been 
advised to disburse funds proportionately to the eligible beneficiaries as per their 
need.   The Corporation provides loans upt o Rs.5.00 lakh and therefore it is upto 
the SCAs and beneficiaries to avail loans as per their need.    
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BE EN ACCEPT ED AND HAV E BE EN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER- I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.17) 
 
4.1 The Com mittee note that Nati onal Bac kward Classes Finance and 
Development Corporation  provides conc essional finance to the members of the 
backward classes with annual income le ss than double the poverty line for their 
socio economic development by extending loan for setting up s elf employ ment 
ventures and income gener ating activ ities.  However, the Committee is  
constrained to find that the Ministry have no data available with t hem about the 
total population of backward classes and also the num ber of OBC persons liv ing 
below double the poverty line in the country.  In the absence of this vital data the 
Ministry do not fix targets under its va rious welfare schemes for OBCs.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that the funds allocation is  based on the 
assumption that all States receive f unds proportionate to their OBC populat ion.  
The Committee are also not satisfied with t he reply of the Minist ry that the office 
of the Registrar General of India has  turned down their request to conduct 
census of the people who fall under OB C category.  The Committee strongly feel 
that in the absence of  accurate data of backward classes, the basic objective  of 
the Corporation i.e. economic development of poor sections of backward classes 
would not be achiev ed.  The Committee,  therefore, str ongly recommend that 
Ministry should vigorously pursue with the Registrar General of India to conduct a 
survey of OBCs and the persons living below double the poverty line in this  
category so that the Ministry could prepar e its Action Plan so that the required 
amount of funds can be made available to the State Go vernments for effective 
implementation of NBCFDCs’ various schemes for the development of backward 
classes. 
 25

 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 Ministry has requested vide letter No. 20012/21/2004-BCC dated 11.07.06 
the Registrar General of India to recons ider the proposal for a survey of Other  
Backward Classes (OBCs), in view of  the observations of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice & Empowerment. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para, No 1.30) 
 
4.3  The Committee note that State Chan nelising Agencies, who are entrus ted 
with the task of identifying and formulati ng technically feasible and financially  
viable schemes, identifying pot ential beneficiaries and  recovering of loans from 
the beneficiaries, have neither been  equipped wi th adequate st aff nor provided 
with adequate infrastructure by the St ate Governments.  The Committee also 
note that due to poor infrastructure, non-availability of State Government  
guarantee and non-repayment of loans to the Corporation, SCAs hav e not been 
able to draw funds from NBCFDC. The Committee find that due to shortage 
of staff and inadequat e infrastructure in certain State Channe lising Agencies are 
not working effectively, selection of benefic iaries is v ery slow and disbursem ent 
of loan to the target groups is very le ss. The Committee are not happy with this 
grave situation.  Since the State C hannelising Age ncies are the main links  
between the beneficiaries and the Corporat ion and their main objective is to 
make funds available for upliftment of t he poor backward cla ss beneficiaries, the 
Committee strongly recommend that necessary measures be taken by t he 
Centre and State Governments to impr ove and strengthen the infrastructure of  
the State Channelising Agenc ies.  SCAs should be permi tted to create their o wn 
 26

infrastructure, recruit their own st aff and some officials of the State Channelising 
Agencies be deputed in each district to ca rry out their designated t ask effectively 
and efficiently.  The Committee also reco mmend that to meet the expenditure for 
strengthening the infrastructure and recruiting the required number of staff for the 
SCAs, adequate funds be alloca ted by the Centre as we ll as State Governments 
in a proportionate manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4   The Corporation has written to the State Gove rnments regarding 
strengthening of SCAs by State Governments. 
  
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.32) 
 
4.5   The Committee also find that in view of expandi ng activities of NBCFDC, 
more professional manpower is r equired.  The reason given by the Ministry that 
in view of austerity policy of Government of  India, furthur process is not initiated, 
is not convincing in view of the importance of the mandate and expanding 
activities of the Corporation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Ministry should take up the matter of recruitment of adequate number of  staff  
for  NBCFDC with the Ministry of Finance urgently so that smooth functioning of  
the Corporation and effectiv e implementation of welf are schemes for Backward 
Classes could be ensured. 
 
 
 
 
 27

 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6.   NBCFDC pro poses to utilize the s ervices of profession als for effective 
implementation of welfare schemes. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. 9, Para No. 3.18) 
 
 4.7   The Committee find that Swayam Saksham Scheme has been 
introduced by the Corporation to inculcat e the spirit of se lf confidence among 
professionally educated unemployed youths in backward community through self 
employment to utilis e their wisd om and experience gained through professional 
training and education.  Ho wever, the Committee express their disple asure to 
note that till Febru ary, 2005   Stat e Channelisin g Agencies of only Andhra  
Pradesh and Maharashtra have provided t he assistance to only  57 unemployed 
youths under this scheme.  The reason put forth by t he Ministry that no separ ate 
target is fixed by NBCFDC for the schem e and the SCAs are required to submit 
their Annual Action Plan indicating their targets for each scheme as per need o f 
the beneficiaries in their States is not conv incing at all.  Keepi ng in view the fact 
that the sc heme has  been formulated to incu lcate the spirit of  self confidence 
among the professionally educated unemployed youth belonging to the backward 
classes, the Committee desir e that the Ministry shou ld pursue the remaining 
States/UTs to implement the Swayam Saksham Scheme in their respective 
States and encourage the State Channelising Agenc ies to send adequate and 
viable proposals for providing loan so t hat a large number of unemploy ed 
educated youth  could get  the benefits of the scheme. 
 
 
 28

 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8  The NBCFDC in its endeavour, to provide loans to the unemployed educated 
youth, advises the SCAs from time to  time to take-up inc ome generating 
schemes under NBCFDC schemes viz.  General Loans, Swayam Sak sham, 
Micro Finance etc. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 4.18) 
 
4.9  The Committee also observe that SCAs are required to pay one per cent 
guarantee commission to the St ate Govern ments for obtaini ng guarantee from  
them.  Thus, only 2%  of the interest am ount is left with the SCAs whic h is not 
sufficient to meet their establis hment/operational and other expenses.  Also 
sometimes the SCAs  find it difficult to  get the State guarant ee which causes  
delay in getting loan from NBCF DC and disbursing it to the beneficiaries in time.  
The Com mittee, therefore, recomm end that State Governments may be 
persuaded not to charge any  guarantee/commission from  the SCAs for giving 
guarantee for the funds being provided to t hem for welfare schemes of backward 
classes so that their admini strative expenditure could be met effectively and t he 
delay caused in getting funds from the NBCFDC could be avoided. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 29

 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.10   The Corporation has written to the State Governments not to charge any  
guarantee commission from the SCAs for giving guarantee. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 4.19) 
 
4.11    The Committee find that recovery of loan from several States is v ery low. 
State Channelising Agenc ies of Andhra Pradesh,  Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharas htra and North Eastern States, etc. 
still have o verdues in  crores   of rupees towards the Corporatio n.  Though  the 
Corporation gives incentiv e @ 1-1.5% of interest  margin to the State 
Channelising Agencies, which is linked to their perfo rmance and has taken some 
steps   to recover the loan, the positi on does not seem to have improved.  The 
Committee , therefore, reco mmended that a Recover y Cell may be set up in all 
the State Channelis ing Agencies to gear up and m onitor the r ecovery pr ocess 
and defaulting agencies may be persuaded to clear their dues in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.12    National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation has  
advised all the State Channelis ing Agenc ies to set up a ‘Rec overy Cell’ to 
monitor the recoveries.  The def aulting SCAs have been further followed up to 
clear their dues in time.  The SCAs of Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir (Women), Madhya Pr adesh (Hasthshilpa), Maharashtra, 
 30

Rajasthan (OBC), Tamil N adu, Pondicherry and Tripura have s et up sepa rate 
recovery cells. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 4.20) 
 
4.13 The Committee note that t he main diffi culties faced by the beneficiaries in 
getting loan are obtaining Government o fficial/collateral guarantee, issue of 
backward class certificate, document ation and completion  of procedural 
formalities.  The Com mittee desire that necessary steps should be taken by the 
State Channelising Agencies to simplify the process of loan disbursem ent to 
avoid inconvenience to the ben eficiaries.  Also in ord er to obviate the diffic ulties 
being faced by the beneficiaries  in s ecuring guarantee of a Gov ernment official, 
the Committee desir e, that the Governm ent should consider to constitute a 
Committee of five res ponsible and prominent citizens of the area /village and on 
the recommendations of that Committee, the beneficiaries may be granted loan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14  The Corporation is writing from ti me to time to simplify the procedure for 
obtaining the loan by the beneficiaries.  However, as suggested, further follow-up 
is being taken. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.25 of Chapter - I of the Report)
 31

CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 1.18) 
 
5.1   The Committee find that the Ministry have requested State Governments/UT 
administrations to conduct survey of OBCs  living below the poverty line in their 
respective States/UTs but only Haryana,  Rajasthan, Tripura, Chandigar h and 
Dadra and  Nagar Ha veli have furnished th e information of OBC families living 
below the poverty line while the Govern ments of Gujarat, Orissa and Delhi hav e 
shown their inability to carry out the survey.  The C ommittee are surprised to 
note that States of Arunac hal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland and the UT o f 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands hav e not even  notified the backwar d classes s o far 
and are not obtaining loan ass istance at all.  Though Dadra & Nagar Haveli,  
Daman and Diu and Mizoram have nominat ed SCAs,  they hav e not sub mitted 
any demand for funds.  The Committee feel  that the Ministry have not followed 
up with the State Governments  the matter of conducting bench survey to cull out 
exact num ber of backward clas ses in thei r respective States sincerely as  only 
five States/UTs have furnished in formation about the OBC familie s living be low 
the poverty line.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
pursue the State Governments to conduct surveys to find out the exact nu mber 
of backward classes  in their respective  States/UTs at the earliest.  The 
Committee also rec ommend that the Go vernments of Arun achal Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Lakshadweep and  Andaman and Nic obar Islands be 
persuaded expeditiously to notify backward classes in their respective States and 
submit their demands for funds for the development of backward classes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2   The NBCFDC has again written to  the concerned authorities in the 
States/UTs of Arunachal Prades h, Andaman & Nicobar Island, Meghalaya, and 
Nagaland to notify the members of Backward Classes and to nominate 
 32

Channelising Agency to obtain loan fr om NBCFDC wherever OBCs hav e been 
identified. The Andaman & Nicobar Administration vide letter dtd. 31st May, 2006 
have informed that they have just notified the OBCs and further necessary action 
is being t aken. As f ar as Dadra & Naga r Haveli is  concerne d, follow-u p is  
continuing to complete formalities to dr aw the loan by Dadra & Nagar Ha veli, 
Daman & Diu SC/STs, OBCs and Mi norities F inancial & Develop ment 
Corporation, which has been nominat ed as Channelising Agency.  The 
Corporation is pursuing matte r with the concerned authorities in the UT of Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 3.20) 
 
5.3  The Com mittee appreciate the in itiative taken by the NBCF DC for 
providing project linked training s chemes from its own internal resources through 
SCAs/Training Institutions.  However, the Committee are of the opinion that a 
large number of beneficiaries  are unsk illed, lack  technical knowledge and 
motivation and the training needs of potential OBC beneficiaries may be of  
different kinds lik e motivational, skill or iented, entrepreneurial and those ge ared 
at marketi ng.    The Committee, ther efore, recommend that  while imparting 
training, such aspects should be taken care of so that the persons getting training 
under the scheme could develop their skill and knowledge in specified trades and 
derive maximum benefits from the effort s and schemes of the NBCFDC.    The 
Committee also recommend that the Vocati onal Training schools for the targeted 
groups may be established in various pa rts of the country, particularly in 
backward class concentrated districts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4   National Back ward Clas ses Finance  & Dev elopment Corporation can 
consider to set up vocational training  schools for skill upgradation and  
 33

 
entrepreneurship development of the OB C beneficiaries, where OBC populat ion 
is concentrated more, for which separate budgetary support shall be required. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.17) 
 
 
5.5   The Committee note that NBCFDC provides loans to SCAs at the rate of 
interest between 1% to 3% per annum fo r its various welfar e schemes, whereas 
5% to 6% interest p.a. is charged fr om the benefic iaries by the SCAs, thus 
cornering away 3% as infrastructure/ operational expenditure.  The Com mittee 
also note that Government may consider fo r equity participation as is available in 
case of SCDCs subj ect to availability of planne d funds for the purpose.  The  
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in order to boo st the income 
generating activities of  the back ward classes, the rate of interest being char ged 
from the beneficiaries on NBCFDC loans may be reduced.  In order to meet the 
infrastructural and operati onal expenditure of SCAs, sufficient funds should be 
provided to the Corporation by t he Government and t he Ministry should pursue 
with the St ate Governments to come forw ard to bear such expe nditure of their  
respective SCAs in a proportional manner  as the State Governments have equal 
obligation for the welfare of  the backward population in their respective, St ates 
thereby reducing the rate of interest being charged from the beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6   The interest rates charged are s imilar to the those under similar s chemes. 
The subject of equity participation for SC As as in case of SCDCs will be 
considered in cons ultation with the State Governments and Planning 
 34

Commission. The Stat e Governments have been requested to strengthen SCAs 
by providing proper financing to meet administrative and operational expenditure. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No. 5.12) 
 
5.7   The Committee   express their c oncern at the inab ility expressed by the  
Ministry in releasing t he list of benef iciaries scheme–wise with addresses on  the 
internet to make the same accessible to the concerned authorities and public  
representatives for pr oper and effective monitoring.  The Com mittee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Government stating that it would not be feasible as 
it involves  huge cos t by SCAs to co ver over 5 lakh beneficiaries.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that t he Ministry should develop a software 
and make available details of beneficiari es, their addresses, amount of loan 
given, purpose for which the loan is sanctioned on the internet for information 
and use of beneficiaries and public representatives.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8   The SCAS have been advised to incl ude details of benefic iaries  on the 
website. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment No. 12013/24/2004-BCC 
dated 13th October,2006] 
 
 
New Delhi:     SUMIT RA MAHAJAN,  
14 December, 2006      Chairperson,  
23 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
       Social Justice and  
       Empowerment  
 35

 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
NATIONAL BACKW ARD CL ASSES FINANCE AND DEV ELOPMENT 
CORPORATION 
 
DETAILS OF STATEWI SE & SCHEME  WISE COVERA GE OF BENEFICIARIE S 
INCEPTION UPTO 31ST MARCH 2006 
Sl. 
No. 
STATE/UT GENERAL LOAN 
SCHEME 
MICRO FINAN CE 
SCHEME 
CUMULATIVE TOTAL  
  NO. OF BENEFICIARIES NO. OF BENEFICIARIES NO. OF 
BENEFICIARIES 
1 ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
205831 57843 263674 
2. ASSAM 1085 1639 2724 
3. BIHAR 8365 400 8765 
4. CHANDIGARH 
(UT) 
127 55 182 
5. CHHATTISHGARH 548 175 723 
6. DELHI (UT) 333 - 333 
7. GUJARAT 11630 1965 13595 
8. GOA 333 - 333 
9. HARYANA 18642 200 18842 
10. HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 
2899 60 2959 
11. JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 
248 108 356 
12. JHARKHAND 590 - 590 
13. KARNATAKA 69202 1572 70774 
14. KERALA 57922 12288 70210 
15. MAHDYA 
PRADESH 
17440 1152 18592 
16. MANIPUR 1061 - 1061 
17. MAHARASHTRA 21138 5769 26907 
18. SIKKIM 2176 275 2451 
19. ORISSA 3837 2710 6547 
20. PUNJAB 4359 - 4359 
21. PONDICHERY(UT) 1368 40 1408 
 36

22. RAJASTHAN 3714 62 3776 
23. TAMIL NADU 24061 111998 136059 
24. TRIPURA 2653 - 2653 
25. UTTAR PRADESH 19818 7496 27314 
26. UTTARANCHAL 234 86 320 
27. WEST BENGAL. 8151 4168 12319 
 GRAND TOTAL 487765 210061 697826 
 
 37

ANNEXEURE -II  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EI GHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL J USTICE AND EMPO WERMENT HELD ON T HURSDAY, 
14th   DECEMBER, 2006. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.30 hr s. to 1630 hrs. in Committee 
Room B Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora  
3. Dr Babu Rao Mediyam 
4. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
5. Shri P.A. Sangma 
6. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
7. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
8. Smt. Usha Verma 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
10. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
11. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
12. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
13. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 
 38

2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chai rperson welcomed t he new Members 
nominated to the Committee.  Thereafter,  she apprised the Members that they  
were meeting to consider and adopt th ree Draft Reports of the Committee 
namely, (i) Twentieth Report on “The Co nstitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 
(Amendment) Bill, 2006” ( ii) Twenty-first Report on action taken by  the 
Government on the recommendations/obs ervations contained in the Fifteenth 
Report of the Committee on the subject “National Backward Classes Finance and 
Development Corporation” of the Minist ry of Social J ustice and Empowerment 
and (iii) T wenty-second Report  on action  taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants – 2006-2007 of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
3. X  X  X   X  X  X    X  X  X 
 
4. Thereafter the Committee took up the Twenty-first Report on action taken 
by the Government on the recommendat ions/observations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the Committee on the subject “N ational Bac kward Clas ses 
Finance and Dev elopment Cor poration” of the Minis try of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and adopted the same without any amendment. 
 
5. X  X  X   X  X  X    X  X  X 
 
6. The Com mittee authorized the Chair person to finalize and pr esent the 
reports on their behalf to the Parliament. 
 
7. X  X  X   X  X  X    X  X  X 
 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 39

 40
  APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
               T o t a l    P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendati ons            19 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which  
have been accepted by the Government:           6       31.57% 
(Sl.  Nos. 3,7,10,16,17 and 18)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which            2       10.52% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Sl.  Nos. 5 and 8) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in               7       36.84% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee: 
  (Sl. Nos.  1,4,6,9,13,14 and 15) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in              4        21.05% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Sl. Nos.   2,11,12 and 19) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 