 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
 AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken b y th e Govern ment on the Observations/ Recommendations  
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Demands for 
Grants 2006-2007) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2007 
 
                                Laid in Rajya Sabha on   3.05.2007 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) 

 
23 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action taken b y the Governmen t on the Observations/ Recommendations  
contained i n the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empow erment on Demands for Grants for the year 2006-2007of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                     
PAGE 
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                 (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….        (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                  1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………               13-22  
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……      23-26                        
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..          27-35    
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                 36-40 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee                               
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on  
 27 April, 2007.                                                                               41--         
    
  
   
  
 
         
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)……………                                         4--                          
                

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2006-2007) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
 4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Longanathan Ganesan 
6. Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain 
7. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
8. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
9. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
10. Shri  Rupchand Murmu 
11. Shri Jual Oram 
12. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
13. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
14. Shri P. A. Sangma 
15. Dr. R. Senthil 
16. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
18. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant  
 
 
           RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan   
24.       Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
25.       Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
26.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
27.       Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
28.       Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
29.       Shri Veer Singh 
30.       Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
31.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 
           
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 
   1.   Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu      -    Additional Secretary 
 2.   Shri Ashok Sarin            -   Joint Secretary  
 3.   Shri R.K. Saxena         -   Director 
 4.   Shri Bhupesh Kumar    -   Deputy Secretary 
           5.   Shri Vanlalruata                  -         Executive Officer 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by the Co mmittee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty-Third Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants – 2006-07 relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 . 
 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on   May 16, 2006.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
December 14, 2006. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on April, 27 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
27 April, 2007        Chairperson,  
7 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)               Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
     

CHAPTER–I 
 
REPORT 
        
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals wit h the ac tion taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in  the Sixteenth R eport of the Standing Com mittee 
on Soc ial Justice and Em powerment (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants-2006-2007 relating to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
1.2 The Sixteenth Report wa s pres ented to Lok Sabha and als o laid in Rajy a 
Sabha on 16 May, 2006.  I t contai ned 23 recommendations.  Replies of  
Government in  respect of all the recommendations have been rece ived, and 
are categorised as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the   
 Government: 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 4.14, 4.17, 4.30, 4.31, 5.7, and 6.16.   
 (Total 10 - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which t he Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 4.18, 4.39 and 5.6.  
 (Total 3 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendation s in respect of which rep lies of the 
 Government have not been accept ed and have been commented upon by  
 the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
 Paragraph Nos.  4.16, 4.29, 4.36, 6.18, 6.19 and 7.7.   
 (Total 6 - Chapter IV) 
 
 1

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
 Government are interim in nature: 
 
  Paragraph Nos.  4.15, 4.19, 6.17 and 7.8. 
 (Total 4  - Chapter V)  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final repli es in respect of the recommend ations 
contained in Chapter -V of this Repor t may  be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal  with some of the rep lies rec eived from the  
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.  SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSIST ANCE (SCA) TO SPECIAL COMPONENT  
 PLAN (SCP) FOR SCHEDULED CASTES 
 
 Recommendation (SL No.7, Para No.4.16) 
 
1.5 In the aforesaid paragraph the Commi ttee had expressed their concern that 
the numbe r of women benefic iaries under  S pecial Central Assistance (SPA) to 
Special Component Plan (SCP) for Sc heduled Castes  during 2005-06 had gone  
down alarmingly to 55349 from 153500 in 2004-05.  Further, there were States/UTs 
like Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhy a 
Pradesh, T ripura and West Bengal wherein the num ber of women benef iciaries 
were nil, while the Minist ry had stated that the percent age of women beneficiaries  
had been increasing every year  and currently was pegged at 28.70%. Further, the 
Ministry had no rec ord of women benef iciaries who after having availed the 
benefits of this scheme were able to cros s the figures of below the pov erty line.  
The Committee had emphasised that as per guidelines issued by the Ministry, 15% 
 2

of the total SCA released to States/UTs shall be utilized exclusively on viabl e 
income generating ec onomic development schemes/programmes for SC w omen.  
The Com mittee had, therefore, recomm ended that the Minist ry should impress 
upon all States/UTs to strictly adhere to  the guidelines, so as to ensure the 
economic upliftment of the vulnerable section of SC women.  T he Committee had 
also des ired the Ministry to obtain dat a from all States/U Ts regarding women 
beneficiaries, who after having availed the benefits of this scheme, were able to 
cross the poverty line and had become economically  independent during the last  
three years, as in abs ence of such vital da ta, the success/ failure of this important 
scheme could not be ascertained. 
  
1.6 In their reply, the Ministry of So cial Justice and Empowerment, have stated 
that information on total beneficiaries and women beneficiaries who had availe d 
benefits under the scheme are maintained by the State Governments. As per the 
information received from various Stat e Governments, the total number of 
beneficiaries declined from 611861 in 2004-05 to 548467 in 2005-06. Similarly the 
number of women beneficiaries  also declined marginally  from 153500 to 139200 
during this  period. However, the share of  women in total beneficiaries inc reased 
from 25.08% in 2004-05 to 25.38% in  2005-06. The decline in number of 
beneficiaries during 2005-06 was primarily  due to lesser coverage reported by  
Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. The Minis try has further stat ed that, among the 
major States, information about number of women beneficiaries during 2005-06 
has not yet been reported by State Governm ents of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Goa, J&K, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, M.P., Orissa, Punjab and West Bengal. The matter has been 
taken up with concerned State Governments asking them to furnish necessary  
information. The decline in coverage of benef iciaries during 2005-06 is also being  
taken up with the State Governments. 
 
 The surveys for estimation of poverty  are conducted by National Sample  
Survey Organization (NSSO). The last su rvey by NSSO was conducted in 1999-
2000 to ascertain the number of beneficiaries including Scheduled Castes who had 
crossed the poverty line. Such s pecified surveys on all India bas is is a spec ialized 
 3

job and can appropriately be done by NSSO. T herefore, it would not be advisable 
to conduct survey at the Corporation level.  
 
1.7 The Committee regret to observe that  the performance of the Ministr y 
in respect of upliftment of SC w omen under the scheme Special Central 
Assistance to Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes has not  shown 
any improvement as the numb er of w omen beneficiaries have declined  from 
153500 in 2004-05 to 139200 in the y ear 2005-06.  What is worse is the fact  
that the Ministry  h ave not made an y e ffort to collect data regarding the 
number of w omen beneficiaries who became economically independent and 
crossed the poverty line after availing the be nefits of this p articular scheme.  
Their contention that majority of States have n ot reported the number of  
women beneficiaries is nothing but indi cative of their poor monitoring of the 
scheme.  The Ministr y have also failed to impress upon all States/UT s to 
strictly ad here to the guidelines and  ensure th at 15 % of the total SCA 
released to the States/UTs is utilized exclusively on viable income generating 
economic develop ment sch emes/programmes for SC w omen.  Keeping in 
view the importance of econo mic uplif tment of vulnerable section of SC 
women, the Comm ittee reiterate th eir earlier recommen dation that the 
Ministry should take up the matter w ith all the States/UTs at sufficiently high 
level so that they strictly adhere to the prescribed guidelines and ensure that 
15% of  total SCA is released for econ omic development 
schemes/programmes for SC w omen.  The Ministry  should al so take 
necessary steps to collect the data of  all beneficiaries including women who 
have crossed the p overty lin e and h ave become economicall y indep endent 
 4

after availing the benefits under the sche me. For this, services of NSSO or  
any other agency co uld be en gaged so that the effectiveness of the schem e 
could be properly assessed. 
  
B.  SCHEME OF COACHING AND A LLIED ASSISTANCE FOR WEAKE R 
 SECTIONS INCLUDING SCHE DULED CASTE S, OTHER BACKWAR D 
 CLASSES AND MINORITIES. 
 
 Recommendation (SL No.11, Para No.4.29) 
 
1.8  The Com mittee in para 4.29 of t he original Report had observ ed that the 
scheme of Coaching and Allie d Assistance for weaker sections including SCs , 
OBCs and  Minorities had been  witnessin g under utiliz ation of sanctione d funds 
during the last three years of  the Tenth Fiv e Year Plan. The reasons attributed for 
this by the Ministry were non-submission o f Utilization  Certificat es by States a s 
they had not been able to utiliz e the entire amount released to them by the Centre, 
as well as t hat during 2005-06, there was a proposal to transfer the scheme to the 
State Governments, though it was decided subsequently to retain this scheme with 
the Central Government. The Committee had,  desired that the Ministry should 
vigorously pursue wit h the Stat e Governments to furnish utilizatio n certificates as 
well as fresh proposals on time, so that f unds for the scheme could be released to 
the States uninterruptedly which would ultimately help the States/UTs to implement 
the scheme effectively and efficiently. The need  was also expressed to ensure that 
the Ministry should ut ilize the allocations proportionately to be able to escape cuts 
at RE stage of BE funds, which was reso rted to regularly by the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance  every yea r due to slow pace d utilization o f funds 
during the first two quarters of the Financial year.  
 
1.9 The Ministr y, in their reply, have st ated that the Ministry pursues with the  
State Govts./UTs to furnish the utiliz ation certificates on time. The other  
recommendations of the Committee have also been noted.   
 5

 
1.10 The Committee had noted w ith concer n that the  scheme of coachi ng 
and Allied Assistance for w eaker sections including SCs, OBCs and 
Minorities had been w itnessing under-utilization of sanctioned funds during 
the last three years of the Tenth Five Year Plan.  This w as stated to be due to 
non-submission of Utilization  Certificat es by  States as they  had not  been 
able to utilize the entire amount released to them by the Centre.  The Ministry 
in their repl y have stated that it pur sues w ith the States/UTs to furnish the 
utilization certificates on time.  The Committee feel that the Ministry should 
have spelt  out concrete and specific st eps taken  at appropriate level w ith 
State Governments in this  regard.  While  reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee expect that the Minist ry w ould take 
necessary steps to ensure th at there is  no under  utilisation of funds b y the 
concerned State Government w hile implementing the scheme of Coaching & 
Allied Assistance for weaker sections.  
   
 6

 
 
C.  SCHEME OF UPGRADATION OF MERIT OF SCHE DULED CASTE S 
 STUDENTS THROUGH EXTRA COACHING. 
 
 Recommendation (SL No.14, Para No.4.36) 
 
1.11 The Committee, in the aforesaid paragraph, had observed that the Ministry  
had not paid any heed to its recommendat ions contained in its First and Seventh 
Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2004-05), (2005-06) wherein st rong concern was voiced over the fact that the 
Ministry had not been able to finalize the proposed modifications  in this sc heme 
since 2004.  The proposed new scheme “Top Class  Education for Scheduled  
Castes” was stated to have been cir culated to the Pl anning Commission,  
Department of Expenditure and the Ministry of Human Resource Development for 
consideration. Keeping in view the futu re of the SC students, the Committee had 
strongly recommended that the Mi nistry should make all out efforts to finalize the 
modalities relating to the new sc heme of “Top Class Education for SCs”, with the  
concerned authorities at the earliest, s o that t he revised scheme can b e 
implemented expeditiously.  
 
1.12 In their action taken note furnis hed to the Committee the Ministry have 
stated that the Expenditure Finance Co mmittee meeting for “Top Class Education  
for SC students” had been held on 13. 10.2006 under the Chairmanship of  
Secretary (Expenditure).  
 
 
1.13 The Com mittee ha d noted w ith con cern that the Ministry could n ot  
finalize the proposed modifications in the ‘Scheme of Upgradation of Merit of 
Scheduled Caste Students’ since 2004- 05. The Ministry  w as stated to have  
proposed a new scheme “Top Class Edu cation for Scheduled Castes” which 
 7

had been circulated to the Planning Commission, Department of Expenditure, 
and the M inistry of Human Resources Development for con sideration.  The 
Committee had desired this ne w scheme should be implemented at the  
earliest.   The Ministry have now stated in their reply that the EFC meeting for 
“Top Class Education for SC student s” had been  held on 13.10.2006 under  
the Chairmanship o f Secretary (Expend iture).  Th e Committee find this repl y 
of the Ministry vague in as much as what transpired in this meeting and w hat 
further is  contemplated in this re gard has not been intimated.  The 
Committee take a seriou s view  of  the casual manner in w hich 
recommendation of the Commi ttee has b een replied to b y the Government.  
The Committee cannot but overemphasize the need to expeditiously  finalize 
the modalities relating to the ne w scheme of “Top Class Edu cation for SCs”  
in consultation and co-ordination w ith the concer ned autho rities to ensure 
expeditious implementation of the revised scheme. 
 
D.   SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF URBAN WAKF PROPERTIES. 
 
 Recommendation (SL No.20, Para No.6.18) 
  and 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 6.19) 
 
1.14 In the aforesaid paragraph the Commi ttee had observed that the survey of 
Wakf properties was  an important pre-r equisite to enable the Wakf Boards to 
exercise power, control and supervision ov er the individual Wakf  properties.  From  
the information furnis hed by the Ministry, the Committee had o bserved that the 
survey had been completed in respec t of Himachal Pradesh,  Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Andaman & Nic obar Island and 
Lakshadweep.  Some of t he States had not yet starte d the survey and in some 
 8

cases the survey wor k of Wakf properties  was very slow.  The Committee had felt 
that unless the Government  had an authentic data of Wa kf properties, they would 
not be able to chalk out a proper plan for their development.  The Committee, had 
therefore, recommended that  the State Governments be persuaded to complete 
survey work of urban Wakf properties ex peditiously and the progress achiev ed in 
this regard be communicated to the Committee. 
 
1.15 The Committee had also noted with seri ous concern that out of 10863 Wakf  
properties which were under illegal possession/encroachment, during the last three 
years, the Ministry had no information r egarding the restoration of these Wakf 
properties from illega l occupants .  The Co mmittee viewed th is situation s eriously 
and had recommended that an effective mec hanism should be evolved to check  
encroachment of Wakf properties.  The Committee had also recommended that all 
the Wakf properties which had been illegally encroache d, transferred, mortgaged, 
leased or sold should be retrieved by taking legal action against their occupants.  
 
1.16 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
stated that survey of Wakfs under the provision of the Wa kf Act, 1995 is the  
responsibility of the State Governments.  The progr ess of survey in the  States 
depends on the priorities of the State Gove rnments and there is no provision in the 
Act for direct intervention of the Centra l Government.  The Central Government, 
however, has been persistently impressi ng upon the State Governments the nee d 
to complete survey works expeditiously.                                                                                              
 
1.17 The Minist ry have further stated that Sec tion 32 of  the Wakf Act 1995 
provides that the general superintendence of all Wakfs in a State shall vest with the 
Board established or the State.  Action for remova l of encroachment on Wakf 
properties is to be taken by  the Stat e Wakf Board/ State Government in  
accordance with the provisions  of Sections  54 & 55 of the Wakf Act 1995.    The 
actual progress, however, depends on the prio rities of the State Government.  Th e 
Central Government, on its part, has been persistently impressing upon the State  
Governments to accord appropriate   priority for the work. 
 9

 
1.18  Keeping in view the fact that survey of Wakf properties is an important 
pre-requisite to enable the Wakf Bo ards to exer cise pow er, control and  
supervision over the individual W akf properties, the Committee h ad 
recommended that all the State Governments be persuad ed to complete 
survey w ork of urban Wakf properti es expeditiousl y.  The Committee have 
now been informed by  the Ministry that survey of Wakfs under the provision 
of the Wakf Act, 1995 is the responsibility  of the State Governments and 
there is no provision in the Act for direct intervention of the Central 
Government.  Even conceding  this assertion of the Ministry , the Committee 
feel that Government, at leas t, c ould and should  have per suaded th e State 
Governments to do the needful.  The Committe e, hope t hat the Ministr y 
would take up the matter at the hi ghest level w ith concerned  State 
Governments and impress u pon those, w ho have so far not completed the 
survey of Wakf properties, to ge t these comp leted expeditiously , w hich 
would enable the Wakf Board s to exercise pow er, control and supervision  
over wakf properties and chalk out proper plan for their proper development.   
 The Com mittee also desire that the Ministry in consultatio n w ith the 
State Governments should evolve an e ffective me chanism to retrieve Wakf 
properties w hich h ave been illegally  en croached, transferred, mortgaged,  
leased or sold by taking legal action against their occupants.    
 
 
 
 
 
 10

 
 
  
 Recommendation (SL No.21, Para No.6.19) 
 
F. NATIONAL HANDICAPPED FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT   
 CORPORATION . 
 
 Recommendation (SL No.22, Para No.7.7) 
 
1.19 The Com mittee in para 7.7 of t he original Report had observed that the 
National Handicapped Financ e and Dev elopment Corporat ion as well as the  
Ministry did not have any data of persons with 40% and above disability and whose 
annual income did not exceed Rs. 1 lakh in urban ar eas and Rs. 80,000 in rural 
areas. These persons were eligible to apply for loans from NHFDC. The reasons  
attributed for this by the Ministry were that collecting data on disabled population 
fulfilling the eligibility c riteria of NHFDC was  a huge ta sk and inv olved large scale 
survey of the population bot h in urban and rural areas  and the Corporation did not  
have the resources to carry out  such s urveys. The Committee were not s atisfied 
with the reply of the Ministry, as in the absence of data on the actual n umber of 
disabled people and out of th em how many were s elected as  benefic iaries, the 
Corporation would no t be able to fulfill t heir main objective. The Committee,  had  
therefore, strongly reco mmended that the Ministry/C orporation should c onduct 
survey to collect the data of eligible beneficiaries and herein they should seek the 
help of the 46 State Channe lising Agencies as these we re the field agenc ies who 
actually interact with the beneficiaries. By doing so NHFDC would be able to play a 
more effective role in the economic up liftment of the handic apped people in our 
country. Further, the Committee had des ired that data of people who were able to 
become economically self reliant, afte r having av ailed loans  from NHFDC b e 
collected as it would epitomize the success  of the Corporation in ameliorating the 
condition of the handicapped. 
 
 11

1.20 In their action taken note the Mini stry have stat ed that T he Ministr y/ 
Corporation do not have manpower and infrastructure facilities to conduct survey of 
beneficiaries who hav e become economically self-reliant after availing loan from 
the Corporation.    
 
1.21. The Committee regret to observe that  the reply of the Min istry is silent 
and they  have not responded  to the recommendation of the Committee to 
conduct survey  to collect the data of eligible persons amongst the 
handicapped.  It  reflects lack of con cern and commitment on the part of the 
Government tow ards the sacred goal of economic upliftment of the 
handicapped people in the co untry.  In the absen ce of such vital data, the 
Ministry w ould not be able to estim ate and take necessar y steps for  their 
upliftment.  The Ministry  have co ntended that neither they no r the 
Corporation have t he manpow er and in frastructure facilities to conduct  
survey of beneficiaries w ho became economically self-reliant after availing 
loan from the Corporation.  In the opinion of the Committee it should also not 
be difficult for the Ministry  / Corporat ion to contact the beneficiaries, once 
they have been given the regu lar loan, to gauge the extent of their upliftment 
on this account.   
The Com mittee, therefore, reiter ate their earlier recommen dation and 
urge the Ministry  / Corporation to make all out efforts to collect the data of 
eligible handicapped people as w ell as the persons w ho became 
economically self-reliant after having av ailed loan from NHFDC, so that the 
scheme could be evaluated and fu rther improvement, if needed, be  
incorporated.    
 
 12

 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAV E BE EN ACCE PTED B Y 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 1, Para No. 3.11) 
  
2.1 The Committee had noted with c oncern that the budgetary allocation under  
Plan  Schemes of the Ministry duri ng the years 2003-04 and 2004-05 had always  
been  revised downwards at RE stage by t he Department of Expenditu re, Ministry 
of Finance.  During the year 2003-04, a cut of Rs.120 crore was imposed, thereby  
bringing down the  BE from Rs.1370.00 crore to Rs.1250.00 cr ore at RE stage. 
Similarly during 2004-05, a cut of Rs.142 crore was imposed. The Committee were 
aware that the Revised Estimates are conv eyed by the Ministry of Finance on the 
basis of expenditure level  upto 3 September. The reason attributed for this cut at 
RE stage is slow pac ed utiliz ation of funds by the Mini stry during the first two 
quarters of the financial year.  The Minist ry had further stated that the slow paced 
utilization is due to non-subm ission of u tilization c ertificates as we ll a s lat e 
submission of fresh proposals by  States/UTs. The general trend witnessed is that 
UCs as well as fresh proposal s are submitted during the th ird or fourth quarter of 
the financial year. The Committee were not at all pleased with this situation as 
funds crucial for the s ocial and economic development of the Sc heduled Castes, - 
Backward Classes, Handicappe d and Elderly people are wit hheld in the process.  
The Committee, had therefor e, urged the Ministry to plan and incur their  
expenditure in a pha sed manner, so that it is evenly spread throughout the year . 
Further, the Committee had opined that all States/UTs may be regularly persuaded 
to furnish utiliz ation certificates of past utiliz ation on time, send the ir fres h 
proposals at the begi nning of t he financia l year and ensure that their Financ e 
Department releases funds to its Welfare Department immediately on receipt of the 
same from the Central out resorting to procedural delays. The progress achieved in 
this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 13

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 Quarterly plan expenditure inc urred in 2005-06 was in phas ed manner 
Rs.205.37 crore (13.40%) upto June 2005, Rs.794. 94 crore (51.83% ) upto 
September 2005, Rs.1014.34 cr ore (66.14%) upto December 2005, Rs.1595.33  
crore (104.%) upto March 2006.   This sh ows an improvement over the previous  
years.  This was duly  accepted by the Department of Expend iture because no cut  
was applied at the RE stage.  I nfact, an additional allocation of Rs.100.00 crore 
was provided. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 2, Para No.3.12) 
 
2.3 The Committee were perturbed to note that the expenditure under the hea d 
“Lump sum provision for North Eastern Region and Sik kim” always remains much 
lower then the allocation.  The Ministry  had informed the Committee that proposals  
from these State Gov ernments are generally re ceived in the third or fourth quarter 
of the financial year.  The Com mittee were alarmed to know t hat during the year  
2003-04, against the RE of Rs.57.50 crore, nil expenditure was witnessed, similarly 
in 2004-05, against RE of Rs.57.48 crore nil expend iture was  witnessed.  I n the 
present year, against RE of  Rs.70.03 crore an  amount of  Rs.40.85 crore  
(provisional) has been utilized.  The Committ ee took serious note of this sordid  
state of affairs and are of t he opinion that holding meeti ngs with Chief Secr etaries/ 
Welfare Secretaries is  not enough as it has  not brough t about the des ired result.  
The Committee, had therefore, strongly recommended that the Ministry should take 
up this matter urgently at t he Ministerial level to ensur e that the North Eastern 
States and Sikkim utilize the funds alloca ted for the developmental schemes in the 
region.  Further, the Committ ee strongly felt that there is a need to urge upon the 
Planning Commission to impress upon these States to a furnish UCs in time as  
 14

well as send fresh proposals at  the beginning of t he year, while it is finalizing the 
Annual Plans of these States. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 The advice of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 3, Para No.3.13) 
 
2.5 The Committee had expressed t heir conc ern over the fact that during the 
year 2004-05 an amount of  Rs.148.12 crore, under  various schemes, was 
surrendered by the Ministry. The Minist ry had stated that the surrender was  
necessitated due to non-receipt of adequate proposals from States/ UTs, as well as 
due to non-formulation of schemes. Further, the Ministry had informed that in case 
of Non-Governmental Organization (NGOs), inspection reports from States/ UTs 
are not received in time, thereby leadin g to delay in release of the second  
installment. Therefore the amount had bee n surrendered. The Committee were not  
satisfied with this reply. In the opinion of  the Committee, the Ministry can under no 
circumstance wash its hands off this aspect  so eas ily by passing the buc k to the  
States/ UTs. The Committee would like to remind the Ministry of its mandate, which 
is to work towards ameliorating the economic condition of the 
downtrodden/vulnerable classe s of our society, which would t hen lead to their 
social emancipation. The Committee, th erefore, had strongly recommended that  
the Ministry vigorous ly pursue with all St ate Governments/ UTs Administration to 
ensure timely submis sion of fres h proposals and UCs.  With regards to NGOs, the 
Committee desire that inspection reports fr om respective States / UTs be obtaine d 
on time. The Committee were of the opini on that the steps recommended by it  
would go a long way in ensuring fiscal disci pline by States/ UTs and the Ministry 
and thereby considerably reduce the surrender of funds. 
 15

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 The Ministry have writ ten to the Stat e Govts./ UTs for timely submission of  
fresh proposals and inspection reports for ti mely release of grants-in-aid to the 
grantee organizations.     
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 4, Para No.3.14) 
 
2.7 The Committee were not at all sati sfied with the reply put f orth by the 
Ministry that compliance with the provisio ns of the Fiscal Re sponsibility Budget  
Management (FRBM) Act, which stipulates t hat UCs are to be provided within 12 
months and funds may not be released to St ates/ UTs defaulting in submission of  
UCs and physical outcomes in quantifiable terms, is t he responsibility of the 
Ministry of Financ e who should motivate  all States/ UTs and  the role of the 
States/UTs is to comply with the provision of the Act.  The Comm ittee had felt that 
the Ministry was shirk ing its resp onsibility here and se ems to be passing th e buck 
to the Ministry of Finance on one hand a nd the States / UTs on the other hand.   
The Committee were of the firm view that non-compliance with the provision of the 
FRBM Act by the States/ UTS would ultima tely affect the budgetary allocations to 
the Ministry, as non -furnishing of utilizat ion certific ates of past allocation by  
States/UTs would result in the M inistry not releasing more funds to them and also 
in low utilization of funds sanctioned by th e Planning Commission to the Ministry.  
Thus, the funds crucial for the overall dev elopment of the vulnerable section of our 
society would be drastically r educed by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage.  The Co mmittee, therefore, had desired that the Ministry play 
a more pro-active role and vigorously pur sue this matter with all States/ UTs to 
comply wit h the prov ision of the FRBM  Act, and minimize ad ministrative an d 
 16

procedural delays in releasing funds.  The progress achieved in this regard may be 
conveyed to the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.7 The Ministry of Social Justic e and Empowerment has been implementing  
the provision of the F iscal Responsibility Budget Ma nagement (FRBM) Act, whic h 
stipulates that UCs are to be provided within 12 mont hs.  While calling for 
proposals from the States/ UT s, they are being request ed to send their complete 
proposals, which include uns pent balance available with them for the funds 
released during the previous year so as to enable the Ministry to release the funds 
to them in time.  They are also being requested to furnish quarterly progress report 
in respect of grants. A conf erence of the State Welfare Secretaries was held on 14 
& 15-9-2006 for the purpose. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 5, Para No.4.14) 
 
2.8 The Com mittee had noted with regret  that though the scheme of SCA to 
SCP is a Central Se ctor Scheme, wherein all the funding is borne by the Central 
Government, yet the actual utilization of funds by the States/UTs is very low.  In the 
year 2005-06, the Centre  released Rs. 38632.19 lakh, out of which only 
Rs.24004.50 lakh wer e utilize d which refle cts only 62% utilization.  Further, the  
Committee had noted that some States li ke Bihar, Goa, Jharkhand and Kerala  
have not been released any fund under the scheme during the last two years.  The 
Ministry had attributed this to the unsatis factory utilization of SCA funds by these  
States due to non-furnishing of utilization certificates on time.  The Committee were 
greatly disappointed at this stat e of affairs as it reflects a rather casual attitude o n 
the part of these Governments in thei r commitment and obligation towar ds the 
upliftment of the SC populati on in their respective St ates.  Keeping in view the 
 17

pivotal nat ure of this scheme towards the economic upliftment of the poor SC 
people, the Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry take up this  
matter in right earnest with the c oncerned State Governments at the highes t level 
to ensure that utilization ce rtificates are submitted timely and sm ooth flow o f SCA 
to SCP funds as well as full utilization of the sanctioned funds could be ensured. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.9 The matter regarding  utilization o f unspent balance of SCA funds  available 
with four States namely Bihar, J harkhand, Goa and Punjab was  taken up at the 
level of Hon’ble Minister vide lette r No.11014/6/2005-SCD-II dated 30.4.2006.  
Consequently, utilization Certificates from Bihar, Jharkhand a nd Punjab  were 
received and first insta llment of SCA for the y ear 2006-2007 has als o been  
released to Bihar and Jharkhand.   
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 8, Para No.4.17) 
 
2.10 The Committee had noted that there ar e 36955 villages across the country 
having 50% or more SC populat ion.  As per the guideli nes issued by the Ministry  
10% of total SCA r eleased to the States /UTs in a year shall be utilized for 
infrastructure develop ment programme s in villa ges having 5 0% on more SC 
population.  Howev er, the Ministry have no data available with them about the 
infrastructure development works carri ed out under this scheme.  The Committee 
had expressed their dismay at this callousness of the Ministry as it reflects a very  
casual approach towards the development of SC people.  Considering that 
infrastructure development of villages having 50% or more SC population is  of vital 
importance for the overall development of poor Scheduled Caste people in the 
country, the Committee had recommended t hat the requisit e data detailin g 
infrastructure development carried out of SCA funds in the 36955 villa ges having 
 18

50% or more SC population may be obtai ned at the earliest from the concerned 
States/UTs so that the success of the scheme could be assessed and future action  
plan for the development of these villages could be prepared.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.11 The earlier information about nu mber of villages hav ing 50% or more SC 
population excluded Tamilnadu, as the requisite information was not available. As  
per the updated information received from  the Planning Commission, there are 
44002 villages in the country having 50%  or more SC population. Village-wise 
information on infrastructure created is mainta ined at block level/district level by 
State Governments. However, the abov e recommendations hav e been brought to 
the notice of State Governments with the request to furnish necessary details. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 12, Para No.4.30) 
 
2.12 The Committee were dismayed to note that the s uccess rate witnesse d 
under this  scheme is not enc ouraging at all and this seriously worries the 
Committee about the overall qualitative as pect of this scheme. During 2005-06, 
11905 students availed the benefits of this scheme, out of which only 735 students 
were able to succeed in various examin ations. The pass percentage is about 
12.45%. The Committee did not endorse the view  of the Ministry that the present  
success rate of 12.45% is a healthy o ne keeping in mind the large number of 
eligible applicants. The Committee were of the opinion that the Ministry should gear 
up its act together and tighten the loose ends, which are pegging down the success 
rate of the scheme. The Committee therefore, had str ongly recommended that the 
Ministry should formulate a comprehensive guideline for institutions select ed for 
imparting coaching under this scheme and undertake periodic  review of these 
 19

institutes to ensure that they are really committed towards the course contents 
which is necessary to get success in the competitive examinations they sit for.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.13 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 13, Para No.4.31) 
 
2.14 The Committee had taken note of the recommendations of the Indian Social 
Institute, N ew Delhi, which during 2005 had conduc ted a study on Conc urrent 
Evaluation of this scheme. The Committee had desir ed that all the 
recommendations contained therein shou ld be implemented wit hout any further 
delay by t he Ministry, as in view of the Committee, this wo uld go a long way in  
increasing the over all succ ess rate of this schem e. The Committee stressed 
particular emphasis on those recommendat ions, which stres s for perennial 
coaching classes, separate scheme for each category of beneficiary and 
enhancing of the monthly stipend to Rs.2000/ - per month. Furt her, the Committee 
had recommended that the Ministry ensure t hat only those Government Institutes, 
which have the requisite infrastructures be selected for imparting coaching. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.15 The process of revising the Coaching and Allied scheme has been initiated. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 17, Para No.5.7) 
 20

 
2.16 The Committee were pleased to note t hat the Ministry envisaged to replace 
the present schemes of ‘pre and post ma tric scholarships for OBC students’ wit h 
an umbrella scheme of scholarship which is to be merit-based.  This will entitle all 
OBC students whos e annual family income is below the poverty line to avail 
benefits of this scheme till they become graduates.  The Committee had also noted 
that in its first years, the new sc heme will benefit 3159 student s, which would then 
go up to 7554 students in the fif th year.  Keeping in view the importance of the 
scheme in increasing the literacy rate of the backward populac e, the Committee 
had desired that the Ministry finalize and implement the proposed new scheme at  
the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.17 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.   
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 18, Para No.6.16) 
 
2.18 The Com mittee had noted that the Mi nistry of Minority Affairs has bee n 
created out by carving out the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on 29 th 
January, 2006 and the subjects relating to Mi nority Affairs have been transferred to 
the Ministry of Minority A ffairs vide notification dated 16 th February, 2006.   
However, the budgetary alloc ations are included in the Demands  for Grants of the 
Ministry of Social Just ice and Empowe rment and only a Non-Plan grant of Rs. 2 
crore for S ecretarial Expenditure has been made as  a new Demand No. 105 of  
Ministry of Minority Affairs.  The Committ ee, had therefore desired that the Ministry 
of Minority Affairs should pursue the Minist ry of Social Justice and Empowe rment 
to make available the Demands for Grants pertaining to minority Division, at the 
earliest so as to enable them to seek s upplementary grants for funding their entir e 
 21

schemes.  The Committee, had further not ed that the budgetary alloc ation under 
Minority Division has always been less. Cons idering that minorities constitute 18% 
of the total population of I ndia, the BE for 2006-07 unde r Plan scheme is a meager  
Rs. 16.47 crore consequent to t he increase in mandate after creation of t he new 
Ministry, the present allocation seems very  inadequate.  Therefore, the Committee 
had desir ed that the Ministry should vigorously pursue wit h the Planning 
Commission to provide more funds so that justice could be done to its mandate. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.19 The budgetary allocation of the Ministry which was earlier merged in th e 
Demand No. 88 of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has since been 
transferred in the Demand No.  105 of the Ministry by the first supplem entary 
Demand for Grants. An amount of Rs. 27.38 crores, which was already available in 
the Demand for Grants of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for 
programmes relating to Minorities has been tr ansferred to the Mi nistry of Mi nority 
Affairs through a technical supplementary gr ant.  In addition, Grant of Rs. 114.14 
crores has also been provi ded in the Budget Estimates of the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs through the first batch of supplem entaries.  Appropriate action is bein g 
taken for enhanced provision during 2007-08 and the XI th Plan.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 22

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE  GOVERNMENT. 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 9, Para No.4.18) 
 
3.1 The Com mittee noted that the S pecial Component Plan is an umbrella 
strategy to ensure flow of targeted fi nancial and phys ical benefits of Schedule d 
Castes.  At present 27 States/UTs, havin g sizeable SC population are availin g 
funds under the ‘Spec ial Central Assistance Scheme’ f rom the center.  The target 
groups here are SC people wh ose income is below the poverty line.  The scheme  
of SCA to SCP aims to provide economic assistance to enable them to raise their 
level of income and get over below the pov erty line figure.  The Committee further 
noted that the scheme of SCA to SCP is one wherein maximum allocation of funds 
is made by the Planning Commission.  Dur ing the cur rent year, the allocation was  
Rs. 407.36 crore.  The Committee, were  however, dismayed t o note that the 
Ministry have no data about the number of  beneficiar ies who ar e successful in 
becoming economically indepen dent after availing the benefi ts of this scheme.  It 
has simply been com mented that it is ex pected that assistanc e out of SCA would 
have helped the beneficiaries in increasing their productivity and income lev el.  In 
view of the Committee, this reflects very po orly and points to a very casual attitude 
on part of the government vis-a-vis its mandated of working for the upliftment of the 
poor SC people.  The Com mittee, therefore, str ongly recommended that the 
Ministry should obtain the data of people w ho were able to cros s the poverty lin e 
after having availed t he benefits of this scheme from all States/UT as it would 
reflect the real picture of success/failure of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 Special Central Assist ance to Special Component Plan is released to State 
Governments/UT Administration s as per laid down criter ia to cover beneficiaries 
 23

including women beneficiaries.   Stat es agenc ies maintain data for all the 
beneficiaries who had availed the benefits under  this programme in the last three  
years.  National Sample Survey  Organization (NSSO) conducted last survey in 
1999-2000 to ascertain number of beneficiaries including Scheduled cast es who 
had crossed the poverty line.  Conducting of  such surveys on an all India basis is a  
specialized task & can appropriately be done by NSSO.  Therefore, it would not be 
advisable and cost effective to conduct survey separately at the Corporation level. 
 
 [Ministry  of Social Justice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
3.2 The Ministry pursues with the State Govts./UTs to furnish the utilizatio n 
certificates on time.   The other re commendations of the Committee have als o 
been noted.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice & Empow erment O.M. No.1-1/2006 (PS)  
PERM Vol. IV dated 15th November 2006] 
 
 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 15, Para No.4.39) 
 
3.3 The Com mittee had noted wit h concer n that the Ministry have not been 
successful in introducing the scheme of ‘Assistance to SC students for pursuin g 
study in Residential Public Schools’ due t o non-finalization of t he scheme for the  
last three years, and thus no expenditure  could be incurred dur ing the last three 
years, resulting in s urrender of funds. The Committee were not at all satisfied with 
the replies  put forth by the Ministry, and feel that the Minist ry are not serious  
enough to the welfare of SC st udents. Keeping in view the pivotal role play ed by 
residential schools in the overall develop ment of SC students, the Committee had 
strongly urged the Ministry to finalise and implement the scheme at the e arliest as 
it would go a long  way in brining about  all r ound development of SC students an d 
prepare them for Post-School challenges. 
 24

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.4 EFC Memo for a new Scheme ‘Est ablishment of R esidential Schools for 
Scheduled Caste Boys and Girls’  has been circulated on 13 th July 2006 for  
comments.   
   
  [Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS) 
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (SL No.16, Para No.5.6) 
 
 
3.5 The Com mittee note with concern t hat under the scheme of Pre-matri c 
Scholarships to OBC Children, no physical targets are fixed.  The reason attributed 
for this by the Ministry is that since the census data of OB C students studying in 
schools is  not available with them, no physical targets could be fixed .  The 
Committee express their dis pleasure on t his kind of  reply of t he Ministry  as it 
concerns the education of OBCs students at primary and middl e school level in 
their delic ate and formative years.  Keepi ng in v iew the relative educational 
backwardness exhibited amongst the OBCs, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that this scheme if pr operly implemented, would incr ease the lit eracy rate of this 
section of our society.  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the  
Ministry should pursue the States/UTs, im plementing this scheme to expedite the 
 25

collection of the data of students availin g this scheme so that the physical targets  
could be fixed.  The Committee also des ire the Ministry to ensure that the drop out 
rate of students is kept under check till they reach the matric stage 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 Allocation under the schem e is  meager so it is not possible t o provid e 
scholarships to all sc hool going OBC popu lation.  F urther, education is  a State 
subject and Ministry of Human Resource Development have iss ued guidelines to 
take steps to reduce droupout rate among school going pop ulation.  Further, the 
size of school-going populat ion c hanges ev ery year.  T herefore, it would not be 
appropriate or cost effective to conduc t survey of OBC school going chilfen on 
regular basis. 
 
 [Ministry of Social Justice & Empow erment O.M. No.1-1/2006 (PS)  
PERM Voll.IV dated 15th November 2006] 
 
  
  
 26

 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REP LIES OF 
THE GOV ERNMENT HAV E NOT BEE N ACCE PTED AND HAV E BEE N 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER – I 
 
 Recommendation (SL. No.7, Para No.4.16) 
 
 4.1 The Committee were alarmed to  note that the number of women 
beneficiaries during 2005-06 has gone down al armingly to 55349 from 153500 in 
2004-05.  Further, there are States/UTs like Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Prad esh, Tripura and Wes t Bengal wherein 
the number of women beneficia ries are nil, while the  Ministry had stated t hat the 
percentage of women beneficiaries has been increasing every year and currently is 
pegged at 28.70%. Further, the Ministry hav e no record of women beneficiaries  
who after having availed the benefits of th is scheme were able to cross the figures  
of below the poverty line.  Keeping in view  that as per guidelines issued  by the 
Ministry, 15% of the total SCA r eleased to States/UTs shall be utilized exclusively 
on viable income generating economic development schemes/programmes for SC 
women, the Committee had st rongly reco mmended that the Ministry should 
impress upon all States/UTs to strictly adhere to the guidelines, so as to ensure the 
economic upliftment of the vulnerable section of SC women.  T he Committee had 
further recommended that the Ministry obtain data from all Stat es/UTs regarding 
women beneficiaries,  who after having ava iled the benefits of this scheme, wer e 
able to cr oss below the poverty line figure and have become econo mically 
independent during t he last th ree years, as in abse nce of suc h vital data, the 
success/ failure of this important scheme could not be ascertained. 
   
 
  
 
 27

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 The information on total beneficia ries and women beneficiaries  who had 
availed benefits under the sch eme are maintained by t he State Governments. As 
per the information received from various State Governments, the total number of 
beneficiaries declined from 611861 in 2004-05 to 548467 in 2005-06. Similarly the 
number of women beneficiaries  also declin ed marginally from 153500 to 139200  
during this  period. However, the share of  women in total beneficiaries inc reased 
from 25.08% in 2004-05 to 25.38% in  2005-06. The decline in number of 
beneficiaries during 2005-06 was primarily  due to lesser coverage reported by  
Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. It may al so be mentioned here that, among the 
major States, information about number of women beneficiaries during 2005-06 
has not yet been reported by State Governm ents of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Goa, J&K, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, M.P., Orissa, Punjab and West Bengal. The matter has been 
taken up with concerned State Governments asking them to furnish necessary  
information. The decline in coverage of benef iciaries during 2005-06 is also being  
taken up with the State Governments. 
 
The surveys for estimation of poverty ar e conducted b y National sample Survey  
Organization (NSSO). The last survey by NSSO was conducted in 1999-2000 to  
ascertain the number of beneficiaries including Scheduled Castes who had crossed 
the poverty line. Such spec ified surveys on all India ba sis is a specialized j ob and 
can appropriately be done by NSSO. Theref ore, it would not  be advis able to 
conduct survey at the Corporation level.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
 
 28

  
 Recommendation (SL No. 11, Para No.4.29) 
 
4.3 The Committee had noted with concern that the scheme of Coaching an d 
Allied Assistance for weaker s ections including SCs , OBCs and Minorities has  
been witnessing under utilization of sanctioned funds during the last three years of 
the Tenth Five Year Plan. The r easons attributed for this by the Ministry are non-
submission of Utilization Certificates by States as they have not been able to utilize 
the entire amount released to them by the Centre, as well as that during 2005-06, 
there was a proposal to transfer the scheme to the State Governments, though it  
was decided to retai n this scheme with the Central Government later on. The  
Committee, therefore, had desi red that the Ministry s hould vigorously pursue wit h 
the State Governments to fu rnish utilization certificates as well as fresh proposals  
on time, so that funds for the scheme could be released to the States  
uninterruptedly whic h would ult imately help the States/UTs to implement the 
scheme effectively and efficiently . The Committee had also em phasized the need 
to ensure that the Ministry should utilize the allocations proportionately to be able 
to escape cuts at RE st age of BE funds, which is  reso rted to regularly  by th e 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of  Finance ever y year due to slow pace d 
utilization of funds during the first two quarters of the Financial year.  
  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 The Ministry pursues with the State Govts./UTs to furnish the utilizatio n 
certificates on time. The other recommendat ions of the Committee have also bee n 
noted.   
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 29

 
 (Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (SL. No. 14, Para No.4.36) 
  
4.5 The Committee had noted with serious co ncern that the Ministry have not  
paid any heed to its recommendations cont ained in its  First and Seventh Reports 
on Demands for Grants of t he Ministry of Social Just ice and Empowerment (2004-
05), (2005-06) and express their disappoint ment and voice their  strong concern 
over the fact that the Ministry has not been able to finalize the proposed  
modifications in this scheme since 2004. The Committee had further noted that the 
actual utiliz ation of funds  under this scheme has been very poor during the last 
three years. The reason attributed for poor  response of the States/UTs for the  
present scheme is that some St ates/UTs are not implementi ng the scheme due to 
non-availability of resident ial schools in t hose States/UTs. The Committee also 
note that the proposed new scheme “Top Class Education for Scheduled Castes” 
has been c irculated to the Planning Commi ssion, Department of Expenditure an d 
the Ministry of Human Resourc es Develo pment for consideration. The Ministry  
have stated that the proposed new scheme would look into all such as pects. 
Keeping in view the future of t he SC students, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that the Ministry should make a ll its efforts to finalize the modalities  
relating to the new scheme of “Top Class Education for SCs”, with the concerned  
authorities at the earliest, so that the scheme can be implemented expeditiously . 
The progress achieved in this regard should be conveyed to the Committee. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.6 The EFC meeting for “Top Class Educ ation for SC students” had been held  
on 13.10.2006 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure).  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 30

 
 Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  
4.7 The Committee had noted with concern that under the scheme of Pre-matric 
Scholarships to OBC Children, no physical targets are fixed.  The reason attributed 
for this by the Ministry is that since the census data of OB C students studying in 
schools is  not available with them, no physical targets could be fixed.  The 
Committee had expressed their displeasure on this kind of reply of the Ministry as it 
concerns the education of OBCs students at primary and middl e school level in 
their delic ate and formative years.  Keepi ng in v iew the relative education al 
backwardness exhibited amongst the OB Cs, the Committee were of the firm 
opinion that this scheme if properly impl emented, would increase the literacy rate 
of this section of our society.  Therefore, the Co mmittee had strongly  
recommended that the Ministry should pur sue the St ates/UTs, implementing this 
scheme to expedite the collection of the data of students availing this scheme so 
that the physical targets could be fix ed.  The Committee had also desir ed the 
Ministry to ensure that the drop out rate of students is kept under check till they 
reach the matric stage.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 Allocation under the schem e is  meager so it is not possible t o provid e 
scholarships to all sc hool going OBC popu lation.  F urther, education is  a State 
subject and Ministry of Human Resource Development have iss ued guidelines to 
take steps to reduce dropout rate among sc hool going population. Further, the size 
of school- going population c hanges every year. Therefore, it would not be 
appropriate or cost effective to conduct survey of OBC school going childr en on 
regular basis. 
 
 31

 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 20, Para No.6.18) 
 
4.9 The Committee had noted that the survey of Wakf properties is an important 
pre-requisite to enable the Wakf Boards to  exercise power, control and supervision 
over the individual Wakf properties.  From the information furnished by the Ministry, 
the Committee had observed that the surv ey has  been completed in respect of 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharasht ra, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar Island and Lakshadweep.  Some of the States hav e 
not yet started the survey and in some case s the survey work of Wakf properties is 
very slow.  The Comm ittee felt that unless the Government have an authentic data 
of Wakf properties, they woul d not be able to c halk out a  proper plan f or their  
development.  The Committee, theref ore, had recommended that the State 
Governments be persuaded to complete su rvey work of urban Wakf properties 
expeditiously and the progress achieved in  this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.10 Survey of  Wakfs under the prov ision of the Wakf Act, 1995 is the 
responsibility of the State Governments.  The progr ess of survey in the  States 
depends on the priorities of the State Gove rnments and there is no provision in the 
Act for direct intervention of the Centra l Government.  The Central Government, 
however, has been persistently impressi ng upon the State Governments the nee d 
to complete survey works expeditiously.                                                                                             
 
 32

 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 21, Para No.6.19) 
 
4.11 “The Committee had noted wit h serious concern that out of 10863 Wakf  
properties which are under illegal poss ession/encroachment, during the last three 
years, the Ministry have no information r egarding the  restoration of these Wakf 
properties from illega l occupant s.  T he Committee viewed t he situatio n very 
seriously and recommended that an effect ive mechanism should be evolv ed to 
check encroachment of Wakf properties.  The Committee had also recommended 
that all the Wakf properties which hav e been illegally encroac hed, transferred, 
mortgaged, leased or sold should be retrie ved by taking legal ac tion against their 
occupants”.  
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.12 Section 32 of the Wakf Act 1995 pr ovides that the ge neral superintendence 
of all Wakfs in a State shall vest with the Board established or the State.  Action for 
removal of encroachment on wakf properties  is to be taken by  the State Wakf 
Board/ State Government in accordance with the provisions of Sections 54 & 55 of 
the Wakf Act 1995.   The actual progress, however, depends on the priorities of the 
State Government.  The Central Governm ent, on its part, has been pers istently 
impressing upon the St ate Governments to accord appr opriate   priority f or the 
work. 
  
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 33

 Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para 1.25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (SL. No. 22, Para No.7.7) 
 
4.13 The Committee had expressed t heir dismay that the Na tional Handicapped 
Finance and Development Corporation as well as the Ministry do not have any data 
of persons with 40% and abov e disabi lity and whos e annual income does not 
exceed Rs . 1 lakh in urban areas and Rs. 80,000 in rura l areas. These are the 
persons who are eligible to apply for loans from NHFDC. The reasons attributed for 
this by the Ministry are that collecti ng data on disabled population fulfilling the 
eligibility criteria of NHF DC is a huge task and involv es large scale survey of the 
population both in urban and rural areas and the Corporation does not have the 
resources to carry out such surveys. The Committee were not at all s atisfied with 
the reply of the Ministry, as in the absence of data on the actual number of disabled 
people and out to them how many were se lected as beneficiaries, the Corporation 
would not be able to fulfill its  main obj ective. The Committee, therefore, had  
strongly recommended that the Ministry/C orporation should conduct survey t o 
collect the data of eligible beneficiaries and herein they should seek the help of the 
46 State Channelis ing Agenc ies as these are the filed agencies who actually  
interact with the beneficiaries. By doing  so NHF DC would be able to play a more 
effective role in the ec onomic upliftment of the handicapped peopl e in our country. 
Further, the Committee had des ired that data of people w ho were able to become 
economically self reliant, after having avai led loans from NHFDC be collected as it 
would epitomize the success of the Corporat ion in ameliorating the condition of the 
handicapped. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.14 The Ministry/ Corporation do n ot have manpower and infrastructure facilities 
to conduct survey of beneficiaries  who have become economically self-reliant after 
availing loan from the Corporation.    
 34

[Ministry of Social Just ice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  PREM 
Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para 1.21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 35

 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REP LIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 Recommendation (SL.No.6, Para No.4.15) 
 
5.1 The Committee were concerned to note that during 2004-05 some States 
with sizable SC population have not al located funds for their SCP as  per 
percentage of their SC population namely; (Andhra Pradesh – SC population  
16.20%, SCP outlay 8.89%), Himachal Pradesh – SC population 24.70%, SCP 
outlay 8.28%, West Bengal – SC population 23.00%, SCP outlay 7.06 %, and 
Orissa – SC population 16.50% , SCP outla y 12.66% .  Keeping in view that the  
percentage of SC population is the criteria for allocation of funds by the Centre and 
State Governments, the Committee had expressed their dis may at this non-
adherence to the norms by these States, as  this deprives them of their rightful 
Central share of SCA funds.  The Committee, therefore, had desired that all the 
States/UTs be persuaded to allocate fund s for SCP in proportion to their SC 
population so that they could get the entitled share of SCA funds from the Centre. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 Attention of the State Government was drawn to the guideline issued by the 
Planning Commission.  As per the guidelin es, the State Governments are requir ed 
to formulate and implement Scheduled Cast es Sub-Plan (SCSP) as part of their 
Annual Plans by  earmarking resources at least in pr oportion to the share of  
Scheduled Castes in total popu lation of the State.  Acco rdingly a letter was sent 
vide d.o. No.16014/2005-SCD-II dated 1 st June 2006 by the Minister (SJ&E) to 17 
Chief Ministers of the State Govern ment, which are not  formulating an d 
 36

implementing SCSP as per the guidelines  of the Pl anning Commission. This is  
being followed up.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL No. 10, Para No.4.19) 
 
5.3 The Committee had noted with serious concern that 14 
Ministries/Department of the Government of India hav e not yet formulated Special 
Component Plan for Scheduled Castes, based on t he recommendations of the 
Central Standing Tripartite Committee set up  by the Planning Commission in 1999, 
till date. T he Committee in its 7 th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) had 
recommended that t he Ministry of Soc ial Justic e and Empowerment should 
persuade t hese Minis tries/department to st art formulating SCP for SCs an d ha d 
desired that the Planning Com mission be apprised of the same.  Despit e such 
recommendation, the Committee had express ed its displeasure that no progress 
has been achieved in this regard so far.  The Committee took a very serious view 
of this and had strongly reiterated their earlier recommendation made in this regard 
and further recommend that the Ministry should not vacillate in impressing upon the 
Planning Commission to play a more pro-active role by  directing the defaulting 14  
Ministries/Departments to formulate the Special Component Pl an for Sc heduled 
Castes in their Annual Plans. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 A meeting of Central Triparti te Committee has been held on 8 & 9 th 
November 2006 by the Planning Commission to discuss the issue.   
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 18, Para No.6.17) 
 37

 
5.5 The Committee had noted with s erious concern that an amount of Rs. 6.23  
crores is outstanding  to  the Central Wa kf Council from 11 Stat e Wakf Boards as  
on 31st March, 2005.  The Committee understood the significance of the Scheme of 
development of Urban Wakf properties, whose aim is to oversee the development  
of these Wakf properties, there by enabling them to be a viable entity, which would 
be financially sound.  The Committee were of  the view that unless the State Wakf 
Boards exercise better financial control an d clear their dues to the Central Wakf 
Board, no fresh loans would be sanctioned to them. Therefore, the Committee had 
strongly recommended that the Central W akf Counc il make concerted efforts to 
ensure that all State Wakf Boards repay their entire outstanding loans, without 
further delay and if need be, they can take  the h elp of the respective State 
Government.  The Committee felt that fiscal disc ipline would go a long way in 
making these Wakf Boards a viable entity  and thus oversee the development of 
Wakf Properties more effectively”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 The Central Wakf Council has  info rmed the Ministry that an amount of 
Rs.5.76 crores had become due against the loanee Mutawalis as on 31.03.2004, 
against which an amount of Rs .1.97 crores was recove red during the year 2004-
05. Therefore, an amount of Rs. 3.79 crores remained the balance to be recovered. 
Again an amount of Rs. 2. 44 c rores became due agains t the loanee mutawalis 
during the year 2004-05, making the total outstanding dues of Rs.6.23 crores as on 
31.03.05, against which an amount of Rs. One crore one lakh has been recovered 
during 2005-06.  
 
5.7 To ensure recovery, the following steps have been taken by CWC:- Loans  
are sanctioned by CWC under  a tripartite agreement   between CWC, loane e 
institutions and the State Wakf  Board, which in turn has to seek permission of the 
State Government under Sect ion 75 of the Wakf Act.  The State Wakf Board is , 
therefore, a Co-borrower. In case of persistent default, loanee institutions are 
 38

black-listed and debarred from further assistance in future. CWC pursues  
defaulting organiz ations both directly as  well as through the Stat e Wakf 
Board/State Government.  Legal notices ha ve also been served in a few cases on 
the State Wakf Boards, w ho are co-borrowers.  Consequent upon efforts of the 
CWC, there has been improved recovery.  The Andhra Pradesh Wakf Board has  
cleared all its dues during 2005-06.  Other defaulting States like Karnataka etc. are 
being pursued.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Ju stice an d Empow erment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 (PS)  
PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 Recommendation (SL. No. 23, Para No.7.8) 
 
5.8 The Committee were perturbed to not e that State Channelising Agencies of  
Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Madhya Prades h and Tripura have not been s anctioned 
funds from NHFDC during the last two y ears due to inadequate recovery of loans  
from them. The Committee had further noted that no funds from National 
Handicapped Financ e and Development Cor poration have been released to any  
State Channelising Agency wi thout Block Government Guarantee; howev er, the 
Union Territories have been exempted from  this. Further, the Committee had bee n 
informed that NHFDC issues quarterly demand notices i ndicating the principal an d 
interest due from the respective SCAs, re gular reminders are al so sent to SCAs 
and to the concerned State G overnments from repayment. The Committee had 
further noted that the main  impediment in recov ery of loans is inadequat e 
infrastructure of the SCAs to regularly visit the benefic iaries spread over a large 
area. Keeping in mind this important factor  and to ensure timely and fully recovery 
of loans, which would then enable these SCAs to get an uninterrupted flow of  
Central Funds, the Committee had desired that the Minist ry vigorously pursue this 
matter at the highest level with the Stat e Governments and impress up on them to 
help their SCAs in developing their infrastructure. 
 
 
 39

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.8 National Handicapped Fi nance and Development Cor poration is regularly  
pursuing with the State Channelising Agenc ies to ensure the full recovery of loan 
and utilization of fund released by NHFDC.  This issue has also been discussed in 
the meeting of State Welfare Secretaries held on 14 & 15th September 2006.  
  
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1-1/2006 
(PS) PREM Voll. IV dated 15th November, 2006 ] 
 
 
 
 
 
           New Delhi;                 SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
          27 April, 2007         C hairperson, 
          7 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
           Social Justice and          
 Empow erment. 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40

ANNEXURE - I  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 27TH APRIL, 2007. 
 
 
 The Com mittee met from 15.00 hrs. to  1550 hrs . in Com mittee Room ‘B’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  
1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
  
    MEMBERS 
    L OK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
4. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
5. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
6. Dr. R. Senthil 
7. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
9. Shri Silvius Condpan 
10. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
11. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
12. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.K. Saxena    - Director 
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  -   Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Contd2/------ 
 41

 
 
2. At the out set, Hon’ble Chairper son welc omed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee and appris ed them that  the sitting has  been convened to consider and adopt  
the following Draft Reports of the Committee: 
 
(i)   Twenty- third Report on Action taken by  the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Repor t on 
Demands For Grants (2006-07)  of the Ministry of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
 
(ii)  Twenty-fourth Report on Dem ands for Grants (2007-08) of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment     
 
(iii)  Twenty-fifth Report on Deman ds for Grants (2007-08 ) of the Ministry  
of Tribal Affairs.  
 
(iv)  Twenty sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry 
of Minority Affairs  
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the aforesaid   Reports of the 
Committee with minor modifications/amendments. 
  
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these draft Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 42

 43
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN TH E SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCI AL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   
          T o t a l      P e r c e n t a g e  
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations    23 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which  
have been accepted by the Government:  10        43.48% 
(Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 12, 13, 17  
and 18)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations wh ich    3        13.04% 
  the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Sl. No. 9, 15, and 18) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in      6        26.08% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I: 
  (Sl. Nos.  7,  11, 14, 20, 21  
and 22) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in    4        17.40% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Governments are interim in nature: 
(Sl. Nos. 6, 10, 19 and 23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 