   11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2005-2006) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF 
CHILDREN) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005.  
 
 
 
      ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
     
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
      
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
                 PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………..                
 
 
INTRODUCTION………………….. 
 
 
REPORT  …………………………….     
 
  
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE I Statement showing the status of notification of Rules by 
States/UTs under  ‘The Juvenile Justice  (Care and   
Protection of Children) Act, 2000.’………. 
 
 
ANNEXURE II  State-wise details of setting up of Juvenile  
Justice Boards and Child Welfare Committees 
by States/UTs….…. .. 
 
 
ANNEXURE III The Juvenile Justice(Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005…….. 
 
 
ANNEXURE IV Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on  27 
October, 2005…………  
 
 
ANNEXURE V Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on  
16 November, 2005…………  
 
 
ANNEXURE VI Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on  8 
December, 2005…………  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
   Statement of Recommendations/Observations Contained  
   in the Report -------------------- 

COMPOSITION 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2005-2006) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - CHAIRPERSON  
 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri M. Appadurai   
4. Shri Ashok Argal    
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
6. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad   
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal   
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
10. Shri Jual Oram    
11. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon   
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi   
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy  
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj   
15. Dr. R. Senthil    
16. Smt. Pratibha Singh   
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
18. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
19. Smt. Usha Verma    
20. Shri K. Yerrannaidu   
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
21. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
22. Shri Silvius Condpan 
23. Shri R.S. Gavai 
24. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
25. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
26. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
27. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
28. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
29. Shri Veer Singh  
 
 
 
            

 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         
 
  1.    Shri John Joseph    -            Secretary 
  2.    Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri R.K. Saxena   - Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri Bhupesh Kumar    - Under Secretary 
          5.   Km. M. Tunglut  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standi ng Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment having been authorised by the Committee to submit  
the Report on their behalf present t h i s    E l e v e n t h   R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Committee  on  ‘The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 29 August, 2005   and 
was referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 
30 August, 2005   under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express thei r thanks to the officials of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for tendering evidence 
before the Committee  and placing before them detailed written 
notes on the subject and for furnishing the information the 
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
4. The Committee considered the Bill at their sittings held on 27 
October and 16 November, 2005 and adopted  the Report at their 
sitting held on 8 December, 2005 and approved 
“The Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2005”. 
 
5. For  facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations  of the Committee have been  printed  in bold 
letters  in the body of the Report.  
 
 

 
      
New Delhi;      SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
 8 December, 2005    Chairperson, 
            17 Agrahayana, 1927(Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 

  
 
REPORT 
 
 
Background relating to “The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protec tion of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005.” 
 
 
1.1 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Prot ection of Children) Amendment Bill, 
2005 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2005 and referred by the 
Hon’ble Speaker to the Standing Committee on Social  Justice and 
Empowerment for examination and repor t.  The Bill seeks to amend ‘The 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of  Children) Act, 2000’ which came into 
force w.e.f. 1st April, 2001 throughout the country except in the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
 
1.2 The Ministry have stated that t he JJ Act was aimed at providing a 
juvenile justice system for juveniles in conflict with law and ch ildren in need of 
care and protection by adopting a child friendly approach in the adjudication 
and disposition of matters in the bes t interests of children and for their 
rehabilitation keeping in view the developmental needs of  the children.  Certain 
provisions of the JJ Act were challenged  before the High Court of Delhi in a 
public interest litigation ( Civil Writ Petition No. 3447  of 2001).  During the 
course of hearings, the High Court observed that some of the provisions of the 
Juvenile Justice Act merited re-consi deration.  Keeping in view these 
observations, the Ministry proposed to carry out amendments in sections 32, 
33, 56, 57 and 59 of the Juvenile Justice Act.    Accordingly, an amendment Bill 
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24. 7.2003.  Meanwhile, taking cognizance 
of the said Bill, the High Court of De lhi disposed of the above said Civil Writ 
Petition on 28.7.2003.  The Lok Sab ha referred the said Bill to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare for examination and 

report.  Before the Standing Committee submitted its report, the Lok Sabha was 
dissolved and the said Bill lapsed. 
 
1.3 Before re-introducing the amendment Bill, the Ministry thought it 
necessary to revisit the amendment proposal  again in the light of suggestions 
received by the Standing Committee from various child/legal experts.  Based 
upon those consultations, a more comprehensive amendment proposal 
involving several provisions includi ng those sought to be amended earlier has 
been formulated.   
 
Comparison between  JJ Bill, 2003 and JJ Bill, 2005: 
 
1.4 The provisions of the Bill in troduced earlier and corresponding changes 
proposed now are compared as under. 
 
(i) Clause (m) in Section 2 of the Act is  proposed to be omitted as in the 
earlier Bill. 
 
(ii) A time period of 24-hour has be en introduced in the Se ction 32 of the 
Act within which a child has to be produced before t he Child Welfare 
Committee.  This Amendment  is similar to the earlier Bill.  However, in 
the earlier Bill, the words “any police officer or special juvenile police 
unit” were replaced by words “any me mber of a special juvenile police 
unit”.  This change has been dispensed with in the present proposal as it 
was felt during the consultations that the interaction of the child and his 
coming into contact with police cannot be avoided. 
 
(iii) In Section 33 of the earlier Bill, the words “any police officer or special 
juvenile police unit” we re replaced by the words “any member of a 
special juvenile police unit”.  However, in the current amendment 
proposal, the words, “any police officer or special juvenile police unit or 

the designated police officer” have been sought to be removed as it was 
felt during the consultations that two agencies, namely, the police and 
the Child Welfare Committee should no t be inquiring about the child at 
the same time.  This was in addition to the reason that the inclusion of 
any police officer who is not trained and has no experience and 
expertise in child psychology shoul d not be associated in the inquiry 
process. 
 
(iv) The words “local authority” are sought to be removed in Section 56 and 
57 of the Act as in the earlier Bill. 
 
(v) The words “for maximum seven da ys” have been sought to be replaced 
by the words “for a period genera lly not exceeding seven days” in 
Section 59(2) of the Act as in the earlier Bill. 
 
Additional provisions introduced in the JJ Bill, 2005: 
 
1.5 The additional provisions sought to be amended are discussed below:  
 
(i) The words “through various institutions established under this 
enactment” are sought to be removed fr om the preamble as they limit 
rehabilitation to be undertaken under the Act through institutions while a 
non-institutional approach for rehabilitation is also feasible. 
 
(ii) An additional provision is sought to  be added in Section 1 to clarify that 
the Act shall apply to all cases involving detention or criminal 
prosecution of juveniles under any other law. 
 
(iii) A change is sought to be made in  Section 2(1) defining juvenile in 
conflict with law so as to make it more explicit and remove doubts that 
the relevant date for a person to be c onsidered as a juvenile is the date 

of alleged offence so as to decide applicability of the Act in particular 
cases.  In addition, with the same in tention of making it  more explicit 
regarding applicability of t he Act, an explanation has been sought to be 
provided after Section 20. 
 
(iv) An additional section 7A is so ught to be introduced laying down the 
procedure to be followed w hen claim of juvenility is raised before any 
court. 
 
(v) A proviso is sought to be added after Section 10(1) providing a juvenile 
in conflict with law to be produced before the Magistrate or a member of 
the Board within a period of twenty-four hours of his apprehension. 
 
(vi) A provision of a juvenile in conflic t with law to be given to the charge of a 
fit institution under Section 12 (1) is sought to be made as an additional 
alternative to detention in observati on homes considering difficulty in 
obtaining release on bail for such children. 
 
(vii) To provide for a maximum peri od of three years confinement of a 
juvenile in a special home under Sect ion 15(1)(g).  At present no upper 
limit has been laid do wn in the Act.  An addition al proviso is also sought 
to be added after section 16(2) clarif ying that period of detention shall 
not exceed the maximum sentence that could have been passed under 
Section 15. 
 
(viii) Under Section 21, in addition to  juvenile in conflict with law being 
covered for prohibition of publication of name etc, ch ildren in need of 
care and protection are also sought to be covered in a similar manner. 
 

(ix) In Section 39, the existing anomal y in the meaning of restoration and 
protection of a child as given in the explanation has been sought to be 
removed. 
 
(x) The words “through institutional and non-institutional methods” are 
sought to be removed and replaced by “through such mechanism as 
may be prescribed”.  Further, a prov ision is sought to be added for 
enabling childless parents to adopt a child and limit the same to citizens 
of India only under section 41 of the Act. 
 
(xi) The words “local authority” ar e sought to be removed from wherever 
they occur due to reasons stated in para 2 above.  In addition, a proviso 
and an explanation is sought to be adde d for review of the case of a 
juvenile undergoing such sentence, who has ceased to be so on or 
before the commencement of this Act, and appropriate order to be 
passed in the interest of such juvenile. 
 
(xii) A proviso is sought to be added in  Section 68 in order to ensure the 
applicability of model rules framed by  the Central Government to the 
States until rules in respect of t hat matter are framed by the State 
Governments.   
 

 
 
I. Clause 2 of the Bill (Amendment of Long Title of the JJ Act, 2000): 
  
1.6 Clause 2 of “The Juvenile Justic e (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005” seeks to amend t he Long Title of the JJ Act, 2000 by 
substituting the words “through various institutions established under this 
enactment” with the words “and for matters  connected therewith or incidental 
thereto”. 
  
1.7 Explaining the rationale for the pr oposed amendment, the Ministry have 
informed that the words “through various institutions established under this 
enactment” indicate that rehabilitation has to be undertaken under the JJ Act 
only through institutions established under the Act and there is no scope for a 
non-institutional approach for rehabilitation, which is not the case. 
 
1.8 During the course of evidence,  the Committee enquired about the 
meaning of institutional and non-instituti onal approach for the rehabilitation of 
orphaned, abandoned, neglected and abused  children.  The Secretary 
responded as under: 
 
“Non-institutional would mean, like foster care.  Foster care means when 
certain people are willing to taking children and keeping children with 
them as part of their family on payment of a certain amount for the 
upkeep of that child.  That is called fo ster care.  So the families have to 
be carefully selected.  They do not  want to permanently adopt children 
but they do not mind bringing up the chil d in the family for some time for 
the benefit of that child.  The child can be re stored if the child’s parents 
are there.  If the child’s parents are not there, he may go into an 
orphanage. But, they can be restored also .  Institutional means, it may 
either be an observation home or child ren’s home.  Observation home is 
for children in conflict with law.  Children’s home is for children in need of 
care and protection.  They can eit her be in these homes, which is 
institutional care or foster care, adoption or sponsorships.  Now, there 
are many schemes in t he private sector where one can sponsor a child.  

Basically, there is foster care, adoptions, sponsorships or any other idea 
which may come up which is non-institutional.” 
 
1.9 In a written reply furnished to t he Committee, the Ministry have further 
explained that the institutional approach involves lodging in various homes.  
The non-institutional approach includes foster care wher e a child is placed in 
the care of a family for a temporar y period.  The other  non-institutional 
alternatives are sponsorship where a child  can remain in his/her family but his 
expenditure for various needs like nutri tion, education, health care etc are 
sponsored by an individual or an organization.  Adoption is another form of non-
institutional approach where a child is placed in a family to which he does not 
belong and a permanent relationship is established. 
  
1.10 The Committee note that ‘The Juveni le Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Amendment Bill, 2005’ seeks to amend, among other things, the Long 
Title of the principal Act to create scope for a non-institutional approach for 
rehabilitation, which has not been provided  for in the Act.  The Ministry have 
informed that non-instituti onal approach would include foster care, adoptions, 
sponsorships etc.  The Committee expr ess apprehension that in case some 
unscrupulous or undesirable person happen to take cust ody of a child in need 
of care and protection and keep him in his foster care, he may abuse the child 
physically and emotionally fo r his unlawful gains.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that adequate provis ions should be made in the Act to safeguard and 
protect the interests of children kept under foster homes from being exploited 
and abused.  The Ministry may evolve gu idelines for placing a child under 
foster home so that extreme care is tak en in the selection of families and also 
for keeping a check by verifying from time to time, the welfare of the child kept 

under foster care.  The Committee al so urge the Ministry to undertake 
awareness generation programmes to encourage sponsoring children for 
adoption under various schemes in private sector. 
 
II. Clause 4 and 5 of the Bill (Deletio n of the words `local authority’):  
  
1.11 Section 2 clause(m) of the Act, whereby ‘local authority’ has been 
defined, has been omitted in clause 4 of th e Bill.  Similarly clause 5 of the Bill 
seeks to omit the words ‘local authority’, ‘or local authority’’ and ‘or the local 
authority’, wherever they occur throughout the principal Act.  The rationale put 
forth by the Ministry is that members of the ‘local authority’ may not necessarily 
be conversant with child psychology an d welfare and should not be given 
powers such as discharge or transfer a child in need of care and protection or a 
juvenile in conflict with law from one chil dren home/special home to another or 
from imprisonment to a special home or a fit institution as the case may be.  
Accordingly, the words ‘or the local authority’ have been s ought to be omitted 
from sections 56, 57, 61, 64, and 66 and  hence, section 2(m).   While it is 
recognized that role of ‘local authority’ is  important, we cannot ignore the fact 
that members of these bodies may not have sufficient knowledge about child 
welfare.  Such people may even get a juvenile discharged who may again get 
into the company of anti-social elements. 
 
1.12 When enquired whether  the local authority may be able to provide 
valuable suggestions and make better decision towards the welfare of the 
juvenile due to their knowledge of the child’s background, fa mily condition and 
local cultural values, the Ministry have stated that the deletion of ‘local authority’ 
has been carried out on the basis of the advice given by the then Attorney 
General of India after his assistance was sought by the Delhi High Court.  
According to the Attorney General, there is no minimum qualification prescribed 
in the case of members of the local aut hority as is the case with the members 

of the Juvenile Justice Boards or  the Child Welfare Committees where 
knowledge relating to child welfare and  child psychology is specifically 
mandated.  Besides, member s of the local authorit y may have generalized 
knowledge of a child’s background but not the particular knowledge about the 
circumstances of the case which t he JJB members may be possessing on the 
basis of their enquiry.  Further, Se ction 10(2) provides that the State 
Government may make rules consistent with Act to provide for persons through 
whom any juvenile in conflict with law may be produced before the JJB.  
Accordingly, as per Rule 22(7) of t he Model Rules, the Board shall order a 
probation officer to conduct a social investigation, reporting on the character 
and antecedents of the juvenile or child with a view to assessing the best 
possible mode for placement such as, with the family, an institution or 
otherwise permissible under the Act.  Hence,  when an institution of probation 
officer is provided under the Act for fi nding out the antecedents of the juvenile 
or the child, there may not be a necessity of local authority or its members to 
carry out the same responsibility. 
 
1.13 The Committee further pointed out that JJBs/CWCs have not yet been 
constituted in many States, and sought the rationale behind deletion of ‘local 
authority’ in Section 56 and 57 of the JJ Act pertaining to discharge and transfer 
of a juvenile from one children hom e or special home to another and even 
outside the State.  The Ministry have informed that the fact that Juvenile Justice 
Boards or Child Welfare Committees hav e not been constituted cannot be the 
reason for placing the same responsibility on the local bodies. The solution lies 
in immediate constitution of JJBs/CWCs  where they have not been set up.  
Besides, the local authorit y has generalized knowled ge whereas JJB will have 
specific knowledge of the case.  Mor eover, the basic res ponsibility and power 
of transferring a child or a juvenile lies with the State Government.  It cannot be 
expected of a local author ity of one State to approa ch a local authority of 
another State for the purpose.   The function can best be performed by a State 
Government.  

 
1.14 The Committee observe that clause 5 of  the Bill seeks to omit the words 
`local authority’, ‘or local authority’ and ‘or the local authority’ throughout the 
principal Act.  The rationale put forth by the Ministry is that members of the 
local authority may not necessarily be  conversant with child psychology and 
welfare.  The Committee do not fully  endorse the Ministry’s views that 
knowledge of a child’s background by memb ers of the local authority may be a 
generalized one with no particular kno wledge about the circ umstances of the 
case which the JJB members may be possessing on the basis of their enquiry 
and also there is no need for the local aut hority when an institution of probation 
officer is provided under the Act for fi nding out the antecedents of the juvenile 
or the child.  The Committee are of the opinion that the local authority can also 
provide valuable suggestions and make better coordination towards the welfare 
of the juvenile due to their vast expe rience, knowledge of child’s background, 
family conditions and local cultural val ues.  Thus, there is scope for the local 
authority to play an important role in exercising the powers and discharging the 
duties conferred under the Act in relation to  a juvenile in conflict with law and a 
juvenile in need of care and protection particularly in St ates/Districts where no 
JJBs/CWCs have been set up so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the words ‘local authority’ may be re tained in the Act so that the services, 
experience and wisdom of the members of lo cal authorities could be utilized for 
the betterment and welfare of juveniles in  conflict with law and children in need 
of care and protection. 
 

III. Clause 3, 6 and 19 of t he Bill (Incorporation of the term ‘in conflict with law’ 
after ‘ juvenile’):  
  
1.15 While examining the Ju venile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment su ggested to incorporate t he term ‘in conflict with 
law’ after `juvenile’ in Clauses 3, 6 and 19 of the Bill to make it more explicit. 
The matter was examined in detail by t he Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in consultation with the Mi nistry of Law and Justice.  Based 
upon the examination,  the Ministry have submi tted certain proposals for 
consideration as under:  
 
(i)  Clause 3 of the Bill:  Section 1(4) of the Bill states as under: 
 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to all cases 
involving detention, prosecution or sentence of imprisonment of 
juveniles under any such law.” 
 
1.16 The Committee had suggested to add the words ‘in conflict with law’ 
after `juvenile’ in the Bill as it would ma ke it more explicit.  The Ministry have 
stated that incorporation of the words `in conflict with law’ after the word 
`juveniles’ and before the words `under any such la w’ may, therefore, be 
considered.  However, they have pointed out that it would make the sentence 
unwieldy and awkward. 
 
(ii)    Clause 6 of the Bill: The Mini stry have informed that Clause 6 of the 
Bill proposes a new section outlinin g the procedure to be followed when claim 
of juvenility is raised before any cour t.  Whenever a juvenile is apprehended, 
the determination of juvenility becomes a basic issue to be decided for invoking 
the provisions of the Act.  In the Act, there was no provision to deal with this 
aspect.  The provision is intended for determination of age of such person as to 

whether he is a juvenile or a child and not the determi nation of the issue as to 
whether he is in conflict with law or in need of care and protection. 
 
(iii) Clause 19 of the Bill: Clause 19 of  the Bill seeks to amend Section 64 of 
the principal Act by inserting the following: 
 
“Provided that the State Government or as the case may be, the 
board may, for any adequate and special reason to be recorded in 
writing, review the case of a juvenile under going such sentences, 
who has ceased to be so on or before the commencement of this 
Act, and pass appropriate order in the interest of such juvenile.”  
 
1.17 The Ministry have stated that Clause 19 of the Bill makes an enabling 
provision for review of the case of a juvenile undergoing a sentence and who 
has ceased to be so on or before t he commencement of t he Act and pass an 
appropriate order in the interest of such juvenile. 
 
1.18 In regard to the suggestion of the Committee, the Ministry submitted that 
although the main provision and the prov iso have to be read together, the 
words `in conflict with law’ could be added after the words `juvenile’ and before 
the words `undergoing such sentence in the proviso.  However, they have 
pointed out that it would make the sentence unwieldy and awkward.  
 
1.19 During the course of evidence, H on’ble Chairperson s ought clarification 
on the reply of the Ministry that incorporation of the term `in conflict with law’ 
after `juvenile’ in Clauses  3, 6 and 19 of the Bill would make the sentence 
awkward. The Secretary clarified as under: 
 
“What we have meant is that it is aw kward in reading. That is all and we 
thought that perhaps the substantive meaning of the Clause will come 
out more clearly if we leave it as it is”. 
 
1.20 On being further asked whether the Ministry are agreeable to the 
addition, the Secretary  submitted that they agree to  the same. 

 
1.21 The Committee find that the te rm ‘juvenile’ has been used by the 
Ministry to denote both a juvenile ‘in c onflict with law’ and ‘in need of care and 
protection’ throughout the principal Act. The Committee feel that there is a need 
to be more explicit in the use of the term `juvenile’ in Clauses 3, 6 and 19 of the 
Bill corresponding to  Sect ion 1(4), Section 7A and Section 64 respectively as 
those Sections specifically pertain to a juvenile in conflict with law and not a 
juvenile who is in need of care and protection.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reply of the Ministry th at incorporation of the term ‘in conflict 
with law’ after ‘juvenile’ in Sections 1( 4), 7A and 64 would make the sentence 
unwieldy and awkward.   In their opinion, the terms and expressions used in the 
Act should be precise and clear cut with no ambiguity. The Committee, 
therefore, desire t hat the Ministry should incor porate the term ‘in conflict with 
law’ after ‘juvenile’ in Clauses 3, 6, and 19 of the Bill se eking to amend   
Sections  1, 7 and 64 of the principal Act respectively. 
  
 
 
IV. Clause 7 of the Bill (Provision for a juvenile not to be put in the lock-up or 
Jail with adult(s): 
 
 
1.22. In Clause 7 of the Bill, the fo llowing sub-section has  been proposed to 
be substituted for sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the principal Act. 
 
“(1) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is apprehended by 
police, he shall be placed under the charge of the special juvenile 
police unit or the designated police officer, who shall produce the 
juvenile before the Board without  any loss of time but within a 
period of twenty-four hours of his apprehension excluding the time 

necessary for the journey, from t he place where the juvenile was 
apprehended, to the Board.” 
 
 
1.23 The Committee observe that Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-
section (1) of section 10 of the principal Act stating that `as soon as a juvenile 
in conflict with law is apprehended by the police, he shall be placed under the 
charge of the special juvenile police unit  or the designated police officer, who 
shall produce the juvenile before the Board within twenty-four hours of his 
apprehension excluding the time necessa ry for the journey’. The Committee 
view that a juvenile who is apprehended by  the police is likely to be put in a 
police lock-up or Jail along with other  adults before being produced to the 
Juvenile Justice Board. The Committ ee desire that adequat e safeguards may 
be provided to prevent such incidents from happening and urge the Ministry 
should insert a proviso after sub-section(1) of section 10 of the Amendment Bill 
stating that “At no point of time will a ju venile in conflict with law be placed in a 
lock-up or Jail with adult(s)”. 
 
V. Clause 12 of the Bill (Penalty fo r publication of the name, address or 
school or any other particulars of a juvenile in need of care and 
protection involved in any proceeding under the Act): 
 
1.24 Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to substi tute section 21 of the principal Act 
with the following : 
“21(1) No report in any newsp aper, magazine, news-sheet or 
visual media of any inquiry regarding a juvenile in conflict with law 
or a child in need of care and protection under this Act shall 
disclose the name, addr ess or school or any  other particulars 
calculated to lead to the identifica tion of the juvenile or child nor 
shall any picture of any such juvenile or child be published: 
 

Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the 
authority holding the inquiry may permit such disclosure, if 
in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the 
juvenile or the child. 
 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provision of sub-section 
(1), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one thousand 
rupees.” 
  
 
1.25 The Committee note that section 21 of the principal Act has been 
proposed to be substituted with a new section to cover, in addition to juveniles 
in conflict with law, those juveniles in n eed of care and protection involved in 
any proceeding under the Act for prohi bition of publication of their names, 
addresses or schools or any other particulars etc.  The Committee, however, 
find that the penalty of one thousand  rupees imposed under the Act for 
contravening the above provision is woefully inadequate to deter a person from 
committing such an act.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
penalty may be raised to twenty-five thousand rupees. The money so 
recovered may be utilized for the welfare of  the juvenile or the child under the 
supervision of the concerned Competent Authority. 
 
 
VI. Clause 20 of the Bill (Applicability of model rules framed by the Central 
Government): 
 
1.26 Section 68(1) of  the principal Act states as under: 
 
“The State Government may, by notif ication in the official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.” 
 

1.27 The following proviso has been pr oposed to be inserted after sub–
section(1) above:- 
 
“Provided that the Central Governm ent may, frame model rules in 
respect of all or any of the matt ers with respect to  which the State 
Government may make rules under th is section, and where any such 
model rules have been framed in res pect of any such matter, they 
shall apply to the State until the rule s in respect of that matter is 
made by the State Government and wh ile making any such rules, so 
far as is practicable, they conform to such model rules.” 
  
1.28 The rationale put forth by the Minist ry is that the addition is to give 
statutory status and to ensure applicability of Mode l Rules framed by the 
Central Government to States/UTs who have not made their own Rules till the 
rules are framed in this regard by the respective States/UTs.  
 
1.29 The Ministry have furnished a St atement indicating the State-wise 
position of framing of rules under t he JJ Act  as shown in Annexure I.  It has 
been observed that rules are under process for notification in the States/UT  of 
Goa, Punjab, Jharkhand and Lakshadweep while information in this regard has 
not been received from Kerala, Arunac hal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Nagaland and Assam. 
 
1.30 The Committee enquired whether a definite time frame can be 
prescribed for States to  frame their own rules under the Act wherein the 
Ministry have stated that as a temporary measure, model rules framed by the 
Central Government under the amended JJ Act shall apply to States / UTs who 
have not notified their rules.  The adminis tration of the Act is the responsibility 
of the State Government and the role of the Central Government is only 
persuasive.  
 
1.31 The Committee note that the Minist ry have sought to insert a proviso 
after sub–section(1) of Section 68 of the principal Act to give statutory status 

and ensure applicability of Model Rules fr amed by the Central Government to 
States/UTs who have not made their own rules till the rules are framed by the 
respective States/UTs.  The Ministry have also informed that no information has 
been received from the States of Kera la, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Nagaland and Assam regarding notificati on of the rules 
while in Goa, Punjab, Jharkhand and Laks hadweep, it is under process. The 
Committee are, therefore, of  the firm view that the th rust should be on framing 
of rules by States/UTs under the Act at  the earliest i.e. at least within six 
months to one year from the date when th e Act came into force for effective 
implementation of the Act and ensuring that  speedy   justice is rendered to the 
juvenile. The Committee, therefore, urge th e Ministry to prescribe definite time-
frame for States/UTs to fr ame rules under the Act and make all out efforts to 
persuade the States/UTs to frame ru les and notify the same within the 
prescribed time- frame.    
 
 
VII. Amendment of Sectio n 2(d) of the JJ Act, 2000 to include begging 
children under the definition of ‘children in need of care and protection’. 
 
1.32 The Committee observed that child beggars, especially those who have 
been forced to beg by anti-social elem ents and who constitute the largest 
segment of neglected children have not been mentioned under the definition of 
‘children in need of care and protection’ in Section 2(d) of the principal Act. 
 
1.33 When asked to state the steps bei ng taken to bring child beggars under 
the purview of the JJ Act through incorporat ion of the same  under section 2(d)  
of the Act, the Ministry have informed t hat child beggars, especially those who 

have been forced to beg by anti-social el ements do require care and protection 
and they are already covered under section 2(d) (i) and (viii) of the Act. 
 
1.34 The Committee note the reply of t he Ministry that child beggars are 
already covered under Section 2(d)(i) and (viii) of the JJ Act, 2000 where a 
child in need of care and protection has been defined.  The Committee also 
note that although a child w ho is found without any home or settled place or 
abode and without any ost ensible means of subsistence and who is being or is 
likely to be abused for unconscionable gain s are included under Section 2(d)(i) 
and (viii), yet child beggars have not been specifically mentioned.  Keeping in 
view the fact that child beggars consti tute the largest segment of neglected 
children in the country, the Committee desire that they  should be specifically 
mentioned under the definition of ‘children in need of care and protection’ in the 
Act.  Steps may, therefor e, be taken to insert the words ‘child beggars’ in 
Section 2(d)(i) or (viii) or a new proviso may be inserted in Section 2(d) of the  
Act. 
 
VIII. Constitution of Juvenile Ju stice Boards(JJBs)/Child Welfare 
Committees(CWCs). 
 
1.35 The Committee observe that Se ction 4 and 29 of the JJ Act, 2000 
provides for constitution of JJBs/CW Cs respectively and enquired about the 
number of States which have so far cons tituted the same in their respective 
States/Districts.  The Ministry have informed that as per the information 
available with them, 203 JJBs and 239 CW Cs have been constituted.  The 
State-wise details of JJBs/CWCs as fu rnished by the Ministry are annexed 
(Annexure II). The Act provides that the State Government may constitute for a 

district or a group of dist ricts, one or more JJBs/CWCs .  Hence, a JJB/CWC in 
one district may be catering to a group of districts. 
 
1.36 Asked whether undue delay has taken place in the constitution of JJBs/ 
CWCs in the States and if so, the reasons and the steps taken to constitute the 
JJBs/CWCs expeditiously, the Committ ee have been informed that since the 
coming into effect of the JJ Act, 2000 w.e.f. 1.4.2001, the Ministry have been 
continuously impressing upon the State Governments regarding the need for its 
speedy implementation and especially the constitution of JJBs and CWCs.  
Letters at various levels have been written regularly for this purpose.  The 
speed of the response of the State has vari ed.  While most of  the States have 
constituted these bodies, the process in  some of the States is yet to be 
completed. 
 
1.37 The Committee further enquired whether  a provision can be incorporated 
in the Bill to make it mandatory for all the States to set up JJBs/CWCs within a 
definite time-frame wherein the Ministry  have stated that keeping in view the 
federal set up under the Constitution, it  may not be desirable to make it 
mandatory for the States to set up such Boards within a definite time frame. 
 
1.38 The Committee feel that the num ber of JJBs/CWCs constituted so far 
i.e., 203 JJBs and 239 CWCs are inadequat e to cater to those juveniles in 
conflict with law and in need of care and protection.  The Committee also 
express concern over the undue delay in constitution of JJBs/CWCs as 
States/UT like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, 
Punjab and Delhi are still in the process of  constituting the JJBs/CWCs in all or 
in some districts, even after five year s since the Act came into force.  The 
Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to make it mandatory for 

the States to constitute  these Boards/Committees expeditiously and urge the 
Ministry to prescribe a definite time-frame in the Act for the same.   
 
IX. Establishment of Observation Home  / Special Home for a juvenile in 
conflict with law and Children’s Home / Shelter Home for a juvenile in 
need of care and protection. 
 
1.39 Section 8 of the JJ Act, 2000 provides  for establishment of observation 
homes for the temporary reception of any juvenile in conflict with law during the 
pendency of any inquiry regarding them under the Ac t.  Section 9 provides for 
establishment of special homes for their reception and rehabilitation.  
 
1.40 Accordingly, Section 34 of the Act provides for setting up of children’s 
homes for the reception of a child in need of care and pr otection during the 
pendency of any inquiry and subsequently for their care, treatment, education, 
training, development and r ehabilitation while Section 37 states that the State 
Government may recognize, reputed and capable voluntary organizations and 
provide them assistance to set up and administer as many shelter homes for 
juveniles or children as may be required. 
 
1.41 On being asked whether observation homes/special homes have been 
established in all the States/Districts, the Ministry have stated  that they have 
not received complete information from  the State Governments regarding 
observation homes/special homes established in the States across the country.  
It is the responsibility of the State Governments to set up these homes as per 
requirement.  
 
1.42 The Committee further enquired w hether the observation homes/special 
homes are provided with all facilities to cater to the ju veniles in conflict with law 
wherein they    have been informed that many of the observation/special homes 
lack in facilities for juveniles in conflict with law such as sanitation and 

recreation facilities.  The State Governments have been requested to send 
proposals for assistance under the Sche me, “A Programme for Juvenile 
Justice” for upgradation of these facilities and for which funds can be provided 
by the Ministry.  
 
1.43 The Ministry have also stated, in reply to a query whet her all the States 
are having adequate number of children’s home that complete information has 
not been received from the State Go vernments regarding the number of 
children homes in various States across the country.  It is the responsibility of 
the State Governments to set up these homes as per r equirement.  There is no 
central norm regarding the adequacy of these homes. 
 
1.44 As regards appointment of Inspecti on Committees for children’s home 
under Section 35 of the Act, the Committee have been informed that as per the 
latest information received, Karnatak a, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Mizoram 
and Delhi have constituted Inspection Committees. 
 
1.45 The Committee also enquired about  the number of ‘Shelter homes’ 
functioning State-wise wherein the Mi nistry have informed that complete 
information has not been received from the State Governments regarding 
shelter homes established in the Stat es across the country.  It is the 
responsibility of the St ate Governments to set up these homes as per 
requirement.  However, the Ministry is  implementing a schem e “An integrated 
programme for street children” under wh ich a total of 105 projects were 
assisted during 2004-05 through NGOs. 
 
1.46 The Committee note with concern that complete information is not 
available with the Ministry regarding t he number of observation homes/special 
homes for juveniles in conflict with law and children’s homes/shelter homes for 
juveniles in need of care and protection,  set up by the States/UTs across the 

country.  Only five States viz, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Mizoram 
and Delhi have constituted Inspection Commi ttees for inspecting the Children’s 
homes.  The Committee further note that though the Act provides for facilities 
and various types of services in the special homes/shelter homes, many of 
these homes are lacking in basic facilities like sanitation and recreation 
facilities.  The Ministry have laid the onus for setting up and managing the 
homes on the State Governm ents.  The Committee are, however, of the view 
that monitoring of the implementation of  the Act is the responsibility of the 
Central Government and hence, the Ministry  should ensure that the provisions 
of the Act are implemented effectively.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to identify the States/UTs/Dis tricts where observation homes/special 
homes and children’s homes/shelter hom es have not yet been established and 
make all out efforts to persuade those States/UTs to set up such homes with 
proper facilities at the earliest.  The Ministry may also pursue all the States/UTs 
to constitute Inspection Committees for the Children’s homes and ensure that 
inspection of the homes are carried out periodically. 
 
1.47 The Committee further note that the Ministry is implementing the scheme 
of ‘A programme for Juvenile Justice’ for upgradation of facilities provided in 
observation homes/special homes with 50% central assistance to the States.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should create awareness 
and generate wide pub licity about the scheme so t hat States/UTs may come 
forward with adequate proposals and the observation homes/special homes are 

equipped with proper facilities  to render services to a juvenile in conflict with 
law. 
  
X. Procedure for adoption. 
 
1.48 The Committee observe that Secti on 41(4) of the JJ Act provides for 
children’s homes or the State Government  run institutions for orphans to be 
recognized as adoption agencies both for scrutiny and placement of such 
children for adoption. 
 
1.49 Asked to state why other licensed and recognized adoption agencies, 
which account for large number of adopt ions in the country have been kept 
outside the purview of the Act, the Ministry  have stated that Section 41 (4) of 
the Act refers to homes which have been set up or recognized under the Act 
and empowered to place children for adopt ion.  The Act does not bar any other 
adoption agency from undertaking activity relating to adoption.  The factual 
position is that State Go vernments license adoption agencies to place children 
in adoption within the country and these licensed agencies can also place 
children in adoption within the country.  As regards inter-country adoption, the 
concerned agencies have to be recognized by CARA. 
 
1.50 When enquired whether there are commercial rackets running in some 
of the States involving buying and selling of young children for adoption and the 
protective measures adopted by the Gove rnment to protect the children from 
such rackets, the Ministry have informed that they, as well as CARA have been 
writing to State Governments for taki ng preventive measures and the need for 
maintaining strict vigil against such activities. 
 
1.51 The Committee wanted to know  whether any mechanism has been 
evolved to ensure that the NGOs, wh ich manage the shelter homes, will not 

use the child for illegal purposes or unscrupulous gain and will produce the 
child before the Child  Welfare Committee within the stipulated period.  They 
have been informed that the State Governments prescribe inspection of NGOs 
for continuation of grants and are respons ible for ensuring that the homes are 
run properly.  The State Governments are also responsible for ensuring that the 
children are being produced before the Child Welfare Committee within the 
stipulated period.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.52 The Committee express their apprehens ion that NGOs, who are actively 
involved in managing the shelter homes may engage in unscrupulous activities 
for unlawful gain like buying and selli ng young children for adoption.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that adequate safeguards should be incorporated 
in the Act or in the M odel Rules framed thereunder to  prevent the NGOs from 
indulging in such activities.  The Commi ttee also urge the Ministry to persuade 
the States/UTs to maintain strict vigil over the activities of the NGOs; ensure 
that the homes are run properly and impose penalty on the NGOs if a child 
lodged under their care is not produc ed before the Child Welfare Committee 
within the stipulated time.    
 

 
New Delhi;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
8 December, 2005                 Chairperson, 
17 Agrahayana, 1927(Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 

ANNEXURE I 
 
 
THE STATES/UTs WHO HAVE NOTIFIED THE RULES IN RESPECT OF THEIR    
STATES/UTs UNDER THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF 
CHILDREN) ACT, 2000 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the States/UTs Rules notified on 
1 Andhra Pradesh Rules notified on 8.5.2003 
2 Bihar  Rules notified on 1.9.2003 
3 Chhatisgarh Rules notified 
4 Gujarat  Rules notified on 31.12.2003 
5. Haryana  Rules notified on 11.10.2002 
6 Himachal Pradesh Rules notified on 4.5.2002 
7 Karnataka  Rules notified on 26.9.2002 
8 Madhya Pradesh  Rules notified on 15.7.2003 
9 Maharashtra  Rules notified on 30.8.2002 
10 Manipur  Rules notified 
11 Mizoram Rules notified on 1.8.2003 
12 Meghalaya  Rules notified on 8.12.2004 
13 Pondicherry  Rules notified on 22.3.2002 
14 Rajasthan  Rules notified on 23.7.2002 
15 Sikkim  Rules notified on 13.3.2003 
16 Tamil Nadu Rules notified on 14.2.2002 
17 Tripura  Rules notified on 23.3.2002 
18 Uttar Pradesh Rules notified on 31.3.2004 
19 West Bengal Rules notified in 2003 
20 Andaman & Nicobar Islands Rules notified on 7.10.2002 
21  Chandigarh Rules notified on 15.3.2002 
22 Daman & Diu Model Rules have been 
adopted 
23 NCT of Delhi Rules notified on 19.8.2002 
24 Dadra & Nagar Haveli Rules notified on 5.4.2002 
25 Orissa Rules notified 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
THE STATES/UTs WHERE RULES ARE UNDER PROCESS FOR 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
Sl. No Name of the States/UTs Present status 
1 Goa  Rules under process for notification 
2 Punjab  Rules under process for notification 
3 Jharkhand Rules under process for notification  
4 Lakshadeep  There is no problem relating to 
juveniles in the territory.  However, 
they have earmarked a room in 
Working Women’s hostel at Kavaratti 
to accommodate such cases if 
required. 
 
 
 
THE STATES/UTs FROM WHERE NO INFORMATION HAS BEEN RECEIVED 
REGARDING NOTIFICATION OF THE RULES 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the States/UTs Present status 
1 Kerala  No information 
2 Arunachal Pradesh No information 
3 Uttaranchal  No information 
4 Jammu & Kashmir No information 
5 Nagaland  No information 
6 Assam  No information 
 
 

         A N N E X U R E  I I 
 
State-wise details of setting up of Juvenile Justice Boards and Child Welfare 
Committees  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UTs 
No. of the JJ Board with name of 
District  
No. of CWC with name of Districts 
1 Andhra Pradesh JJBs constituted for all Homes CWCs constituted for all Homes 
2 Bihar  Proposal for constitution of 9 JJBs 
– one in each Divisional Hqrs. Is 
under process 
Constitution of a CWC at Patna is 
under process 
3. Chattishgarh 9 JJB have been constituted in r/o 
of all 16 districts of the state 
7 CWCs have been constituted in r/o 
of all 16 districts 
4 Goa  JJB constituted for entire state CWC constituted for entire state 
5 Gujarat JJBs constituted in each district CWCs constituted in each district 
6 Haryana  4 JJBs constituted at Ambala, 
Sonipat, Gurgaon and Hissar 
19 CWCs constituted in each district 
under the Chairmanship of Dy. 
Commissioner 
7 Himachal Pradesh 2JJBs constituted at Shimla and 
Una 
Proposal is under consideration 
8 Karnataka  5 JJBs constituted at Bangalore, 
Mysore, Shimoga, Dharwad and 
Gulbarg covering all 27 districts of 
the state 
27 CWCs constituted in each district 
9 Kerala  14 Juvenile Courts set up in the 
state 
14 CWCs set up in the state 
10 Madhya Pradesh Under processing  Under processing 
11 Maharastra 30 JJBs constituted 37 CWCs constituted 
12 Manipur  1 JJB constituted 1 CWC constituted 
13 Mizoram JJB constituted 5 CWCs at Aizawl, Champhai, 
Kolasib, Serchhip and Mamit 
14 Meghalaya  7 JJBs constituted  7 CWC constituted 
15 Pondicherry  JJB constituted CWC constituted 
16 Punjab  Under consideration of High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana 
CWCs at Gurdaspur, Patiala, Ropar, 
Jalandhar and Bhatinda 
17 Rajasthan JJBs constituted in 9 districts and 
remaining districts have been 
attached to these Boards. 
CWCs constituted in 9 districts and 
remaining districts have been 
attached to these Boards 
18 Sikkim  1 JJB constituted  1 CWC constituted 
19 Tamil Nadu  8 JJBs constituted  18 CWC constituted 
20 Tripura  JJB constituted  Proposal is under processing 
21 Uttar Pradesh JJBs constituted in 25 districts and 
action underway for constitution of 
CWC in remaining districts 
CWCs constituted in 12 districts and 
action underway for constitution of 
CWC in remaining districts 
22 West Bengal 2 JJBs constituted for all the 
districts in the State 
5 CWCs constituted for all the 
districts in the State 
 
23 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
1 JJB constituted both Andaman 
and Nicobar  
1 CWC constituted both Andaman 
and Nicobar 

24 Chandigarh JJB constituted  CWC constituted 
25 Daman & Diu  Action initiated for constitution of 
JJB 
CWC will be formulated soon 
26 Delhi  1 JJB constituted and proposal for 
constitution of 1 more Board is 
under consideration 
3 CWCs constituted and proposal for 
constitution of 2 more committee is 
under consideration 
27 Lakshadweep  There is no problem relating to 
juveniles in the territory.  However, 
they have earmarked a room in 
Working Women’s Hostel at 
Kavarati to accommodate such 
cases, if required 
- 
28 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
1 JJB constituted 1 CWC constituted 
29 Orissa  28 JJB constituted and 2 JJBs are 
under construction 
30 CWC constituted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                          
ANNEXURE III                  
 
 
Introduced in Lok Sabha on 29.8.2005 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 124 of 2005. 
 
 
 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005. 
 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. 
 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fi fty-sixth Year of the Republic   
of India as follows:- 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called th e Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2005. Short title. 
 56 of 2000. 2. In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, Amendment 
 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long of long title. 
 T itle, for the words “through various institutions established under 
this enactment”, the words “and fo r matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto” shall be substituted. 
3.   In section 1 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “and commence- of section 1 
ment”, the words “commencement and application” shall be 
substituted; 

(ii) after sub-section (3), th e following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to all cases involving de tention, prosecution or sentence 
of imprisonment of juveniles under any such law.” 
  
Amendment 4. In section 2 of the principal Act,-  
of section 2. 
  (i) for clause (I), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
  
  ‘(I) “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who is 
alleged to have committed an offence and has not completed 
eighteenth year of age as on the date of commission of such 
offence;’, 5 
 
 ( ii) clause (m) shall be omitted. 
 
Omission of  5. Throughout the principal Act, the words “local  
Certain authority”, “or local authority”  and “or the local authority”, 
wherever they  
Expressions. occur, shall be omitted. 
 
Insertion of  6. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following  
new section 7A. section shall be inserted, namely:- 10 
 
Procedure to be         “7A (I) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised  
followed when  before any court or a court is of the opinion that an  
claim of juvenile is  accused person produced before it was a juvenile on the  
raised before any  date of commission of the offence, the court shall make  
court. an inquiry,  take such evidence as may be necessary (but not an 
affidavit) so as to determine the age of such person, and shall 
record a finding whether the person  is a juvenile or a child or 
not, stating his age as nearly as may be: 15 
 
       Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any 
court and it shall be recognized at  any stage even after disposal 
of the case in terms of the provi sions contained in this Act and 
the rules made thereunder. 
 
       (2) If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date of 
commission of the offence, it shall forward the juvenile to the 
Board.” 20 
 
Amendment of 7.       In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the  

        Section 10. following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
 “(1) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is apprehended 
by police, he shall be placed under the charge of the special 
juvenile police unit or the designated police officer, who 
shall produce the juvenile before the Board without any loss 
of time but within a period of twenty-four hours of his 
apprehension excluding the time necessary for the journey, 
from the place where the juvenile was apprehended, to the 
Board.” 
 
 
Amendment of 
Section 12  8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after 
the words, “with or without surety”, the words “or placed under the 
care of any fit institution” shall be inserted. 
 
 Amendment  9. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I),  
Of section 15       for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted,  
        namely:- 
     
    “(g) make an order di recting the juvenile to be  
sent to a special home for a peri od of three years or until he 
ceases to be a juvenile, whichever is later: 
 
 Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied that 
having regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances 
of the case it is expedient so to do, for reasons to be recorded, 
reduce the period of stay to such period as it thinks fit.” 
 
Amendment 
Of section 16           10. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),       
  for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
        Substituted, namely:- 
 
   “Provided that the period of detention so ordered shall  
   not exceed in any case the maximum period provided  
   under section 15.” 
 
Amendment           11. In section 20 of the principal Act, the following 
Of section 20      shall be inserted, namely:-  
 
“Provided that the Board may, for any adequate and special 
reason to be mentioned in the or der, review the case and pass 
appropriate order in the interest of such juvenile. 
 

Explanation.- In all pending cases in respec t of a juvenile in 
conflict with law, in any court, the determination of juvenility 
of such a juvenile shall be in te rms of clause (l) of section 2, 
even if the juvenile ceases to be  so on or before the date of 
commencement of this Act and the provisions of this Act 
shall apply as if the said provisions had been in force, for all 
purposes and at all material tim es when the alleged offence 
was committed.” 
 
12.     For section 21 of the principal Act, the following Substitution of 
section shall be substituted, namely:- new section for 
 section 21. 
          “21. (I) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visual  
          media of any inquiry regarding a juvenile in conflict with law or a child Prohibition of 
          in need of care and protection under this Act shall disclose the 
name,      publication of 
          address or school or any other particulars calculated to lead to the  name, etc., of  
          identification of the juvenile or child nor shall any picture of any 
such juvenile or child 
          juvenile or child be published: in need of care 
 and protection 
  involved 
 any proceeding  
 under the Act. 
          Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the 
authority holding the inquiry may permit such disclosure, if in its 
opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the juvenile or the 
child. 
 
           (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (I), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.” 
 
13. In section 32 of the principal Act,- amendment of 
 section 32. 
      (a) in sub-section(I), the following proviso shall be inserted at 
the end, namely:- 
            
        “Provided that the ch ild shall be produced before the 
Committee without any loss of time but within a period of twenty-
four hours excluding the time necessary for the journey.” 
 
     (b) in sub-section(2), the words “to the police and” shall be 
omitted. 
 
14.  In section 33 of the principal Act,- Amendment 

 of section 33. 
      (a) in sub-section(1), th e words, “or any police officer or 
special juvenile police unit or the designated police officer” shall 
be omitted; 
 
      (b) for sub-section(3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
              “(3) After the completion of the inquiry, if, the Committee 
is of the opinion that the said child has no family or ostensible 
support or is in continued need of care and protection, it may allow 
the child to remain in the children’s home or shelter home till 
suitable rehabilitation is found for him or till he atta ins the age of 
eighteen years.” 
 
15. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the 
following  Amendment 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely:- of section 39. 
 
       'Explanation.- For the purposes of this section “restoration of 
and protection of a child” means restoration to- 
 
(a) parents; 
(b) adopted parents; 
(c) foster parents; 
(d) guardian; 
(e) fit person; or 
(f) fit institution.’ 
 
         16. In section 41 of the principal Act,- Amendment  
      of section 41. 
               (i) for sub-sec tion(2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, 
        namely:- 
“(2) Adoption shall be resorted to through such mechanism as                                                        
may be prescribed for the rehabi litation of the children who are 
orphaned, abandoned, neglected and abused.” 
 
            (ii) for sub-secti on(6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
             “(6) The Board may allow a child to be given in adoption- 
  
(a) to a single parent; 
(b) to parents to adopt a child of same sex irrespective of 
the number of living biological sons or daughters; or 
(c) to childless parents.”, 
  

 (iii) after sub-section (6), th e following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely- 
 “(7) No adoption under this sect ion shall be allowed unless the 
child and the parents are the citizens of India.” 
 
Substitution of 17. For section 57 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be 
new section for   substituted, namely:- 
section 57. 
 
Transfer     “57. The State Govern ment may direct any child or the 
juvenile to  
between children’s be transferred from  any children’s home or special home 
within the  
homes, under the  State to any other chil dren’s home, special home or institution 
of  
Act, and juvenile like nature with the prior intimation to the Committee or the 
Board, 
Homes of like nature as the case may be, and such order shall be deemed to be 
operative  
within the State. for the competent author ity of the area to which the child or the 
juvenile is sent.” 
 
Amendment of  18. In sectio n 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section(2), for the 
Section 59. words “for maximum seve n days”, the words “for a period 
generally not exceeding seven days” shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of  19. In section 64 of the principal Act, the following shall be 
inserted, 
Section 64. namely:- 
               “provided that the State Government or as the case 
may be, the Board may, for any adequate and special reason to 
be recorded in writing, review the case of a juvenile 
undergoing such sentence, who has ceased to be so on or 
before the commencement of th is Act, and pass appropriate 
order in the interest of such juvenile. 
 
       Explanation- In all cases where a juvenile in conflict with 
law is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment at any stage on 
the date of commencement of th is Act, his case including the 
issue of juvenility, shall be deemed to be decided in terms of 
the provisions contained in th is Act and the rules made 
thereunder, irrespective of the fact that he ceases to be juvenile 
on or before such date and accordingly he shall be sent to the 
special home or a fit institution, as the case may be, for the 
remainder of the period of the sentence.” 

 
Amendment of  20. In sectio n 68 of the principal Act,- 
Section 68.  
       (a) in sub-section(1) , the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
             “Provided that the Central Government may, frame 
model rules in respect of all or any of the matters with respect 
to which the State Government may make rules under this 
section, and where any such mode l rules have been framed in 
respect of any such matter, they  shall apply to the State until 
the rules in respect of that matter is made by the State 
Government and while making any such rules, so far as is 
practicable, they conform to such model rules.” 
   
       (b) in sub-section(2), after clause (xii), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
        “(xiia) rehabilitation mechanism to be resorted to in 
adoption under sub-section (2) of section 41;” 
 
       (c) sub-section (3) sha ll be renumbered as sub-section (4) 
thereof, as before sub-section (4) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted namely:- 
 
         “(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessi ons, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive 
session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule sha ll thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modifi cation or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done 
under that rule.” 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
             The Juvenile Justi ce (Care and Protection of  Children) Act, 2000 
(the Juvenile Justice Act) was brought into force on 1 st April, 2001.  The 

Juvenile Justice Act was aimed at pr oviding a juvenile justice system for 
juveniles in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection 
by adopting a child friendly approach in the adjudicati on and disposition 
of matters in the best interests of children and for their rehabilitation 
keeping in view the developmental needs of the children. 
            
            2. In a public interest litigation (Civil Writ Petition No. 3447 of 
2001) certain provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act were challenged 
before the High Court of Delhi.  Du ring the course of hearings, the High 
Court observed that some of the provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act 
merited re-consideration.  Keeping in  view these observations, it was 
proposed to carry out amendments in  sections 32, 33, 56, 57 and 59 of the 
Juvenile Justice Act.  Accordingly, an amendment Bill was introduced in 
the Lok Sabha on 24.7.2003.  Meanwhile, taking cognizance of the said 
Bill, the High Court of Delhi disposed of the above said Civil Writ 
Petition on 28.7.2003.  The Lok Sabha referred the said Bill to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committ ee on Labour and Welfare for 
examination and report.  Before the Standing Committee submitted its 
report to the Lok Sabha, the Lok Sa bha was dissolved and the said Bill 
lapsed. 
 
           3. Thereafter, before re-introducing a fresh amendment Bill the 
Government considered it necessary to revisit the amendment proposals 
again along with other suggestions received by the Standing Committee 
from various experts. In the process,  further consultations were held and 
suggestions/views of all concerned were obtained.  Based upon these 
consultations, it is proposed to make amendments in other provisions of 
the Juvenile Justice Act in addition to those contained in the earlier Bill.  
Modifications proposed in the Bill, inter alia, intend- 
  
(i) to modify the long title of the Juvenile Justice Act so as to 
convey a wider scope of rehabilitation of child in need of care 
and protection or a juvenile in conflict with law under the Act 
through not only institutional but also non-i nstitutional 
approach; 
(ii) to clarify that the Juvenile Just ice Act shall apply to all cases 
involving detention or criminal prosecution of juveniles under 
any other law; 
(iii) to remove doubts regarding the relevant date in determining 
the juvenility of a person and applicability of the Juvenile 
Justice Act; 
(iv) exclusion of the local authority from the provisions 
authorizing them to discharge or  transfer a child in need of 
care and protection or a juvenile from the children’s home or 
special home or for sending a juvenile in conflict with law 

undergoing imprisonment, to  a special home or a fit 
institution; 
(v) to have a procedure laid down where claim of juvenility is 
raised before any court; 
(vi) to have a minimum period of twenty-four hours, excluding the 
time necessary for the journey from the place where the 
juvenile in conflict with law was apprehended, within which 
he should be produced before  the Board and a similar 
provision with regard to production of a child before the Child 
Welfare Committee; 
(vii) to provide for alternatives to detention in the observation 
home to achieve the intention of the Juvenile Justice Act; 
(viii) to do away with the association of any police officer from the 
inquiry process, for the child in need of care and protection as 
the work is assigned to the Child Welfare Committee and to 
cover other cases where the child can remain in 
children/shelter home after completion of enquiry; 
(ix) to extend the scope of adoption of  a child to childless parents 
and to limit the same under the Juvenile Justice Act to citizens 
of India only; 
(x) to provide for a flexible period of leave that may be given to 
child on special occasions like examination, marriage of 
relatives, death of kith and kin or accident or serious illness of 
parent or any emergency of the like nature; 
(xi)  to ensure the applicability  of model rules framed by the 
Central Government in the Stat es/Union territories who have 
not made their own rules, till the rules are framed in this 
regard by the respective States/Union territories. 
 
4. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
 
MEIRA KUMAR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd August, 2005. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
      Under clause 20 of the Bi ll the Central Government may frame 
model rules in respect of all or an y of the matters with respect to 
which the State Government may make rules under the provision of 
section 68 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2000.  The model rules framed by the Central Government shall 
apply to the States until the rules in  this regard are made by them and 
while making such rules, so far as is practicable, they will conform to 
such model rules.  The made rules sh all be required to be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 
 
      Clause 16 (i) authorizes th e State Government to frame rules to 
provide for rehabilitation mechanis m to be resorted to in adoption 
under sub-section (2) of section 41 of the said Act. 
 
        The matters with respect to which the said rules may be made 
are matters of procedure or admi nistrative detail and it may not be 
possible to provide for them in the amendment Bill itself. 
 
        In context of the circumstances as explained above, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE 
AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2000 
(56 OF 2000) 
*                               *                                          *                                   
*    
    
   An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to juveniles in 
conflict with law and children in need of care and protection, by 
providing for proper care, protection and treatment by catering to 
their development needs, and by adopting a child-friendly approach 
in the adjudication and disposition of  matters in the best interest of 
children and for their ultimate rehabilitation through various 
institutions established under this enactment. 
 
*                               *                                        *                                    
* 
CHAPTER I 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called th e Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of   short title, extent 
Children) Act, 2000. and  
 commencement. 
     (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
    
     (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
 
*                                  *                                     *                                       
* 
 
      (l) “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who is alleged 
to have committed an offence;  
 
      (m) “local authority” means Panchayats at the village and Zila 
Parishad at the district level a nd shall also include a Municipal 
Committee or Corporation or a Cantonment Board or such other body 
legally entitle to function as local authority by  the Government;                     
 

*                                  *                                        *                                       
* 
 
10. (1) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is apprehended by 
police, Apprehension 
he shall be placed under the charge of the special juvenile police unit 
or  of juvenile in 
the designated police officer who shall immediately report the matter conflict with law. 
to a member of the Board. 
 
    *                                         *                                    *                                   *  
 
    12. (1) When any person accused of a bailable or non-bailable offence, and  Bail of Juvenile 
apparently a juvenile, is arrested or  detained or appears or is brought 
before    a Board, such person shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law 
for the time being in force, be releas ed on bail with or  without surety 
but he shall not be so released if  there appear r easonable grounds for 
believing that the release is likely to bring him into association with 
any known criminal or expose him to  moral, physical or psychological 
danger or that his release would defeat the ends of justice.  
 
*                                             *                                          *                            
* 
 
15. (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a juvenile has 
committed  Order that may 
an offence, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
any be passed  
  other law for the time being in force, the Board may, if it thinks so fit,- regarding 
 juvenile. 
 
(a) allow the juvenile to go home after advice or admonition 
following appropriate inquiry ag ainst and counselling to the 
parent or the guardian and the juvenile; 
(b) direct the juvenile to particip ate in group counseling and similar 
activities; 
(c) order the juvenile to perform community service; 
(d) order the parent of the juvenile or the juvenile himself to pay a 
fine, if he is over fourteen years of age and earns money; 
(e) direct the juvenile to be re leased on probation of good conduct 
and placed under the care of an y parent, guardia n or other fit 
person, on such parent, guardian or other fit pe rson executing a 
bond, with or without surety, as the Board may require, for the 
good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period not 
exceeding three years; 

(f) direct the juvenile to be re leased on probation of good conduct 
and placed under the care of any fit institution for the good 
behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period not 
exceeding three years; 
(g) make an order directing the juve nile to be sent to a special 
home,- 
 
(i) in the case of juvenile, over seventeen years but less than 
eighteen years of age for a period of not less than two years; 
 
(ii) in case of any other juvenile for the period until he ceases to be a 
juvenile: 
 
    Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied that having regard to the 
nature of the offence and the circumstances of the case it is expedient so 
to do, for reasons to be recorded, reduce the period of stay to such period 
as it thinks fit. 
 
*                                          *                                         *                                   
* 
 
   (2) On receipt of a report from a Board under sub-section (1), the State 
Government may make such arrangement in respect of the juvenile as it 
deems proper and may order such j uvenile to be kept under protective 
custody at such place and on such conditions as it thinks fit: 
 
     Provided that the period of detention so ordered shall not exceed the 
maximum period of imprisonment to which the juvenile could have been 
sentenced for the offence committed. 
 
*                                         *                                          *                                   
* 
 
Special          20. Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this Act, all proceedings  
provision in in respect of a juvenile pendi ng in any court in a ny area on the date on 
which 
respect of  this Act comes into force in that  area, shall be continued in that court as 
if this 
pending cases. Act had not been passed and if  the court finds that the juvenile has 
committed an offence, it shall record such finding and instead of passing 
any sentence in respect of the juvenile, forward the juvenile to the Board 
which shall pass orders in respect of that juvenile in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act as if it had been satisfied on inquiry under this Act 
that a juvenile has committed the offence.  
 

Prohibition of      21. (1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visual 
media 
publication of  of any inquiry regarding a j uvenile in conflict with  law under this Act 
shall  
name, etc., of  disclose the name, address or school or any other particulars calculated 
to lead  
juvenile  to the identification of the j uvenile nor shall any picture of any such 
juvenile 
involved in  be published: 
any proceeding 
under the Act. 
       Provided that for reasons to  be recorded in writing the authority 
holding the inquiry may permit such di sclosure, if in its opinion such 
disclosure is in the interest of the juvenile. 
  
        (2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall 
be punishable with fine, which may extend one thousand rupees. 
 
 *                                          *                                  *                                  
*        
 
   32. (1) Any child in need of care and protection may be produced 
before  Production 
 the Committee by one of the following persons- before  
  Committee. 
(i)  any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a 
designated police officer; 
(ii) any public servant; 
(iii) childline, a registered vol untary organization or by 
such other voluntary organization or an agency as 
may be recognized by the State Government; 
(iv) any social worker or a public spirited citizen 
authorized by the State Government; or 
(v) by the child himself. 
 
           (2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this 
Act to provide for the manner of maki ng the report to the police and to 
the Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to 
children’s home pending the inquiry. 
 
         33. (1) On receipt of a report under section 32, the Committee or 
any  Inquiry 
police officer or special juvenile police unit or the designated police 
officer shall hold an inquiry in  the prescribed manner and the 
Committee, on its own or on the report from any person or agency as 
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 32, may pass an order to send the 

child to the children’s home for sp eedy inquiry by a social worker or 
child welfare officer. 
 
*                                         *                                 *                                   *    
 (3) After the completion of the inquiry if the Committee is of the 
opinion that the said child has no fam ily or ostensible support, it may 
allow the child to remain in the children’s home or shelter home till 
suitable rehabilitation is found for hi m or till he attains the age of 
eighteen years. 
 
          (39) (1) Restoration of and protection to a child shall be the prime Restoration. 
objective of any children’s home or the shelter home. 
 
          (2) The children’s home or a shelter home, as the case may be, 
shall take such steps as are considered necessary for the restoration of 
and protection to a child deprived of his family environment temporarily 
or permanently where such child is  under the care and protection of a 
children’s home or a shelter home, as the case may be. 
 
            (3) The Committee shall have the powers to restore any child in 
need of care and protection to his parent, guardian, fit person or fit 
institution, as the case may be, and give them suitable directions. 
 
               Explanation.-For the purposes of this section “restoration of 
child” means restoration to- 
(a) parents; 
(b) adopted parents; Adoption 
(c) foster parents. 
*                                         *                                  *                                           
* 
   
      41. (1)* 
           (2) Adoption shall be re sorted to for the rehabilitation of such 
children as are orphaned, abandoned, neglected and abused through 
institutional and non-institutional methods. 
 
*                                        *                                            *                              
*  
 
     
            (6) The Board may allow a child to be given in adoption- 
(a) to a single parent, and 
(b) to parents to adopt a child  of same sex irrespective 
of the number of living biological sons or 
daughters. 
 

                         *                                       *                                           *                                 
*   
 
Power of      56. The Competent au thority or the local authority may, 
notwithstanding 
competent  anything contained in this Act, at any time, order a child in need of care 
and  
authority to  protection or a juvenile in conflict with law to be discharged or transferred 
from  
discharge  one children’s home or specia l home to another, as the case may be 
keeping 
and transfer  in view the best  interest of the child or the juvenile, and his natural place 
of 
juvenile  stay, either absolutely or on su ch conditions as it may think fit to impose: 
or child. 
     Provided that the total period of stay of the juvenile or the child in a 
children’s home or a special home or a fit institution or under a fit 
person shall not be increased by such transfer. 
 
Transfer   57. The State Government or the lo cal authority may direct any child or 
the  
between juvenile to be transferred from  any children’s home or special home 
outside 
children’s  the State to any other children’s home, special home or institution of a 
like  
homes’ under nature with the prior intimation to the local Committee or the Board, as 
the  
that Act, and case may be, and such order shall be  deemed to be operative for the 
competent 
juvenile  authority of the area to which the child or the juvenile is sent. 
homes, of  
like nature  *                                               *                                       *                               * 
in different 
parts of India.  
 
Release and  59. (1) 
absence of   (2) The competent authority may also permit leave of absence to any 
juvenile 
juvenile or the child, to allow him, on special occasions like examination, 
marriage of 
or child on relatives, death if  kith and kin or th e accident or serious illness of parent 
or 
placement. any emergency of like nature, to go on leave under supervision, for 
maximum seven days, excluding the time taken in journey. 
 
 *                                   *                                          *                                      
* 

Juvenile in    64. In any area which th is Act is brought into force, the State 
Government 
conflict with  or the local authority may dire ct that a juvenile in conflict with law who 
is 
law under-  undergoing any sentence of impr isonment at the commencement of this 
Act, 
going  shall, in lieu of undergoing such sentence, be sent to a special home or 
be kept 
sentence at in fit institution in such ma nner as the State Government or the local 
authority 
commence- thinks fit for the remainder of the period of the sentence; and the 
provisions of 
of this Act.  this Act shall apply to the juvenile as if he ha d been ordered by the 
Board to be sent to such special home  or institution or, as the case may 
be, ordered to be kept under protective care under sub- section (2) of 
section 16 of this Act.  
 
 *                                  *                                  *                                         * 
 
Power to    68.(1) The State Governme nt may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, 
make rules.  make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
          (2) In particular, and w ithout prejudice to th e generality of the 
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-     
 
 *                                      *                                *                                         
* 
  
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE IV 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMI TTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 27TH OCTOBER, 2005 
 
 
 The Committee met from 11.00 hrs. to 12.30 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - Chairperson 
 
     M E M B E R S 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Ashok Argal 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
6. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
7. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
8. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
9. Dr. R. Senthil 
10. Smt. Usha Verma 
11. Shri K. Yerrannaidu  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Smt  Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Shri.  Silvius Condpan 
14. Shri. R.S. Gavai 
15. Shri. Abdul Wahab Peevee 
16. Shri. Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
17. Shri. Ram Narayan Sahu 
18. Shri. Tarlochan Singh 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena    Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
  
 1. Smt. Sarita Prasad   Secretary, M/o SJE 
 2. Dr. Sundeep Khanna Additi onal Secretary, M/o SJE 
 3. Shri. P.N. Murthy  Joint Secretary, M/o SJE 
 4. Shri. J.S. Kochar  Director, M/o SJE  
5. Dr. Sanjay Singh  Joint Se cretary and L.C., M/o Law &    
Justice 
  
 
 
 At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson we lcomed the Members and witnesses to 
the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justic e and Empowerment on “The Ju venile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2005.” 
 
2. Thereafter she apprised the Members that a Bill to am end the Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 was introduced earlier in Lok Sabha on 
24th July, 2003 and had been referred to t he erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour 
and Welfare for examination and report.  The Committee had then invited suggestions 
from interested groups/individuals concerned with the welfare of Juveniles.  The 
suggestions received were sent to Ministry  of Social Justice and Empowerment for 
comments.  The Chairperson then asked whether those suggestions have been 
incorporated in the Bill or not. 
 
3. Hon’ble Chairperson also  enquired from the Secretar y the steps  being taken 
by them to define ‘Ch ildren in need of care  and protection’ in a precise manner and 
also whether the begging child ren who are in need of care  too, may be brought under 
the purview of the JJ Act. 

 
4. She expressed concern over the dela y in constitution of Juvenile Justice 
Boards by all the States and desired that the Boards should be constituted in all the 
States expeditiously.  She further enquir ed as to why other licensed and recognized 
adoption agencies have not been brought under t he purview of the JJ Act keeping in 
view the fact that they account for large number of adoptions in the country. 
 
5. The Secretary then responded to the queries put forward by the Hon’ble 
Chairperson and other members of the Committee. 
 
6. Hon’ble Chairpers on then thanked the officials of t he Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment and the Ministry of Law and Justice for giving valuable information 
to the Committee and expressing their views in a candid manner.  
 
7. A Verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE V 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 2005. 
 
  
 The Committee met from 11.00 hrs. to 12.10 hrs in Committee Room  No. 
‘139’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 1. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - Chairperson 
 
     M E M B E R S 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri.  M. Appadurai 
3. Shri.  Ashok Argal 
4. Shri.  Eknath M. Gakiwad 
5. Shri.  Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6. Shri.  Rupchand Murmu 
7. Shri.  Rameshwar Oraon 
8. Shri.  Asaduddin Owaisi 
9. Shri.  Daroga Prasad Saroj 
10. Smt.  Pratibha Singh 
11. Shri.  Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
12. Smt.  Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Shri.  Silvius Condpan 
14. Shri.  Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri. Tarlochan Singh 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri.  A.K. Singh  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri.  R.K. Sax ena  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri.  Bhupesh Kumar Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
  
 1. Smt. Sarita Prasad   Secretary, M/o SJE 
 2. Dr.  Sundeep Khanna Additi onal Secretary, M/o SJE 
 3. Shri.  P.N. Murthy  Joint Secretary, M/o SJE 
 4. Shri.  J.S. Kochar  Director, M/o SJE  
5. Dr.  Sanjay Singh  Joint Secretary and L.C., M/o Law &    
Justice 
  
            
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairper son welcomed the Members and 
witnesses to the sitting of the Committee convened to have oral 
evidence of the representat ives of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment on “The Juvenile Just ice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Amendment Bill, 2005.” 
 
2. Hon’ble Chairperson asked the Secret ary to clarify ‘institutional’ and ‘non-
institutional’ approach for the rehabilitation of the orphaned, abandoned, neglected 
and abused children.  She also  enquired about the number of States / Districts which 
have so far constituted Juvenile Justice Boards / Child Welfare Committees as well as 
the number of States / Districts where the same were not functioning and also whether 
all the States have framed rules under JJ Act. 
 
3. She also sought clarification on the reply of the Ministry that incorporation of the 
term “in conflict with law,” after ‘juvenile’ in  clauses 3, 6 and 19 of the Bill would make 
the sentence awkward. 
 

4. The Secretary then responded to the queries put forward by the Hon’ble 
Chairperson and other Members of the Committee. 
 
5. Hon’ble Chairpers on then thanked the officials of t he Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment and the Ministry of Law and Justice for giving valuable information 
to the Committee and expressing their views in a candid manner. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned.  
 

  
ANNEXURE VI 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING ON THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 8th DECEMBER, 2005. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to  1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
4. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
5. Dr. R. Senthil 
6. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
7. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
8. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
10. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
11. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
12. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
   
   
  1. Shri R.K. Saxe na -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 

 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson apprised the Committee that they are 
meeting to consider and ad opt two Draft Reports of the Committee namely, 
Tenth Report on the subjec t  “Grants-in-aid to St ate Tribal Development 
Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) for Minor Forest Produce Operations” and 
Eleventh Report on “The Juvenile Justic e (Care and Protec tion of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2005.”  
 
3.XXX                         XXX             XXX   XXX  XXX 
 
 
4. The Committee then took up the draft Eleventh Report on ‘The Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Chil dren) Amendment Bill, 2005’ and adopted 
the same without any amendment. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chair person to finalize and present the 
reports on their behalf to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
APPENDIX 
 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT 
 
 
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations 
1. 1.10  The Committee note that ‘The Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2005’ 
seeks to amend, among other things, the Long Title of the 
principal Act to create scope for a non-institutional 
approach for rehabilitation, which has not been provided 
for in the Act.  The Ministry have informed that non-
institutional approach would include foster care, 
adoptions, sponsorships etc.  The Committee express 
apprehension that in case some unscrupulous or 
undesirable person happen to take custody of a child in 
need of care and protection and keep him in his foster 
care, he may abuse the child physically and emotionally 
for his unlawful gains.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that adequate provisions should be made in the Act to 
safeguard and protect the interests of children kept under 
foster homes from being exploited and abused.  The 
Ministry may evolve guidelines for placing a child under 
foster home so that extreme care is taken in the selection 
of families and also for keeping a check by verifying from 
time to time, the welfare of the child kept under foster care.  
The Committee also urge the Ministry to undertake 
awareness generation programmes to encourage 
sponsoring children for adoption under various schemes 
in private sector. 
 
2 1.14  The Committee observe that clause 5 of the Bill 
seeks to omit the words `local authority’, ‘or local 
authority’ and ‘or the local authority’ throughout the 
principal Act.  The rationale put forth by the Ministry is that 
members of the local authority may not necessarily be 
conversant with child psychology and welfare.  The 
Committee do not fully endorse the Ministry’s views that 
knowledge of a child’s background by members of the 
local authority may be a generalized one with no particular 
knowledge about the circumstances of the case which the 
JJB members may be possessing on the basis of their 
enquiry and also there is no need for the local authority 
when an institution of probation officer is provided under 
the Act for finding out the antecedents of the juvenile or 
the child.  The Committee are of the opinion that the local 
authority can also provide valuable suggestions and make 
better coordination towards the welfare of the juvenile due 
to their vast experience, knowledge of child’s background, 
family conditions and local cultural values.  Thus, there is 
scope for the local authority to play an important role in 
exercisin
g the powers and dischar ging the duties 

conferred under the Act in relation to a juvenile in conflict 
with law and a juvenile in need of care and protection 
particularly in States/Districts where no JJBs/CWCs have 
been set up so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the words ‘local authority’ may be retained in the Act 
so that the services, experience and wisdom of the 
members of local authorities could be utilized for the 
betterment and welfare of juveniles in conflict with law and 
children in need of care and protection. 
 
3 1.21  The Committee find that the term ‘juvenile’ has 
been used by the Ministry to denote both a juvenile ‘in 
conflict with law’ and ‘in need of care and protection’ 
throughout the principal Act. The Committee feel that there 
is a need to be more explicit in the use of the term 
`juvenile’ in Clauses 3, 6 and 19 of the Bill corresponding 
to  Section 1(4), Section 7A and Section 64 respectively as 
those Sections specifically pertain to a juvenile in conflict 
with law and not a juvenile who is in need of care and 
protection.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
reply of the Ministry that incorporation of the term ‘in 
conflict with law’ after ‘juvenile’ in Sections 1(4), 7A and 64 
would make the sentence unwieldy and awkward.   In their 
opinion, the terms and expressions used in the Act should 
be precise and clear cut with no ambiguity. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should 
incorporate the term ‘in conflict with law’ after ‘juvenile’ in 
Clauses 3, 6, and 19 of the Bill seeking to amend   Sections  
1, 7 and 64 of the principal Act respectively. 
 
4 1.23  The Committee observe that Clause 7 of the Bill 
seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 10 of the 
principal Act stating that `as so on as a juvenile in conflict 
with law is apprehended by the police, he shall be placed 
under the charge of the special juvenile police unit or the 
designated police officer, who shall produce the juvenile 
before the Board within twenty-four hours of his 
apprehension excluding the time necessary for the 
journey’. The Committee view that a juvenile who is 
apprehended by the police is likely to be put in a police 
lock-up or Jail along with other adults before being 
produced to the Juvenile Justice Board. The Committee 
desire that adequate safeguards may be provided to 
prevent such incidents from happening and urge the 
Ministry should insert a proviso after sub-section(1) of 
section 10 of the Amendment Bill stating that “At no point 
of time will a juvenile in conflict with law be placed in a 
lock-up or Jail with adult(s)”. 
 
5 1.25  The Committee note that section 21 of the principal 
Act has been proposed to be substituted with a new 
section to cover, in addition to juveniles in conflict with 
law, those juveniles in need of care and protection 
involved in any proceeding under the Act for prohibition of 
publication of their names, addresses or schools or an y 

other particulars etc.  The Committee, however, find that 
the penalty of one thousand rupees imposed under the Act 
for contravening the above provision is woefully 
inadequate to deter a person from committing such an act.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the penalty 
may be raised to twenty-five thousand rupees. The money 
so recovered may be utilized for the welfare of the juvenile 
or the child under the supervision of the concerned 
Competent Authority. 
 
6 1.31        The Committee note that the Ministry have sought to 
insert a proviso after sub–section(1) of Section 68 of the 
principal Act to give statutory status and ensure 
applicability of Model Rules framed by the Central 
Government to States/UTs who have not made their own 
rules till the rules are framed by the respective States/UTs.  
The Ministry have also informed that no information has 
been received from the States of Kerala, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Jammu & Kashmir, Nagaland and 
Assam regarding notification of  the rules while in Goa, 
Punjab, Jharkhand and Lakshadweep, it is under process. 
The Committee are, therefore, of the firm view that the 
thrust should be on framing of rules by States/UTs under 
the Act at the earliest i.e. at least within six months to one 
year from the date when the Act came into force for 
effective implementation of the Act and ensuring that  
speedy   justice is rendered to the juvenile. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to prescribe 
definite time-frame for States/UTs to frame rules under the 
Act and make all out efforts to persuade the States/UTs to 
frame rules and notify the same within the prescribed time- 
frame.    
 
7 1.34  The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that 
child beggars are already covered under Section 2(d)(i) 
and (viii) of the JJ Act, 2000 where a child in need of care 
and protection has been defined.  The Committee also note 
that although a child who is found without any home or 
settled place or abode and without any ostensible means 
of subsistence and who is being or is likely to be abused 
for unconscionable gains are included under Section 
2(d)(i) and (viii), yet child beggars have not been 
specifically mentioned.  Keeping in view the fact that child 
beggars constitute the largest segment of neglected 
children in the country, the Committee desire that they 
should be specifically mentioned under the definition of 
‘children in need of care and protection’ in the Act.  Steps 
may, therefore, be taken to insert the words ‘child beggars’ 
in Section 2(d)(i) or (viii) or a new proviso may be inserted 
in Section 2(d) of the  Act. 
 
8 1.38  The Committee feel that the number of JJBs/CWCs 
constituted so far i.e., 203 JJBs and 239 CWCs are 
inadequate to cater to those juveniles in conflict with law 
and in need of care and protection.  The Committee also 

express concern over the undue delay in constitution of 
JJBs/CWCs as States/UT like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Daman & Diu, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab and Delhi are 
still in the process of constituting the JJBs/CWCs in all or 
in some districts, even after five years since the Act came 
into force.  The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an 
urgent need to make it mandatory for the States to 
constitute these Boards/Committees expeditiously and 
urge the Ministry to prescribe a definite time-frame in the 
Act for the same.  
  
9 1.46  The Committee note with concern that complete 
information is not available with the Ministry regarding the 
number of observation homes/special homes for juveniles 
in conflict with law and children’s homes/shelter homes for 
juveniles in need of care and protection, set up by the 
States/UTs across the country.  Only five States viz, 
Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Mizoram and Delhi 
have constituted Inspection Committees for inspecting the 
Children’s homes.  The Committee further note that though 
the Act provides for facilities and various types of services 
in the special homes/shelter homes, many of these homes 
are lacking in basic facilities like sanitation and recreation 
facilities.  The Ministry have laid the onus for setting up 
and managing the homes on the State Governments.  The 
Committee are, however, of the view that monitoring of the 
implementation of the Act is  the responsibility of the 
Central Government and hence, the Ministry should ensure 
that the provisions of the Act are implemented effectively.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to identify the 
States/UTs/Districts where observation homes/special 
homes and children’s homes/shelter homes have not yet 
been established and make all out efforts to persuade 
those States/UTs to set up such homes with proper 
facilities at the earliest.  The Ministry may also pursue all 
the States/UTs to constitute Inspection Committees for the 
Children’s homes and ensure that inspection of the homes 
are carried out periodically. 
 
10 1.47 The Committee further note that the Ministry is 
implementing the scheme of ‘A programme for Juvenile 
Justice’ for upgradation of facilities provided in 
observation homes/special homes with 50% central 
assistance to the States.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry should create awareness and generate 
wide publicity about the scheme so that States/UTs may 
come forward with adequate proposals and the 
observation homes/special homes are equipped with 
proper facilities to render services to a juvenile in conflict 
with law. 
 
11 1.52  The Committee express their apprehension that 
NGOs, who are actively involved in managing the shelter 
homes may engage in unscrupulous activities for unlawful 
gain like bu ying and sellin g young children for ado ption.  

The Committee, therefore, desire that adequate safeguards 
should be incorporated in the Act or in the Model Rules 
framed thereunder to prevent the NGOs from indulging in 
such activities.  The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
persuade the States/UTs to maintain strict vigil over the 
activities of the NGOs; ensure that the homes are run 
properly and impose penalty on the NGOs if a child lodged 
under their care is not produced before the Child Welfare 
Committee within the stipulated time.    
 
 