 
 4 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS  
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Twenty-eighth Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee 
on Labour and Welfare on `Development of Primitive Tribal Groups’ 
 
 
 
 FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.3..2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.3.2005. 
 
 
 
            
     
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)

CONTENTS 
 
      
      
      
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the Committee in 
Chapter I 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
replies of the Government  are interim in nature   
 
 
ANNEXURE Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
18 March,  2005 
 
APPENDIX Analysis of the action taken by Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-eighth   
Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour 
and Welfare (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT(2004-2005) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - CHAIRPERSON 
 
              MEMBERS 
                 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri M. Appadurai 
3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6.       Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
7.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
                          8.          Shri Kailash Meghwal 
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
      10. Shri Jual Oram 
11. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
15. Dr. R. Senthil 
16. Shri Mohd. Shahid 
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
20. Smt. Usha Verma 
21. Shri K. Yerrannaidu 
 
          R A J Y A  S A B H A  
                               
22. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan 
24. Shri R.S. Gavai 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao  
26. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
27. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
29. Smt. Savita Sharda 
30. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
31. Shri Veer Singh        
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary      -  Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Saxena          - Deputy Secretary               
 4. Shri  Bhupesh Kumar           - Under Secretary 
5.        Km. M. Tunglut     - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing  Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment, having been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this  Fourth  Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Twenty-eighth  Report of 
the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Development of Primitive Tribal Groups’ . 
 
2. The Twenty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2002.  The Mini stry of Tribal Affairs furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the re commendations contained in that Report 
on 03 December, 2004. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 18 March , 
2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-eighth Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on 
Labour and Welfare (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference, re commendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed  in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee place on record th eir appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the offici als of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
18 March ,  2005        C h a i r p e r s o n  
27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
      REPORT 
         
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-
eighth  Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and 
Welfare (Thirteenth  Lok Sabha)  on ‘Development of Primitive 
Tribal Groups’ .  
 
1.2 The Twenty-eighth Report wa s presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 20  December, 2002.   It contained 20 
recommendations.  Replies of Gove rnment in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are categorised as 
under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12, 18 and 20 
 
(Total 8 - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  1, 4, 17 and 19.    
 
(Total 4 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter I: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 3, 6, 8, 11, 13, 15 and 16 
 
(Total 7 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which 
replies of the Government is interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Sl. No. 14. 
  
(Total 1 - Chapter V)  
 
 
 
 

1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken  notes 
in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report may be furnished to them at  the earliest and in any case not 
later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Twenty-eighth Report was presented to the House and 
sent to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 20 December, 2002 for taking 
necessary action on the recommendations contained thereon and 
furnishing of the action taken notes by 21 March, 2003. However the 
Ministry, inspite of several reminders, have furnished the action taken 
notes on 3 December, 2004. The Co mmittee express serious concern 
over this inordinate delay and hope that the Ministry will take a note 
of the same and ensure that such delay will not occur in future. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal wi th the action taken replies 
of the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Formulation of Specific Action Plan for Primitive Tribal 
Groups 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 2.11) 
  
1.6 The Committee are surprised to note that despite Government’s 
continued efforts for the development of PTGs right from Fifth Five-Year 
Plan, no state Governments have ever proposed to delete any group from 
the list of PTGs. The Committee further note that basic statistics is not 
available in the Ministry to ascerta in the number of PTGs brought at par 
with other tribal communities during the 8
th & 9 th Five Year Plans. The 
Committee note with dismay that no specific action plan has been 
formulated by the Ministry for reha bilitation of PTGs in their own 
habitation. This reflects the lackadaisica l attitude of the Ministry and lack 
of commitment to fulfill its objectiv e of bringing the PTGs into the 
mainstream of the tribal society. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should make concerted efforts to bring maximum number of 
PTGs at par with other trib al communities during the 10
th Five Year Plan 
by formulating specific Action Plan with the help of tribal Research 
Institutes and other expert bodies by  pooling the resources from SCA to 
TSP, Grants under Article 275(1) of  the Constitution and funds from 
Centrally Sponsored, Central Sector & State Plan Schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.7  The Ministry have stated in thei r action taken note furnished to the 
Committee that a Meeting of the Secretaries and Principal Chief 
Conservators of Forests from the concerned States was convened to 
emphasize preparation of comprehensiv e action plan for the development 
of each of the PTGs. The Ministry have also adopted a system of 
earmarking of funds to each of the  PTGs of different States from the 
current financial year. The State G overnments had been requested to 
prepare Project Reports under the sche me of Development of PTGs for 
each of the tribes separately. From this year  onwards efforts would be 
taken to earmark funds for each of the PTG proportionate to their 
population.  On receipt of Base Line  Survey Reports from the State 
Governments, the data would be analy zed to review the impact of various 
programmes on socio economic developm ent of PTGs over last few years 
and measures might be taken to exclude the PTGs from the list of PTGs 
who have advanced to be classified as  other STs. The Ministry have also 
revised guidelines for sanction/re lease of grants under SCA to TSP 
wherein a system had been put in place to monitor sanction/releases to 
States including programmes taken up for. 
 
1.8 It has further been cl arified by the Ministry that the meeting of the 
Secretaries in charge of State Trib al Welfare Departments and Principal 
Chief Conservators of Forests was convened on 10 February, 2004 to 
emphasize preparation of comprehensiv e action plan for the development 
of each of the PTGs. In the meeti ng, various representatives of State 
Governments have expressed their a nxiety that forest villages have 
remained deprived and denied of the benefits of development. There are 
difficulties in conversion of forest vill ages into revenue villages. Due to 
restrictions under the Forest Conserva tion Acts, it is difficult to take 
developmental works in villages located within forest areas.  
 
1.9 The Committee had desired the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts to bring maximum number of PTGs at par with other tribal 
communities during the Tenth Five Ye ar Plan by formulating specific 
action plans. However, the Committee note with serious concern that 
the Ministry had taken more than a year since the Report of the 
Committee was presented to convene a meeting of Secretaries in 
charge of State Tribal Welfare Departments and Principal Chief 

Conservators of Forests to emphasise preparation of comprehensive 
action plan for the development of PTGs. In the meeting, various 
representatives of State Government s have expressed their anxiety 
that forest villages have remained de prived and denied of the benefits 
of development. There are difficult ies in conversion of forest villages 
into revenue villages. Due to restrictions under the Forest 
Conservation Acts, it is difficult to take developmental works in 
villages located within forest areas. In view of the same, the 
Committee observe that for ensuring smooth and speedy development 
of the PTGs, the Ministry should get the main hurdle in the way to 
their development removed by effe cting amendments in the Indian 
Forest Act, 1927 and the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. The 
Committee strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation of making 
concerted efforts for development of PTGs and bringing them into the 
mainstream. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs should take up the issue of incorporating necessary 
amendments in the above mentio ned Acts urgently with the 
competent authorities in the G overnment and ensure that the 
necessary amendments are incorpor ated urgently. The action being 
taken in this regard may be conveyed to the Committee. 
 

 
B. Legal and Administrati ve support for PTGs : 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 4.7) 
  
1.10 The Committee had  noted with co ncern that no sp ecific legal and 
administrative machinery exists at the national level for the development 
of PTGs, some of whom are still at the stage of  gatherers, hunters and 
shifting cultivators etc. The Committee had further noted that only four 
States viz. Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra had 
established special agencies at micr o-level for the development of the 
PTGs. The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the remaining 
States/UTs should also be impresse d upon to set up special agencies at 
micro-level to take care of the PT Gs. The Committee had further desired 
that a Special Officer of suitable rank having adequate knowledge and 
experience about the conditions and needs of PTGs and having 
commitment for them, should be posted in the areas of their concentration 
to protect their interests effectively. 
 
1.11 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their action taken note furnished 
to the Committee, have stated that the recommendation has been brought 
to the notice of the State Governments for compliance. 
 
 
1.12 The Committee had noted with concern that no specific legal 
and administrative machinery exists  at the national level for the 
development of Primitive Tribal Gr oups(PTGs). It was also observed 
that only four States viz. Ori ssa, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh 
and Maharashtra had established sp ecial agencies at micro-level for 
the development of PTGs. The Committee, had therefore, 
recommended setting up of special agencies in the remaining 
States/UTs. The Committee note with dismay that even after a lapse of 
two years since then, no specific plan has been formulated by the 
Ministry for setting up of special agencies at micro-level to take care 
of  PTGs.   This reflects the apathetic attitude of the Ministry and lack 

of commitment to fulfill its object ive of bringing the PTGs into the 
mainstream of society.  The Committ ee strongly feel that since PTGs 
are still at the stage of gatherers, hunt ers and shifting cultivators, and 
are living in remote and hilly area s, they need special care and 
protection.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to act upon 
its earlier recommendation in the right earnest and impress upon the 
States/Union Territories to set up special agencies at micro level to 
take care of PTGs and depute special officers in PTG areas at the 
earliest. 
C. Strengthening of State Tribal Research Institutes  
     
Recommendation (No. 8, Para No.4.9) 
 
1.13 The Committee had noted that as  a result of developmental 
activities like education, economic de velopment and various training 
programmes, the lifestyle of PTGs ha d changed considerably and helped 
them to join the mainstream.  The Committee had appreciated the efforts 
made by the Ministry to bring the PT Gs into the mainstream but at the 
same time had desired that in the na me of modernization, the rich cultural 
heritage of the PTGs including th eir traditional livelihood resources 
should not be adversely affected.  The Committee, had therefore, 
recommended that State Tribal Research Institutes, whose activities 
include preservation of the cultural heritage of the tribal population, 
should be strengthened and equipped to perform their job effectively.  
Moreover, these institutes should be persuaded to work in close tandem 
with the Ministry of Human Res ource Development, Department of 
Culture, for disseminating the rich tribal culture. 
 
1.14 The Ministry in their reply have  stated that the recommendations 
of the Committee have been brought to the notice of TRIs, set up in 
different States for compliance by taki ng appropriate steps.  The Ministry 
held a meeting of State Secretaries in-charge of Tribal Development and 
Directors of TRIs on 28 Novemb er, 2003 to devise strategy for 
strengthening the TRIs.  The TRIs ha d been facing financial crunch due to 
difficulty being expressed by the Stat es in making available the State 
Share of 50% under the scheme of Gran t-in-aid to TRIs  under Research 
Scheme.  The proposal of the Mini stry to extend 100% grant under the 

scheme to TRIs has been approv ed by the Planning Commission in 
principle.  The Ministry have further stated that restructuring of the staff 
of the TRIs and to change to Central grant from 50% to 100% for TRIs are 
under consideration.  The Ministry al so organized a day long seminar of 
all share holders to get specific feed -back on various issues relating to 
preservation of cultural heritage of  Scheduled Tribes including PTGs and 
steps required thereof to develop and disseminate the same. 
 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended that State Tribal Research 
Institutes (TRIs) should be st rengthened and equipped to perform 
their job effectively and these instit utes should be persuaded to work 
in close tandem with the Ministry  of Human Resource Development, 
Department of Culture, for disseminati ng the rich tribal culture.  The 
Ministry in their reply have stat ed that the recommendations of the 
Committee have been brought to the notice of TRIs, set up in different 
States, for compliance by taking appropriate steps.  It is further stated 
that TRIs had been facing financial crunch due to difficulty being 
expressed by the States in making available the State share of 50% 
under the scheme of Grants-in-aid to TRIs under Research Scheme.  
The Committee is, however, happy to note that the proposal of the 
Ministry to extend 100% grant under the scheme  to TRIs has been 
approved by the Planning Commission in principle.  The Committee 
express their serious concern that the issues of restructuring of the 
staff of the TRIs and to change the Central grant from 50% to 100% 
for TRIs are still under consideration.  The Committee had sent their 
Report to the Ministry on 20 December, 2002 for taking urgent action 
on their recommendations. The Commi ttee are shocked at the slow 

pace of the functioning of the Ministry. They have taken about one 
year in convening the m eeting of State Secretarie s in charge of Tribal 
Development Departments and Direct ors of TRIs and the same was 
convened on 28 November, 2003, wh ich reflects the casual approach 
of the Ministry in this regard.  Besides, the Committee also express 
their concern over the fact that th e Ministry have not taken up the 
matter of strengthening of State Tr ibal Research Institutes at the 
highest level in the State Governments. The Committee hope that the 
proposal to restructure staff of  TRIs and grant of 100% Central 
Assistance to them would be impl emented urgently  and the State 
Tribal Research Institutes woul d be strengthened and equipped to 
perform their job effectively. 
 
 
D. Protection of PTGs from land alienation  
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 11, Para 5.16) 
 
1.16 The Committee had noted with  concern that though State 
Governments and UT Administrations have enacted various Laws and 
Regulations to check alienation of trib als from their lands, the tribals are 
still being deprived of their lands in the States/UTs. The Committee had 
further noted that only five States/U T viz. Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Orissa, Tripura and Andaman and Nicobar Islands have enacted provisions 
to deal with cases of occupation of tribal land through deceit on the pattern 
of provisions made in the Bonde d Labour Abolition Act, 1976.  The 
Committee, had therefore, strongly recommended that the Ministry should 
ensure that adequate safeguards are incorporated in the State 
Laws/Regulations to protect the poor  tribals including the PTGs against 
occupation of their lands by the non-tribals through deceit.  State 
Governments might also be persuaded to amend their Land Alienation 
Acts to make it more stringent against the offenders and for speedy 
restoration of lands from illegal o ccupation.  The Committee had also 

desired that free legal aid should be  provided to the tribals through 
ITDPs/ITDAs and NGOs especially in the cases of tribal land alienation.  
 
 
1.17 In their action taken note furnishe d to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated that the recommendation has been brought to the notice of the 
State Governments/UT Administrations for compliance. 
 
1.18 The Committee deeply regret to note that though it had 
recommended for protective measures like incorporation of adequate 
safeguards in State Laws/Regulatio ns to protect the poor tribals 
against occupation of their lands through deceit; amendment in Land 
Alienation Acts of States and provision for free legal aid through 
ITDPs/ITDAs and NGOs, yet the Minist ry have not been able to show 
any progress in this regard. They have only brought the 
recommendation of the Committee to the notice of the States/UTs for 
compliance. The Committee, therefo re, urge the Ministry to take 
follow up action with the States/UTs at the highest level so that the 
poor tribals, especially PTGs are adequately protected against 
alienation from their lands. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
E. Restructuring and strengthening  the framework of Integrated 
Tribal Development Projects(ITDPs) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 6.11) 
 
1.19 The Committee had noted with concern that though the Project 
Officers of Integrated Tribal De velopment Projects (ITDPs) were 
entrusted with the task of implementing policies for protection and 
development of PTGs, the Ministry  were not satisfied with their 
performance and achievement. Th e Committee, had therefore, 
recommended that for effective f unctioning, framework of  ITDPs in 
States should be suitably restruct ured and strengthened in terms of 
finance, manpower and delegation of powers to the Project Officers so that 
various programmes could be implemented through the line departments 
smoothly & effectively. 
 
1.20 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their action taken note furnished 
to the Committee,  have stated that the State Governments have been 
requested for compliance of the recommendation. The Government of 
Andhra Pradesh has recently issued or ders giving more powers to Project 
Officers of the ITDPs.   
 
1.21 The Committee are not satisfied wi th the reply of the Ministry, 
since so far only one State i,e, Andhra Pradesh, has issued orders 
giving more powers to Project Office rs of the ITDPs. Keeping in view 
the fact that implementation of tr ibal welfare programmes is carried 
out by ITDP/ITDA frameworks in th e States, the Committee feel that 
there is an immediate need for rest ructuring and strengthening these 
frameworks in terms of finance, manpower and delegation of powers 
to the Project Officers. The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to persuade the 
remaining States to restructur e and strengthen their ITDP/ITDA 
frameworks for effective implementation of the schemes for the 
welfare and development of the poor tribals. 

 
F. Training to the members of Primitive Tribal Groups  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 6.13) 
 
1.22 The Committee had taken note of the fact that State machineries 
were not making adequate efforts for the development of PTGs and the 
degree of participation of PTGs in the activities/programmes for their 
development was low due to low level of literacy and rigidity of social & 
cultural values prevailing among the PTGs. The Committee, had therefore, 
recommended that training to few selected PTG members from each 
group, might be imparted in batche s so that the number of PTGs 
participating in development program me might increase substantially 
during the Tenth Five Year Plan. 
 
1.23 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs,  in their action taken reply have 
stated that efforts are being made fo r wider dissemination of information 
among the PTGs as per recommenda tion through the State Government 
and Voluntary Agencies. The Ministry have also informed that Seva 
Bharati, an Established Voluntary Agen cy is running the Project of “JAN 
JAGARAN” through 300 single teacher  schools in Mandla, Dindori, 
Shivapuri, Sheopur & Guna Distri cts of Madhya Pradesh bringing 
awareness among the PTGs of 300 v illages about the importance of 
education, medical care, vocationa l training, etc. An awareness 
Programme has also been undertaken in Karnataka through the 
organization `Vivekanand Youth Moveme nt’. The direct impact of the 
Programme has been in the form of enhancement of student’s enrolment in 
respect of Jenukorba PTGs in local primary schools.  
 
1.24 The Committee had specially re commended to impart training 
to few selected PTG members from each group so that all the PTGs 
could be covered by imparting training to selected ones in batches and 
they could disseminate informatio n among their own group about the 
programmes being implemented by the Government for their 
development. The reply given by the Ministry does not indicate any 
straight  forward approach of the Government in this regard. Instead 
of coming forward with its action pl an to impart training to selected 

PTG members, the Ministry have mentioned about the awareness 
generation programmes among PTGs a nd that too only in two States 
through two voluntary agencies. Th e Committee, therefore, take a 
serious note of the fact that action has not been taken on this 
important recommendation in lett er and spirit. While expressing 
concern on the superficial approach of the Ministry, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendati on and desire that the Ministry 
should expeditiously formulate an action plan to impart necessary 
training to few selected PTG memb ers from each of the Primitive 
Tribal Groups to enable them to effectively participate in the 
programmes being run for their development during the Tenth Five 
Year Plan. 
 
G. Health Care Facilities for Primitive Tribal Groups  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para 7.25) 
1.25 The Committee had noted with concern that only 13 Mobile 
Dispensaries had been sanctioned to provide health care facilities to the 
PTGs in six States.  There were no Primary Health Centres/Health Sub-
Centres functioning exclusively in the PTG areas.  Therefore, the 
identified PTGs had to avail health car e facilities from the medical centres 
functioning in the tribal areas.  The Committee had observed that the 
health care facilities for the PTGs were  grossly inadequate particularly for 
the groups who were living in the remo te, hilly and inaccessible areas.  
The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that adequate 
number of Mobile Dispensaries, Prim ary Health Centres, Sub-Centres, 
Community Health Centres, etc. which might exclusively cater to the 
PTGs should be set up in the areas of their habitation.  The Committee had 
also desired that Project Directors of ITDPs should conduct health surveys 
among the PTGs regularly and ensure th at medicines and other life saving 
drugs were made available on demand. 
 

 
1.26 In their action taken note furnishe d to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs have stated that  the recommendation of the Committee 
has been brought to the notice of th e State Governments and the Union 
Ministry of Health and Family Welf are. The main focus during the Tenth 
Five Year Plan is ensuring food secur ity through settled agriculture, safe 
drinking water, primary education a nd basic minimum medical facilities 
for each of the PTG. The State Governments and NGOs have been 
sanctioned projects of hospitals, m obile dispensaries, primary schools, 
etc., as per the necessity of PTG villages.  
 
1.27 In the Committee’s view, the reply of the Ministry, in so far as 
the health care facilities of the PT Gs are concerned, is unsatisfactory. 
Even though health care is th e responsibility of the State 
Governments and the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
the Committee are of the opinion that  the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
should give due importance to this matter while implementing 
schemes for the development of  PTGs. The Committee, while 
reiterating their earlier recommendati on, urge the Ministry to make 
all out efforts to ensure that basi c health care facilities are made 
available to all the PTGs in the areas of their concentration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No.2, Para 2.10) 
 
2.1 The Committee note with concern that  the progress made so far in the 
development of PTGs is negligible. The Committee further note that the Ministry had 
already requested the States and UT Administ rations to undertake a baseline survey for 
identification of the Primitive Tribal Groups. A set of questionnaires and schedules has 
been circulated to the concerned State Gove rnments to collect information on the socio-
economic status of each primitive group. However, the Committee express their concern 
that no time frame has been fixed to complete  the survey. Keeping in view the fact that 
the Ministry has no authentic data of PTGs population so far, the Committee, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should pe rsuade the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations to undertake a tribe-wise benchmark survey of these Primitive Groups 
within a specified time frame so that plans and programmes could be formulated for their 
overall development during the Tenth Five Year Plan. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The State Governments have been requested  to complete the survey on a priority 
basis alongwith conservation and developmen t plan suggesting specific programmes to 
bring them at least at par with the other trib al communities by the end of the current five-
year plan. Most of the State Governments have almost comple ted the baseline survey of 
Primitive Tribal Groups. The survey reports from the States of Rajasthan, Jharakhand, 
Manipur, Kerala and Gujarat have been r eceived. The other State Governments have 
reported to the Ministry that reports are under compilation and likely to be submitted 
soon. These State Governments are being pursue d to complete it quickly and not later 
than in the current financial year. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No.5, Para 3.10) 
 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that the State Government s are not able to 
submit the report on the utilisati on of funds to the Ministry in time due to difficulties 
faced by them in getting timely information from their field offices.  The Committee 
observe that the total expe nditure incurred by State/NGOs under the new Central Sector 
Scheme of ‘Development of PTGs’ during the la st three years has not been satisfactory.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that  the Ministry should impress upon the State 
Governments/UT Administrations, to keep cons tant vigil over the pace of expenditure 

and the progress made in the implementation of the scheme should be monitored 
effectively.  Also, the State Governments should be made to realise their obligation 
towards the PTGs and persuaded to make sincer e efforts to utilise the funds released to 
them fully within the same financial year.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4. The Ministry convenes meeting of the Secretaries from the States and 
representatives of the NGOs to  review and monitor progre ss including utilization. The 
constant persuasion has shown improvement. It has also been made clear to the States 
that further releases under th e schemes of the Ministry would henceforth be strictly 
linked to timely utilization of funds. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
      
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl.No.7, Para 4.8) 
 
2.5 The Committee note with regret that th e PTGs living in inaccessible, hilly and 
forest areas are unaware of Central protectiv e measures such as SC/ST (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act 1989 and Protection of Civil Rights Act 1955 and there is no separate law 
to protect the PTGs exclusively from exploitation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry  should pursue the State Gove rnments/UTs Administrations 
to make special efforts to educate and ge nerate awareness among the PTGs about the 
provisions of these Acts.  The Committee also  desire that States /UT should effectively 
implement the various laws/rules to check e xploitation of PTGs in the field of money-
lending, liquor vending, collection and disposal of minor forest produce, etc.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6. The State Governments have been requested to act effectively on the 
recommendations of the Committee. The Mi nistry has also f unded a few reputed 
voluntary agencies for promotion of education and awareness generation among PTGs. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9, Para 5.14) 
 
2.7 The Committee note with concern that  85.40 lakh tribal people including PTGs 
have been displaced from 1951 to 1990 due to development projects like dams, industries 
and mines. About 21.20 lakh Scheduled Tribe Pe ople have been rehabilitated during the 
same period. The Committee further note that a National Rehabilitation Policy is in the 
offing. The Committee also observe that the tr ibal people, especially PTGs, are worst 
affected by the development projects like dams, industries & mines and they need 
adequate relief and rehabilitation pack age. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend  that the Ministry of Tribal A ffairs being the nodal Ministry should impress 
upon the Ministry of Rural Development to move a comprehensive Bill, for rehabilitation 
and resettlement of tribals affected by the developmental projects, in Parliament without 
further delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 The Ministry of Rural Developmen t has already notified the National 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy for People affected by Developmental Projects 
including tribals. Special compensation has be en provided in the pol icy for tribals. The 
Ministry also insists on inclusion of specific parameter in rehabilitation and resettlement 
package before granting clearance for any project involving displacement of scheduled 
tribes. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 10, Para 5.15) 
 
2.9 The Committee take note of the fact that the tribals are the orig inal inhabitants of 
forests but their rights in fo rests and on forest produce are not adequately protected. The 
enactment of the Forest Conservation Ac t, 1980, the Wildlife Preservation Act, 1972 and 
various policies of Central Government etc. have failed to protect the traditional rights of 
the PTGs in the forests. The Committee, theref ore, desire that the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs should coordinate the efforts bei ng made by important Ministries/Departments 
like Rural Development, Agriculture, Environm ent & Forests, Health & Family Welfare, 
etc. for protecting the rights of the tribals in the forests. Keeping in the view the role of 
forests in the development of PTGs the Commi ttee also desire that PTGs should also be 
actively involved in protection, conservation and development of forests. The Committee 
note with concern that in the name of impl ementation of Conservation Acts and in the 
name of public interest, orde rs are obtained from Courts wh ich result in the eviction of 
tribals from their traditional abodes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should take active interest in such litigation and, if necessary, intervene to 
protect the interest of the tribals. 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 The Ministry is alert in th e matters of unauthor ized evictions of tribals and is in 
constant contact of concerned Ministries to protect the interest of tribals including PTGs. 
On the initiatives of the Ministry, the Mini stry of Environment & Forests has issued 
clarification to all State Governments for not  undertaking eviction operations in respect 
of eligible forest dwellers (encroachers) as per guidelines  issued in 1990. The MOEF is 
taking further steps to regulari ze the occupation of forestland by eligible forest dwellers 
including tribals.  
 
2.11 The Ministry has taken up in the right earnest variou s issues concerning tribal 
forest interface with the concerned Ministr y. The Ministry has also requested to the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests to include representative of Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
in the Central Empowered Committee set up under orders from Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
so that the interest of tribals may be protected. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No.12, Para 5.17) 
 
2.12  The Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation in implementing the Scheme of 
Watershed Development Project in Shifted Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA) in which 
67,000 hectares of land have been treate d benefiting nearly 41,000 Jhumia families 
during the Eighth Five Year Plan. The Committ ee also note with satisfaction that the 
number of Jhumia families benefited during the Ninth Five Year Pl an has increased to 
99,037 and the total areas of land treated is 1,59,949 hectares. Keeping in view the fact 
that  PTGs are mostly shifting cultivators,  the Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs should coordinate with the Ministry of Agriculture, so that concerted 
efforts are made towards reclamation of la nd for settlement and ag riculture purposes of 
the PTGs and the tribal people during the Tenth Plan period. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.13 The Ministry has taken up the matter w ith the Ministry of Agriculture for 
reclamation of land of PTGs for settled ag riculture. Efforts are also being made to 
sanction projects under the scheme of Develo pment of PTGs and also through grants 
being released by the Ministry under other schemes/programmes. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 

 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 18, Para 7.27) 
 
2.14 The Committee note that the average rate of literacy among the PTGs is estimated 
at 10% only as compared to the rate of literacy among the whole tribal communities 
which is 29.60% according to the 1991 Census.  The Committee view the situation 
seriously and recommend that the Ministry s hould make all out efforts for the spread of 
literacy among the PTGs during the Tenth Five Year Plan by ensuring that children of 
PTGs are enrolled in schools, hostels, ashram schools and educatio nal complexes set up 
for imparting education to the tribal students in general and the PTGs in particular.  The 
Committee further desire that incentives to  check the dropout rates among the PTGs 
should be made more attractive.  The Committ ee also urge the Ministry to approach the 
Union Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Education and State 
Education Departments for construction of more schools in PTG areas for raising the 
level of literacy among the PTGs.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.15 The recommendation of the Committee ha s been brought to the notice of the 
Ministry of Human Resources Development and the State Governments for initiating 
action. Efforts have been made for promoti on of education and li teracy in PTG areas 
through the programmes of the Ministry as well as through schemes of the Ministry of 
Human Resources Development.  The Ministry has taken up prospects for strengthening 
and creation of educational infrastructure in tr ibal areas for promoti ng levels of literacy 
among scheduled tribes including PTGs. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 20, Para 8.5) 
 
 
2.16 The Committee note with grave con cern that funds earmarked for the 
development of PTGs are at times utili zed by the States/Uts for meeting the 
administrative costs and that are compara tively higher.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should st rengthen its monitoring over the schemes by 
keeping a close watch on the pace of expenditure incurred by States/UT and ensure that 
funds are not diverted for other purposes in  any case.  The Comm ittee also feel that 
evaluation study on the schemes for “Developme nt of PTGs” is requ ired in order to 
assess the progress made and difficulties faced in the implementation of the scheme.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to  undertake evaluation st udies for ascertaining 
the impact of the scheme at the earliest so that corrective measures can be taken both in 
planning and execution at the beginning of the Tenth Five Year Plan.  

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.17 The Ministry has given reorientation to the scheme from  2003-04 by indicating 
the allocation under the scheme to each of the PTG and sanctioned projects on prioritized 
activities for ensuring food security, shelter,  primary education, safe drinking water and 
basic minimum medical facilities. The mon itoring and evaluation mechanism have been 
provided in the scheme. The Ministry review s the performance of the project on annual 
basis. Further the Ministry has initiated  the process to unde rtake evaluation of 
programmes implemented under the scheme of PTGs in last few years through reputed 
organizations. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 

 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl.No.1, Para 1.7) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that although the Tribal Sub Plan concept and Special 
Central Assistance to State Governments fo r the socio-economic development of the 
Scheduled Tribes have been in operation since the Fifth Five Year Pl an, the benefits of 
these schemes are not percolating to the Prim itive Tribal Groups to the desired extent. 
The Committee further note th at a special Central Sector  Scheme was introduced in 
1998-99 with the approval of the Planning co mmission and Ministry of  Finance with the 
objective to cover those items/ activities not already covered specifically by any existing 
scheme. The committee, therefore, desire that  this scheme should be implemented in the 
right earnest so as to give a boost to th e development of Primitive Tribal Groups and 
bring them to the stage from where they can demand and receive the services. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 The development of Primitive Tribal Group is being accorded priority. The States 
have been asked to prepare baseline survey and thereafter PTG-wise conservation and 
development plans, so as to direct resources in a more focused manner. 
 
3.3 The PTG-wise projects are sanctioned unde r the scheme of Development of PTGs 
in consultation with States and concer ned NGOs. In addition to funding under the 
scheme, funds are also provided under other schemes of the Ministry for the development 
of PTGs, specially under SCA to TSP.    
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 4, Para 3.9) 
 
3.4 The Committee note that as per the guidelines of the Mi nistry, funds out of SCA 
to TSP could be utilised for the developm ent of Primitive Tribes through ITDPs, MADA 
pockets/clusters, Dispersed Tr ibal Groups but the Ministry  do not maintain separate 
figures for each of these programmes since th e beginning of the Fift h Five Year Plan.  
The Committee further note with concern that the States have not shown any details of 
separate allocations in their State Plan schemes for the development of PTGs except 
under the Central Sector Scheme of ‘Devel opment of Primitive Tribal Groups’.  The 
Committee fail to understand as to how the Ministry would be able to ensure that a part 
of the SCA to TSP and State Plan funds are act ually utilised for the PTGs without getting 

any feedback from them.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
take up the matter with the State Governments/UT Administrations, to indicate separately 
the allocation of funds for PTGs both under Centrally Sponsored and State Plan Schemes 
for proper and effective implementation of the schemes meant for the development of the 
primitive tribes.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.5 In the revised guidelines for sanction of  grants under SCA to TSP as circulated 
vide F.No.14020/5/2003-SG&C, dated 02.05.2003 ther e is formula to arrive at the 
admissible grant of a state from the total al location against the scheme. In the formula, 
due weightage is given to the numerical size of  PTG as well as No. of PTGs in the State. 
While issuing sanctions under SCA to TSP, it is specially mentioned that funds should be 
spent for PTGs as well in proportion to  the population. Further, the performa for 
reporting progress report has also been revi sed to include physical  financial progress 
separately for PTGs. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 17, Para 7.26) 
 
3.6 The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare specifically for the health 
care of the PTGs. ICMR has undertaken some pi lot projects and research studies in some 
PTG areas but since provision of health faci lities and medical staff is not within the 
purview of ICMR, the Committee desire that th e Ministry should take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Health a nd Family Welfare to provide adequate funds through its 
resources or approach WHO (World Health Organisation for undertak ing studies in other 
areas also in a phased manner.  The Committ ee also desire that the Ministry should 
pursue the Ministry of Health and Family We lfare to make all out efforts to provide 
health care facilities and medical infrastructure for the PTGs living in hilly and 
inaccessible areas.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.7 The recommendation of the Committee is note d. The Ministry of Health and family 
Welfare has also been requested to take ne cessary action on the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 

 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 19, Para 7.28) 
 
 
3.8 The Committee note that very few States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Raja sthan, Tripura and Andaman and Nicobar Islands, have 
constructed pucca houses/upgraded the houses for the PTGs but the number of pucca 
houses constructed by them have been very limited.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to pursue the States/UTs vigorously to provide adequate funds for construction 
of pucca houses as per the needs and lifestyles of the PTGs.       
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.9 The State Governments/Union Territory Ad ministrations have been requested for 
taking steps as per recommendations of the Committee. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER I 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 3, Para 2.11) 
  
4.1 The Committee are surprised to note that  despite Government’s continued efforts 
for the development of PTGs right from Fifth Five-Year Plan, no state Governments have 
ever proposed to delete any group from the list of PTGs. The Committee further note that 
basic statistics is not available in the Ministry to ascertain the number of PTGs brought at 
par with other tribal communities during the 8 th & 9 th Five Year Plans. The Committee 
note with dismay that no specific action plan  has been formulated by the Ministry for 
rehabilitation of PTGs in their own habitation. This reflects the lackadaisical attitude of 
the Ministry and lack of commitment to fulfil l its objective of bringing the PTGs into the 
mainstream of the tribal soci ety. The Committee, therefore,  desire that the Ministry 
should make concerted efforts to bring maximum number of PTGs at par with other tribal 
communities during the 10th Five Year Plan by formulating specific Action Plan with the 
help of tribal Research Institutes and ot her expert bodies by poo ling the resources from 
SCA to TSP, Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution and funds from Centrally 
Sponsored, Central Sector & State Plan Schemes. 
     
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 The Ministry convened a Meeting of the Secretaries and Principal Chief 
Conservators of Forests from the concer ned States to emphasi ze preparation of 
comprehensive action plan for the developmen t of each of the PTGs. The Ministry have 
also adopted a system of earma rking of funds to each of the  PTGs of different States 
from the current financial year. The State G overnments have been requested to prepare 
Project Reports under the scheme of Develo pment of PTGs for each of the tribes 
separately. From this year  onwards efforts would be taken to earmark funds for each of 
the PTG proportionate to their population.  On receipt of Base  Line Survey Reports from 
the State Governments, the data would be analyzed to review the impact of various 
programmes on socio economic development of PTGs over last few years and measures 
might be taken to exclude the PTGs from th e list of PTGs who have advanced to be 
classified as other STs. The Ministry have also revised guidelines for sanction/release of 
grants under SCA to TSP wherein a syst em had been put in place to monitor 
sanction/releases to States including programmes taken up for. 
 
4.3 It is also clarified that the Ministry c onvene a meeting of the Secretaries in charge 
of State Tribal Welfare Departments and Prin cipal Chief Conservators of Forests on 10 
February, 2004 to emphasize preparation of comprehensive action plan for the 
development of each of the PTGs. In the meeting, various representatives of State 
Governments express their anxiety that fore st villages have remained deprived and 

denied of the benefits of development. Th ere are difficulties in conversion of forest 
villages into revenue villages. Due to restrictions under the Forest Conservation Acts, it is 
difficult to take developmental works in villages located within forest areas.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.9  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 6, Para 4.7) 
 
4.4 The Committee note with concern that  no specific legal and administrative 
machinery exists at the national level for the development of Primitive Tribal Groups, 
some of whom are still at the stage of gatherers, hunters and shifting cultivators, etc.  The 
Committee further note that  only four States viz. Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra 
Pradesh and Maharashtra have established special agencies at micro-level for the 
development of the PTGs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the remaining 
States/UTs should also be impressed upon to set up special agencies at micro-level to 
take care of the PTGs.  The Committee further desire that Special Officer of suitable rank 
having adequate knowledge and experience abou t the conditions and needs of PTGs and 
having commitment for them, should be posted in the areas of thei r concentration to 
protect their interests effectively.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5 The recommendation has been brought to the notice of the St ate Governments for 
compliance. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.12  of Chapter–I of the Report) 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl.No. 8, Para 4.9) 
 
4.6 The Committee note that as a result of  developmental activities like education, 
economic development and various training programmes, the lifystyle of PTGs has 
changed considerably and helped them to join the mainstream. The Committee appreciate 
the efforts made by the Ministry to bring th e PTGs into the mainstream but at the same 
time desire that in the name of modernizatio n, the rich cultural heritage of the PTGs 
including their traditional liv elihood resources should not be  adeversely affected. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that State Tribal Research Institutes, whose activities 
include preservation of the cultural her itage of the tribal  population should be 
strengthened and equipped to  perform their job effectively. Moreover, these institutes 
should be persuaded to work in close tande m with the Ministry of Human Resources 
Development, Department of Culture, for disseminating the rich tribal Culture.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.7 The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of TRIs 
set up in different States for compliance by taki ng appropriate steps. The Ministry held a 
meeting of State Secretaries in-charge of Tr ibal Development and Directors of TRIs on 
28 November, 2003 to devise strategy for stre ngthening the TRIs. The TRIs had been 
facing financial crunch due to difficulty being expressed by the States in making 
available the State Share of 50% under the scheme of Grant-in -aid to TRIs under 
Research Scheme. The proposal of the Minist ry to extend 100% gr ant under the scheme 
to TRIs has been approved by the Planning Co mmission in principle. The Ministry also 
organized a day long seminar of all share hol ders to get specific feed-back on various 
issues relating to preservation of cultural heritage of Sche duled Tribes including PTGs 
and steps required thereof to develop and disseminate the same.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.15  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 11, Para 5.16) 
 
4.8 The Committee note with concern that  though State Governments and UT 
Administrations have enacted Laws and Regulations to check  the  alienation of tribals 
from their lands plots the tribals are still being deprived of their lands in the States/UTs.  
The Committee further note that only five States/UT viz. Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Orissa, Tripura and Andaman and Nicobar Isla nds have enacted provisions to deal with 
cases of occupation of tribal land through deceit on the pattern of provisions made in the 

Bonded Labour Abolition Act, 1976.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Ministry should ensure  that adequate safeguards ar e incorporated in the State 
Laws/Regulations to protect the poor tribals in cluding the PTGs against occupation of 
their lands by the non-tribals through deceit.  State Governments might also be persuaded 
to amend their Land Alienation Acts to make it more stringent against the offenders and 
for speedy restoration of lands from illegal occupation.  Th e Committee also desire that 
free legal aid should be provided to th e tribals through IT DPs/ITDAs and NGOs 
especially in the cases of tribal land alienation.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.9 The recommendation has been brought to the notice of the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administration for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.18  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 13, Para 6.11) 
 
4.10 The committee note with concern that t hough the Project Office rs of Integrated 
Tribal Development Projects (ITDPs) are entrusted with the task of implementing 
policies for protection and development of PTGs , the Ministry are not satisfied with their 
performance and achievement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that for effective 
functioning, ITDP framework in States should  be suitably restructured and strengthened 
in terms of finance, manpower and delegation of powers to the Project Officers so that 
various programmes could be implemente d through the line departments smoothly and 
effectively. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.11 The State Governments have been  requested for compliance of the 
recommendation. The Government of Andhra Pr adesh has recently issued orders giving 
more powers to Project Officers of the ITDPs.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.21  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 15, Para 6.13) 
 
4.12 The Committee further note that State machineries are not making adequate 
efforts for the development of PTGs and th e degree of participation of PTGs in the 
activities/ programmes for their development is low due to the factors of rigidity of social 
and cultural values prevailing among them and low level of literacy, etc. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the training to few selected PTG members from each group, 
who will be able to disseminate information among their own group may be imparted in 
batches so that the number of PTGs par ticipating in development programme may 
increase substantially during the Tenth Five Year Plan. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.13 The efforts are being made for wider dissemination of information among the 
PTGs as per recommendation through the St ate Government and Voluntary Agencies. 
Seva Bharati, an Established Voluntary Agency is running the Project of “JAN 
JAGARAN” through 300 single te acher schools in Mandla, Di ndori, Shivapuri, Sheopur 
and Guna Districts of Madhya Pradesh for bringing awareness among the PTGs of 300 
villages about importance of education, medi cal care, vocational training, etc. Awareness 
programme have also been under taken in Karnataka through the organization – 
Vivekanand Youth Movement. The direct impact  of the programme has been in form of 
enhancement of students’ enrolment in re spect of Jenukorba PTGs in local primary 
schools.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.24 of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION(Sl. No. 16, Para 7.25) 
 
4.14 The Committee note with concern that only 13 Mobile Dispensaries have been 
sanctioned to provide health care facilities to the PTGs in six States.  There are no 
Primary Health Centres/Health Sub-Centres functioning exclusively in the PTG areas.  
Therefore, the identified PTGs have to avai l health care facilities from the medical 
centres functioning in the tribal areas.  The Committee observe that the health care 
facilities for the PTGs are grossly inadequate particularly for the groups who are living in 
the remote, hilly and inaccessible areas.  Th e Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 

that adequate number of Mobile Dispensari es, Primary Health Centres, sub-Centres, 
Community Health Centres, etc. which may ex clusively cater to the PTGs should be set 
up in the areas of their habitation.  The Comm ittee also desire that  Project Directors of 
ITDPs should conduct health surveys among the PTGs regularly and ensure that 
medicines and other life saving drugs are made available on demand. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.15 The recommendation of the Committee has b een brought to the notice of the State 
Governments and the Union Ministry of Heal th and Family Welfare. The main focus 
during the Tenth Five Year Plan is ensuring food security through settled agriculture, safe 
drinking water, primary education and basic minimum medical facili ties for each of the 
PTG. The State Governments and NGOs have been sanctioned projects of hospitals, 
mobile dispensaries, primary schools etc. as per the necessity of PTG villages.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.27  of Chapter–I of the Report) 
 

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 14, Para 6.12) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that financial as sistance has been provided to State 
Governments and Voluntary Agencies for form ation of Self Help Groups and generation 
of awareness among the PTGs to enable  them to gain knowledge about various 
Government Programmes and schemes for their development.  However, the Ministry 
have no information on the number of Self He lp Groups set up so far.  The Committee 
fail to understand how in the absence of such vital data, funds released for the formation 
of Self Help Groups will actually be utilised for that purpose.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should ensure that funds provided fo r the formation of Self Help 
Groups are fully utilised, as intended, by th e State Governments a nd NGOs and also to 
collect the necessary data on Self Help Groups formed in States/UTs at the earliest.  
 
    REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Ministry had requested the State G overnments and voluntary organizations to 
furnish the utilization status of  grants released for setting up of Self Help Groups. As per 
report received in the Ministry, in Orissa, 75 SHGs are functioning.  
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. F.No.16015/4/2002-R&P(NGO), dated 
03.12.2004) 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
18 March,  2005        Chairperson 
           27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Social   Justice 
and Empowerment  
 
 
 
 
 

          ANNEXURE  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING ON THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 18TH 
MARCH, 2005. 
 
 The Committee met from 14.00 hrs. to 15.15 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M.Gaikwad 
5. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
6. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
7. Dr. R. Senthil 
8. Mohd. Sahid Akhlaque 
9. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
10. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
15. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
SECRETARIAT 
   
  1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Smt. P. Jyoti Rao  - Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rajiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary  
4. Dr. R. M. Dubey  - Director 

 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and informed them that 
the meeting has been convened to seek clarifications from the Ministry on 
certain points furnished in their action taken notes on the Twenty-eighth 
Report of the erstwhile Committee on Labour and Welfare on 
‘Development of Primitive Tribal Groups’ and the Second Report of the 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on Demands for Grants, 
2004-05 of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The Committee expressed grave 
concern over the fact that the Ministry had taken a long time in furnishing 
the action taken notes on the Twenty-eighth Report on ‘Development of 
PTGs’. Though the Report was sent to  the Ministry  20 December, 2002 
for furnishing action taken notes  by 21 March, 2003, the Ministry 
furnished the action taken notes on 3 December, 2004.  The Committee 
also pointed out that not much progr ess has been made even after a long 
time in implementing the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry 
clarified the points raised by the Members. 
 
4. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Secretary and other officials for 
their cooperation and valuable information given to the Committee.  
 
(The Witnesses then withdrew) 
 
5. The Committee took up the Draft Fourth Report on ‘Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendati ons/observations contained in the 
Twenty-eighth Report of the erstwh ile Committee on Labour and Welfare 
on ‘Development of Primitive Tribal Groups’ for consideration and 
adoption.  Certain change s incorporated in the Report on the basis of 
written clarifications received from the Ministry were read out.  The 
Committee then adopted the draft Fourth Report without any amendment. 
 
6. XX   XX   XX    
 
7. XX   XX   XX 
 
8. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports 
and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
9. The Committee then placed on reco rd their deep appreciation and 
thanks to the officers and staff of th e Lok Sabha Secretariat for their hard 
work and valuable assistance rendered by them to facilitate the work of the 
Committee in preparing their draft Reports within the limited time. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTY-
EIGHTH REPORT OF THE ERSTWHILE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR AND WELFARE (THIRTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage
        
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   20 
 
II. Recommendations/Observati ons  which have 8  40%  
been accepted by the Government 
(Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 7, 9, 10,12, 18 and 20)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the   4  20% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
the replies of the Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 17 and 19) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 7  35%  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and commented upon by the Committee  
(Sl. Nos. 3, 6, 8, 11, 13, 15 and 17)  
 
V. Recommendation/Observati on in respect of  1  5% 
 which final replies of Government is interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. No. 14) 
 
 
 
 