 
1 0 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2005-2006) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Grants-in-aid to State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations for Minor Forest Produce  Operations 
 
 
TENTH  REPORT 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2005 
 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2005 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
                  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
              NEW DELHI 
               December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
      

CONTENTS 
Pages 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………. 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………. 
REPORT 
                         CHAPTER -I   
  Introductory                           
 A - Profile of Minor Forest Produce in the country   
B - Setting up of State Tribal Development Cooperative                                                             
Corporations 
C-  Financial Performance of State Tribal Development                               
Cooperative Corporations 
  D - Commercial Operations                         
                        CHAPTER -II  
 A - Common Minimum Price for Minor Forest Produce                      
  B - Ownership of Minor Forest Produce by Tribals                    
               C - Monopoly of Minor Forest Produce  Markets by                             
       private traders/middlemen 
 
                CHAPTER  - III  
 
                         A - Minor Forest Produce Operations on Scientific                    
      Lines 
 B - Research and Development                      
  C - Awareness generation and Training                     
D - Coordination between Ministry and State Tribal                                               
Development Cooperative  Corporations 
 
E - Obstacles in Carrying out Minor Forest Produce operations         
 
  ANNEXURES 
 
ANNEXURE I   MFPs found in various States                                 
 
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee          
held on  24 September, 2004…………  
 
ANNEXURE III Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee  
held on  25 May, 2005…………  
 
ANNEXURE IV Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee 
held on  8 December, 2005…………  
 
APPENDIX 
 
   Statement of Recommendations/Observations Contained  
   in the Report -------------------- 

 
     C O M P O S I T I O N   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2005-2006) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan-CHAIRPERSON  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque   
3. Shri M. Appadurai   
4. Shri Ashok Argal    
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
6. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad   
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal   
8. Shri Kailash Meghwal   
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
10. Shri Jual Oram    
11. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon   
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi   
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy  
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj   
15. Dr. R. Senthil    
16. Smt. Pratibha Singh   
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
18. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
19. Smt. Usha Verma    
20. Shri K. Yerrannaidu   
 
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
21. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
22. Shri Silvius Condpan 
23. Shri R.S. Gavai 
24. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
25. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
26. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
27. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
28. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
29. Shri Veer Singh  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
            SECRETARIAT 
         
 
  1.    Shri John Joseph    -            Secretary 
  2.    Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri R.K. Saxena   - Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri Bhupesh Kumar    - Under Secretary 
          5.   Km. M. Tunglut  - Sr. Executive Assistant 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2005-06) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Tenth Report on the subject “Grants-in-aid to 
State Tribal Development Co-operative Corporations for Minor Forest Produce 
Operations”. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the repres entatives of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs on 24 th September, 2004 and 25 th May, 2005.  The Committee wish to 
express their thanks to the officers of th e Ministry of Tribal Affairs for placing 
before them the detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing whatever 
information the Committee desired in c onnection with the examination of the 
subject. 
 
3. The Committee undertook on the spot st udy visit to Adilabad district and 
interacted with beneficiaries of women Self Help Groups and the tribal people 
regarding the problems and difficulties being faced in the collection and marketing of 
minor forest produce.  The Committee also held discussions with the District 
Collector, Adilabad and offici als of ITDA.  The observa tions of the Committee are 
based on the outcome of the oral evidence of  the Ministry and de liberations during 
their study visit.  
 
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 8 December, 2005. 
 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the 
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the 
Report.   
 
 
 
New Delhi:               SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
8 December, 2005         Chairperson,  
17 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
     

 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 The Committee have been informed that  a Central Sector Scheme of Grants-
in-aid to State Tribal Development Coope rative Corporations (STDCCs) for Minor 
Forest Produce (MFP) Operations wa s introduced during 1992-93.  Under the 
Scheme, funds were made available to State Tribal Devel opment Cooperative 
Corporations/Forest Development Corporat ions/Minor Forest Produce (Trade and 
Development)  Federations for: 
 
a) increasing the quantum of MFP ha ndled by setting off operational 
losses, if need be; 
 
b) strengthening the share capital base of the Corporation for undertaking 
MFP operations thereby increasing th e quantum of the MFP presently 
handled; 
 
c) setting up of scientific warehousing facilities, wherever necessary; 
 
d) establishing processing industries for value addition with the objective 
of ensuring maximum returns on the MFPs for the tribals; 
 
e) giving consumption loans to tribals; and  
 
f) supplementing Research & Development (R&D) efforts. 
 

 
 
 
A.   PROFILE OF MINOR FOREST PRODUCE IN THE COUNTRY  
 
1.2 The Ministry have informed that Minor Forest Produce (MFP), also known as 
NTFP (Non-Timber Forest  Produce) has been defined by an expert Committee set up 
in 1998 by the Ministry of Environment a nd Forests as ‘forest produce, other than 
timber, harvestable on a non-destructive basis’ .  The list of such items is notified by 
the State Government and differs from Stat e to State.  The list includes Tamarind, 
Amla, Naramamidi Bark, soap, Nut, Nuxvomica, Pongam seed, Honey, Hill Grass, 
Marking Nuts, Mohwa Flower and see d, Addaleaf, Sheekakai, Maredugaddalu, 
Myrobalans, Chebulic Myrobalans, etc. Th e list of Minor Forest  Produces found in 
various States is appended at Annexure – I. 
 
1.3 The Ministry have further stated that M FP is central to the existence of tribal 
communities. A study by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (June 1999) has 
observed that `some 50 million tribal people depend on MFP for meeting their 
subsistence consumption and income needs. MFP provides 60% of their food and 
medicinal needs and 60% of their income’. 
 
1.4 A detailed profile of MFP in India has been furnished by the Ministry as 
under:- 
 
Sl. No.                               Products Annual 
Production(MT)
1. Wild edible products 101200 
2. Myrobalan 132250 
3. Sal seeds 709700 
4. Mahua seeds 697600 
5. Neem seeds 115000 

6. Other seeds 57500 
7. Essential oils 3160 
8. Gum Karaya 15000 
9. Resin from pine 45000 
10. Katha 5750 
11. Tans and dyes including cutch  222900 
12. Bamboo 4716600 
13. Fibres and Flosses  15000 
14. Beedi leaves  360000 
15. Lac 30000 
  
TOTAL  
 
1,17,71,850 
 
Source: Report of Expert Committee se t up by the Ministry of Forests 
and Environment(1999). 
 
 
1.5 The Ministry have also furnished th e following statement showing the tribal 
share of MFP market worked out by Insight  Management Consultants in the year 
2002:- 
 
                                   TRIBAL SHARE OF MFP MARKET 
 
 COMMODITY TRIBAL SHAR PROCUREMENT VALU
Rs. (in crore) 
 
1. Hill Grass 100% 150 
2. Tamarind 65%  60 
3. Sal+Mahua+Other tree borne oil 100% 100 
4. Mahua Flower 100% 15 
5. Tej Patta 100% 35 
6. Siyali Leaves 100% 35 
7. Shikakai 100% 10 
8. Honey 25% 15 
9. Myrobalan 100% 10 
10. Sericulture(Muga/Tassar) 100% 30 
11. Shellac (Lac) 100% 75 
12. Gum (Karaya)&Others 100% 15 
13. Other Commodities 100% 100 
14. Estimated Supply 95% 650 
Source: Insight Management Consultants(2002) 

 
 
 
1.6 On being asked about the existing potenti al of MFPs within the States, present 
level of exploitation etc., the Ministry have stated that the MFP–wise potential or the 
assessment of MFP-wise availability is not precisely quantifia ble due to various 
factors such as age of crop, seasonal and c limatic variations, pathogen attacks etc.  
Current enumeration and assessment tec hnology even through remote sensing is 
unable to cover and provide authenticated  potential.  Being a natural produce of 
forests, there is apparently no certainty of  production in terms of quantity.  However, 
the existing potential of some MFPs within  the States, present level of exploitation 
has been worked out as an exercise for its internal use by TRIFED. 
 
1.7 The Committee have been informed that MFP collecting families have been 
collecting a variety of forest produce for se lf consumption as well as for commercial 
purposes. Earlier they used to collect more  qualities for self consumption and less 
quantity for sale.  But, as the prices for various MFP are increasing and there is 
scarcity of MFP resources, there is stiff competition among the tribal MFP collecting 
families which leads to collection of immature plant parts, leaves, flowers, fruits, 
barks, roots, tubers thereby causing damage to the mother plant and less returns to the 
forest dependent community. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.8 The Committee also enquired whether STDCCs are aware of the existing 
potential of MFPs in their States and whether any specific ac tion plan has been 
prepared by them/TRIFED to exploit the potential in a scientific manner.  The 
Ministry have informed that State TD CCs/Forest Corporations have collected 
information on the existing potential of MFPs in the respective States.  The States  
prepare their action Plans/proposals and accordingly undertake procurement activities 
on the basis of yearly   assessed anticipated yield.  Under the STDCCs scheme, States 
also send proposals to the Ministry for re lease of funds on annual basis for a few 
activities as provided under the scheme. 
 
1.9 The Committee note that Minor Forest Produce is central to the existence 
of tribal communities.  Acco rding to the Report of an Expert Committee set up 
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1999, the amount of MFP 
produced annually is 1,17,71,850 MT.  The study conducted by Insight 
Management Consultants in the year 2002 had estimated  the share of the tribals 
in the MFP market, except for Tamarind and Honey, to be 100%.  The 
Committee are, however, distressed to note that due to scarcity of MFP 
resources, there is stiff competition amon g the tribal MFP collecting families 
which leads to collection of immature pl ant parts, leaves, flowers, fruits, bark 
and roots thereby causing damage to the mother plant and less than optimum 
return to the forest dependent community. The Committee observe that MFPs 
are playing a pivotal role in the lives of  the forest dependant tribal families but 

express its serious concern that collection of immature plant parts and 
unscientific exploitation of MFP resources would ultimately lead to the 
destruction of the source of livelihood of these tribal families. The Committee 
are of the view that the existing pote ntial of Minor Forest Produce should be 
exploited economically and scientifically so that they remain as a sustainable and 
renewable source of income for the tribal families.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should pursue with the States to prepare specific 
action plan for harnessing the existing potential of MFP in their respective States 
in a scientific manner, provide technological inputs for value addition to Minor 
Forest Produces and undertake procurement activities with improved methods.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry/TRIFED should lend their expertise 
to the States for preparation of specific action plans and in their procurement 
operations so that Minor Forest Produce continue to be a viable and self- 
sustaining source of income for the fore st dependant tribal families for many 
generations to come. 
 
B. SETTING UP OF STATE TRIB AL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATIVE 
CORPORATIONS 
 
1.10 The State Tribal Development Coopera tive Corporations(STDCCs) are State 
level Registered Bodies under the relevant Acts of the concerned State. The main 
function of these Corporations is to procure MFP. The STDCCs are functioning in the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, West Benga l, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur, 
Kerala and Assam. 
 

1.11 On being asked to state the reason s why STDCCs are not set up in the 
remaining States, the Ministry have stated  that States are pr ovided grants under the 
STDCCs scheme only when they send their proposals after establishing the Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporations.  U nder the scheme the States are free to 
establish the Corporations and in fact, at the beginning of each financial year all the 
States are addressed to send their proposals.  
 
1.12 When enquired how MFPs are procured and marketed in the absence of the 
STDCCs, the Committee have been informed that in some States  certain MFP items 
are procured and marketed by State Fo rest Development Corporations, MFP 
Development Cooperative Federations, othe r State Government Organisations like 
MARKFED, LAMP Societies etc. 
1.13 The Ministry have informed that th e Central Government has nominated two 
officers on the Board of Directors of STD CCs to ensure better cooperation between 
the Ministry and TRIFED on one hand and the State bodies on the other.  
1.14 The Committee desired to know whethe r the nominated officials from the 
Ministry have been attending the meetings of the Board regularly and how far they 
have been able to ensure better cooper ation between TRIFED and STDCCs wherein 
they have been informed that the attendance of Central Government nominees in the 
Board meeting of STDCCs has not been very regular due to limited number of 
officials in the Ministry. However, repres entatives of member STDCCs on the Board 
of TRIFED do regularly a ttend Board meetings of TRIFED, which achieves 
coordination between TRIFED and STDCCs.    
 

 
1.15 The Committee find that  State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations (STDCCs), whose main function is to procure MFPs, are 
functioning in fourteen States at presen t.  In some States, certain MFP items are 
procured and marketed by State Forest Development Corporations, MFP 
Development Cooperative Federations, other State Government organizations 
like MARKFED, Large Area Multipurpose Projects (LAMPs) Societies etc.  The 
Committee are not happy with this situatio n.  They  strongly feel that in the 
absence of STDCCs, the poor tribals woul d not be able to procure and market 
the produce effectively and would also  not get remunerative prices. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously persuade the remaining 
States to set up STDCCs  in their States  at the earliest so that MFPs are 
procured from the tribals and marketed at remunerative prices thereby 
benefiting them. 
 
1.16 The Committee note that due to limited number of officials in the 
Ministry, the nominees of th e Central Government have not been able to attend 
the Board meetings of STDCCs on a reg ular basis.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that proper coordination is to be maintained between the Ministry and 
TRIFED on one hand and the State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations on the other for their effective functioning.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the nominated member s of the Ministry should attend the 
meetings of the Board of Directors of STDCCs regularly, acquaint themselves 
with the overall functioning of the Stat e bodies and ensure better coordination 
between the Ministry and STDCCs/TRIFED.  

 
 
C. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF  STATE TRIBAL DEVELOPMENT 
COOPERATIVE CORPORATIONS 
 
(a) Allocation of Funds 
 
1.17 The Ministry have provided the details of  funds released to the State Tribal  
Development  Cooperative  Corporations for the previous years along with the 
position of utilization of the funds as under:- 
         Rs. (in lakhs) 
Sl.No Name of the State Year Amount 
Released
Purposes for which grant released  Utilization 
i)   Procurement of MFP Operations                   400.00 
ii)  Strengthening of share Capital                       100.00 
2001-2002 520.00 
iii) Construction of Godowns/Warehouses           20.00 
  
 
UC received 
2002-2003 480.00 For procurement of MFP Operations UC received 
2003-2004   30.00 For procurement of MFP Operations UC received 
1. Andhra Pradesh 
2004-2005 300.00 For procurement of MFP Operations 
 
UC received 
2. Assam 2003-2004   30.00 For procurement of MFP Operations UC awaited 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 2003-2004   30.00 For procurement of MFP Operations UC awaited 
4. Chhattisgarh 2004-2005 144.00 For procurement of MFP Operations UC awaited 
i)   Share Capital investment                                400.00 
ii)Procurement of MFP Operations                      100.00 
5. Kerala 2002-2003 225.00 
iii) Construction of Godowns/Warehouses           20.00 
  
 
UC awaited 
2003-2004 300.00 Strengthening the share capital UC received 6. Madhya Pradesh 
2004-2005 356.00 Strengthening the share capital and establishment of Pr o
Industries 
UC awaited 
2001-2002    47.00 Collection of MFP operations UC received 7. Meghalaya 
2002-2003  100.00 Collection of MFP operations UC received 

  2003-2004    30.00 For procurement of MFP operations UC received 
 
2001-2002   200.00 For procurement of MFP operations UC received 
2002-2003   400.00 For procurement of MFP operations UC received 
8. Orissa 
2003-2004    30.00 For procurement of MFP operations UC received 
For Strengthening share capital base for               50.00 
undertaking  increased MFP Operations 
 
Share capital Investment                                       84.61 
 
Processing units                                                      7.00     
 
2001-2002 251.61 
Procurement of MFP Operation                           110.00 
UC received 
Share Capital investment                                     98.20 
 
For go downs & warehouses                                  28.00 
  
Total                                                                   126.20    
 
Less unspent                                                            6.83 
 
9. 
 
Rajasthan 
 
2002-2003 119.37 
Balance                                                                119.37  
 
 
UC awaited 
10. Maharashtra 2001-2002  200.00 For procurement of MFP operations UC received 
2001-2002   62.06 For procurement of MFP operations                 
 
UC received 
For procurement of MFP operations                   125.00 
 
Less unspent                                                            3.00 
11. Tripura 
2002-2003 122.00 
Balance                                                                122.00  
UC received 
amount of Rs.
lakhs 
12. West Bengal 2002-2003    53.63 For collection of MFP operations UC received 
 
1.18 On being asked whether the funds have  been adequate, th e Ministry have 
stated that though the demands for funds from the States is larger than the allotment 
in the scheme, the inter-scheme allocations are made on the basis of the allocations 
given by the Planning Commission to the Ministry.  
1.19 When enquired whether the matter of allo tting more funds has ever been taken 
up with the Planning Comm ission, the Committee have been informed that the  

Ministry had written to the Planning Co mmission for overall enhancement in the 
budgetary allocation.  During 2005-06, the overall budg etary allocation has been 
enhanced by more than Rs. 352 crore; of  the enhanced allocation Rs. 230 crore is 
earmarked for development of forest villages and Rs. 50 crore for providing irrigation 
facilities in tribal areas only.  Allocation under the Post Matric Scholarship scheme 
has also been increased due to enhanced ra tes of scholarships.   As a result, the 
allocation under other schemes including the scheme of STDCCs has either been kept 
at par with 2004-05 or has been reduced.     
 
1.20 The Committee desired to know whether STDCCs are not receiving sufficient 
funds from the State Governments for thei r MFP operations and whether they have 
approached their State Govern ments in this regard. They have been informed that  
although there is no specific  complaint from any STDCCs , it has been found that in 
some cases even the funds released by the Ministry under the scheme are released by 
the State Governments to their Corporations  in a delayed manner.   Whenever such 
instances have been reported, the Ministry have addressed the respective States for 
expediting release.   
 
1.21 The Committee enquired whether the grants-in-aid to STDCCs should be 
enhanced to make them financially viable  thereby improving their performance. The 
Ministry are of the view that the gran ts in aid for STDCCs scheme should be 
enhanced to cover the potential of MFPs in the States and make them financially 
viable.  The same can, however be done with in the overall allocat ions given to the 
Ministry on a year to year basis.  The Ministry urged that the Committee may like to 
recommend suitably in this regard.  Implem entation of the provisions of Panchayats 

(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act 1996, de nationalization of MFPs, agricultural 
costing and sharing of market intelligen ce would go a long wa y to increase the 
trading volumes of MFPs. 
 
1.22 The reasons for non release and non recei pt of utilization certificates from 
various States from the year 2002-03 to 2004 -05 have been furnished by the Ministry 
as under:- 
  
 Non release of funds: 
  
(a) Kerala, Rajasthan, Maharashtr a: During 2003-04, funds could not be                         
released due to non-receipt of UCs for earlier years.   
 
(b) Tripura and West Bengal: Despite receipt  of the proposals from these States 
the overall performance of the Corporat ions did not qualify for any further 
release.   
 
(c) During 2004-05 funds could not be re leased to the States of Assa m, Kerala           
and Rajasthan due to non-receipt of UCs for earlier releases.  Proposal from 
Arunachal Pradesh was not received.   
 
1.23 So far as Orissa, West Bengal a nd Tripura are concerned, their overall 
performance did not qualify for any further release during 2004-05. The proposals 
received from Meghalaya and Maharashtra were found to be deficient in some 
respects and the States were addressed accordingly. 
 
Non receipt of Utilisation Certificates: 
 
  
(a) Kerala and Rajasthan: The States have been repeatedly requested to provide 
the UCs.   
 
(b) Assam and Arunachal Pradesh: The funds  released to Assam were in   turn 
released by the State Government to their Corporation till January, 2005 for 
which the Ministry has taken up the issue with the State Government.  So far as 
Arunachal Pradesh is concerned, they have been requested to furnish the UCs.   
 
 

(b) Separate funds for Establishment Expenses 
 
1.24 The Ministry have informed that there is no separate provision for the 
establishment expenses of the STDCCs in cluding TRIFED. Since the salaries etc.  
have to be paid, most of the funds of the Corporations are spent on salaries etc.  
Therefore, to make the scheme viable, there should be a se parate provision for 
meeting establishment costs (through Plan or Non-Plan budget).  Unless this is done, 
the financial conditions of the Corporations cannot improve. 
1.25 The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs also stated during evidence:  
 
“Coming to the funds made available, fi rst of all a sum of Rs. 18 crore made 
available to the Tribal Development Co rporations, I would submit before the 
Hon. Committee, is not at all sufficient.  That is our view.  If you would 
kindly see our submissions, the States are not giving funds regularly to the 
Tribal Development Corporations.  Th ey expect the State level Tribal 
Development Co-operative Federations or  Corporations to procure the minor 
forest produce.  But passing of most of  the funds, if at all they are made 
available, to the Corporati ons is delayed.  Whatever they are passing on, that 
amount is eaten away in the shape of  salaries to the employees of the 
corporations.  We have repeatedly been reques ting them to meet the 
establishment cost.  We are no better in  the case of TRIFED.  Most of the 
amount made available to them are eaten away in the shape of  salaries to the 
employees.  Whatever money we have given here has been spent on meeting 
establishment costs.  So is the cas e with the State level Development 
Corporations.  We have repeatedly been writing to them about this.  We have 
the copies of the letters here and we could submit them to the hon. Committee.  
We have been requesting them to use this amount for procurement.  Whenever 
we are releasing the limited amount at our  disposal we are requesting them to 
use that fund for procurement.  But what  are they doing? They are spending it 
on the payment of salaries to their employees.” 
 
1.26 When asked whether the Government is contemplating any steps in this 
regard, the  Ministry have stated that m eeting the  expenditur e on establishment and 
administrative matters is the responsibility of the States.  The funds meant for 
establishment expenses may be drying up though the situation differs from State to 
State. Nonetheless, Corporations have re ported turnovers indicating procurement of 

MFPs. The Ministry does not have any pl an to supplement establishment cost of 
STDCCs. 
 
1.27 The Committee enquired whether the Mi nistry have advised the States to 
allocate adequate funds for financing thei r MFP activities as well as make separate 
provisions for meeting the establishmen t expenses, the Committee have been 
informed that procurement of MFP is a State specific subject and States provide funds 
for this operation within availability of f unds in their respectiv e State plans and in 
order of priority accorded by the State Government.  Since the Ministry do not 
provide assistance for establishment expenses, it is for the State to decide adequacy 
and means of financing non-plan funds for their employees, including various 
Corporations.  The Ministry, however, provides funds for a few activities as 
prescribed under the STDCCs scheme to the States.    
 
(c) Bank Loans for MFP operations 
 
 
1.28 The Ministry have also stated th at depending on their needs, STDCCs 
obtained loans from Banks so as to increa se their presence in the trade of MFPs 
including Haat Bazars. 
 
1.29 On being asked whether it is feasible to obtain loans from banks and repaying 
them with interest in the long run, the Ministry have informed that  feasibility of 
taking loan from Banks depend on the commerc ial viability of a particular MFP and 
the effectiveness in application of borrowe r funds, according to the prudent practices 
of business.     
 

1.30 The Committee note that during 2005- 06 the overall budgetary allocation 
of the Ministry has been enhanced by more than Rs.352 crore.  However, out of 
the enhanced allocation, Rs.230 crore has been earmarked exclusively for 
development of forest villages and Rs.50 cro re for providing irrigation facilities 
in tribal areas.  Also allocation und er the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme has 
been increased due to enhanced rates of scholarship. As a result allocation under 
other schemes including the schemes of STDCCs has either been kept at par 
with 2004-05 or has been reduced.  The Co mmittee further note that though the 
demand for funds from the States is larger than the allotment under the scheme, 
the inter-scheme allocations are made on the basis of the allocations given by the 
Planning Commission to the Ministry.  The Committee further note that in some 
cases even the funds released by the Mini stry under the scheme are released by 
the State Governments to their Corpor ations in a delayed manner.  The 
Committee are of the view that grants-in-aid for STDCCs Scheme should be 
enhanced adequately to cover the potent ial of MFPs in States and make them 
financially viable.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should approach the Planning Commission to give due priority to the STDCCs 
Schemes by allocating more funds specifically for Corp oration’s schemes within 
the overall budgetary allocations of the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should ensure that  the grants-in-aid released to  the States are actually 
utilized for procurement of minor forest produce.  The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to pursue with the States to pr ovide funds to their Tribal Development 
Cooperative Corporations without any delay as well as submit proposals 

complete in all respects and utilization cer tificates of earlier funds released to 
them in time and regularly. 
 
1.31 The Committee are constrained to note  that most of the funds of the 
STDCCs are spent on salaries as th ere are no separate provisions for the 
establishment expenses of the STDCCs including TRIFED.  The Committee have 
been apprised that meeting the expenditure on establishment and administrative 
matters is the responsibility of the States.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to persuade the State Govern ments to make separate provision for 
meeting establishment costs either through Plan or Non-Plan budget and ensure 
that the funds released to the STDCCs are utilized in MFP operations. 
     
1.32 The Committee regret to note that STDCCs are obtaining loans from 
Banks and repaying them with interest to increase their presence in the trade of 
MFPs including Haat Bazars.  The Commi ttee express apprehension that this 
practice will not be in the best interest of the poor tribals depending on collection 
of  MFP for their livelihood.  The Commi ttee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
impress upon the States to examine the commercial viability of MFPs thoroughly 
before taking loans from Banks and st rictly adhere to prudent business 
practices. 
 
D. COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS 
1.33 The Committee found that some Stat es are enjoying monopoly rights for 
collection of MFP whereas in other States , MFP are not nationalized and enquired  
whether monopoly rights for collection of MFPs to STDCCs will be more beneficial 

to the tribals engaged in collection of M FPs. The Ministry have stated that the 
Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas ) Act, 1996 (PESA) gives the rights of 
ownership of MFP to the re spective Gram Sabhas and is applicable to all the 
scheduled areas. The views of the Ministry on this issue are that  ownership of MFPs 
should be passed on to Gram Sabhas in terms of the PESA and the STs should be 
allowed to collect and sell MFPs through cooperatives or Self-Help Groups (SHGs) 
as the contractors tend to extract more than the carrying capacity of forests so as to 
maximize returns in fixed time. It is, therefore, desirable that SHGs of STs 
themselves collect MFPs and State agenci es play the role of facilitator and 
accordingly provide infrastructural support.  
1.34 When asked whether the STDCCs have util ised the services of grass root level 
agencies to procure MFP directly from village Haat, the Ministry have informed the 
States have devised varying procedures of  procurement through different agencies at 
the grass root level including Large Area Multipurpose Projects(LAMPS) and other 
primary level cooperative societies and ev en direct procurement from the weekly 
Haats.   
1.35 On being asked whether varied markets (both national and international)  have 
been explored by the Ministry and STDCCs for marketing of MFPs, it has been stated 
that  the State TDCCs/local agencies gene rally sell their produce locally within the 
States without much  value addition in most cases.  The markets explored by the State 
Corporation are generally local and national in nature.  The Ministry has not laid 
down guidelines for exploring the National and International markets as the State 
Level Corporations are independent to take their-own decisions based on sound 
commercial grounds.  However, as   an outfit of the Minist ry, TRIFED has, to some 

extent, played a role  in the international trade of  commodities including niger seed, 
gum karaya, mustard DOC etc. 
1.36 As regards the efforts made by the Mi nistry and the STDCCs to expose the 
tribals to marketi ng channels, market knowledge re garding weights and measures, 
costing and quality control,  it was informed that the STDCCs conduct awareness 
generation programmes from time to time de pending on the needs which are location 
specific.  In addition, TRIFED has also  organized various awareness and skill 
improvement programme relating to collec tion, processing, value addition, grading, 
packing, storage, marketing of MFPs.   
 
1.37 In reply to a query, the Ministry have stated that by adopting the following 
broad strategies/policies & programmes, TRIFED would be able to play a greater role 
in marketing of MFPs collected by STDCCs  in National and International markets:   
 
a) Provide them market intelligence about their products  
b) Lay down the norms for standard para meters for quality specifications for 
various MFPs collected by STDCCs 
c) Provide information about good collection practices, packing and storages 
 
d) Provide training on the elementary value addition at the point of 
collection/storage.  
e) Provide technological inputs for value addition. 
f) Vocational Training Centres are proposed to be set up in the tribal areas. 
Export Facilitation Centres proposed to be set up at Mumbai will be open to 
all STDCCs  and all required  export related services   can be provided to  
them.   The STDCCs can store their products in the godowns of TRIFED at 
Mumbai.    TRIFED  can secure export orders for their products.  
g) TRIFED proposed to form the consortiums of  STDCCs so as to strengthen 
their bargaining power and organise sale  of their products through auctions in 
systematic manner so as to fetch better rates for their products. 
h) For limited products TRIFED can get involved  in direct selling in the country 
through outlets of TRIBES  under a national brand. 
i) TRIFED can organise Buyer Seller Meets at periodic intervals so as to bring 
together the STDCCs and the big buyers of the MFP which can go a long way 
in boosting the trade of MFP.   
 

 
1.38 The Committee note with concern that  most of the States are enjoying 
monopoly rights for the collection of MFPs.  The States have devised varying 
procedures of procurement through diffe rent agencies at the grass-roots level, 
including Large Area Multi-purpos e Projects and other primary level 
cooperative societies.  The Committee are,  however, of the firm view that the 
poor tribal collectors of MFPs will be op timally benefited if they are allowed to 
collect and sell MFPs through Cooperative s or Self Help Groups formed by 
them. The Committee, therefore, urge the Mi nistry to direct the States and their 
Corporations to assist the tribals in forming Cooperati ves or Self Help Groups 
while providing the infrastructural support  and acting as a facilitator for the 
marketing of the MFPs.   
1.39 The Committee note that markets expl ored by the STDCCs are generally 
local and national in nature and MFPs are sold without much value addition.  
TRIFED has, to some extent, played a role in the international trade of 
commodities including Niger Seed, Gum Karaya, Mustard DOC etc.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry/T RIFED should assist the STDCCs in 
educating the tribals about marketing channels, market knowledge regarding 
weights and measures, costing and quality control and also explore the avenues 
for sale of MFPs in international mark ets on a larger scale.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to play a pr oactive role in the marketing of MFPs 
by providing market intelligence about their products,   rendering export related 
services, opening of Export Facilitation Centres to enable the STDCCs to sell 
their products and adopting direct selling through outlets of TRIBES under a 

national brand.  The Committee also desi re the Ministry to lay down guidelines 
for exploring the national as well as international market to expand the scope for 
the supply of MFPs   and export of the same to other countries. 

 
CHAPTER –II 
 
A. COMMON MINIMUM PRICE FO R MINOR FOREST PRODUCE  
 
2.1 The Ministry have informed that in most  of the States the price of the various 
MFP items are fixed by the State Government by taking into consideration various 
factors that affect th e price. The method of price fixati on varies from State to State.  
Generally, the District Aut horities fix the price of the MFP through their Price 
Fixation Committees in consultation w ith the relevant bodies including the 
representatives from the STDCCs/FDCs etc. 
 
2.2 On being asked the criteria for fixing the price of MFPs, the Ministry have 
stated that  fixation of the price of MFPs is State specifi c subject.  The pricing policy 
differs from State to State. There is no uniformity at all. TRIFED is not associated in 
the process of price fixati on. Details of price fixation Committees are not available 
with the Ministry as well as TRIFED. 
 
2.3 The Ministry have further stated that in Gujarat, the State Government has 
appointed the State Advisory Committ ee and based on their recommendation, the 
State Government fix up the price of nationalized MFPs.  In West Bengal, the price of 
MFPs is fixed after comparing them with th e other States and also local market.  In 
Rajasthan, prices are fixed based upon the tr end of the rate in the area of collection 
which is further compared with the prevailing mandi price.   
 
2.4 The Committee also desired to know wh ether the Ministry have made all out 
efforts to persuade the States to adopt uniform (as far as possible) minimum support 

price for the MFPs wherein they have been informed that in view of divergent views 
of the States and variation in local c onditions, the adoption of uniform minimum 
support price has not yet been resolved. 
 
2.5 When asked to state the steps taken to provide minimum support price for the 
MFPs of the tribals as is available to other commodities in the agricultural sector 
through Agricultural Price Commission as well as the views of the States in this 
regard, the Ministry have stated that th e issue regarding the provision of minimum 
support price for the MFPs, being a forestry matter, was taken up with the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests who have stated that the issue concerns States and thereafter 
had directed TRIFED to take  up the issue with  the Stat es.  However, the matter was 
also taken up with the States on receipt of  the Fifth Report of the erstwhile Standing 
Committee on Labour and Welfare and there wa s no unanimity of the decision of the 
States. TRIFED has recently taken up the issu e with the Ministry of Agriculture as 
well (Agriculture Price Commission). 
 
 
2.6 Queried further, the Ministry have inform ed that the Ministry of Agriculture is 
yet to respond to the proposal regarding provision of minimum support price for the 
MFPs. 
2.7 The Committee are constrained to note that there is no uniformity in 
fixing the price of MFPs amongst the Stat es.  Generally, the Di strict Authorities 
fix the prices of the MFPs through their Price Fixation Committees in 
consultation with the relevant bodies, including the representatives from the 
STDCCs/FDCs, etc.  However, the details  of the price fixation Committees are 
not available with the Ministry as well as TRIFED.  The Committee desire that 

members of tribal community should also  be represented in the Price Fixation 
Committees proportionately and the States  should adopt (as far as possible) 
common minimum prices for the minor fore st produce of the tribals and urge 
the Ministry to pursue the matter with the States so that the issue is resolved and 
implemented at the earliest.  
2.8 The Committee express serious con cern over the fact that minimum 
support price is not available for the MFPs  of the tribals as is available for other 
commodities in the agriculture sector th rough Agricultural Price Commission.  
TRIFED has recently taken up the issue with the Ministry of Agriculture as well 
but they are yet to respond to the proposal.  The  Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need to bring the minor fores t produce under the ambit of minimum 
support price as they are the main so urce of livelihood and income for a 
majority of the tribal people.  The Co mmittee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
earnestly pursue the nodal Ministry,  i.e. Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and also the  Ministry of Agriculture to fix minimum suppo rt prices for the 
MFPs of the tribals, in consultation wi th concerned State Governments so that 
the tribals could get proper value for the forest produce collected by them. 
  
B.       OWNERSHIP OF MINOR FOREST PRODUCE 
 
2.9 On being asked whether tribals living in the forests are enjoying any 
ownership rights of the MFPs the Ministry ha ve informed that the tribals living in the 
forests are not entirely enjoying ownership of the MFPs.  The major issue in this 
regard is that the term “Minor Forest Produce” has not been clearly defined.   
2.10 When asked whether any step is being taken to define the term “Minor Forest 
Produce” clearly so as to avoid any ambiguity , the Ministry have stated they have 

formulated a draft “Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2005” to 
recognize and vest the forest rights and occupation of forest land in the forest 
dwelling Scheduled Tribes who have been residing there for generations and who are 
integral to the very survival and sustaina bility of forest eco- system including wild 
life but whose rights could not be recorded so far. It is proposed to define the term 
“minor forest produce” also in the draft Bill. The Bill is, however, still a tentative Bill 
and has been placed on the website (tribal.ni c.in) of the Ministry for comments/views 
of public/experts, etc.  
2.11 As regards the steps and efforts bei ng made in the matter of vesting the 
ownership rights of MFPs with the tribals,  the Ministry have informed that the 
Panchayats (Extension of Scheduled Areas ) Act, 1996 (PESA) gives the rights of 
ownership of MFP to the respective Panchaya ts/Gram Sabhas and is applicable to all 
the scheduled areas. 
2.12 The views of the Ministry of Tribal Af fairs on this issue are that ownership of 
MFP should be passed on to Panchayats /Gram Sabhas as per the provision of 
Panchayat (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 and STs should be allowed to 
collect and sell MFP through cooperatives or Self Help Groups.  The Panchayats, 
however, should not tender th e entire area under their control as the same again 
amounts to parceling it off to contractor s who again, in turn, employ STs as wage 
earners for collecting MFP.   Further, the contractors tend to extract more than the 
carrying capacity of forests so as to maximize returns in fixed time.   
2.13 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have requested the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests that the provisions of the PESA Act should be implemented in the right spirit 
and that the respective Gram Sabhas should be  given the right of ownership of all the 

MFPs.  There are still a number of cases, such as, in case of  Tendu leaves, where 
trading is being done by Forest Corporati ons through contractors.   The Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs have brought this to the notice of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests and requested them to remove middlemen, including monopoly of the State 
Corporations. 
2.14 The Ministry have further informed that they have written to the State 
Governments on 18.6.2004 to confer ownership rights in respect of MFP, including 
tendu patta, on the scheduled tribes after d eciding about the definition of MFP, which 
should  include all the trad itional produce being produced  by all the tribals, by 
amending the concerned State legislations.  
2.15 It has further been stated that the Ministry of Environm ent & Forests have 
now advised the State Governments to bring about appropriate legislations conferring 
ownership rights on people from weaker sections working in forests.  The Ministry of 
Environment and Forests is also in the process of finalizing a Model Bill for 
conferring ownership rights in respect of MFP on forest dependent communities. 
2.16 The Ministry have informed that  with the enactment of various Acts of the 
Central Government like Forest(Conserva tion)Act, 1980, the Wild  Life Protection 
Act, 1972 etc, the Forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes who are residing in the forest for 
years and are dependant on MFP for their livelihood have been labeled as encroachers 
of forest land. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have been mandated to formulate a 
Scheduled Tribe (Recognition of Forest Righ ts) Bill, 2005 with the main objective to 
undo this historical injustice by recognisi ng and vesting the forest rights and 
occupation in forest land in forest dwelli ng Scheduled Tribes who have been residing 
there for generations but whose rights could not be recorded. 

   
2. 17 The Committee further enquired about the present status of the Bill and 
whether there is a tussle between the Mini stry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of 
Environment and Forests over the provisions of  the Bill and also whether the Bill is 
facing stiff opposition from Conservationists.  The Ministry informed that they had 
circulated the draft Bill amongst the concer ned Ministries including the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for their comments. The draft Bill has by and large been 
accepted with suggestions by the concerned Central Ministries, except the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. The comments of  the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
who were involved in the process of drafting the Bill, have been duly answered by the 
Ministry and included in the Cabinet Note.  The Ministry have sent a Note for the 
Cabinet along with the draft Bill to the Cabi net Secretariat.  The matter is yet to be 
considered by the Cabinet. The Bill has in the meantime been placed on the web site 
of the Ministry (tribal.nic.in) for comments/views of the public/experts.  The Bill will 
be finalized as per the established procedure.  
 
2.18 The Committee are dismayed to note that the forest-dwelling Scheduled 
Tribes, who have been residing there for generations and are dependant on MFP 
for their livelihood are still not enjoying  ownership of their MFP mostly due to 
ambiguity in the definition  of the term ‘Minor Fores t Produce’.  The Ministry 
have informed that they are in the process of finalizing a draft “Scheduled 
Tribes (Recognition of Forest Righ ts) Bill, 2005” to recognize and confer 
ownership rights to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes.  The Committee urge 
the Ministry to clearly define the term “Minor Forest Produce” and bring within 
the ambit of the term ‘MFP’ all the tradit ional minor forest produce in the Bill.  

The Committee further desire that in order to recognize and vest the forest 
rights and occupation of forest lands to the forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes, the 
Ministry should finalise the  “Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Bill, 2005”, in consultation with the Mi nistry of Environment and Forests and 
concerned Departments/States and bring it to the Parliament at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.19 The Committee further note that  for finalizing a Model Bill for 
conferring ownership rights in respe ct of MFP on forest dependant 
communities, the Ministry of Enviro nment and Forests have sought the 
comments of concerned Ministries, including  the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in 
this regard.  Keeping in view the fact th at the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the 
nodal Ministry concerned with the welf are and development of the Scheduled 
Tribes, majority of whom live in forests and depend on MFP for their 
sustenance, the Committee urge the Mini stry to lend their expertise to the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests a nd actively involve themselves in the 
drafting of the Bill.  
 
2.20 The Committee note that though the Panchayats  (Extension to Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 gives the rights of ownership of MFP to the respective 

Panchayats/Gram Sabhas and is applicable to all the Scheduled areas, yet it has 
not been implemented by the States in the right spirit.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue th e States to amend their legislations in 
accordance with the PESA Act, 1996 so that ownership rights of MFPs is 
conferred on the Panchayats/Gram Sa bhas and the poor Scheduled Tribe 
families living in the forests are not deprived of their source of livelihood.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. MONOPOLY OF MFP MARKETS BY PRIVATE 
TRADERS/MIDDLEMEN 
 
2.21 The Ministry have stated that the control of MFP market through direct 
Government intervention is only around 25-40% . The private traders virtually control 
the supply market(1egally and illegally). As much as 60% of the transactions are 
unaccounted.  
2.22 During the briefing on the subject, the S ecretary, Ministry of  Tribal Affairs 
also stated as under: 
“There is Rs. 650 crore worth of minor forest produce available in the 
country. Out of that, 60 per cent is going into the hands of the unorganized 
sector and the traders. They are dealing with it. Not even 30 per cent is 
procured by the Government agencies”. 
 
2.23 The Committee enquired about the r easons for monopoly of the entire MFP 
markets by private traders, the steps proposed to be taken in this regard and whether 
Government Agencies(Central + States) could be  involved more extensively in the 
collection and marketing of MFPs so that the tribals get proper value. The Ministry 

have informed that handling of MFPs is a State subject where policies on 
monopolistic control or free trade are decided by the State Governments.  Every State 
Government has its own list of nationalise d MFP, collection and trade of which is 
solely controlled by the State or bodies under  control of the State.  The rest of the 
MFP commodities are open for collection free ly and the collectors have the liberty of 
trading with either Government controlled bodies or with private traders.  There could 
be instances where even monopolized co mmodities are being traded by private 
agencies owing to loose control being exercised by State agencies.  The State 
controlled commodities are also in many case, handled through the medium of 
auctions involving private operators, perhaps owing to the volume of trade involved 
which is beyond the feasible coverage ab ility of any Government body, apart from 
causing monetary loss due to various reasons .  In addition to th e grants provided by 
the Ministry and  depending on their need s, the STDCCs also obtained loans from 
Banks so as to increase their presence in the trade including   Haat Bazaars.   
2.24 In reply to a query, the Committee have also been informed that none of the STDCCs 
has indicated that they are leasing out the Forest Divisions/ Ranges to the private parties. 
2.25 When asked whether non-tribals are au thorized to collect MFPs and the 
average total income for tribals and non-tribals from marketing of MFPs, the Ministry 
have stated that they have been informed that generally the non-tribals who live in the 
forest and forest fringe areas, also co llect MFPs and  are also in many cases 
dependent on the collection and sale of MFPs for their livelihood. There is no 
authentic data available on the aspect of area-wise, MFP- wise, ST/Non ST- wise 
income generated by MFP trades. 
2.26 The Committee desired to know whether there are instances where the private 

traders or middlemen do not allow the trib als to reap the harvest of their MFP 
wherein the Ministry have informed that some of the STDCCs like Gujarat, Rajasthan 
and West Bengal have stated that there ar e no instances where private traders or 
middlemen do not allow the tribals to reap the harvest of their MFPs.  The State 
Government of Meghalaya has indicated that  there is no hard and fast rules in 
restricting non-tribals from participating in  collecting MFPs.  As such, the Ministry 
have not received any report or complaint in this regard.   
2.27 When asked as to how State agencies can  play an active role  in the collection 
and marketing of MFPs and regulate their ope rations with strict control, the Ministry 
have stated that State Agencies can play an  effective role in collection and marketing 
of MFPs and regulate their operations with  strict control by effective management 
conditions of access to and sale of MFPs.  Th ere is need to synerg ise activities of the 
administrative machinery at the field level, belonging to various Departments, such as 
Revenue, Forests, Cooperatives, Tribal Welfare, Agriculture Market Committees, etc.  
for maximization of returns to STs and minimizing the exploitati on of tribals by 
unscrupulous middle men. Since many commod ities are procured in many States, 
though often at different pri ces, the formation of consor tium of State TDCCs and 
periodic buyers-sellers meet can go a long way in this direction.  
 
2.28 The Committee  note with deep concern   that marketing of minor forest 
produce remains unorganized main ly in the hands of private 
traders/middlemen.  Out of Rs. 650 cro re worth of MFPs available in the 
country, 60 per cent is going into the hands of the  unorganized sector  and 
private traders or middlemen while no t even 30 per cent is procured by 
Government agencies. The Committee have also been informed that only 

Gujarat, Rajasthan and West Bengal have stated that there are no instances 
where private traders or middlemen do not allow tribals to reap the harvest of 
their MFPs. The Committee strongly feel that monopoly of the MFP market by 
private traders, legally or illegally owing to inadequa te control being exercised 
by State agencies, should be curtaile d. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to vigorously pursue the STDCCs to play an active role in the collection 
and marketing of MFPs and regulate their operations with strict administrative 
control and effective management techni ques.  Proper coordination among field 
level agencies involved in MFP operation s should be ensured.  The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry  should take immediate st eps to form a consortium 
of State TDCCs which will organize p eriodic buyers-sell ers meet thereby 
enabling the tribals to get proper price for their MFPs and also  minimize the 
monopoly of the MFP markets by private traders/middlemen.  Steps taken in 
this regard may be communicated to the Committee.  
 
2.29 During their on the spot study vi sit to Adilabad in November, 2004 the 
Committee observed that the tribals are getting very low price for their MFP, 
though the same is being sold at a much  higher price in the open market.  The 
tribal collectors of MFPs are not getting any subsidy or marketing support.  The 
Committee are not happy with the si tuation and desire that the State 
Governments or its Corporations should provide adequate marketing support to 
the tribals and take steps to  ensure that they  are able  to reap the full benefits 
accruing from the sale of MFP.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 

take stringent steps to minimize the role  of  Private Traders in the MFP market 
and ensure maximization of returns to the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
A. MINOR FOREST PRODUCE OPERATIONS ON SCIENTIFIC LINES 
 
3.1 The Ministry have stated that MFP co llecting families have been using tools 
like axes, chisels etc. for collecting MFP including Gum Karaya. The Committee 
enquired whether the tribals engaged in M FP operations are using improved methods 
and scientific prac tices in the collection, processing and storage of MFPs. The 
Ministry have informed that the tribal s mostly engage in collection of MFP on 
sustainable basis in accordance with thei r traditional wisdom.  They are also 
supported by STDCCs, TRIFED in the handlin g of MFP.  Nonetheless, they are not 
yet fully updated with latest  developed modern technolo gies.  As an attempt to 
overcome this, TRIFED in its limited capacity had given the STDCCs some 
machinery and implements  and also imparted training in some States towards 
sustainable collection, pre and post harvest technology etc.  
 
3.2   The Ministry have furnished the details of  toolkits/technological aids provided to the 
tribals by TRIFED as under:- 
 
 Year No. of  toolkits /technological inputs pro          Activity No. of b
ciaries 
2004-05    
 Technology input was provided by T R
for training in scientific cultivation met h
Safed Musli 
Cultivation of Safed M50 
 Honey Boxes –100 numbers and ass o
tool kit-100 nos. 
Rearing of Honey  100 
 

 
3.3 The Ministry have further stated that  TRIFED in its limited resources has 
supplemented efforts of the STDCCs by providing tool kits and technological aids for 
enhancing the quality and quantity of the following products: 
1. Decorticating machines for Tree Borne Oilseeds. 
2. Implements for sustainable training of Gums and resins. 
3. Involve the tribals of Karbi & N.C. Hills  districts of Assam in cultivation and 
extraction of essential oils from aromatic grass in the distillation plants 
provided in the above two districts.   
4. Bio fuel operated Dona Pattal making Machines. 
5. Boxes for production of apiary Honey. 
6. Hill broom binding Machines. 
 
3.4  TRIFED is also exploring avenues to im part training and other support  to the  
tribal honey hunters in the State of Karnataka. 
3.5 When asked to state the steps taken/pr oposed to be taken to ensure that the 
tribals engaged in MFP operations start to resort to improved methods and scientific 
practices in the collection, processing and storage of MFPs, the Ministry have 
informed that the State Governments and their Corporations take State specific 
actions.  As far as TRIFED is concerned, the Federation is undertaking the following 
activities in this direction:-  
 
i) TRIFED has undertaken training programs of tribals /SHGs in various fields 
for scientific study and value addi tion activities like Hill Brooms,  Safed 
Musli, Leaf plates & cups, Handicrafts, Gum Karaya and Honey.  
 
ii) TRIFED has also initiated standardization of quality norms for MFP. TRIFED 
has identified Tamarind, Honey, Mahua and Gum Karaya to be taken up in the 
first phase under assistance of Directorat e of Marketing Inte lligence  already 
working in this area. If funds are pr ovided, TRIFED could expand the number 
of commodities for development of standard norms. 
 
 

iii) Common Facility Centers/Vocational Tr aining Centers to be set up in tribal 
clusters for providing them a comm on platform for imparting training on 
scientific methods of co llection, value addition and storage besides marketing 
of their produce.  
 
 
3.6 The Committee note that the tribals li ving in the forest are engaged  in 
MFP operations in accordance with their traditional wisdom using tools like 
axes, chisels, etc. for collection of minor forest produce and are not updated with 
the latest technologies in this regard. Due to overall resource constraints, 
TRIFED and STDCCs are not in a positi on to provide adequate technological 
aids and tools.  The Committee, however,  desire that the Ministry should pursue 
the State Governments and their Corporations to take necessary action for 
imparting training to the tribals in the application of modern tools, scientific 
methods of collection, processing, stor age and marketing of MFPs and also 
provide tool kits and technological aids to them.   TRIFED, as the nodal 
organization should develop standard norm s for the MFPs so that their market 
could be expanded considerably.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should assist the STDCCs  in setting up common facility 
centres/vocational training centres in trib al clusters which could be utilized for 
imparting training regarding scientific me thods of collection, value addition and 
storage besides marketing of the MFP of the tribals.  

  
B. RESEARCH  AND DEVELOPMENT 
3.7 The Committee enquired whether the STDCCs are having the facility of 
Research and Development(R&D) centres fo r quality control of the MFPs and their 
conversion as raw material for cosmetic , toiletry and medicinal products. The 
Ministry have informed that by and large STDCCs are involved in facilitating trade of 
collected raw material in the form of seed s, flowers and other parts of plants, which 
are collected in respective seasons by Scheduled Tribes.  The STDCCs have by and 
large involved themselves in arranging procurement of MFP in their respective 
jurisdictions  at remunerati ve price for the collectors and thereafter di spose off the 
same through sale in the appropriate market with an attempt to recover the prices and 
overheads paid into  organising the entire trade practice.  Some of the State bodies 
such as Girijan Cooperative Corporation, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat State Forest 
Development Corporation have involved themselves in the R&D works   for 
enhancing marketability of MFPs. However,  the R&D efforts have to be suitably 
augmented to enhance income from the MFP.   Such efforts of the STDCCs may be 
supported under the Scheme of the Ministry.  
3.8 When asked whether the Ministry have ever approached the remaining States 
i,e, States other than Andhra Pradesh a nd Gujarat to engage in research and 
development for enhancing the marketability of  MFPs, the Ministry stated that grants 
under the scheme of STDCCs are released as per the provisions of the scheme and the 
States are always requested to send thei r proposals accordingly.  No other State has 
approached the Ministry for funding their R&D efforts. 
 

3.9 As regards augmenting the R&D efforts of STDCCs to enhance the 
quality(value addition) and marketability of  MFPs, the Ministry have stated that 
grants are released subject to the provisions of the scheme vis-à-vis the proposals 
received from the States. 
  
3.10 As far as TRIFED is concerned, it has its own Research and Development 
Centre at Delhi which is working on the following R&D projects:-  
 
a) Development of quality standards of MFP in association with Directorate 
of Marketing Intelligen ce. In the first phase Tamarind, Mahua, Shikakai, 
Amla and Forest Castor are being taken up. 
 
b) Development of storage norms for tr ee borne oil seeds like Sal Seed, 
Karanj Seed, Neem Seed, Mahua Seed etc.  
 
c)   Development of scientific storage norms for MFP   
 
 
3.11 The Committee desired to know whether the STDCCs coordinate with 
TRIFED for use of its R&D centers as we ll as lend expertis e in MFP operations 
wherein they have been informed that TRIFED has provided th e quality control and 
R&D service to various STDCCs. The STD CCs of West Bengal, Manipur and GCC 
of Andhra Pradesh have appreciated efforts of TRIFED in this regard. 
 
3.12 During the course of evidence, the Committee have been informed that the 
Tata Institute of Social Scie nces is finalizing a study titl ed ‘Quantification of State-
wise MFP value addition and backward and forward linkages with a market to ensure 
enhanced income in the States of Chhattisgarh, Madhya  Pradesh, Orissa and Andhra 
Pradesh’. 
 

3.13 Queried further, the Minist ry have stated that they have sanctioned a project to 
the Tata Institute of Social Sciences for undertaking evaluation on “Quantification of 
state-wise Minor Forest Produces, value addition and backward forward linkages with 
the market to ensure enhanced income of the Scheduled Tribes in the States of 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa & Andhra Pradesh”.  The study 
covers the main tribal dominated States of Central and South India.  The study has 
been sanctioned during 2004-05 and the report  from the organization is awaited.  
Depending upon the outcome of the final repo rt,  the Ministry would consider the 
essentiality of such studies for other States and also for wider spectrum of objectives.    
 
3.14 The Ministry have also given an ev aluation study to National Institute of 
Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad on ‘P rocurement and marketing of items of 
tribal produce marketed by TRIFED’ during 2003-04. 
 
3.15 The Committee regret to note that mo st of the STDCCs are not having 
the facility of Research and Developmen t for enhancing the quality of MFPs, 
which would commensurately enhance the marketability of MFPs.  Only two 
State bodies i.e. Girijan Cooperative Corporation, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat 
State Forest Development Corporation h ave involved themselves in Research 
and Development works.  The Committee  are of the view that the tribals 
depending on MFP would be able to derive maximum income through 
marketing of their minor forest produce only after refining the quality and value 
addition  of the MFPs and desire that the STDCCs should focus on Research and 
Development to enhance the marketab ility of the MFPs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should render financial assistance to 

augment the Research and Development efforts of STDCCs through increased 
budgetary allocation so that income d erived from MFPs may be adequately 
enhanced.  The Committee also desire that TRIFED should provide assistance to 
STDCCs in setting up Research and De velopment Centres for value addition 
activities of MFPs and maintaining stri ct quality control norms and also to 
ensure that their products are viable in the competitive market.  
  
3.16 The Committee note that the Ministry have sanctioned evaluation studies 
on ‘Procurement and marketing of it ems of tribal produce marketed by 
TRIFED during 2003-04’ and ‘Quantification of State-wise minor forest 
produces, value addition and backward, forward linkages with the market to 
ensure enhanced income of the Scheduled Tribes’ during 2004-05.  The 
Committee desire that these studies should be completed at the earliest so that 
the Ministry would be able to plan a wide spectrum of activities pertaining to  
MFP operations.   
 
 C. AWARENESS GENERATION AND TRAINING 
 
3.17 The Ministry have stated that various training programmes, workshops, 
seminars are organized by TRIFED for skill upgradation, revenue generation, value 
addition, cultivation of medicinal herbs, abou t the latest tools an d kits, scientific 
practices for pre & post harvest management  (i.e. processing, packaging and storage 
as well as marketing etc.), transfer of knowledge and technology etc. The 
Ministryhave furnished information regarding training/ workshop/seminar organized  

by TRIFED as under: 
 
Sl. No.              Period No. of tribals trained Amount spent o n
training (in Rs.) 
1. 1.4.1999 to 31.3.2000 563 5,69,603 
2. 1.4.2000 to 31.3.2001 611 3,28,948 
3. 1.4.2001 to 31.3.2002 1940 10,44,000 
4. 1.4.2002 to 31.3.2003 - - 
5. 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2004 237  
174 SHGs 
 
 
3.18 When asked why no tribals have been trained from 1 April 2002 to 31 March, 
2003 as well as the reasons for the steep decline in the number of tribals trained 
during 2003-2004 as compared to 2001-2002, the Ministry have informed that 
TRIFED has been organising training of tr ibals/SHGs out of its own funds or the 
funds received from various Ministries under specified schemes. During the year 
2002-03, TRIFED was in a transitional phase of  deciding its own role direction from 
its earlier main business of procurement of MFP and agriculture items to marketing 
development activities.  Fu rther, TRIFED was facing severe financial crunch.  
Therefore, training programmes could not be undertaken by TRIFED during 2002-03.  
In the year 2003-04, again TRIFED coul d not take up training programmes on a 
larger scale because of paucity of funds.  However, in the current year, TRIFED 
propose to take up training programmes on a larger scale. 
 
3.19 The Committee desired to know the num ber of tribals/SHGs trained during 
2004-2005 wherein the Ministry have stated  that during the year 2004-05, TRIFED 
has imparted training to Heads of 20 SHGs in the scientific collection and harvesting 
of Honey in Karnataka.  Th e expenditure for the traini ng was borne by Government 
of Karnataka.  In addition to this, dur ing the year under reference, TRIFED had 
imparted training to 24 tribal women in Hill Broom making at Jagdalpur and further 

213 tribals in making plates and bowls from the leaves of Sal and Siali by using Bio-
fuelled based moulding machine.   
 
3.20 The Committee note with deep con cern that during the year 2002-2003, 
no training/workshop/seminar has been organized for scientific collection, 
processing, storage and marketing of M FPs.  The number of tribals imparted 
training from April, 2003 to March, 2004 i.e. 174 SHGs and 237 tribals are not 
adequate keeping in view the fact that  most of the trib als still use their 
traditional tools and are ignorant abou t scientific methods of collection and 
harvesting of MFPs.  The Committee also observe that during the year 2004-
2005, only 20 SHGs have been trained in sc ientific collection and harvesting of 
Honey in Karnataka; 24 tribal women in  Hill Broom making at Jagdalpur and 
213 tribals in making plates and bowls from Sal and Siali leaves by using bio-
fuel based moulding machines.  The Co mmittee express their dissatisfaction at 
the decline in the number of training programmes held during the previous 
years and desire that the Ministry /TRIFED should organize training 
programmes, workshops and seminars for the skill upgradation, revenue 
generation, value addition, usages of latest tool kits, scientific practices for pre & 
post harvest management on a large scale.  The Committee also recommend that 
the Ministry should pursue the States  to organize awareness generation and 
training programmes regarding scientific  collection and harvesting of MFP as 
well as provide adequate funds for the same  so that the poor tribals who mainly 
depend on MFP are able to reap the harvest to the maximum.   
 
 

D. COORDINATION BETWEEN MINISTRY AND STATE TRIBAL 
DEVELOPMENT COOPERATIVE CORPORATIONS 
  
3.21 The Ministry have informed that they have been providing funds to the State 
Tribal Development Cooperative Corpor ations since 1992-93 basically for their 
minor forest produce operations. Besides, TRIFED had been engaged in procurement 
and marketing of commodities till 2002-200 3. Majority of the procurement of 
commodities (especially MFPs) were undertaken through the State Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporations and Forest Development Corporations as the 
rights of collection were vested with the STDCCs/FDCs.  
3.22 The Committee desired to know how th e Ministry coordinate with STDCCs 
for procuring minor forest produce of the tr ibals and rendering marketing assistance 
wherein they have been informed that TDCCs being State owned bodies, procurement 
and marketing of MFP at th e execution level remains with the STDCCs themselves, 
governed largely by policies and decisions of  the State Government taken from time 
to time.  
3.23 When enquired about proper coordina tion with STDCCs and TRIFED for 
development of the MFP sector, analysi ng of proposals from State Governments, 
technological inputs and expert ise in research and development, the Ministry have 
stated that coordination between STDCCs  and TRIFED has been suggested by the 
Ministry from time to time.  Member re presentatives of the STDCCs attend board 
meetings of TRIFED and the matters re quiring coordination or tie ups between 
STDCCs and TRIFED are sorted out at that level. TRIFED have provided R&D 
inputs to STDCCs which have been appreciated by some. 
 

3.24 In reply to a query, the Ministry have informed about the measures that can be 
undertaken to ensure proper coordination between  STDCCs and TRIFED  as under:- 
a) The procurement of MFPs and their trade fall within the ambit of the 
States.  Hence, TRIFED in its cha nged role direction can share market 
intelligence with the Corporations for augmenting their volume of trade.  
 
b) As per the provisions of the scheme  TRIFED has nominated officers on 
the Board of the State Corporations .  The State TDCCs on their part 
should invite the nominees invariably so that the views can be shared. 
 
c) This Ministry have formulated a dr aft “Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Bill, 20 05” to recognize and vest  the forest rights and 
occupation of forest land in the fo rest dwelling Scheduled Tribes who 
have been residing there for generations  and who are integral to the very 
survival and sustainability of forest eco system including wild life but 
whose rights could not be recorded so far. 
 
d) Proper implementation of the provisi ons of the PESA Act, 1996 would 
help in better realization of MFPs on part of the Gram Sabhas.  Ministry is 
already working in this line for conferring ownership rights of MFPs to the 
Scheduled Tribes in the manner as stated above.  
 
 
3.25 The Committee note that procuremen t and marketing of MFPs at the 
execution level remains with the STDCCs and are largely governed by policies 
and decisions of the State Governments.  The Committee, however, feel that 
there are lots of areas where the Ministry/TRIFED can work together like 
development of the MFP sector, anal yzing of proposals from the State 
Governments, technological inputs and in the field of research and development.  
The Committee,  therefore,   urge    th e     Ministry/TRIFED to (i) maintain 
proper coordination with the STDCCs by  providing market intelligence thereby 
augmenting the volume of trade of the STDCCs; (ii)  ensure that nominees to the 
Board of STDCCs attend the meetings re gularly; (iii) provi de R&D inputs to 
STDCCs; (iv) persuade the States to impl ement the provisions of the PESA Act, 
1996 and (v) confer ownership rights of MFPs to the Scheduled Tribes. 

 
E. OBSTACLES IN CARRYING OUT MINOR FOREST PRODUCE 
OPERATIONS 
  
3.26 The main obstacles faced by the STDCCs in carrying out their operations are:- 
i. financial constraints 
ii. lack of awareness among the tribals on collection, storage, grading, primary 
level value addition and prices of MFPs in primary markets. 
iii. unorganised market of MFPs 
iv. seasonal fluctuations in crop product 
 
3.27 Although the Ministry have been provi ding grants under the scheme to the 
States, the State Governments have to take  proper care in creating awareness about 
collection, storage as well as primary level value addition of MFPs amongst tribals so 
that they can reap the harvest. 
 
3.28 The Committee desired to know about taxe s/forest levies for trading in MFPs 
wherein they have been info rmed that it is gove rned by the Statut ory levies imposed 
by the State from time to time. 
3.29 On being asked whether movement restrictions are imposed on MFPs 
resulting in lower price realisation by tribal collectors as well as efforts made by 
them/STDCCs for abolition of the same, the Ministry have stated that as per the 
information received from the States, no blanket restrictions are imposed on the 
trading of MFPs. Some States in fact have also waived the fees leviable on transit of 
such MFP.  However, under the rules made vide Indian Forest Act and relevant State 
Forest Acts, there are regulatory provisions such as transit rules which are statutory in 
nature. These vary from State to State. 
3.30 When asked whether the issue of waiving the taxes/forest levies for trading in 
MFPs has been taken up with the State Gove rnments, the Ministry  have stated that 

they are yet to take up the matter with the States.  However, the issue of conferring 
ownership rights over MFP to the Scheduled Tribes has been taken up. 
3.31 The Committee enquired about the States which have waived the fees leviable 
on transit of MFP  wherein the Ministry ha ve informed that  as per the available 
information, in Orissa, there is no restriction for movement of MFP items in the State.  
In Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and West Bengal also there is no movement 
restriction. In Meghalaya, tax and levies on transit pass are imposed on the movement 
of MFPs.  
 
3.32 The Committee express concern over th e fact that STDCCs are facing a 
number of obstacles in carrying out their MFP operations viz, financial 
constraints, lack of awareness among the tribals in the collection, storage, 
grading, primary level value addition, uno rganized market of MFPs etc.  The 
Committee further note that under the Indian Forest Act and relevant State 
Forest Acts, regulatory provisions such as transit fees are statutory in nature.  
However, States like Orissa, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and West 
Bengal have waived the fees leviable on transit of such MFP.  The Committee  
desire that the remaining States should be pursued to abolish the taxes/forest 
levies for trading in MFPs and urge the Ministry to take up the issue with the 
State Governments on priority basis. 
  
New Delhi:      SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
8 December, 2005         Chairperson,  
17 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
. 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
MFPs FOUND IN VARIOUS STATES 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
                                             Name of MFPs found in the State 
 
MFP under Monopoly rights                             MFP under non-monopoly rights 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Adda Leaf, Wild Broom, Hill Broom, 
Shikakai, Amla, Cleaning Nut, Chironjee, 
Rock Bee Honey, Apiary Honey, Kusum 
Oil seed, Myrobalan, Mahua seed, Mahua 
Flower, Marking Nut, Nux Vomica, 
Naramamidi Bark, Pungam Seed, 
Sarpgandha Roots, Soap Nut, Honey Wax, 
Gum Karaya, Tamarind, Tamarind Seed, 
Teripods, Maredur, Gaddalu, 
Sugandhipala, Tendu Leaves 
All MFPs nationalized/under monopoly
Department 
2. Assam  Agarwood, Amla, Cane, Chirata, C h
Chini, Hill Broom, Honey, J.C.Grass, 
Safed Musli, Sal Dhuna, Sal Seed, Si a
Flower, Tej Patta 
3. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 Agarwood, Amla, Cane, Chirata, C h
Chini, Hilli Broom, Honey, J.C.Grass ,
Safed Musli, Sal Dhuna, Sal Seed, Sial
Patta 
4. Bihar Sal Seed, Mahua Seed, Tendu Leaves 
Myrobalan and Lac 
Kusum Seed, Karanj Seed, Palas, M
Bahera, Amla, Gum Karaya, Dharua 
Gum, Broom Grass, Sawai Grass, P
h
Tassar Cocoon, Katha, Leaves of M
Medicinal Herbs. 
5. Chhattisgarh Tendu Leaves, Myrobalan, Sal Seed, 
Gums. 
Mahua Seed, Mahua Flower, Tamar i
Seed, Karanji Seed, Lac, Amchur, Man
Seed, Karkatya, Peng Seed, Bheda, G h
Cashew Nut, Shikakai, Bibiding, Bamb
Phool, Cocoons, Phool Bahari, Bhil w
Bantulsi. 
6. Gujarat Timru Leaves, Mahuda Flower, Mahuda 
Doli, Kadaya Gum, Dhavada Gum, Baval 
Gum, Moina Gum, Salai Gum, Gugal 
Gum, Gandabaval Gum, Gorad Gum, 
Khair Gum, Khakhar Gum 
Puwad Seed, Hareda, Baheda, Amla, S
Honey 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
Resin, Bamboo and Khair About 42 Medicinal Herbs 
8. Jharkhand  Sal Seed, Mahua Seed, Tendu Leaves, 
Mahulan Leaves, Myrobalan, Baheda 
Mahua Flower, Karanj Seed, Kusu m
Tassar, Cocoons, Neem Seed, Ber, A
Seed, Chiraita, Arjun Bark, Kurji, S a

Bamboo, Honey, Bahera, Nux-Vomic a
Tamarind 
9. Karnataka No MFP is Nationalised but the produce 
has to be traded in the regulated Mandis 
Black Pepper, Tamarind, Shikakai, Soa
10. Kerala No MFP is Nationalised  Black Pepper, Small Cardamom, Cinna
Shikakai and Amla 
11. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Tendu Leaves, Sal Seed, Kullu Gond Baheda, Aonla, Nagarmotha, Belguda,
Katcheri, Gudmar, Safed Musli, Go k
Palas Flower, Harra, Chirota Seed, Chi
Neem, Keokand, Kalihari, Rasa Gr a
Mahua Flower, Ashwaganda, Bibidi n
Cocoon, Bhilwa Seed, Mahua See d
Leaves, Kali Musli, Imli 
12. Maharashtra Mahua Flower, Mahua Seed, Gum, 
Myrobalan, Chironjee, Amla Seed, 
Cleaning Nuts, Beleric Myrobalan, 
Pungam Seed, Indian Laburnam, Tamarind 
Pulp, White Musli, Black Musli, Ceilin 
Oak, Phisicnut, Foetid Cassia, Purple 
Floabane, Indian Bedellium, Nux Vomica, 
Shikakai, Soap Nut, Marking Nut, 
Jaquirily, Cashew Nu t, Hill Broom, 
Vavading, Baphali, Mango Kernel, Neem 
Seed, Tamarind Seed, Palas Lac, Dry 
Grass. 
 
13.  Manipur   Agarwood, Amla, Cane, Chirata, C h
Chini, Hill Broom, Honey, Mybro b
Dhuna, Siali Leaf, Stone Flower, Tez P
14. Meghalaya   Amla, Chirata, Chopchini, Cocoons, 
Honey, Wild Peple, Myrobalan, Safe d
Dhuna, Stone Flower, J.C. Grass, Tez P
15. Mizoram   Amla, Cane, Chirata, Cocoons, Hill Bro
Siali Leaf, Stone Flower 
16. Nagaland   Amla Chirata, Chopchini, Cocoons, 
Honey, Myrobalan, Safed Musli, Sal D
Flower, Tej Patta, J.C. Grass, Jabarang,
17. Orissa  Sal Seed, Kendu Leaves Tamarind, Mahua Flower, Hill B
Phulajhadu, Broom Grass, Nux Vo m
Amla, Soap Nut, Marking Nut, Cle a
Leaves, Sawai Grass, Mango Kern e
Cotton, Arrow Root, Dhatuki Flower, P
Jada Or Gaba, Palasa Seed, Siali 
Benachera, Bena Hladi, Bana Kolath
a
Seed, Tala Makhana Seed, Baidanka 
Kamala Gundi Fruit, Landa Banguli,
Pata, Rohini Fruit, Bhurasunga 
Phenephena Fruit, Sidha Fruit, Sathab
a
Khelua Lai, Suam Lai, Eksira Fruit, K

Anata Mula, Anatia Pata, Nageswar 
Atundi Fruit, Mahula Seed, Kusum S e
Seed, Char Seed, Chakunda Seed, Babu
18 Rajasthan Tendu Patta Kanji, Mahua Phool, Areetha, Anwala
Gond Salar, Gond Kadaya, Gond Babo
Musli, Bichhu Kanta, Kemech Beej, G
Gondal, Shahad, Mom, Gond Kher, L a
Baheda Chaal, Palas Beej, Gond 
Shatawari, Chitrak Chhal, Aducha Patt
i
19. Sikkim   Amla, Chirata, Hill Broom, Honey, Sto
20. Tamil Nadu No MFP is Nationalised.  Tamil Nadu 
Forest allots the MFP units to 
societies/tribal societies. 
Tamarind, Shikakai, Soap Nut, Ho n
Pungam Seed, Sambai Grass, Neem 
Lemon Grass, Broom Grass Cashew, C
21. Tripura   Amla, Cane, Chirata, Hill Broom, H
Leaf, Stone Flower, Wild Peple, Agarw
22. West 
Bengal 
Sal Seed, Tendu Leaves, Mahua Seed, 
Neem Seed 
Lac, Tassar Cocoon, Honey, Bees W
Sabai Grass, Kurchi, Palas, Ber, Bah e
Gaj Pipal, Sarpgandha, Arjun Bark, Bam
 

ANNEXURE II  
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMM ITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 24TH  SEPTEMBER 2004. 
 
The Committee met from    15.00  hrs. to  16.15 hrs. in Committee Room 
`E’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai 
3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
7. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
8. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
9. Shri Jual Oram 
10. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
11. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
12. Dr. R. Senthil 
13. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
14. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
15. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
16. Shri Silvius Condpan 
17. Shri R.S. Gavai 
18. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
19. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
20. Smt. Savita Sharda 
21. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
22. Shri Veer Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  1.  Shri R.C. Ahuja  -  Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri R.K. Saxena   -  Deputy Secretary 
  3. Shri Bhupesh Kumar -  Under Secretary 
 

          
          
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 1. Dr. A.V.S. Reddy   -  Secretary 
2. Shri S.Chatterjee  - Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Ramesh  Chandra - - Director 
4. Mrs. V.S. Rao - - Managing Director, TRIFED 
5. Shri Kush Verma  - Executive Director, TRIFED 
   
 
 At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and other officials 
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and drew their attention to the subject “Grants-in-aid 
to State Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations for minor forest produce 
operations”, selected by the Committ ee for detailed examination. Hon’ble 
Chairperson  observed that the State Governments are not  in a position to finance 
the activities of STDCCs and hence the Corporations and TRIFED were cash 
starved.  She therefore desir ed to be apprised of the c oncrete steps taken by the 
Government to make the STDC Cs financially viable so that  they could function as a 
healthy tool to improve the condition of tribals and achi eve the avowed goal of 
procuring the minor forest produce as well as  assist the tribals in marketing of the 
same. 
 
3. The members also raised queries on va rious points including (i) financial 
performance under the scheme (ii) monitoring and evaluation of the scheme    (iii) 
commercial operations (iv) linkage with TR IFED and other cooperative societies (v) 
elimination of private traders/middleman (vi) obstacles in carrying out MFP 
operations, giving ownership rights to Tribal s to cultivate, procure and sell the Minor 
Forest produce etc. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries of 
the members. 
 
4. Hon’ble Chairperson thank ed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and 
expressing their views in a candid manner.  

 
 
 
5. The Committee also decided to have an on- the-spot study visit to some tribal 
areas to have an interaction with the  tribals on the problems and difficulties faced by 
them in procuring the minor forest produce. 
 
6. A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE III 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING ON THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 25th May 2005. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 11.00 hrs. to 12.40 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
7. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
8. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
9. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
10. Dr.R. Senthil 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Silvius Condpan 

12. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
13. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
14. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
   
   
  1. Bhupesh Kumar  - Under Secretary 

 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
 
1. Smt. P. Jyoti Rao Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rajiv Kumar Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Wilfred Lakra MD, TRIFED 
5. Shri R.S. Meena ED, (I/C) TRIFED 
6. Dr. R.M. Dubey Director 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed 
the Members of the Committee, Secretary and other 
officials of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and drew 
their attention to the subject “Grants-in-aid to State 
Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations 
(STDCCs) for minor forest produce operations” 
which has been selected by the Committee for 
detailed examination.  She observed that Minor 
Forest  Produce (MFP) is an important source of 
livelihood for the poor tribals living in the forests and 
enquired whether any specific action plan has been 
formulated to exploit the existing potential of MFPs 
in the country in a scientific manner. She expressed 
the need to address the issue of conferring  
ownership rights of MFPs on the tribals urgently and 
has also requested the Ministry to apprise about the 
steps to be taken to make the STDCCs financially 
viable, thereby improving their performance.  
 

3. Thereafter the Members raised queries an 
important topics relating to (i) Financial performance 
of STDCCs in terms of funds released and utilization 
certificates received (ii) Setting up of Scientific 
Warehouses (godowns) and processing industries 
for value addition etc.  (iii) Ownerships rights of 
forests and MFPs to the tribals, (iv) Monopoly of MFP 
Markets by private traders/middlemen etc.  The 
Secretary and other officials of the Ministry 
responded to the queries raised by the Members.   
 
4. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Secretary 
and other officials of the Ministry for giving valuable 
information to the Committee on the subject in a 
candid manner.  She also directed the Secretary to 
send written replies to the queries of the Members on 
which ready information was not available with them 
during the evidence. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been 
kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-IV 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING ON THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 8th DECEMBER, 2005. 
 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to  1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
15. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
16. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
17. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
18. Dr. R. Senthil 
19. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
20. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
21. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
23. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
24. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
25. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
   
   
  1. Shri R.K. Saxe na -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Bhupesh Kumar - Under Secretary 

 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson apprised 
the Committee that they are meeting to consider and 
adopt two Draft Reports of the Committee namely, 
Tenth Report on the subject  “Grants-in-aid to State 
Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations 
(STDCCs) for Minor Forest Produce Operations” and 
Eleventh Report on “The Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2005.”  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the 
Tenth Report on the subject “Grants-in-aid to State 
Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations 
(STDCCs)  for Minor Forest Produce Operations” and 
adopted the same with the following amendment : 
 
Page No. 23      Para No. 2.7 after the words “The Committee desire that” 
 
 a dd “Members of tribal community should also be 
represented in the Price Fixation Committees 
proportionately and ” 
 
 
4.XXX   XXX         XXX 
 XXX  XXX 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize and present the reports on their behalf to the 
Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX 
 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT 
 
 
 
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations 
1. 1.9  The Committee note that Minor Forest Produce is 
central to the existence of tr ibal communities.  According 
to the Report of an Expert Committee set up by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1999, the amount 
of MFP produced annually is 1,17,71,850 MT.  The study 
conducted by Insight Management Consultants in the year 
2002 had estimated the share of the tribals in the MFP 
market, except for Tamarind and Honey, to be 100%.  The 
Committee are, however, distressed to note that due to 
scarcity of MFP resources, there is stiff competition 
among the tribal MFP collecti ng families which leads to 
collection of immature plant pa rts, leaves, flowers, fruits, 
bark and roots thereby causing damage to the mother 
plant and less than optimum return to the forest 
dependent community. The Committee observe that MFPs 
are playing a pivotal role in the lives of the forest 
dependant tribal families but express its serious concern 
that collection of immature plant parts and unscientific 
exploitation of MFP resources would ultimately lead to the 
destruction of the source of livelihood of these tribal 
families. The Committee are of the view that the existing 
potential of Minor Forest Produce should be exploited 
economically and scientifically so that they remain as a 
sustainable and renewable source of income for the tribal 
families.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should pursue with the States to prepare specific 
action plan for harnessing the existing potential of MFP in 
their respective States in a scientific manner, provide 
technological inputs for value addition to Minor Forest 
Produces and undertake procurement activities with 
improved methods.  The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry/TRIFED should lend their expertise to the States 
for preparation of specific action plans and in their 
procurement operations so that Minor Forest Produce 
continue to be a viable and self- sustaining source of 
income for the forest dependant tribal families for many 
generations to come. 
 
2 1.15  The Committee find that  State Tribal Development 
Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs), whose main function 
is to procure MFPs, are functioning in fourteen States at 
present.  In some States, certain MFP items are procured 
and marketed by State Forest Development Corporations, 
MFP Development Cooperative Federations, other State 
Government organizations like MARKFED, Large Area 
Multipurpose Projects (LAMPs) Societies etc.  The 
Committee are not happy with this situation.  They  
strongly feel that in the absence of STDCCs, the poor 

tribals would not be able to procure and market the 
produce effectively and would also not get remunerative 
prices. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
vigorously persuade the remaining States to set up 
STDCCs  in their States at the earliest so that MFPs are 
procured from the tribals and marketed at remunerative 
prices thereby benefiting them. 
 
3 1.16  The Committee note that due to limited number of 
officials in the Ministry, the nominees of the Central 
Government have not been able to attend the Board 
meetings of STDCCs on a regular basis.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that proper coordination is to be 
maintained between the Ministry and TRIFED on one hand 
and the State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations on the other for their effective functioning.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the nominated 
members of the Ministry should attend the meetings of the 
Board of Directors of STDCCs regularly, acquaint 
themselves with the overall functioning of the State bodies 
and ensure better coordination between the Ministry and 
STDCCs/TRIFED. 
 
4 1.30  The Committee note that during 2005-06 the overall 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry has been enhanced by 
more than Rs.352 crore.  However, out of the enhanced 
allocation, Rs.230 crore has been earmarked exclusively 
for development of forest villages and Rs.50 crore for 
providing irrigation facilities in tribal areas.  Also 
allocation under the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme has 
been increased due to enhanced rates of scholarship. As a 
result allocation under other schemes including the 
schemes of STDCCs has either been kept at par with 2004-
05 or has been reduced.  The Committee further note that 
though the demand for funds from the States is larger than 
the allotment under the scheme, the inter-scheme 
allocations are made on the basis of the allocations given 
by the Planning Commission to the Ministry.  The 
Committee further note that in some cases even the funds 
released by the Ministry under the scheme are released by 
the State Governments to their Corporations in a delayed 
manner.  The Committee are of the view that grants-in-aid 
for STDCCs Scheme should be enhanced adequately to 
cover the potential of MFPs in States and make them 
financially viable.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should approach the Planning 
Commission to give due priority to the STDCCs Schemes 
by allocating more funds specifically for Corporation’s 
schemes within the overall budgetary allocations of the 
Ministry.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
ensure that the grants-in-aid released to the States are 
actually utilized for procurement of minor forest produce.  
The Committee also urge the Ministry to pursue with the 
States to provide funds to their Tribal Development 
Cooperative Corporations without any delay as well as 
submit 
proposals com plete in all res pects and utilization 

certificates of earlier funds released to them in time and 
regularly. 
      
5 1.31      The Committee are constrained to note that most of the 
funds of the STDCCs are spent on salaries as there are no 
separate provisions for the establishment expenses of the 
STDCCs including TRIFED.  The Committee have been 
apprised that meeting the expenditure on establishment 
and administrative matters is the responsibility of the 
States.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
persuade the State Governments to make separate 
provision for meeting establishment costs either through 
Plan or Non-Plan budget and ensure that the funds 
released to the STDCCs are utilized in MFP operations. 
 
6 1.32        The Committee regret to note that STDCCs are 
obtaining loans from Banks and repaying them with 
interest to increase their presence in the trade of MFPs 
including Haat Bazars.  The Committee express 
apprehension that this practice will not be in the best 
interest of the poor tribals depending on collection of  MFP 
for their livelihood.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to impress upon the States to examine the 
commercial viability of MFPs thoroughly before taking 
loans from Banks and strictly adhere to prudent business 
practices. 
 
7 1.38  The Committee note with concern that most of the 
States are enjoying monopoly rights for the collection of 
MFPs.  The States have devised varying procedures of 
procurement through different agencies at the grass-roots 
level, including Large Area Multi-purpose Projects and 
other primary level cooperative societies.  The Committee 
are, however, of the firm view that the poor tribal collectors 
of MFPs will be optimally benefited if they are allowed to 
collect and sell MFPs through Cooperatives or Self Help 
Groups formed by them. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to direct the States and their Corporations to 
assist the tribals in forming Cooperatives or Self Help 
Groups while providing the infrastructural support and 
acting as a facilitator for the marketing of the MFPs.   
 
8 1.39         The Committee note that markets explored by the 
STDCCs are generally local and national in nature and 
MFPs are sold without much value addition.  TRIFED has, 
to some extent, played a role in the international trade of 
commodities including Niger Seed, Gum Karaya, Mustard 
DOC etc.  The Committee desire  that the Ministry/TRIFED 
should assist the STDCCs in educating the tribals about 
marketing channels, market knowledge regarding weights 
and measures, costing and quality control and also 
explore the avenues for sale of MFPs in international 
markets on a larger scale.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to play a proactive role in the marketing of 
MFPs b y providing market intelli gence about their 

products,   rendering export related services, opening of 
Export Facilitation Centres to enable the STDCCs to sell 
their products and adopting di rect selling through outlets 
of TRIBES under a national brand.  The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to lay down guidelines for exploring the 
national as well as international market to expand the 
scope for the supply of MFPs   and export of the same to 
other countries. 
 
9 2.7  The Committee are constrained to note that 
there is no uniformity in fi xing the price of MFPs 
amongst the States.  Generally, the District Authorities 
fix the prices of the MFPs through their Price Fixation 
Committees in consultation with the relevant bodies, 
including the representatives from the STDCCs/FDCs, 
etc.  However, the details  of the price fixation 
Committees are not available with the Ministry as well 
as TRIFED.  The Committee desire that members of 
tribal community should also be represented in the 
Price Fixation Committees proportionately and the 
States should adopt (as far as possible) common 
minimum prices for the minor forest produce of the 
tribals and urge the Minist ry to pursue the matter 
with the States so that the issue is resolved and 
implemented at the earliest.  
  
10 2.8 The Committee express seriou s concern over the fact 
that minimum support price is not available for the 
MFPs of the tribals as is available for other 
commodities in the agriculture sector through 
Agricultural Price Commission.  TRIFED has recently 
taken up the issue with the Ministry of Agriculture as 
well but the
y are yet to respond to the proposal.  The  
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to bring 
the minor forest produce under the ambit of minimum 
support price as they are th e main source of livelihood 
and income for a majority of the tribal people.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to earnestly 
pursue the nodal Ministry,  i.e. Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and also the  Ministry of 
Agriculture to fix minimum support prices for the 
MFPs of the tribals, in consultation with concerned 
State Governments so that the tribals could get proper 
value for the forest produce collected by them. 
 
11 2.18  The Committee are dismayed to note that the forest-
dwelling Scheduled Tribes, who have been residing there 
for generations and are dependant on MFP for their 
livelihood are still not en joying ownershi p of their MFP 

mostly due to ambiguity in the definition of the term ‘Minor 
Forest Produce’.  The Ministry have informed that they are 
in the process of finalizing a draft “Scheduled Tribes 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2005” to recognize and 
confer ownership rights to the forest dwelling Scheduled 
Tribes.  The Committee urge the Ministry to clearly define 
the term “Minor Forest Produce” and bring within the 
ambit of the term ‘MFP’ all the traditional minor forest 
produce in the Bill.  The Committe e further desire that in 
order to recognize and vest the forest rights and 
occupation of forest lands to the forest-dwelling 
Scheduled Tribes, the Ministry should finalise the  
“Scheduled Tribes (Recogniti on of Forest Rights) Bill, 
2005”, in consultation with the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and concerned Departments/States and bring 
it to the Parliament at the earliest.  
 
12 2.19         The Committee further note that for finalizing a Model 
Bill for conferring ownership ri ghts in respect of MFP on 
forest dependant communities, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests have sought the comments of 
concerned Ministries, including the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs in this regard.  Keeping in view the fact that the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry concerned 
with the welfare and development of the Scheduled Tribes, 
majority of whom live in forests and depend on MFP for 
their sustenance, the Committee urge the Ministry to lend 
their expertise to the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and actively involve themselves in the drafting of the Bill.  
   
13 2.20 The Committee note that thou gh the Pancha yats  
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 gives the 
rights of ownership of MFP to the respective 
Panchayats/Gram Sabhas and is applicable to all the 
Scheduled areas, yet it has not been implemented by 
the States in the right spirit.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the States to 
amend their legislations in  accordance with the PESA 
Act, 1996 so that ownership rights of MFPs is 
conferred on the Panchayats/Gram Sabhas and the 
poor Scheduled Tribe families living in the forests are 
not deprived of their source of livelihood.  
 
14 2.28  The Committee  note with deep concern   that 
marketing of minor forest produce remains unorganized 
mainly in the hands of private traders/middlemen.  Out of 
Rs. 650 crore worth of MFPs available in the country, 60 
per cent is going into the hands of the  unorganized sector  
and private traders or middlemen while not even 30 per 
cent is procured by Government agencies. The Committee 
have also been informed that only Gujarat, Rajasthan and 
West Bengal have stated that there are no instances where 
private traders or middlemen do not allow tribals to rea p 

the harvest of their MFPs. The Committee strongly feel that 
monopoly of the MFP market by private traders, legally or 
illegally owing to inadequate control being exercised by 
State agencies, should be curtailed. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the 
STDCCs to play an active role in the collection and 
marketing of MFPs and regulate their operations with strict 
administrative control and effective management 
techniques.  Proper coordination among field level 
agencies involved in MFP operations should be ensured.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take 
immediate steps to form a consortium of State TDCCs 
which will organize periodic buyers-sellers meet thereby 
enabling the tribals to get proper price for their MFPs and 
also  minimize the monopoly of the MFP markets by 
private traders/middlemen.  Steps taken in this regard may 
be communicated to the Committee.  
 
15 2.29          During their on the spot study visit to Adilabad in 
November, 2004 the Committee observed that the tribals 
are getting very low price for their MFP, though the same 
is being sold at a much higher price in the open market.  
The tribal collectors of MFPs are not getting any subsidy 
or marketing support.  The Committee are not happy with 
the situation and desire that the State Governments or its 
Corporations should provide adequate marketing support 
to the tribals and take steps to ensure that they  are able to 
reap the full benefits accruing from the sale of MFP.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take stringent 
steps to minimize the role of  Private Traders in the MFP 
market and ensure maximization of returns to the 
Scheduled Tribes
. 
 
16 3.6  The Committee note that the tribals living in the 
forest are engaged  in MFP operations in accordance with 
their traditional wisdom using tools like axes, chisels, etc. 
for collection of minor forest produce and are not updated 
with the latest technologies in this regard. Due to overall 
resource constraints, TRIFED and STDCCs are not in a 
position to provide adequate technological aids and tools.  
The Committee, however, desire that the Ministry should 
pursue the State Governments and their Corporations to 
take necessary action for imparting training to the tribals 
in the application of modern tools, scientific methods of 
collection, processing, storage and marketing of MFPs and 
also provide tool kits and technological aids to them.  
TRIFED, as the nodal organization should develop 
standard norms for the MFPs so that their market could be 
expanded considerably.  The Committee also recommend 
that the Ministry should assist the STDCCs in setting up 
common facility centres/vocati onal training centres in 
tribal clusters which could be utilized for imparting 
training regarding scientific methods of collection, value 
addition and storage besides marketing of the MFP of the 
tribals.  

 
17 3.15  The Committee regret to note that most of the 
STDCCs are not having the facility of Research and 
Development for enhancing the quality of MFPs, which 
would commensurately enhance the marketability of MFPs.  
Only two State bodies i.e. Girijan Cooperative Corporation, 
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat State Forest Development 
Corporation have involved themselves in Research and 
Development works.  The Committee are of the view that 
the tribals depending on MFP would be able to derive 
maximum income through marketing of their minor forest 
produce only after refining the quality and value addition  
of the MFPs and desire that the STDCCs should focus on 
Research and Development to enhance the marketability of 
the MFPs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should render financial assistance to augment the 
Research and Development efforts of STDCCs through 
increased budgetary allocation so that income derived 
from MFPs may be adequately enhanced.  The Committee 
also desire that TRIFED should provide assistance to 
STDCCs in setting up Research and Development Centres 
for value addition activities of MFPs and maintaining strict 
quality control norms and also to ensure that their 
products are viable in the competitive market.  
  
18 3.16       The Committee note that the Ministry have sanctioned 
evaluation studies on ‘Procurement and marketing of 
items of tribal produce marketed by TRIFED during 2003-
04’ and ‘Quantification of State-wise minor forest 
produces, value addition and backward, forward linkages 
with the market to ensure enhanced income of the 
Scheduled Tribes’ during 2004-05.  The Committee desire 
that these studies should be completed at the earliest so 
that the Ministry would be able to plan a wide spectrum of 
activities pertaining to  MFP operations.   
 
19 3.20  The Committee note with deep concern that 
during the year 2002-2003, no 
training/workshop/seminar has been organized for 
scientific collection, processing, storage and marketing 
of MFPs.  The number of tr ibals imparted training 
from April, 2003 to March, 2004 i.e. 174 SHGs and 237 
tribals are not adequate keep ing in view the fact that 
most of the tribals still us e their traditional tools and 
are ignorant about scientific methods of collection and 
harvesting of MFPs.  The Committee also observe that 
during the year 2004-2005, only  20 SHGs have been 
trained in scientific collection and harvesting of Honey 
in Karnataka; 24 tribal women in Hill Broom making 
at Jagdalpur and 213 tribal s in making plates and 
bowls from Sal and Siali leaves by using bio-fuel based 
moulding machines.  The Committee ex press their 

dissatisfaction at the declin e in the number of training 
programmes held during the previous years and desire 
that the Ministry/TRIFED should organize training 
programmes, workshops and seminars for the skill 
upgradation, revenue generation, value addition, 
usages of latest tool kits, scientific practices for pre & 
post harvest management on a large scale.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should 
pursue the States to organize awareness generation 
and training programmes regarding scientific 
collection and harvesting of MFP as well as provide 
adequate funds for the same so that the poor tribals 
who mainly depend on MFP are able to reap the 
harvest to the maximum.   
 
20 3.25         The Committee note that procurement and marketing 
of MFPs at the execution level remains with the STDCCs 
and are largely governed by policies and decisions of the 
State Governments.  The Committee, however, feel that 
there are lots of areas where the Ministry/TRIFED can work 
together like development of the MFP sector, analyzing of 
proposals from the State Governments, technological 
inputs and in the field of research and development.  The 
Committee,  therefore,   urge    the     Ministry/TRIFED to (i) 
maintain proper coordination with the STDCCs by 
providing market intelligence thereby augmenting the 
volume of trade of the STDCCs; (ii)  ensure that nominees 
to the Board of STDCCs attend the meetings regularly; (iii) 
provide R&D inputs to STDCCs; (iv) persuade the States to 
implement the provisions of the PESA Act, 1996 and (v) 
confer ownership rights of MFPs to the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
21 3.32  The Committee express concern over the fact that 
STDCCs are facing a number of obstacles in carrying out 
their MFP operations viz, financial constraints, lack of 
awareness among the tribals in the collection, storage, 
grading, primary level value addition, unorganized market 
of MFPs etc.  The Committee further note that under the 
Indian Forest Act and relevant State Forest Acts, 
regulatory provisions such as transit fees are statutory in 
nature.  However, States li ke Orissa, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat and West Bengal have waived the fees 
leviable on transit of such MFP.  The Committee  
desire that the remaining States should be pursued to 
abolish the taxes/forest levies for trading in MFPs and urge 
the Ministry to take up the issue with the State 
Governments on priority basis. 
 
 