    
   36 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT 
        (2007-2008) 
 
  (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
          MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) (UNION 
TERRITORIES) ORDER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2008/Ashadha, 1930 (Saka) 
      

 2 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) (UNION 
TERRITORIES) ORDER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
 
      THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
     
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18.09.2008 
                                        Laid in Lok Sabha on ……………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on …………. 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 July, 2008/Ashadha, 1930 (Saka) 
      
 
 
 
 

 3 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                                PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………..                
 
 
INTRODUCTION………………….. 
 
 
REPORT  …………………………….                     
  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories)    
                                    Order, 1951   
                                                        
         
II The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories)    
                                    Order (Amendment) Bill, 2003 as introduced in Rajya 
                                    Sabha on 5th March, 2003       
 
III The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories)    
                                    Order (Amendment) Bill, 2007 as introduced in Rajya 
                                    Sabha on 27th November, 2007    
  
IV Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held 
on 11 January, 2008 
 
V Minutes of t he Seventh sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held 
on 27 February, 2008 
 
VI Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held 
on 15 July, 2008 
 
     
APPENDIX 
 
Statement of Observations/Recommendations          ...  
  

 4 
 

 5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
 Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - CHAIRPERSON  
 
     MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2.# Shri Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque 
3. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora   
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad  
5. Shri Loganathan Ganesan 
6.@ Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain 
7. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
8. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
9. Shri Bhai Lal 
10. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam  
11. Shri Kailash Meghwal  
12.*** Shri Vasantrao J. More  
13. Shri Rupchand Murmu   
14. Shri Jual Oram  
15. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
16. Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana 
17.* Shri P.A. Sangma 
18. Dr. R. Senthil  
19. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
20. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya  
21. Smt. Krishna Tirath   
22. Smt. Usha Verma    
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
23.$ Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma 
24. Shri Silvius Condpan 
25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
26.** Shri Ahmad Sayeed Malihabadi 
27. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
28. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
30 Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
31. Shri Veer Singh 
32. Ms. Anusuiya Uikey 
33. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@ Shri Syed Shah Nawaz Hussain ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. August 30, 2007.  
# Shri Mohd. Shahid Akhlaque ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqualification 
from the Membership of the 14th Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. January 27, 2008. 
* Shri P.A. Sangma Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his resi gnation from the 14th Lok 
Sabha w.e.f. March 20, 2008 
$ Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his retirement from the 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. April 9, 2008. 
** Nominated w.e.f. 22 May, 2008 
*** Nominated w.e.f. 13 June, 2008 

 6 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Saxena  - Director 
4. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to submit  the 
Report on their behalf present the   Thirty -sixth Report of the Committee  on  
‘The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order (Amendment) 
Bill, 2007’ of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 27 November, 2007   and 
was referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 14 
December, 2007under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department), representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Registrar General of India for tendering evidence and placing their 
considered views before the Committee and also for furnishing written notes 
and information as desired by the Committee in connect ion with the 
examination of the Bills. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bill at their 
sitting held on 15th July, 2008. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations  of the Committee have been   printed  in bold letters  in 
the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
      
New Delhi;   SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
15 July, 2008    Chairperson, 
24 Ashadha, 1930(Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 

 8 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have i ntimated that according to the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories ) Order , 1951, the inhabitants of the Laccadive, 
Minicoy and Amindivi islands who, and both of whose parents were born in the Union 
Territory are deemed to be the Scheduled Tribes.  The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
(Union Territories) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2007 seeks to further amend the 1951 Order.  
In the Schedule to the Constitution (Schedule Tribes) (Union territories) Order, 1951, in 
Part I- Lakshadweep, the following proviso and Explanation are proposed to   be inserted 
at the end of the proposed Bill, namely :- 
“Provided that the children who are born to inhabitants of Lakshadweep in any 
other place in the mainland of India shall be deemed to be inhabitants born in  the islands 
if such children settle permanently in the islands. 
 Explanation : - The term “settle permanently” shall have the same meaning as 
defined under clause 3 (I)(d) of the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulation, 1994.” 
 
Background and reasons for the rev ision of the list of Scheduled Tribes in Union 
Territory of Lakshadweep. 
 
1.2. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their note have stated   that the Scheduled 
Tribes are notified by the Presidential Order under article 342 (I) of the constitution.  
Subsequently, an Act of Parliament can only modify such an Order.  Article 342 
prescribes the procedure to be followed in the matter of specification of Scheduled 
Tribes. 
 

 9 
“342. Scheduled Tribes: 
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, a nd 
where it is a State after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public 
notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups 
within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this 
Constitution be deemed to b e Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or 
Union Territory as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may, by law, include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe 
or tribal community or par t of or group within any tribe or tribal community, 
but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be 
varied by any subsequent notification.” 
(ii) The list of Scheduled Tribes is State/Union Territory specific and also 
community specific.  The persons belonging to the notified Scheduled Tribes are 
eligible to get the benefit meant for such Tribes only in the State/Union Territory in 
respect of which the community has been notified. 
1.3. Further, according to the Ministry, the li st of Scheduled Tribes of 
Lakshadweep is contained in Part-I of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 as amended to date and all the inhabitants 
of Lakshadweep, who and both  of whose parents were born in Lakshadweep have 
been given Scheduled Tribe status based on the principle of geographic isolation 
without reference to any community (A copy of the 1951 order is appended in 
Annexure-I).  The entry is as under : 
 “Throughout the Union territory :- 

 10 
 Inhabitants of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands who, and both 
of whose parents, were born in those islands”. 
 
Need for Legislation 
 
 
1.4. At the instance of the Committee the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have  
explained  that they had received several representat ions from the Union Territory 
that Part I of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union 
Territories) Order, 1951 was creating difficulties for certain islanders who were 
born on the mainland on account of non -availability of adequate health  services in 
the Islands. 
1.5. Seeing the genuine difficulties faced by the islanders, since the aforesaid 
Order provides that the person has necessarily to be born in the islands apart from 
his/her parents also having been born in the Islands for being co nsidered as a 
member of the Scheduled Tribe community of Lakshadweep, such persons who 
are born outside the islands, even to the inhabitants of the islands, were not 
treated as belonging to a Scheduled Tribe, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs introduced 
a Bil l namely “the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order 
(Amendment) Bill, 2003” to amend the list of Scheduled Tribes in relation to 
Lakshadweep in the Rajya Sabha on 5 th March, 2003 (Annexure -II) with the 
following proviso:-   
“Throughout the Union Territory:- 
 Inhabitants of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands who, and both 
of whose parents, were born in those islands”. 
 “Provided that the children who are born to inhabitants in any other 
place in the mainland of India on account of ca ses referred by the competent 

 11 
medical authority for safe delivery of the children by such inhabitants shall 
be deemed to be inhabitants born in the Islands if such children are brought 
to the Islands for inhabitation soon after their birth. 
 Provided further that the President may, by order, notify any authority 
as competent medical authority for the purposes of this part”. 
1.6. Explaining further in this regard, the Ministry have stated that the 
consideration of the above Bill was deferred on 9 -4-2003 sinc e the Ministry of 
Home Affairs was pressing for a more open ended amendment so as to include 
cases other than the medical ground cases covered by the afore -cited amendment 
Bill of 2003.  Thereafter, the Ministry of Home Affairs also proposed the following 
amendment:- 
 “Throughout the Union Territory- 
 Inhabitants of Lakshadweep who, and both of whose parents, were born in 
those Islands. 
 “Provided that if children born outside Lakshadweep to such parents, both of 
whom were born in these islands, settle permanently in Lakshadweep, they shall 
be deemed to have been born in Lakshadweep”. 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs suggested the following definition of the 
expression “settle permanentaly”. 
“Settle permanently means a minimum period of stay of 10 years either for 
education or otherwise in the Island of Lakshadweep”. 
1.7. According to the Ministry the definition of the term ‘settle permanently was 
deliberated upon in a meeting taken by Secretary (TA) on 6 -4-2005 with the 
representatives of Ministry of Law & Just ice, Ministry of Home Affairs, Registrar 
General of India (RGI), National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (NCST), and 

 12 
the UT Admn. Of Lakshadweep with the limited agenda of defining “settle 
permanently” as suggested by the Ministry of Home Affairs.  After deliberations, 
the following formulation proposed by the Ministry of Home Affairs was agreed to:- 
 “Throughout the Union Territory:- 
 Inhabitants of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands who, and both of 
whose parents, were born in those islands. 
 Provided that if the children born outside Lakshadweep to such parents, 
both of whom were born in these islands, settle permanently in Lakshadweep, they 
shall be deemed to have been born in Lakshadweep”. 
 (N.B.* Settle per permanently means a minimum period of 1 0 year’s stay 
immediately after birth for education or otherwise in the islands of Lakshadweep). 
 Subsequently, the Ministry of Home Affairs, vide their letter dated 21.4.2005 
intimated that the definition of “settle permanently” given by them may not be 
proceeded with and to await their revised comments.  The Ministry of Home Affairs 
vide their OM number U -14011/2/2001-ANL  dated 9.9.05 furnished the following 
definition:- 
 “Settle permanently would mean those who are ordinarily residents as 
defined under Clause 3(I)(d) of the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 
1994”, which is explained as under :- 
 3(I) A Gram Sabha shall consist of persons registered in the electoral 
rolls relating to an Island or group of Islands comprising the area of Village  
 
(Dweep Panchayat): 
 Provided that a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the 
Gram Sabha, if he 

 13 
 (d) is not ordinarily a resident within the Island for which the Gram 
Sabha is established. 
Explanation : - For the purposes of clause (d) a person shall be deemed to be 
“ordinarily resident” in an Island if he has been ordinarily residing in such 
Island or is in possession of a dwelling house therein ready for occupation”. 
1.8. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have added that the suggestion of the Ministry 
of Home  Affairs regarding the definition of “ settle permanently” was 
examined by them   but it was felt that the Ministry of Home Affairs 
formulation was contrary to the principle of geographic isolation, the main 
basis for treating all such inhabitants of Laksh adweep, who and both of 
whose parents were born in these Islands.  The Ministry of Home Affairs, 
however, did not accept this view and reiterated that the formulated and 
suggested by it be adopted. 
1.9. The matter was discussed in many meetings and then fi nally, in a meeting 
between Hon’ble Minister of Home Affairs and Minister of Tribal Affairs on 
23/05/2007, it was ordered that necessary action be initiated to bring in an 
amendment to the Bill already introduced in Rajya Sabha in 2003 incorporating the 
afore-cited formulation suggested by the Ministry of Home Affairs read with the 
definition of term ‘settle permanently’. 
1.10. The formulation suggested by the Ministry of Home Affairs has been 
considered and in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justic e (Legislative 
Department), it is proposed that in the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, in Part I -Lakshadweep, the following 
proviso and Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely :- 

 14 
 “Provided that the  children, who are born to inhabitants of Lakshadweep in 
any other place in the mainland of India shall be deemed to be inhabitants born in 
the islands, if such children settle permanently in the islands. 
 Explanation : The term “settle permanently” shall have the same meaning 
as defined under Clause 3(I)(d) of Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 1994”. 
 Clauses 3(I)(d) of the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 1994 reads as 
follows:- 
 “3(I) A Gram Sabha shall consist of persons registered in the electoral rol ls 
relating to an Island or group of Islands comprising the area of Village (Dweep 
Panchayat): 
 Provided that a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Gram 
Sabha, if he- 
 (d) is not ordinarily a resident within the Island for which the Gram  Sabha is 
established. 
Explanation : For the purposes of clause (d) a person shall be deemed to be 
“ordinarily resident” in an Island if he has been ordinarily residing in such island or 
is in possession of a dwelling house therein ready for occupation.” 
1.11 Taking into account the above said facts, the proposals in the Bill introduced 
in 2003 have been revised and revised Bill namely “the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2007” has been introduced in 
the Rajya Sabha on 27/11/2007 so as to include case of inhabitants of the islands, 
who have been residing away from Lakshdweep due to educational or job 
requirements, etc., resulting in their children having been born in the mainland of 
India. 

 15 
1.12 During interaction with the representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, 
Home Affairs, Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and Registrar General of 
India, Hon’ble Chairperson pointed out that in case of parents either of whom is 
born in and is inhabitant of the i sland but marries in  other part of the country  and 
settle permanently in the islands after marriage and desired to know whether their 
children would be conferred the status of Scheduled Tribe in the islands.  She 
stated that she was asking that question because it had been agreed to that that 
was a geographical isolated   area. 
1.13  The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs replied that :- 
“Madam, I would like to tell you that this community is tribal.  There is 
a Supreme Court order that if a member of the family is tribal, and if 
he/she gets married to a person residing at some other place, in that 
case in which category their children will be treated, the order of the 
Supreme Court is quite clear in this regard,  it says  that it depends 
upon the child ren in which category he wants to be treated after his 
birth.  If he wants to be treated as tribal, he will be regarded as tribal.  
If he does not want to be treated as tribal, he will be regarded as a 
non-tribal.  But it has not been the case with regard to 
Lakshadweep*.  The decision of the Apex Court, the Supreme Court, 
is very clear.  In the case of Lakshadweep, geographical isolation is 
paramount. In the definition, the first part of the clause is that both 
parents must have been born to show that they  are the inhabitants of 
Lakshadweep from the beginning.”  
  
* Originally spoken in Hindi. 
 
1.14. In this context Registrar General of India also   stated that:- 
“I would like to add this thing as the Registrar General of India 
because we are only handling these cases.  The geographical 
isolation is at the core of deciding that saying all right, we will give the 
benefit of Scheduled Tribe status to those who stay there.  But, I 
think, the Entry is very carefully and wisely written that they must be 
born ther e so that the other communities do not take undue 
advantage of it; they do not go there, settle there and become the 
Scheduled Tribes.  The benefit has to be given to the local 
community   which is there and to those who are born there.  I think 
this is a principle  which holds good for most of the tribal areas.  If I 

 16 
am born in Rajasthan as a tribe, then I am a tribal of that area.  If I go 
from outside, settle down and marry somebody – I think Mr. 
Mukherjee has clarified what the Supreme Court’s decision is – then, 
I get the benefit only under certain conditions.  But here in the case of 
Lakshadweep, to see that nobody goes from outside and takes 
undue benefit of the geographical isolation, they have said that both 
the parents must be born there.  I think this is a protection given to 
the local people of it.” 
 
1.15 The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs   added that :- 
 
“We are not making changes in the fundamental and only doing 
minor modifications for convenience.” 
 
1.16 In this connection, the Committ ee undertook a study visit to Lakshadweep 
from 21st to 23rd May, 2008 and interacted with individuals/groups/representatives 
etc. of Tribal Communities of Lakshadweep and heard their views on the proposed 
Bill.   Divergent views were expressed by them befo re the Committee on the 
proposed amendment in the Bill which are as follows :- 
(i) Inhabitants of Lakshadweep islands do not want to loose their Scheduled 
Tribes status because of any reason whatsoever.  However, children of the 
inhabitants of islands born  in mainland due to reasons like medical, 
employment, education etc. should be given ST status. 
 
(ii) The main criteria of inclusion in the list of STs of Lakshadweep should be 
the status of residence i.e. ordinarily resident and permanent and 
continuous s tay in Lakshadweep for the first fifteen years of one’s life or 
before he attains the age of eighteen years.   
  
(iii) If an inhabitant of Lakshadweep marries a boy or girl from the mainland, 
their children should be given ST status.  However, in this conn ection it was 

 17 
also expressed  by some that in case the parents are inhabitants of islands, 
only then their children should be given ST status.  If either of them are not 
from islands, their children should not be given ST status.  Another view that 
was put forth was  that in case one of the parents marries in mainland, as a 
special category they may be classified as OBC and may be given 
consideration in proportion to their population in Lakshadweep. 
 
(iv)  Non resident Lakshadweewians, who on their own pref erred to settle in 
mainland to overcome the remoteness and backwardness arising out of it, 
should never be given the status of ST of Lakshadweep.   Those born and 
brought up in mainland and residing in mainland and owning properties and 
business interest s hould not be considered for issue of ST certificates due 
to their current status and circumstances in mainland.    Ownership of a 
piece of ancestral property or ancestral house should not be accepted as a 
ground for ST certificate.  
1.17 The Committee obse rve that no particular community is listed  as 
Scheduled Tribe in Lakshadaweep and all the inhabitants of the Union 
Territory irrespective of the community or religious affiliation are being 
treated as Scheduled Tribe in view of their socio -economic backwa rdness 
arising out of geographical isolation from the mainland.  The Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order 1951 provides that throughout 
the Union Territory, inhabitants of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi islands 
who and both of whose parents were born in those islands are deemed to be 
the Scheduled Tribe. It is   based on the principle of geographical isolation 
without reference to any community.  However, the children of  islanders 

 18 
who were born in the mainland on account of non -availability of adequate 
health services in the island or due to educational or job requirements etc.,  
were not conferred the status of Scheduled Tribe in the island.   Keeping 
such difficulties faced by the inhabitants of Lakshadweep the present Bill 
envisages to  insert a proviso wherein children who are born to inhabitants 
of Lakshadweep in any other place in the mainland of India shall be deemed 
to be inhabitants born in the lslands if such children settle permanently in 
the island. 
1.18  While agreeing with  the proposed amendment in the Bill, the 
Committee   recommend that the term ‘Settle Permanently’ should be 
clarified/defined under ‘Explanation’ of clause 2 of the proposed Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribe) (Union Territory) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2007 as :- 
‘a person shall be deemed to be a “ordinary resident” in the island if 
he has been ordinarily residing in such island and is in possession of 
a dwelling house therein’.   
 
1.19 The Committee further desire that the suggestions/views expressed 
before the Committee by the individuals/groups/representatives of tribal 
community of Lakshadweep may also be considered before finalizing the 
proposed amendment in the Bill. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;   SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
15 July, 2008                 Chairperson, 
24 Ashadha, 1930(Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 