 
3 
 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2004 -2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Thirty-third Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare 
on ‘The Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited 
(TRIFED)’  
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd  December, 2004 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22nd  December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
S 
 
E 
 
A 
 
L 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
  
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 

 3
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
      
     P A G E  
      
     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report……………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observati ons which have been accepted by 
the Government…………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government…………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration……………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  replies of 
the Government  are interim in nature    …………. 
 
  ANNEXURES 
 
ANNEXURE I A list of exhibitions/ events organised by India Trade 
Promotion Organisation/Export Promotion 
Organisation/Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts 
during the year 2003-2004 
  
ANNEXURE II  O.M.No.16015/3/2002 – CP&R dated 5 November 2003 from 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to Secretary, Ministry of 
Environment and Forest, Government of India 
 
ANNEXURE III Minutes of the Ninth Sitti ng of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 20 December, 
2004….. 
 
APPENDIX Analysis of the action taken by Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third   Report of the 
erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 
 
 
 

 4
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT(2004-2005) 
 
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan  - CHAIRPERSON 
 
              MEMBERS 
                 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai 
3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6.         Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
7.         Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
                             8. Shri Kailash Meghwal 
9. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
      10. Shri Jual Oram 
11. Shri Rameshwar Oraon 
12. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
13. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
15. Dr. R. Senthil 
16. Shri Mohd. Shahid 
17. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
19. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
20. Smt. Usha Verma 
21. Shri K. Yerrannaidu 
 
          R A J Y A  S A B H A  
                               
22. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan 
24. Shri R.S. Gavai 
25. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao  
26. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee 
27. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
29. Smt. Savita Sharda 
30. Shri Trilochan Singh 
31. Shri Veer Singh        
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C Ahuja                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena                - Deputy Secretary                 
3. Shri  Bhupesh Kumar           - Under Secretary 
4.        Km. M. Tunglut     - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 

 5
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing  Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment having been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this  Third  Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Thirty-third  Report of 
the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘The Tribal Cooperative Mark eting Development Federation of India 
Limited (TRIFED)’ . 
 
2. The Thirty-third Report was presente d to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21 August 2003.  The Ministry of  Tribal Affairs furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 13 
January 2004. The report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on  20 th  
December 2004. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-third   Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on 
Labour and Welfare (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  is given in 
Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility  of reference recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed  in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi:     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
December,  2004        C h a i r p e r s o n  
Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
    
 

 6
CHAPTER I 
 
      REPORT 
         
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty-third  
Report of the erstwhile Committee on Labour and Welfare 
(Thirteenth  Lok Sabha)  on ‘The Tribal Cooperative Marketing 
Development Federation of India Limited (TRIFED)’ .  
 
1.2 The Thirty-third  Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 August 2003.   It contained 22 
recommendations.  Replies of Gove rnment in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are categorised as 
under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21 and 22 
 
(Total 11 - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  2, 12, 14 and 16.    
 
(Total 4 - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 1, 5, 7, 8 and 17. 
 
(Total 5 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Sl. Nos.  11 and 19. 
  
(Total 2 - Chapter V)  
 
 
 
 

 7
1.3 The Committee desire that ac tion taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken  notes 
in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report may be furnished to them at  the earliest and in any case not 
later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal wi th the action taken replies 
of the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. To bring TRIFED under Companies Act :  
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para 1.8) 
  
1.5 The Committee had noted that Messrs. Insight Management 
Consultants, entrusted with the ta sk of studying the structure and 
functions of TRIFED and to suggest ways and means for 
restructuring so as to improve its performance had advised the 
need for TRIFED to come under the purview of the Companies Act.  
For that, it had recommended floati ng a subsidiary institution in 
the form of a corporate body, which can be registered under the 
Companies Act.  The Committee, had further noted that spinning 
of a subsidiary institution in the form of a Corporate body was not 
finding favour with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs because TRIFED 
would not be able to transfer a part  of their business or activities 
undertaken in furtherance of its object in view of the restriction 
imposed under proviso to sub-section 2 of Section 19 of the Multi-
State Cooperative Societies Act.  The Committee had, therefore, 
r e c o m m e n d e d  t h a t  i n  o r d e r  t o  s w i t c h  o v e r  t h e  T R I F E D  t o  a  
corporate entity, the above restriction under the MSCS Act might 
be removed by bringing suitable amendment in the Act itself.  
 
1.6 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in its action taken note 
furnished to the Committee, have stated that the Multi-State 
Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 is applicable to all such societies 
throughout the country.  Since the proposed amendment to the said 
Act will be applicable to TRIFED on ly, it will not be agreed to by 
the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of  Agriculture & Cooperation.  In a 
recent case where the Ministry ha d proposed an amendment to the 
MSCS Act, 2002 it was turned down by the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Cooperation.  

 8
 
1.7 The Committee are not at all sa tisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry that since the proposed  amendment to the Multi-State 
Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 would be applicable to TRIFED only, 
it would not be agreed to by the no dal Ministry i,e the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperation.  The Committee feel that the 
Government has not given due consideration to the recommendation 
of the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, to improve its 
performance and also to bring more professionalism in its 
functioning, the status of TRIFED needs  to be changed from a 
Cooperative to a
 Corporate Body.  A thorough analysis of the whole 
matter in the related fields is necessary before coming to any 
conclusion. The Committee, theref ore, reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that in order to  switch over the TRIFED to a 
corporate entity, the restriction under the MSCS Act may be removed 
by bringing suitable amendment in the Act itself. The Committee 
desire that the matter be pursued with the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Cooperation with all sincerity. 
 
 
 
 
 

 9
 
B. Investment in the share capita l and restructuring of  TRIFED:  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 5, Para 2.5 and Sl. No.  17, Para 7.16) 
 
1.8 The Committee had noted that  the Central Government had 
not found it feasible to further invest in the share capital of TRIFED 
due to huge losses incurred by it over the years and its 
unsatisfactory performance. However, in order to provide 
additional funds to meet the requ irements of TRIFED, the Ministry 
was revising the present scheme of grants-in-aid to State Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporations including TRIFED. The 
Committee welcomed this step but had opined that to bail out 
TRIFED from the present financial crisis, adequate capital base was 
required and hence further investment was necessary to be made 
by the Central Government as it was the principal investor.  Also 
keeping in view the fact that TR IFED was performing the unique 
role of marketing development for the tribal produce and had 
reoriented its focus from direct trading to the role of a market 
developer, the Committee had urged the Ministry to re-examine the 
issue of enhancing their share capi tal in TRIFED to enable it to 
carry out its action plan for activities relating to marketing 
development effectively.  
 
1.9 The Committee had also noted that in order to make the 
restructuring plan of TRIFED possible, an infusion of Rs.100 crore 
in the form of equity capital an d grants-in-aid by the Central 
Government in the next five ye ars was necessary.  The Committee, 
had therefore, recommended that the Ministry  should give serious 
consideration to the financial re quirement of TRIFED and take 
necessary steps to provide sufficien t capital to TRIFED for carrying 
out its restructuring exercise s and attaining professional 
competence. 
 
1.10 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated that the requirement of funds for the 
promotional activities of TRIFED has already been considered in 
the Ministry.  During the current financial year (2003-04) an 
amount of Rs.2.00 crore has already been released to TRIFED under 
the Price Support Scheme, against an allocation of Rs.6.00 crore.  
For the balance amount, the file is under submission to IFD for their 
concurrence. 
 

 10
1.11 The existing scheme of gran ts-in-aid to State Tribal 
Development Cooperative Corporatio ns has been proposed to be 
revised so that funds can be released to TRIFED also.  
 
1.12 Besides the Ministry have already mooted a proposal to 
fund the administrative expenditure of TRIFED through a Non-
Plan budget head.  This will ensu re the payment of administrative 
expenditure as well as interest. 
 
1.13 However, at this juncture with the present financial scenario 
where TRIFED has incurred huge  losses of more than Rs.80.00 
crore, any more investment in the share capital of TRIFED is likely 
to be turned down by the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs(CCEA).  However, restru cturing process of TRIFED has 
already started.  In case, there is a turn around in the financial 
scenario of TRIFED in the near futur e, the case of enhancement of 
share capital can be considered thereafter.   
 
1.14 The Ministry has further stated that TRIFED has requested 
the Ministry to provide funds under non-plan budget head @ 
Rs.10.00 crore per year for carrying ou t its restructuring exercises 
and attaining professional competence.  The matter has already 
been examined and TRIFED has been requested to provide 
necessary information/details as sought for by FA (TA).
 

 11
 
1.15 The Committee note the reply that with  the present financial scenario where 
TRIFED has incurred huge losses of more than      Rs. 80 crore, any more 
investment in the share capital of TRIFED is likely to be turned down by the CCEA. 
The Committee feel that in view of the unique objective of the Federation i.e. 
marketing development for the tribal produce and also the fact that restructuring of 
TRIFED has already started, increase in the share capital  base for TRIFED  by the 
Government is absolutely necessary.  The Committee desire that in order to enable 
it to carry out its operations effectively, the Ministry should release  more funds 
early to TRIFED under its Price Support Scheme.  The Committee also hope that 
the existing scheme for grants-in-aid to State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations will be revised soon so that funds could be released to TRIFED at the 
earliest.  In brief, in order to bail out TRIFED from financial crisis  and to enable it 
to carry out its action plan for activities relating to marketing development 
effectively, the Committee desire that the Ministry should enhance the share capital 
of TRIFED.  The Committee also hope that the restructuring process of TRIFED 
will be completed soon.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Disciplinary action again st employees of TRIFED:   
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para 2.13) 
 
1.16 The Committee had taken serious note of the fact that some 
of the employees/senior offi cials of TRIFED were found 
responsible for bad investment by  TRIFED and were also involved 
in irregularities relating to purchase, sales, storage, shortages, 
procedural lapses and other misconduct.  Some of the 
officials/employees were facing CB I inquiry/Departmental action. 
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that all the 
irregularities might be thoroughly investigated and stringent action 
taken against the guilty persons.  
  
1.17 The Ministry have stated in their action taken note furnished 
to the Committee that disciplinary action against 48 employees of 
TRIFED has been taken so far with respect to misconduct on 
various kinds of irregularities rela ted to purchase, sales, storage, 
shortages, procedural lapses and other misconduct.  Out of these, 
12 employees were dismissed/removed from service on account of 
grave misconduct related to unau thorized actions, fraudulent 

 12
purchases and false credentials.  Major penalty was 
imposed on 11 employees; minor pe nalty on 8 employees while 7 
were exonerated.  
 
1.18 Pending 11 disciplinary cases are in progress. Further 
disciplinary action against 5 other employees is contemplated. 
Apart from this, CBI has already launched criminal prosecution 
against 7 former employees of TRIFED (6 of which were 
dismissed/removed/services dispensed during probation and one 
present employee).  Two cases have been referred to CBI for 
investigation.  
 
1.19 The Committee note with serious concern that the  Ministry 
had given the same reply during th e detailed examination of the 
subject the previous year.  No further progress has been made in 
punishing the guilty persons involved  in fraudulent purchases and 
grave misconduct.  The Committee,  therefore, again urge the 
Government to take st ringent action against th e guilty persons early 
and take necessary measures to ensu re that such lapses do not occur 
in future.  
 
D. Foreign marketing of Minor Forest Produce:  
 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para  3.8) 
 
1.20 The Committee had noted that the commodities procured by 
TRIFED have expanded over the years of its operations. TRIFED 
was now procuring 57 varieties of Surplus Agricultural 
Produce(SAP) and 50 varieties of Minor Forest Produce(MFP) 
including tree-borne oilseeds. Th e Committee had been informed 
that export of Minor Forest Produce had stopped after 1996-97 and 
that the efforts of marketing tr ibal produce could not culminate 
into business with foreign buyers du e to certain constraints such as 
products not conforming to qua lity specifications, inconsistent 
supply base and uncompetitive price.  They had, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry  should assist TRIFED in 
overcoming those constraints and exploring foreign market for its 
MFP and SAP items.  

 13
 
1.21 In their reply, the Ministry ha ve informed that as  far as 
TRIFED is concerned,  the primary  area which needs  attention  is 
the development of the quality of the tribal  produce. In this regard, 
TRIFED has already planned action in the following areas through 
its Research & Development Wing:  
 
a) Development of norms fo r determining  normal and 
abnormal losses during storage of major Tree-borne Oilseeds 
(Neem, Mahua Seed, Karanj, Mango Kernel & Sal Seed),  
b) Development of Quality standard for Mahua Flower,  
c) Good storage practices for Non-Timber Forest Produce.  
 
1.22 TRIFED has also been exploring possibilities of export 
potential of various MFPs and of providing necessary service to its 
members for promoting exports of MFPs.  
 
1.23 Ministry of Tribal Affairs have, however, no objection in 
promoting TRIFED’s market develo pment initiative as per their 
existing bye-laws in so far as they conform to the schemes being 
implemented by this Ministry.  
 
1.24 The Committee have been apprised that as far as TRIFED is 
concerned  the primary area which needs attention is the development 
of quality of the tribal produce.  It  is further stated  that TRIFED has 
also planned action in developmen t of norms for determining normal 
and abnormal losses during storage of major tree borne oilseeds, 
development of quality standard for Mahua flower and good storage 
practices for Non Timber Forest Produce.  However, the Committee 
feel that the Government’s action plan has not yielded the desired 
results as the marketing efforts of tribal produces could not culminate 
into business with foreign buyers due to already existing constraints. 
The Committee are of the opinion  that unless constraints like 
products not conforming to quality specifications, inconsistent supply 

 14
base and uncompetitive prices are  removed, the situation will 
not improve.  Keeping in view that TRIFED functions  under the aegis  
of the Ministry of Tribal Affa irs, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should involve itself active ly in the affairs of the Federation 
and provide full assistance  in removing  the constraints  for 
improving  the quality and marketabili ty  of MFP as well as finding  
foreign market for such produce.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT   
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para 1.23) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Central G overnment is the major shareholder of 
TRIFED with equity capital amounting to Rs .99.75 crore out of the paid up share capital 
of Rs.98.99 crore.  The other members of TRIFED like NCDC, NAFED, State-level 
Tribal Development Corporations, Forest Development Corporati ons, State Marketing 
Federations, etc. have contributed the remaining Rs.23 lakh of the paid-up share capital.  
The Committee further note that  various provisions have been incorporated in the new 
bye-laws of TRIFED for enhancing the shar e contribution.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to persua de the National and State leve l agencies to enhance their 
contribution to the share capital of TRIFED so that it may have adequate capital base to 
enable it to carry out its operations effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Chief Executive Officers of all the Member  Organisations of TR IFED vide letter 
dated 19.6.2003 have been impressed upon that in view of various provisions enumerated 
in the Bye-laws, it is essential that a serious thought is  given regarding enhancing 
contribution to share capital of TRIFED, a copy of the lett er was also endorsed to the 
Secretaries (Tribal Development) and Secretaries (Cooperation) who have been requested 
to initiate necessary action in this regard. 

 15
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004)  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para 1.28) 
 
2.3. The Committee note that the existing Bran ch offices of TRIFED are located in the 
main cities for better linkage with the termin al market and to have close liaison with 
concerned authorities of the State Governments.  Keeping in view the shift in the focus of 
TRIFED from mere trading of  tribal produce to marketing development activities, the 
Committee  feel that TRIFED should review and re-examine the utility of the existing 
location of its Branch Offices.  The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that TRIFED 
should explore the feasibility of  setting up its Branch Offices at strategic locations which 
would facilitate not only its marketing development activities but also the proper network 
of its operations for better linkage and smooth functioning in  its new role as a market 
developer. 
 

 16
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 Consequent upon shifting of the activities of TRIFED from direct trading to 
Marketing Development sin ce July 2002, the Marketing De velopment Projects along 
with the areas of operation have been and are being identified by the Branches. Once 
Federation reaches a consolidation stage the ma tter will be reviewed and restructuring of 
the Branch Offices shall be done taking into consideration the above factor. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para 2.10) 
 
2.5 The Committee note with concern that the administrative expenses incurred by 
TRIFED including salary of employees has been very high i.e., Rs.82.98 crore since its 
inception.  Out of the total administrative e xpenses, 47 per cent has been spent on salary 
and allowances of the employees; 16.6 per cent on selling and distribution which includes 
TA & DA of staff posted in tribal areas and 9 per cent on hiring of office premises and its 
maintenance.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that administrative expenses 
especially on salaries of employees shoul d be curtailed by downsizing the organisation 
Also, keeping in view the fact that TRIFED is now concentrating on market development 
activities rather than on procurement and sale of tribal produce, the Committee desire that 
the Ministry should ensure that utmost economy be effected on the expenses under 
selling and distribution which includes TA & DA for staff posted in tribal areas for 
procurement purposes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Board of Directors of TRIFED in its 64th meeting held on 28.4.2003 while 
discussing on the recommendation of M/s Insight Management Consultants, have 
approved downsizing the Organisation by intr oducing Voluntary Retirement Scheme and 
also for further appointment in the Federa tion only by outsourcing. Accordingly, a draft 
scheme of Voluntary Retirement to be in troduced along with pr oposed benefits and 
arrangement for funds to meet the financial liability is under active consideration.  
 
2.7 As regards ensuring utmost econo my on the expenses under selling and 
distribution including TA & DA, necessary steps are being ensured by the Federation.  
This is evident from the fact that during the financial year 2002-03 strict financial 
austerity measures and discipline were enforced and administrative expenditures were 
curtailed to the maximum extent possible commensurate with the maintenance of 
efficient functioning of the Federation.  As a result of this, there has been a reduction of 
Rs.1.79 crore in Revenue Expenditure as compar ed to the previous year.  The Revenue 
Expenditure which was Rs.11.43 crore in th e financial year 2001- 02 was reduced to 
Rs.9.64 crore during 2002-03. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 

 17
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para 3.9) 
 
2.8 The Committee welcome the steps take n by TRIFED to establish an Export 
Facilitation Centre (EFC) at Mu mbai which would perform the ro le of an agency to help 
its members in booking export orders, providing storage infrastructure, value addition 
facilities and executing export orders.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommend that 
TRIFED should set up the Export Facilitation Cent re at the earliest so that it could serve 
as a center for coordination of exports for its members societies/organisations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.9 TRIFED has initiated th e process of conceptualiz ing the purpose and desired 
performance of an EFC proposed to be set up at Mumbai.  However, as per requirement 
for setting up EFC, TRIFED has to examin e the actual need of the same depending upon 
some market information/intelligence on the commodities and their value added products, 
for the promotion of which the setting up of  the EFC is being examined.  TRIFED has 
already started gathering the relevant market intelligence for which the Member Societies 
are also being involved. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para 4.4) 
 
2.10 The Committee note that the present Ma nagement of TRIFED  had prepared a 
detailed action plan for marketing devel opment activities but no time-frame has been 
fixed for completion of these projects.  Though it may not be feasible to assign a definite 
time-frame to these projects as they may n eed some gestation period and would depend 
on financial support from the Government, th e Committee desire that they should be 
monitored regularly and feedb ack on the actual implementa tion of these projects should 
be obtained periodically. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.11 The projects prepared towards marketing development activities are of two types: 
 
(i) The projects entitled Babasaheb Am bedkar Hast Shilp Vikas Yojana (AHVY) 
which is being implemented in the four Stat es, namely, Karnataka, Gujarat, West Bengal 
and Assam; and the project on cultivation and development of medicinal herbs viz. Safed 
Musli and Amla.  These two projects have been funded by Office of the Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts), Ministry of Textiles, Govt. of India and National Medicinal 
Plant Board (NMPB), Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, 
respectively.  For these projects, a tentative time frame has been assigned subject to the 
various factors and constraints.  Moreover, the completion of the said two projects within 
the time-limit prescribed by the funding organisations is the essence of the projects unless 
there are any compelling circumstances wh ich would stand in the way of their 
implementability in time. 
 

 18
(ii) The projects such as value addition of Sal/Siali leaves into Dona-pattals, 
development of minor Millets into health foods, preparation of trade directory and 
benchmarking of the price and quality of  Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs), 
cultivation and development of Jatropha as Bio-fuel and some other livelihood generation 
projects for the tribals have been prepared for which no financial assistance has so far 
been received.  For all these projects it is inte nded to initially take up a few pilot as well 
as demonstrative modules.  Once the pilot proj ects are found successful then these would 
be multiplied in the same places/ or and also replicated in other areas where a distinct role 
model of TRIFED will be definitely spelt out giving a finite time frame on their 
implementation vis-a-vis the outcome thereof.  However, as rightly suggested a 
mechanism would be put in place to monitor th e implementation of the pilot projects as 
well and record their results periodically.  A Project Committee has already been set up in 
the Head Office of TRIFED, which is entrusted with the job, inter alia, of monitoring the 
progress.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 6.10) 
 
2.12 The Committee note that only one Research and Development Centre is 
functioning presently at Sikka Complex, New Delhi to carr y out various research and 
development work relating to marketing develo pment of tribal products.  Besides lack of 
adequate equipment and laboratory instrument s in the Centre, the posts of Development 
Chemist and Analyst are yet to be filled up.  In the opinion of the Committee, the R&D 
Centre needs to be upgraded both in te rms of technical manpower and laboratory 
equipment.  The Committee recommend that the recruitment process of technical staff for 
R&D Center should be expedited and all the necessary equipment and laboratory 
instruments should be acqui red without further delay .  The Committee further 
recommend that some more R&D Centre where testing and certification of tribal products 
from various divisions of TRIFED and othe r private parties could be conducted, should 
be opened in appropriate locations to bri ng about quality contro l and generation of 
revenues 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.13 To take up the activities of quality Cont rol and Development in a more efficient 
way, a proposal for recruitment of a Deve lopment Chemist and Analyst is under active 
consideration.  A Committee comprising expert from outside institution and officers from 
TRIFED has been constituted for deciding the selection of suitable candidates. It has been 
decided to appoint such candida tes on contract basis, for wh ich process has already been 
initiated. 
 
2.14 A list of instruments and equipment required for better functioning of the 
laboratory has already been identified by R& D Centre.  The technical expert committee, 
comprising of scientists from IIT, Delhi,  Director FRAC and DGM, TRIFED (R&D), 
during the meeting held on 23 rd March, 2003 has found that the instruments identified by 
R&D Centre are the basic requirement of th e laboratory and therefore, the purchase of 
these instruments is essential for running th e R&D Centre.  The process of purchase of 

 19
these instruments and equipment as per the recommendations of the technical expert 
members will be taken up shortly as soon as fund is available from the Ministry.  
Ministry of Food Processing & Industries has been approached for sanction of necessary 
financial assistance for upgradation of the laboratory. 
 
2.15 Regarding opening of some more R&D Cent res it is stated that presently stress is 
being given for upgrading the ex isting R&D Centre at New De lhi so that it could get 
accreditation from the concerned National Agen cies and other Departments and reach a 
satisfactory level of performance.  The openi ng of other R&D Centre will be taken up at 
appropriate time based on the performance of  the existing R&D Centre and subject to 
availability of adequate fund for this purpose. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para 7.14) 
 
2.16 The Committee have been apprised that Messers. Insight Management 
Consultants, who were entrusted with th e task of suggesting ways and means for 
restructuring of TRIFED, have, 
inter  alia recommended for downsizing of manpower of 
TRIFED and outsourcing of professionals/pro fessional agencies on contract basis.  The 
Committee take note that the Board of Directors of TRIFED had accepted these 
recommendations of the Management Consultants.  The Committee is also of the opinion 
that in order to fulfil its new role as a market developer, TRIFED has to attain 
professional competence.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that TRIFED should 
recruit managerial and financial expert s who may help TRIFED grow into a 
professionally competent marketing developmen t organisation.  Steps may also be taken 
to downsize the organisation from its existing strength in a phased manner.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.17 TRIFED has already started the process of obtaining professi onals on contract 
basis and in this direction applications for the post of Development Chemist & Analyst 
for R&D Centre have been received and shortlisted candidates will be called for 
interview shortly. The job of Advertisement and Public Relation for the Federation is 
being entrusted to a professional advertising agency already selected for this purpose. 
 
2.18 So as to provide financial expertise to the Management for taking important 
decisions, a Chartered Accountant has been re cruited on deputation basis in the rank of 
Dy. General Manager from the National Cooperative Union of India (NCUI).   
 
2.19 A Committee has been set up in the Head Office to examine the relevant issues 
relating to downsizing of the Organisation in a phased manner and to suggest course of 
action.
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para 7.17) 
 

 20
2.20 The Committee regret to note that there has been frequent change of 
Managing Directors of TRIFED resulting in obstruction in the smooth functioning of the 
organisation.  Keeping in view the fact that  day-to-day management of the business of 
TRIFED is the responsibility of the Mana ging Director, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should ensure a reasonable te nure of office for each Managing Director.  
Also, only sincere, dedicated and honest pe rson should be appoint ed as the Managing 
Director of TRIFED. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.21 The post of Managing Director, TRIFED  has been filled up by the Deptt. of 
Personnel & Training under Central Staffing Sche me without consulting this Ministry.  
However, the views of the Committee wi ll be communicated to the DOPT when the 
present incumbent leaves TRIFED. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para 8.9) 
 
2.22 The Committee note that a proposal re ceived from Gujarat State Forest 
Development Corporation for opening an outle t of TRIBES Shop at Vadodara is under 
active consideration.  However, financial arrangements for opening the outlet is yet to be 
worked out with GSFDC.  The Committee, theref ore, urge the Ministry to take an early 
decision for opening of the outle t and to finalise the details of financial arrangements 
with GSFDC.  The Committee also recommend that TRIFED should set up more outlets 
of TRIBES shops at strategic locations all over India to promote the sales of tribal 
handicrafts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.23 One of the outlets of Tribes Shop has b een opened at the Du ty Free Shop at the 
Departure Lounge of the Indi ra Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi which was 
inaugurated on 14.8.03.   
 
2.24 The Tribal Research Institutes have set up Tribal Museums in most of the States.  
Ministry may persuade the Tribal Museum s to set up Museum shops which can sell 
ethnic tribal handicrafts from all over the country and Tribes can supply the items to such 
outlets. 
 
2.25 A proposal for sale of items of Tribes Shop on consignment basis by way of tie-
up with M/s. AP Handicrafts Corporation is being actively considered and after 
finalisation the items will be sold at retailed outlet of Lepakshi - the State Government 
Emporium. 
 
2.26 On similar lines, another proposal of ope ning an outlet of Trib es at Baroda in 
collaboration with Gujarat State Forest Development Corporation, where the Tribes Shop 
items would be sold on consignment basis, has been received and is under active 
consideration.  

 21
 
2.27  Recently, a proposal has been received from CPKVIC (a marketing initiative of 
KVIC) inter alia for a possible tie-up with TRIFED for display/ sale of tribal products at 
KVIC’s various outlets in the country. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.21, Para 8.11) 
 
2.28 The Committee note that in order to ge nerate awareness about the TRIBES Shop, 
TRIFED has been organising exhibitions, giving advertisement and publicity, opening an 
outlet at IGI Airport and Kendriya Bhandar,  sending catalogues of tribal products to 
Indian Missions abroad, etc.  The Committee desire that efforts should be made to 
promote tribal handicrafts by pa rticipation in domestic and international exhibitions and 
also a comprehensive action plan should be prepared to promote the sale of tribal 
handicrafts on a sustainable basis.  Also, Indian Amba ssadors/High Commissioners and 
Indian missions abroad should be persuaded to supply the names of prospective buyers 
for the tribal handicrafts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.29 A list of Exhibitions/events or ganised by India Trade Promotion 
Organisation/Export Promotion Organisation/ Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts 
during the current financial y ear is placed at Annexure-I. Tribes will examine the 
feasibility of participation in exhibitions relating to Handicrafts, Gifts and Textile items. 
 
2.30 Letters have been sent to the Indian Missions abroad enclosing therewith Product 
Catalogues of Tribes and some of the Missi ons have responded back sending the list of 
importers of handicraft items.  Action is being taken on the details received. 
 
2.31 A consignment of hand block printed hand made paper has been supplied to a 
buyer in Italy by Tribes.  This was a follow up action to the participation in the exhibition 
at MACEF 2002 Milan, Italy by Tribes in September 2002. 
 
2.32 Another order for export of handicraf t from the same buyer has been received 
which is being readied for despatch during September 2003. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.22, Para 9.3) 
 
2.33 The Committee note that though TRIFED’s role relating to medicinal plants is 
limited to marketing development of already identified medicinal plants but 32 number of 
identified medicinal plants are facing threat to their existence in the absence of adequate 
measures for their controlled cultivation.  The Committee, therefore, desire that TRIFED 
should extend its full support to National Medicinal Plan t Board for preservation, 
conservation and cultivation of the medicinal plants found in the forest 
 

 22
Reply of the Government 
 
2.34 There are innumerable Medicinal Plant species found in the forest.  The efficacy 
of the medicinal values of all of them is neither established nor the suitability of all the 
Medicinal Plants to address the health and treatment issue has gained ground by way of  
standardisation  and proper documentation.  On ly from the despondency of the word of 
mouth from one generation to the next a nd through the hearsay following the practices 
undertaken by the traditional healers, some in formation of the healing capacities of the 
plants grown in the forest keep doing the rounds.  So the agenda of extending full support 
to National Medicinal Plant Board for pres ervation, conservation and cultivation of all 
the Medicinal Plants found in the forest is neither tenable nor is covered by the mandate 
of TRIFED which is marketing development activities of the agriculture produce and 
Non Timber Forest Produce grown and cultivat ed in the tribal areas only amongst which 
the Medicinal Plant is one category.   
 
2.35 However, TRIFED has taken up some usef ul Medicinal Plants for development in 
tribal areas depending upon the locational needs, factors and constraints.  Such Medicinal 
Plants are Safed Musli, Amla, Jatropha, Sarp aganda, etc.  to begin with.  TRIFED had 
already conceptualised and prepared a Project Report on controlled cultivation and 
propagation of Safed Musli and Amla as intercrop in Chhattisgarh which has been 
sanctioned and funded by National Medicina l Plant Board (NMPB), Government of 
India.  Similarly, other Medicinal Plants, out of the 32 numbers identified by NMPB, 
would be taken up in different States for wh ich TRIFED has been attempting to tie up 
with the State Federations.  But in all these efforts, nothing can be achieved if required 
fund support is not provided to TRIFED. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 

 23
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para 1.18) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that under the new Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 
2002 the Central Government can nominate at  the most four persons on the Board of 
Directors of TRIFED as against thirteen unde r the old Multi State Cooperative Societies 
Act, 1984 out of which seven were to be tribal  representatives.  Further, the MSCS Act, 
2002 is a general enactment applicable to all c ooperative societies and not particularly to 
TRIFED.  The Committee feel that under the new law, a Multi State Cooperative Society 
like TRIFED which is basically meant for looking after th e interest of  the tribal 
population may not have sufficient tribal representatives.  Therefore, in order to provide 
adequate representation in the BOD of TRIFED, the Committee recommend that in 
addition to non-official members who may be from tribal community, the BOD should 
induct atleast 2 MPs/MLAs from tribal commun ity only, having professional skills in the 
field, as associate members. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 TRIFED’s new Bye-laws (clause 18.1.9) provi de that the  Board may co-opt as  
Directors two eminent experts/professionals in the field highly relevant to fulfillment of 
TRIFED’s objects and nature of services to be provided by TRIFED to its Members.    
Hence, two MPs can be co-opted to the Board of Directors of TRIFED provided they are 
having the required professional sk ills in the field.  However, as per the latest guidelines 
of the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, no Ministry can nominate any MP to any Board 
except the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs.   At present the constitution of Board of 
Directors is at a final stage, any furt her induction of MPs after observing of the 
procedural formalities, will further delay the constitution of Board of Directors.  Hence, it 
has been decided to continue with the present system.   
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para 5.8) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that evolving a mini mum support price for the MFP items on 
the pattern of agricultural pr oduce and designation of a nodal agency fo r carrying out the 
price support operations is an issue concerning the National Fo rest Policy and is under 
the administrative ambit of the Ministry of  Environment and Forests.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that th e Ministry should vigorously persuade the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests which in consulta tion with the State G overnments may bring 
about a solution for uniform declaration of  MSP under the price support scheme and 
designate TRIFED as the nodal agency for fixing the minimum support price for the MFP 
of the tribals on the pattern of FCI and NAFED for agricultural produce. 
 

 24
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 The Ministry has already taken up the i ssue with the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests.  A copy of the O.M is placed at Annexure-II. 
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para 6.11) 
 
3.5 The Committee note that though developmen t of value added products from tribal 
produce is one of the objectives of R&D Ce ntre, no significant valu e addition activities 
have been taken up so far.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend that TRIFED should 
urgently take up value addition activities in consultation with other research institutions 
involved in the same work to increase the quality and marketability of tribal products.  
The Committee also desire that norms and methods for scientific collection, processing 
and storage of MFP should be evolved so as  to conform to the quality specifications of 
the developed foreign countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 Since at present R&D Centre of TRIF ED is not adequately equipped with 
manpower and equipment, therefore for valu e addition activities and development of 
norms/specifications, different Ministries/ Departments/ Institutes working in these areas 
have been contacted for exploring the possibil ities of financial assistance and initiating 
the above activities jointly.  Some of the main institutions contacted are as under: 
 
(a) Ministry of Food Processing & Industry:   
 
3.7 In an effort to upgrade the TRIFED’s laboratory, TRIFED have approached 
Ministry of Food Processing & Industry for availing grant of Rs.15.00 lakh under their 
schemes. 
 
(b) Department of Science & Technology:   
 
3.8 Discussions have been held with Director, Science & Society Division (DST) to 
identify certain R&D Projects related to development of technologies on marketing 
development of tribal commodities suitable for implementation in tribal areas. 
 
(c) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI):  (Ministry of Agriculture):  
 
3.9 TRIFED and DMI have many objectives in  common.  Representatives of both the 
organisations have discussed and identified ce rtain projects to be taken up jointly.  One 
such project is Development of Quality Stan dards for Mahua Flower, Neem Seed, Aonla, 
Sikkakai, Seeded Tamarind, Jatropha.   Strate gies are being prepar ed to init iate the 
projects at the earliest. 
 
(d) National Medicinal Pl ants Board (NMPB):   
 

 25
3.10 Discussions have been held with CEO, NMPB wh o has requested TRIFED 
to prepare a suitable plan for marketing of  Medicinal Plants.  Financial assistance 
required for the above work will be met from NMPB.  Suitable actions in this regard will 
be initiated shortly. 
 
(e) Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialisation, Wardha:   
 
3.11 Discussions have been held with Scient ists of MGIRI and IIT , Delhi to jointly 
initiate R&D Projects in tribal areas.  Some  areas of cooperation have been tentatively 
identified. Discussions are on for deciding further course of action in this regard. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para 7.15) 
 
3.12 The Committee further note that a training programme for the officials/staff of 
TRIFED on the basic aspects fundamental to the concept for marketing development was 
being finalised after detailed discussion with the officials of Directorate of Marketing and 
Inspection, Ministry of Agriculture.  The Comm ittee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should finalise the details of the training  pr ogramme at the earliest so that training is 
imparted to the officials/staff of TRIFED to increase the level of professionalism in 
TRIFED. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.13 TRIFED has already held preliminary di scussion with Directorate of Marketing 
and Inspection, Ministry of Agriculture, for the training to be imparted. The areas chosen 
are  
 
(i) Marketing intelligence on the products 
(ii) Quality standardization of the products 
(iii) Marketing survey and study 
 
3.14 Details are being worked out to start the process.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 

 26
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE  AND WHICH REQUIRES  REITERATION   
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para 1.8) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that Messrs. Insight Management Consultants, entrusted with 
the task of studying the struct ure and functions of TRIFED  and to suggest ways and 
means for restructuring so as to improve its performance have advised the need for 
TRIFED to come under the purview of the Companies Act.  For this, it has recommended 
floating a subsidiary institution in the form of a corporate body whic h can be registered 
under the Companies Act.  The Committee further note that spinning of a subsidiary 
institution in the form of a corporate body is not finding favour with the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs because TRIFED will not be ab le to transfer a part of its business or 
activities undertaken in furthe rance of its object in view of  the restriction imposed under 
proviso to sub-section 2 of section 19 of the MSCS Act.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in order to switch over th e TRIFED to a corporate entity, the above 
restriction under the MSCS Act may be rem oved by bringing suitab le amendment in the 
Act itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 is applicable to all such societies 
throughout the country. Since, the proposed amendment to the said Act will be applicable 
to TRIFED only, it will not be agreed to by the nodal Ministry, i.e. the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperation. In  a recent case where our Ministry had proposed an 
amendment to MSCS Act, 2002, it was turned down by the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperation.  
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para 2.5) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that the Central G overnment have not found it feasible to 
further invest in the share capital of TRIFED du e to huge losses incurred by it over the 
years and its unsatisfactory performance.  Ho wever, in order to provide additional funds 
to meet the requirements of TRIFED the Mi nistry is revising the present scheme of 
grants-in-aid to State Tribal Development C ooperative Corporations including TRIFED.  
The Committee welcome this step but are of the opinion that to bail out TRIFED from the 
present financial crisis, TRIFED requires ad equate capital base and for that further 
investment in the share capital is required from the Central Government which is the 
principal investor.  Also, keep ing in view the fact that TR IFED is performing the unique 

 27
role of marketing development for the tr ibal produce and has reoriented its focus 
from direct trading to the role  of a market developer, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
re-examine the issue of enhancing the share cap ital in TRIFED  to enable it to carry out 
its action plan for activities relating to marketing development effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 The requirement of funds for the promo tional activities of TRIFED has already 
been considered in th is Ministry.  During the current fi nancial year (2003-04) an amount 
of Rs.2.00 crore has already been released to TRIFED under the Price Support Scheme, 
against an allocation of Rs.6.00 crore.  Fo r the balance amount, the file is under 
submission to IFD for their concurrence. 
 
4.5 The existing scheme of grants-in-aid to  State Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporations has been proposed to be revised so that funds can be released to TRIFED 
also.  
 
4.6 Besides the Ministry have  already mooted a proposal to fund the administrative 
expenditure of TRIFED through a Non-Plan bud get head.  This will ensure the payment 
of administrative expenditure as well as interest. 
 
4.7 However, at this juncture with the pr esent financial scenario where TRIFED has 
incurred huge losses of more than Rs.80.00 crore, any more investment in the share 
capital of TRIFED is likely to be turned  down by the CCEA.  However, restructuring 
process of TRIFED has already started.  In case, there is a turn around in the financial 
scenario of TRIFED in the ne ar future, the case of enhancem ent of share capital can be 
considered thereafter.
   
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para 2.13) 
 
4.8 The Committee take serious note of the fact that some of the employees/senior 
officials of TRIFED were found responsible  for bad investment by TRIFED and were 
also involved in irregularities relating to purchase, sales, st orage, shortages, procedural 
lapses and other misconduct.  Some of the officials/employees are facing CBI 
inquiry/Departmental action.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend that all the 
irregularities may be thoroughl y investigated and stringent action be taken against the 
guilty persons.  Steps taken in this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.9 Disciplinary action against 48 employees of TRIFED has been taken so far with 
respect to misconduct on various kinds of irregularities related to purchase, sales, storage, 

 28
shortages, procedural lapses and other misconducts.  Out of these 12 employees 
were dismissed/removed from service on account of grave misconduct related to 
unauthorised actions, fraudulent purchases an d false credentials.  Major penalty was 
imposed on 11 employees and minor penalty was imposed on 8 employees while 7 were 
exonerated.   
 
4.10 Pending 11 disciplinary cases are in progress.  Further disciplinary action against 
5 other employees is contempl ated.  Apart from this, CBI has already launched criminal 
prosecution against 7 former employ ees of TRIFED (6  of which were 
dismissed/removed/services dispensed during probation and one present employee).  Two 
cases have been referred to CBI for investigation.
 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
  (Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para 3.8) 
 
4.11 The Committee note that the commodities procured by TRIFED have expanded 
over the years of its operations.  TRIFED is now procuring 57 varieties of Surplus 
Agricultural Produce (SAP) and 50 varieties of Minor Forest Pr oduce (MFP) including 
tree borne oilseeds.  The Committee have been informed that the export of MFP has 
stopped after 1996-97.  The Committee observe that the marketing efforts of tribal 
produce  could not culminate into business with  foreign buyers due to certain constraints 
such as products not conforming to quality sp ecifications, inconsistent supply base and 
uncompetitive price.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the Ministry should 
assist TRIFED in overcoming these constraint s and exploring foreign market for its MFP 
and SAP items. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.12 As far as TRIFED is concerned the pr imary area which needs attention is the 
development of the quality of the tribal pr oduce. In this regar d, TRIFED has already 
planned action in the following areas through its Research & Development Wing: 
 
(a) Development of norms for determining normal and abnormal losses during 
storage of major Tree-borne Oilseeds (Neem, Mahua Seed, Karanj, Mango Kernel 
& Sal Seed), 
(b) Development of Quality standard for Mahua Flower, 
(c) Good storage practices for NTFP. 
 
4.13 TRIFED has also been expl oring possibilities of export potential of various MFPs 
and of providing necessary service to its members for promoting exports of MFPs.  
 

 29
4.14 Ministry of Tribal Affairs has,  however, no objection in promoting 
TRIFED’s  market development initiative as pe r their existing bye-laws in so far as they 
conform to the schemes being implemented by this Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para 1.24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para 7.16) 
 
4.15 The Committee note that in order to ma ke the restructuring plan of TRIFED 
possible, an infusion of Rs.100 crore in the form of equity capital and grants-in-aid by the 
Central Government in the next five year s is necessary.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should give serious consideration to the financial 
requirement of TRIFED and take necessary st eps to provide sufficient capital to TRIFED 
for carrying out its restructuring exercises and attaining professional competence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.16 The Ministry’s initiative  to provide funds to TRIFED for sustaining their 
activities has already been mentioned at reply to para 2.5.   
 
4.17 It may be mentioned here that TRIFED has requested this Ministry to provide 
funds under non-plan budget head @ Rs.10.00 cr ore per year for carrying out its 
restructuring exercises and attaining profe ssional competence.  The matter has already 
been examined and TRIFED has been requested  to provide necessary information/details 
as sought for by FA (TA). 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report)

 30
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para 4.14) 
 
5.1 The Committee note with dismay that a dispute has arisen between TRIFED and 
Messrs. Universal Cooperative of USA over the supply of Niger Seed and the case is still 
pending.  TRIFED has maintained that there was no written contract but the US Court 
had rule in favour of Messrs Universal C ooperative and TRIFED has to pay a huge 
amount of US $24,9900+US $6708 to Messrs. Un iversal Cooperative as out of court 
settlement.  The Committee view the situati on very seriously and opine that the dispute 
has not only brought a bad name to TRIFED in  the global market but has also caused 
losses to the organization which is already running in financial crisis.  The Committee, 
therefore, direct the Ministry to make a ll out efforts for settli ng the case without any 
further delay.  The Committee also desire th at TRIFED should tread cautiously while 
dealing with the global market which is highly competitive and demanding. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The issue regarding the feas ibility and the mode of settlement of the case has both 
legal and commercial overtones and needs to be  decided under proper legal advice and in 
full consideration of all relevant pros and cons .  TRIFED has, therefor e, sent the case to 
the learned Attorney General of India.  His views are still awaited. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para 8.5) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that TRIFED is implementing Babasaheb Ambedkar 
Hastshilp Vikas Yojna with the financial assistance from the office of Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts) to boost the marketing of tribal handicrafts.  Under this 
project Self Help Groups consisting of tribal artisans will be encouraged to form a society 
and become members of TRIFED, which w ill provide the opportunity of selling their 
products at the outlets of TRIBES in Delhi and at international airports.  Keeping in view 
the fact that the existing supply base of tribal handicrafts is not sufficient to cater to the 
international market in te rms of volume and quality, th e Committee desire that the 
Ministry should assist TRIFED in creating a large and sustai nable supply base of tribal 
handicrafts and maintaining its quality conforming to the international standards. 
 
 
 
 
 

 31
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 As far as TRIFED  is concerned, TRIFED and Tribal Research Institutes in 
various States can jointly undertake a study to ascertain the following: - 
 
(a) Documentation of Traditional tribal craf ts and artisans currently practising the 
craft. 
 
(b) Study the traditional methods of making the craft and suggest technical know how 
for improvement in the quality of produc t with active involv ement of Designers 
from NID. 
 
5.5 For requirement of funds for product development, Development Commissioner 
(Handicrafts) could be approached. 
 
5.6 TRIFED on its part is alr eady exploring the possibility of tie-up with appropriate 
agency/institution for initiating action in this crucial area. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No.16015/3/2002-CP&R (pt.) dated 13.1.2004) 
 
 
New Delhi;      SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
December, 2004      Chairperson, 
Agrahayana, 1926(Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
     

 32
           
ANNEXURE- I 
 
EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCIL FOR HANDICRAFTS 
 
                                 Council’s Participation in International Exhibitions 
2003-2004 
 
 23rd –26th July, 2003      HONG KONG HOUSEWARE WEEK, 
         Hong Kong  
 
         HONGKONG GIFTS & PREMIUM WEEK 
 
 5 th –8th September, 2003      MACEF AUTUMN, 
         M i l a n ,  I t a l y  
 
 7 th –10th September, 2003               INTERNATIONAL AUTUMN FAIR, 
        Birminghan, UK 
 
 21 st –24th October, 2003                 ASIAN GIFTS  PREMIUM & HOUSEHOLD     
        PRODUCTS SHOW, Hong Kong 
 
 31 st –3rd February, 2004    EXPO. HOGAR REGALO SPRING, 
       B a r c e l o n a ,  S p a i n  
 
 1 st –5th February, 2004    INTERNATIONAL SPRING FAIR, 
       Birmingham, UK 
 
 13 th –15th March, 2004   SOUTH AFRICA-SARCDA INTERNATIONAL 
                                                                  TRADE FAIR OF GIFTS & HOME DECORATIVE, 
      Midrand, South Africa. 
 
      

 33
 

 34
 
ANNEXURE- III  
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 20th  DECEMBER 2004. 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to  16.00 hrs. in Room No. 131,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Appadurai 
   3. Shri Ashok Argal 
4. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
5. Shri Mahaveer Bhagora 
6. Shri RameshwarOraon 
7. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
8. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
10. Smt. Krishna Tirath 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
12. Smt. Jamana Devi Barupal 
13. Dr. Narayan Singh Manaklao 
14. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
15. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  1. Shri R.K. Saxena  -  Deputy Secretary 
  2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar -  Under Secretary 
   
             C o n t d . . 2 / -  

 35
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chai rperson, welcomed the Members 
to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up 
the draft Third Report on the Acti on Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-third 
Report of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on The Tribal Cooperative Marketing 
Development Federation of Indi a Limited (TRIFED) and adopted 
the same without any amendment. 
 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Report 
and present the same on their behalf to the Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 36
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY-THIRD 
REPORT OF THE ERSTWHILE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND 
WELFARE (THIRTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
       Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations  22 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have 11  50%  
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 9, 10,13, 15, 18, 20, 21and 22)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the  4  18.18% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 2, 12, 14 and 16) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 5  22.73% 
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 7, 8 and 17)  
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 2  9.09% 
 which final replies of Government are interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 11 and 19) 
 
 