i 
 
 
31 
  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2012 - 2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December,  2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2012-2013) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommenda tions 
contained  in  the  Twenty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2012 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on   19.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December,  2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(vi) 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
19 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
40 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which repl ies 
of the Government have not been accepted and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter- I. 
 
41 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
50 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I Action taken by the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth and Fifth Chapter s 
of the Fifteenth Report of the Committee. 
 
55 
ANNEXURE-II Guidelines regarding Pre -matric Scholarship Scheme for 
Scheduled  Castes students. 
 
70 
ANNEXURE -III Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 17.12.2012.             
        
89 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
91 
                                         
 
    
   
 
 
                                               
                                         

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2012-2013) 
       
 
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
  
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
12. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
13. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18. Shri Kabir Suman 
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24. Shri Rishang Keishing 
25. Shri Mangala Kisan 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 

v 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
2. Shri Kusal Sarkar - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Neena Juneja - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   

vi 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chair man of the Standing C ommittee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty-first Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 2nd May, 201 2. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
17.9.2012.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 17.12.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officia ls of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      HEMANAND BISWAL    
17 December, 2012       Chairman, 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants , 2012-13 relating to the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
1.2 The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
2nd May, 2012.  It contained 23 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government:  
Paragraph Nos.  2.3, 3.28, 3.29,  3.33, 3.34, 4.30, 4.31, 5.12, 5.13, 6.22,  
6.23. 6.25 and 7.11. 
 (Total 13  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
- Nil - 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I:  
Paragraph Nos. 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 4.29, 6.24 and 6.26. 
(Total 6 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos. 3.35, 4.32, 4.33 and 5.11  
  (Total 4  - Chapter V)  
 

 
 
2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the repli es received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Low allocation of funds in the development of OBCs 
Recommendation (S. No. 4, Para No. 3.30) 
 
1.5 The Committee had found  that the Ministry had sought an allocation of Rs. 
12,500.00 crore from the Planning Commission during the year 2012 -13 however an 
allocation of only Rs. 5915.00 crore  was made.  The main areas where there had been a 
slashing of funds was in the Other Backward Classes Development i.e. from Rs. 3525.00 
crore to Rs. 900.00 crore.   The Secretary informed the Committee during evidence that 
the schemes in the OBC sector hav e unfortunately not got the requisite funds and the 
Ministry is therefore requesting States to restrict their expenditure unless they could meet 
any additional requirement out of their own resources.  Keeping in mind the financial 
performance of the Minist ry in the XI Plan period, against an allocation of Rs. 16776.00 
crore the expenditure for the five years has been Rs. 16171.48 crore, the Committee 
desired the Ministry to vigorously pursue with Planning Commission to increase allocation 
of funds especially in schemes for OBC sector.  
1.6 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
"The Ministry is constantly pursuing the Planning Commission for allocation of more 
funds for the OBC sector at the highest level viz. Minister (SJ&E) vide his letter  
dated 27.7.2012 addressed to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, has 

 
 
3 
 
requested to increase the budgetary allocation under Pre -matric and Post -matric 
scholarship schemes for OBC students  as due to budgetary constraints, it has not 
been possible to provi de scholarships to all the eligible students under these 
schemes. It is also proposed to revise the scholarship rates and income ceiling 
under the Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme, as it has not been revised ever since its 
inception in 1998-99. Planning Commission has accordingly been requested to take 
urgent action for allocation of minimum additional funds of Rs 1400 crore for Post -
matric Scholarship and Rs 1950 crore for Pre -matric Scholarship Schemes for 
OBCs during the current year and also similar alloca tion for the remaining period of 
the 12th Plan (2012-17)".      
  

 
 
4 
 
 
1.7 Expressing unhappiness at reduced budgetary outlay of Rs. 5915 crores  for 
2012-13 by the Planning Commission against a demand of Rs. 12500 crores  from 
the Ministry, which resulted in slashing of funds for many schemes especially for 
schemes for OBC development wherein  Rs. 900 crores  was allocated  against a 
demand of Rs. 3525 crores , the Committee had recommended the Ministry to 
pursue with Planning  Commission to increase allocations during the year.  The 
Ministry in the action taken reply have informed the Committee that Ministry is 
constantly pursuing with the Planning Commission for allocation of more funds for 
OBC sector at highest level.  I n a letter to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission 
the Minister (SJ&E) has requested to take urgent action for allocation of minimum 
additional funds of Rs. 1400 crores for Post -matric and Rs. 1950 crores for Pre -
matric Scholarship Schemes for OBC during the cu rrent year and also similar 
allocation for the remaining period of Twelfth Plan. 
 The Committee are  constrained to note that despite the matter regarding 
higher allocation for OBC sector , having been taken up by the Ministry with the 
Planning Commission at Minister's level, there is no positive response of the 
Planning Commission on the request of the Ministry.  Since reduced allocation will 
deprive the eligible OBC students from getting scholarships, the Committee would 
demand that  the Planning Commission may make additional allocations as 
requested by the Ministry without any delay.               
 
  

 
 
5 
 
B. Clearance for new proposals of the Ministry  and consolidation of previous 
programmes/schemes 
 
Recommendations (S. No. 5, Para No. 3.31) 
1.8 The Committee were informed that the Planning Commission constituted four 
Working Groups in April, 2011 for formulation of the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17) of the 
Ministry i.e. Improvement of Scheduled Castes, empowerment of persons with disabilities, 
Social Welfare/Social Defence and Empowerment of  Backward  Classes,  EBCS   
Nomadic,  Semi -Nomadic and De -notified Tribes.  These groups submitted their Reports 
to the Planning Commission in October, 2011. The 12th Five Year Plan outlay 
recommended by the Working Groups is Rs.  9.55 lakh crore.   The Working Groups have 
recommended rationalization/consolidation of existing schemes/programmes for their 
effective implementation, which includes consolidation of SC related schemes of the 
Ministry into a composite Centrally Sponsored  Scheme called 'National Programme for 
Empowerment of Scheduled Castes', consolidation of most disability related schemes of 
the Ministry into a composite Centrally Sponsored National Programme called 'National 
Programme for Empowerment of Persons with Dis abilities (NPEPWD)‟. The Working 
Groups have also suggested that some educational/scholarship schemes being 
implemented for Scheduled Castes be extended to OBCs and PwDs.  The Committee 
were of the view that as these are good proposals and the Planning Com mission should 
give adequate funding to the Ministry so that concrete steps can be taken to improve the 
working of schemes and to benefit maximally the target groups.  The Committee were told 
that Rs. 1048.00 crore have been allocated in the year 2012 -13 for new schemes of the 
Ministry.  However, the new schemes were to take off although 'in Principle' approval has 
been obtained for Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwDs. A Concept Note on National 
Overseas Scholarships for OBC has been sent to the Plann ing Commission for 'in 

 
 
6 
 
Principle' approval.   The Committee strongly recommend ed that the Ministry pursue with 
the Planning Commission for clearance of the proposals so that the new schemes of the 
Ministry for which Rs. 1048.00 crore has been earmarked in the year 2012-13 can take off 
in a time bound manner. 
1.9 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
“As regards the status of the new schemes proposed for 2012 -13, the Pre -matric 
Scheme for SC Students studying in Class IX and X has already been launched 
with effect from 1.7.2012, and the Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwDs is 
under consideration o f Standing Finance Committee, the meeting of which is 
scheduled to be held in September, 2012.  The ín principle‟ approval for the 
Scheme of National Overseas Scholarship for OBC students, is being pursued with 
Planning Commission. Other new schemes propos ed for 2012 -13 are still at the 
conceptual stage and being examined in the Ministry”.  
 
  

 
 
7 
 
1.10 The Committee had desired that the Ministry pursue with the Planning 
Commission for clearance of the proposals for new schemes of the Ministry for 
which Rs. 1048 .00  crore has been earmarked in the year 2012 -2013 so that these 
schemes during the year could take off.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies 
giving the status of the new schemes  have stated that t he Pre -matric Scholarship 
Scheme for SC students studying in Class IX and X has already been launched on 
1.7.2012.  Also, the Rajiv Gandhi  National Fellowship for PwDs is  under 
consideration of Standing Finance Committee.  Approval of the scheme of Nationa l 
Overseas Scholarship for OBC Students is being p ursued with the Planning 
Commission.  In regard to other new schemes, the Ministry have stated that they are 
at conceptual stage and are being examined by the Ministry.   
The Committee are dismayed that important new schemes especially for 
students with disabilities and for OBCs like  Rajiv Gandhi Fellowship scheme for 
PwDs, National Fellowship scheme for OBCs  have still not got final approval.  The 
Committee are also unhap py that other new schemes are still at conceptual stage 
despite the fact that money was allocated for them in the Plan outlay, 2012 -13.  
Expressing disappointment at the delay, t he Committee desire that the Ministry  to 
pursue vigorously with Planning Commission for early approval of the schemes so 
that they are launched at the earliest.  Further, new schemes being examined in the 
Ministry be expedited and place d before the Planning Commission for the approval.  
Also, the Ministry have not  thrown any light on any further developments in regard 
to the rationalization/consolidation of existing schemes/programmes for their 
effective implementation, that were recommended by the working group constituted 
by the Planning Commission in April, 2011  for formulation of the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan (2012-17) of the Ministry.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest 
developments in this regard.    

 
 
8 
 
C.  Unutilized funds  for NE Region 
Recommendation (S. No. 6, Para No. 3.32) 
1.11  The Committee have found  that the lump sum allocation for the NE region and 
Sikkim was Rs. 213.50 crore which was revised to Rs. 190.80 crore, the expenditure has 
been shown as Rs. 117.22 crore.  Further an enhanced allocation of Rs. 248.00 crore  has 
been made in the year 2012 -13.  Although the Ministry was making efforts by holding 
meetings with officers of Social Welfare Department and representatives of NGOs in the 
region besides giving publicity to their schemes, the financial performance in t he year 
2011-12 was not good as no money was spent in North Eastern region and Sikkim under 
Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme, ALIMCO, National Handicap Finance and 
Development Corporation, Employment of Physically Challenged etc.  The Committee 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments in 
the North-Eastern Region to send viable proposals for implementing the various schemes 
and also exhort NGOs, working for disadvantaged section, to take benefit of the schemes.  
The Committee also recommend ed that TV and Radio programmes on the various 
schemes run by the Ministry should be made and telecast in the regional languages so 
that people can avail the benefit of the schemes run by the Ministry. 
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
“The reasons for the low or nil expenditure under  Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship 
Scheme, ALIMCO, National Handicap Finance and Development Corporation, 
Employment of Physically Challenged are given below: 
 
(i) As for the Scheme of Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC 
candidates, it is submitted that it is a Central Sector Scheme which is 
implemented through the University Grants Commission (UGC). There is no 
state-wise release of funds. The total number of fe llowships to be awarded 
under the scheme to the Scheduled Caste students every year is 2000. The 
numbers of fellowships have been distributed state -wise based on 
percentage of SC population in that State. The funds are released to UGC as 
per their demand. The funds utilized under the Scheme also include funds 

 
 
9 
 
used for candidates selected from NE states. There is no separate 
demarcation for NE States. 
 
(ii) In case of NHFDC, it is informed that at the beginning of the current 
year, NHFDC conveys the notional allo cation of funds to the SCAs, in 
proportion to the disabled population of the state/UT and considering 
disbursement in preceding three years. All SCAs are also advised to draw 
50% of the notional allocation as advance to expedite the implementation of 
NHFDC schemes in the states. However, majority of SCAs in North East do 
not come forward to draw the allocated funds from NHFDC despite repeated 
persuasions by NHFDC. During 2011 -12, SCAs from Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura did  not avail funds 
against their notional allocations. Many State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) 
of North Eastern States are not providing adequate Block Government 
Guarantee (BGG) in time, which makes it extremely difficult for NHFDC to 
release funds to these SCAs. 
(iii) ALIMCO could not organize the ADIP and ADIP -SSA Camps in a 
number of NE States due to non -response from the concerned State 
Governments. Besides, wherever camps were organized, turnout of persons 
with disabilities particularly when assessment and distribution camps are 
held separately is extremely poor owing to problems in commuting due to 
geographical distances and difficult terrain. 
 
The following steps have been taken to improve utilization of funds in the NE region: 
 
(i) In order to provide publici ty, various schemes implemented by the 
Ministry have been put on its website. Further, a radio programme namely 
„Sanwarti Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen‟ is being broadcast in all regional 
languages of the NE States through All India Radio.   
(ii) The Ministry has also been seeking help of the Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) and the North Eastern 
Council, to impress upon the NE States for sending complete proposals on 
adequate scale under the various schemes implemented in the region by 
this Ministry.  
(iii) To boost the expenditure in the region and to identify the problems 
being faced by the State Governments in utilizing the funds, we have been 
organizing the meetings with Social Welfare Secretaries & other officers of 
Social Welfare Departments of NE R States as well as representatives of 
non-Government organizations in the region for the last three years.   
 
Besides above, in view of the special problems being faced by the North -eastern 
States and to give focused attention to their issues at the highest level, States‟ 
Social Welfare Conference for NE States was convened in May, 2012 wherein the 
schemes/programmes with low expenditure in NE States were discussed and the 

 
 
10 
 
participating States requested to take necessary action for expediting the prop osals 
under these schemes during the current year”. 
 
  

 
 
11 
 
1.13 The Committee were unhappy at the low utilization of funds in the important 
schemes in the North-East Region which includes important schemes such as Rajiv 
Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme, Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of 
India (ALIMCO), National Handicap Finance and Development Corporation (NHFDC).  
The Committee had also desired that Radio and T.V. programmes on the various 
schemes of the Ministry should be made in regional la nguages so as to generate 
awareness on the scheme s of the Ministry .  The Ministry have informed the 
Committee in their Action Taken Reply that many State Channelizing Agencies 
(SCAs) of North Eastern States are not providing adequate Block Government 
Guarantee (BGG) in time, which ma de it extremely difficult for NHFDC to release 
funds.   Further, in case of scheme of Assistance to Disabled Persons for 
Purchase/Fitting of Aids  and Appliances (ADIP) turnout of persons with disabilities 
was extremely poor owing to problems in commuting due to geographical distances 
and difficult terrain.  The Ministry have stated that to improve the utilization of funds 
they have taken certain steps which include impressing on State Governments to 
send viable proposal.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee 
feel that impediments as stated by the Ministry above in implementing the scheme s 
can be tackled effectively by taking pro -active steps in co -ordination with the State 
Governments so that proposals complete in all aspects reach NHFDC in time.  Wide 
publicity can also be given to organization of ADIP camps to make them a success 
in North Eastern region. The Com mittee, once again reiterate that pointed efforts 
should be made to pop ularize the schemes of the Ministry in the North Eastern 
region particularly through regional languages on Doordarshan .  Also, the Ministry 
should make continuous efforts to persuade State Governments and State 
Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) in North Eastern States to send complete and viable 

 
 
12 
 
proposals in time so as to utilize funds kept for important schemes especially in 
disability areas to benefit the needy people in these States.  
  

 
 
13 
 
D. Allocation of funds under Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP)                        
 
Recommendation (S.No.10, Para No. 4.29) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that the Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan (SCSP) is an 
umbrella strategy to ensure earmarking of funds for development of Scheduled Castes in 
proportion to their population by the Central Ministries/Departments and States/UTs.   The 
Committee ha d been told that o ut of an outlay for 2011 -12 of Rs. 3.36 lakh crore, an 
amount of Rs. 0.31 lakh crore (9.4%) was earmarked by 25 Ministries/Departments as 
against the stipulated amount of Rs. 0.54 lakh crore (16.2%).  The defaulting 
Ministries/Departments in terms of earma rking funds as per guidelines circulated by the 
Planning Commission were the Department of Rural Development (Rs. 14000.00 crore) 
Ministries of Panchayati Raj (17.81 crore), Ministry of Science and Technology (58.73 
crore) and Rs. 3.82 in case of Ministry of DONER.  The Committee had recommended that 
the Ministry should take up the matter with the Planning Commission at the highest level 
so that important Ministries of Government i.e. especially the Ministry of Rural 
Development which plays a vital role in the development of Scheduled Castes allocates 
funds in proportion to the laid down guidelines under the Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan. 
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :-  
 
"The matter was taken up again by the Minister for Social Just ice and 
Empowerment vide his d.o. letters dated 24.03.2011 with the Deputy Chairman, 
Planning Commission and the Minister, Rural Development.  The matter was 
followed up with them, thereafter, on regular basis. The issue of shortfall in 
allocation of funds  under SCSP was also taken up by Minister (SJ&E) with Prime 
Minister vide letter dated 01.4.2011 with the request to suitably advise the Planning 
Commission on the issue".  
 
  

 
 
14 
 
1.16 The Committee have noted that the Central Ministries/Departments are not 
earmarking funds for development of SCs under Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan (SCSP) 
as per the guidelines circulated by the Planning Commission and have therefore 
recommended to take up the  matter with Planning Commission at the highest level 
so that important Ministries of Government i.e. especially the Ministry of Rural 
Development which is  the largest defaulter with a shortfall of Rs. 14000 crore , 
allocate funds in proportion to the laid down guidelines under the Scheduled Castes 
Sub-Plan.  The Ministry in their reply have stated that the matter has been taken up 
by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment with the Deputy Chairman, 
Planning Commission and Minister of Rural Developmen t and also with Prime 
Minister with the request to suitably advice the Planning Commission on the issue. 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that though the matter has been taken up 
by the Ministry at the highest level, there is no assurance of any correcti ve action 
from the Planning  Commission against the defaulting Ministries.  Taking a serious 
view of the casual approach of the Government on development of SCs, the 
Committee recommend the Government to seriously look into the matter and 
ensure that the M inistries allocate funds for development of SCs in proportion to 
the laid down guidelines under the Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP). 
  

 
 
15 
 
E. Restructuring of the ADIP Scheme 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 20, Para No. 6.24) 
 
1.17 The Committee were given to understand that the monitoring teams have found that 
Grants-in-Aid were not being properly used for implementation of ADIP scheme and they 
have given suggestions like physical verification of beneficiaries of each implementing 
agency, issue of in ventory card with full address and contact number of beneficiaries, 
computerization of the list of beneficiaries etc.  The Committee recommend ed that in the 
revision of the scheme, Stringent Monitoring Mechanisms should be adopted so that the 
Aids and Appl iances are given to the genuine beneficiaries.  The Committee also 
recommended that the Ministry should try to rope in Central Government and State 
Government Hospitals in the important disability related schemes so that it reaches the 
masses.  Also the of ficers of the Health Department, as suggested by the Ministry, should 
be authorized to do fast track checking of aids and appliances given under the scheme. 
 
1.18 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
“The ADIP Scheme is under revision with regard to the income ceiling for the 
eligible beneficiaries, ceiling of the cost of assistive devices and also for 
streamlining the provisions in the Scheme. The suggestions of the Committee are 
noted and shall be considered at the time of the revision of the Scheme”. 
 
           
  

 
 
16 
 
1.19  The Committee were informed that monitoring teams have found that Grants -
in-Aid were not being properly used for implementation of ADIP scheme.  The 
Committee had desired that in the revision of the scheme, stringent m onitoring 
mechanisms should be adopted so that Aids and Appliances are given to the 
genuine beneficiaries.  The Committee had also desired that they should rope in 
Central Governments and State Government hospital in the important disability 
related schemes.  The Ministry have however stated in their Action Taken Reply that 
ADIP scheme is under revision with regard to the income ceiling for the eligible 
beneficiaries, ceiling of the cost of assistive devices and also for streamlining the 
provisions in the Scheme. The Ministry has further informed that the suggestions of 
the Committee are noted and shall be considered at the time of the revision of the 
Scheme.   
The Committee  are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry .  
Notwithstanding proposed revision of ADIP scheme, the Committee desire that 
urgent action be taken on the suggestion s of monitoring teams regarding 
computerization of list of beneficiaries and their physical verification by 
implementing agencies, which will go a long way in ensur ing proper utilization of 
grants-in-aid for the scheme.  The Committee also desire that Central and State 
Government agencies should be preferred for distribution of aids and appliances. 
  

 
 
17 
 
F. Indian Spinal Injury Centre (ISIC) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 22, Para No. 6.26) 
 
1.20 The Committee note d that the Indian Spinal Injury Centre, New Delhi, a Non -
Governmental Organization provides comprehensive rehabilitation management services 
to patients with spinal injuries and related ailments.  Rs. 2.00 crore was made available to 
the centre during 2011 -12 and expenditure was only 50% i.e. Rs. 1.00 crore.  The 
Government has approved the support to 30 free beds for treatment of poor patients.  The 
Ministry is reimbursing the cost of 25 free beds and cost of 5 beds is being borne by the 
Centre.  During 2011-12, cost of free bed was Rs. 5,780/- per bed per day.  Since the ISIC 
is a specialized centre catering to patients with spinal cord injuries, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry should generate awareness so that poor people can 
actually use the f acilities available with the ISIC and there is full occupancy of the free 
beds.  Also, rather than surrendering th e funds, free OPD facilities could  also be provided 
so that more patients can avail the much needed medical expertise available with the 
Indian Spinal Injury Centre.  
1.21 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
 
 “The Indian Spinal Injury Centre (ISIC), New Delhi, a Non -Governmental 
Organization, provides comprehensive rehabilitation management services to 
patients with spinal cord injuries and related ailments. These include intervention in 
the form of reconstructive surgery, stabilization operations, physical rehabilitation, 
psycho-social rehabilitation, and vocational rehabilitation services. As against the 
BE of Rs 2 crore, t he ISIC was released only  Rs one crore during  2011 -12, as 
there are some issues relating to laying of Annual Reports of ISIC in Parliament and 
audit observations pertaining to 2007 -08 and 2008 -09. However, amount released 
was fully utilized by the ISIC d uring the year. Efforts are made to reimburse the 
expenditure on 25 free beds to the maximum extent. As per bills submitted by ISIC, 
free beds are almost occupied at all times”. 
 
  

 
 
18 
 
1.22 The Committee had been informed that the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment were reimbursing the cost of 25 free beds Indian Spinal Injuries 
Centre (ISIC) , New Delhi  and d uring the year 2011 -12, cost of free bad was Rs. 
5,780/- per day.  The Commit tee had desired in their recommendation that  the 
Ministry should generate awareness so that poor people could actually use the 
facilities available with the Indian Spinal Injuries Centre (ISIC) and there was full 
occupancy of the free beds  and also some fr ee OPD facilities be provided to the 
poor patients .  The Ministry have informed in their Action Taken Reply that as 
against  the BE of Rs. 2 crore, only 1 crore was released during 2011-12 as there 
were some issues relating to laying of Annual Reports of I SIC in Parliament and 
audit observations pertaining to the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 and also that efforts 
were being made to reimburse the expenditure on 25 free beds to the maximum 
extent.   
The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the Government.  H aving 
been informed that expenditure of free beds worked out in 2011 -12 to be Rs. 5,780/- 
per day, the Committee find the release of Rs. 1 crore  for 25 free beds  appeared to 
be far too less to cater to the n eeds as per the requirement .  The Committee , 
therefore, desire that the Ministry take up the issue of free beds with ISIC insisting 
that vacancy and occupancy of the free beds should be clearly displayed and 
efforts should be made to reimburse the actual expenditure of the beneficiaries  
using the facilities in  ISIC.  Also, the Committee reiterate that publicity should be 
given so that poor people can avail the facilities available  with the ISIC and also 
some free OPD facilities be provided to poor patients.  The Committee also desire 
that the Annual Reports of the Indian Spinal Injuries Centre (ISIC) should also be 
laid in Parliament at the earliest.                      
  

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 1, Para No. 2.3) 
2.1 The Committee are unhappy with implementation aspect of the Recommendations 
contained in their Fifteenth Report on Demands for Grants, 2011 -12 of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment as only 11 out of 21 recommendations have been 
implemented.  Th e Committee advise expeditious implementation of the remaining 
recommendations already accepted by the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The details of 21 recommendations given in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice & Empowerment are as follows: 
Sl. 
No.  
Category of recommendation Number Paragraph no of the 
recommendation in 15 th 
Report of the Committee 
1. Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
11 2.3, 3.25, 3.28, 3.29, 3.32, 
4.20, 4.37, 5.6, 6.9, 6.10, 
7.18  
2. Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
2 3.27, 3.31 
3. Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which need to be 
reiterated  
4 3.24, 3.26, 6.11, 7.9 
4 Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are of interim  
nature 
4 3.30, 4.12, 4.13, 4.28 
 Total 21  
 

 
 
20 
 
  Action taken by the Government in respect of the recommendations mentioned at 
Sl. No. 3 & 4 is indicated in the Annexure I. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
                                 Recommendation (S. No. 2, Para No. 3.28) 
2.3 The Committee note that against a plan allocation of BE Rs. 5375.00 crore in the 
year 2011-12 the RE was reduced to Rs. 5123.00 crore  and the Actual Expenditure was 
Rs. 5006.40 crore.  The Budgetary provision for the year 2012 -13 has been kept at Rs. 
5915.00 crore.  The main reasons for lower expenditure of the Ministry in the plan 
schemes has been the delay by Planning Commission in ac cording first 'in principle' 
approval and also full Planning Commission approval to the new Pre-matric scholarship for 
SCs and Non -receipt of sufficient proposals from State Governments/ Voluntary 
Organizations especially from those located in North -Eastern Region and Sikkim.  The 
Committee are unhappy at the non approval of the new Pre-matric Scholarship scheme for 
Scheduled Castes for which Rs. 200 crore was allocated last year and this year also a 
provision has been made of Rs. 824 crore.  The Committee desire that the Ministry pursue 
with the Planning Commission for early approval of the scheme and its implementation in 
this year itself.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The issue of obtaining approval of the Full Planning Commission was vigorously 
pursued by this Ministry. Consequently, the approval of the Full Planning Commission was 
communicated vide Commission‟s O.M. dated 16.04.2012. Thereafter, the draft note for 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) was sent to the Ministry of Finance on 
30.04.2012 for seeking approval of the Finance Minister. Approval of the Finance Minister 

 
 
21 
 
was conveyed vide Ministry of Finance O.M. dated 17.05.2012. The final Note was sent to 
Cabinet Secretariat on 05.06.2012 for consideration of CCEA. CCEA approved the 
proposal, in its meeting held on 14.06.2012, to launch a new „Pre -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme for SC students studying in Classes IX & X‟ with effect from 01.07.2012  
The Guide lines of the Scheme were circulated to the State Governments/UT 
administrations on 26 -6-2012 (Copy of the Circular is enclosed at Annexure II)   with a 
request to give wide publicity to the Scheme and send proposals under the Scheme for 
obtaining Central assistance from this Ministry. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 3, Para No. 3.29) 
2.5 The Committee further note that the RE was comparatively lower than the BE in two 
key areas of the Ministry i.e. (i) Disability Division where BE was 480.00, the RE was 
curtailed to Rs. 334.70 crore and Actual Expenditure was Rs. 292.02 crore and (ii) Soci al 
Defence Division where BE was Rs. 122.00 crore which was revised to Rs. 91.25 crore 
and expenditure was Rs. 85.73 crore.  The Committee feel that the challenge of the 
Ministry is to improve both the physical and financial performance in these key areas of 
development.  The Committee desire that the Ministry make efforts to revamp the 
schemes in the disability sector in the first year of 12th Plan period itself so as to give 
maximum benefit to the sections of population for which they have been envisaged.   The 
Ministry should tightly monitor the implementing agencies and NGOs responsible for 
implementation of the schemes.  The Ministry also needs to play a proactive role in 
helping the Implementing agencies to make complete and viable proposals so that the y 
get appropriate funds for implementing the schemes. Social Defence sector also requires 

 
 
22 
 
a boost with the construction of Old Age Homes and other well being measures as old 
persons make up a sizable portion of the population. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Revamping the Disability Sector     
The Government of India vide its Order dated 12 th May, 2012, created a new 
Department of Disability Affairs within the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment. With 
setting up of this new Department exclusively for disa bility issues, we now hope to be able 
to more effectively address issues confronting persons with disabilities 
The Working Group on Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities constituted by 
the Planning Commission to formulate the XII Plan strategy for the d isability sector has 
recommended to view the PwDs as a valuable human resource in nation building, with a 
large untapped potential, and policies and programmes, to be reoriented to tap this 
resource rather than merely being a provisioning exercise.  The Wo rking Group identified 
the priority areas for action in the disability sector viz. accessibility; reasonable 
accommodation; education, health and housing; skill training and economic 
empowerment; awareness generation; and independent living and equal parti cipation in 
community life. The Working Group also suggested that for the effective management and 
improved delivery under various central sector schemes in the disability sector, all the 
existing schemes should be consolidated into a composite Centrally S ponsored National 
Programme called “National Programme for Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities”.  
The action on these recommendations would, however, be initiated as and when the XII 
Plan document is finalized by the Planning Commission. 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
Capacity Building of NGOs 
National Institutes and Composite Regional Centres  under this Ministry have been 
assigned specific territorial responsibilities for monitoring the implementation of the 
disability related schemes including distribution of Aids and Appliances. The guidelines 
have been issued to them to undertake capacity building of NGOs located in their territorial 
jurisdictions in a much bigger way. 
New Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens with integrated Multi-facility Centres 
 
 With a view to assist State Governments in the discharge of their statutory 
responsibility under Section 19 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007, a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of 
Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens with integrated Multi -facility Centres of varying 
capacity (25, 60 and 120) to cover all the 640 districts in the XII FYP is proposed to be 
implemented from 2013 -14.  The Ministry has been requesting the Planning Commiss ion 
for the last 2 years to accord its ín principle‟ approval to the scheme, but Planning 
Commission, due to one reason or the other did not grant the approval during the 11 th Plan 
period and asked the Ministry to place the demand before the Working Group on Social 
Welfare constituted by it for formulating the 12 th Plan for the sector. Based on the 
recommendation of the Working Group, Ministry has again taken up the proposal with the 
Planning Commission for granting its ín principle‟ vide Minister‟s letter dated 23.8.2012 
addressed to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commisison.   
Monitoring of Schemes 
 The initiatives taken by the Ministry for monitoring the progress of implementation of 
various schemes especially those implemented through NGOs include the following : -   
 

 
 
24 
 
(i) For the effective monitoring of the all the schemes, Ministry has designated 
Bureau Heads and Divisional Heads as Nodal Officers for various regions 
and States/UTs. During the field visits of Officers of this Ministry to 
States/UTs discussions ar e held in order to identify constraints and to take 
corrective measures.   
 
(ii) Financial and physical performance is reviewed by the Secretary (SJ&E) with 
Bureau Heads on fortnightly/weekly basis to ensure that the allocations 
provided for the schemes of the Ministry are fully utilized and to monitor all 
important activities.   
 
(iii) Selected high priority schemes are monitored at the level of Minister (SJ&E) 
regularly.  
 
(iv) Ministry also organizes Biannual Conference of State Social Welfare 
Ministers and the Annual C onference of State Welfare Secretaries wherein, 
inter alia, all the schemes of the Ministry are reviewed. States/UTs have also 
been advised to strengthen their monitoring mechanism.  
 
(v) The Ministry also sponsors evaluation studies from time to time through 
independent evaluation agencies to check whether their benefits reach the 
target groups. 
 
(vi) To have a close watch by people‟s representatives especially MPs on the 
working of NGOs receiving funds under its various schemes, Ministry vide its 
Order dated 13.2.2012 has decided to endorse a copy of the sanction letters 
of Grant in aid released to NGO (s), to the concerned MPs, in whose 
constituency the particular NGO is working, for his information and 
appropriate action. The modalities for implementation of this Order from 
2012-13 are being worked out.  
 
(vii) For effective monitoring the progress and utili zation of funds under its major 
schemes, a proposal for constitution of Vigilance -cum-Monitoring 
Committees at the State and district levels is under active consideration of 
the Ministry in consultation with the Planning Commission.  These 
Committees would  be expected to keep a regular watch on the 
implementation of the Programmes as per the prescribed procedures and 
guidelines. These Committees would, inter alia,  include Members of 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).  
 
(viii) Other initiatives taken by the Ministry for effective implementation of the 
Schemes include the following: 
 
 The Ministry has set up a Monitoring Committee for monitoring    
implementation of Aids and Appliances and other disability related 
schemes in all States/UTs.  
 Fresh/subsequent releases of grants to State Governments/NGOs 
during a year are made only on receipt of audited Utilization 

 
 
25 
 
Certificates in respect of previous grants sanctioned which have 
become due. 
 State Governments/UT Administrations are also  advised to monitor 
the schemes/programmes implemented through NGOs  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
                                   Recommendation (S. No. 7, Para No. 3.33) 
2.7 The Committee find that the Ministry has been running a self employment  scheme 
for the Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) since January, 2007 to rehabilitate all 
the remaining manual scavengers and their dependents.  The Ministry have informed that 
in pursuance of the resolutions of National Advisory Council after dis cussion with various 
Ministries, a task force was constituted on 10.2.2011 to recommend detailed modalities for 
undertaking a fresh survey of Manual Scavengers, which submitted its report on 6.5.2011. 
Accordingly a scheme of Survey of Manual Scavengers and  Dependents under the Self 
Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) has been 
approved by the Government in December, 2011.  The Ministry has also prepared a draft 
Bill titled "The Prohibition of Employment of Manual Scavengers and t heir Rehabilitation 
Bill, 2011".  The Committee regret that even after 64 years of independence, the manual 
scavenging is still practiced in many parts of the country and it is very shameful for the civil 
society.  Therefore, the Committee while appreciati ng the efforts of Ministry, emphasize 
that Manual Scavenging should be abolished from the country at the earliest. The Ministry 
should expedite the process of survey and Rehabilitation of all Manual Scavengers and 
also take up early enactment of the proposed Bill. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Ministry is making all out efforts for expediting the process of survey of manual 
scavengers and early enactment of the proposed Bill titled “The Prohibition of Employment 

 
 
26 
 
as Manual Scavengers and Their Rehabilitati on Bill, 2012‟. The present status on the two 
issues is given below : 
Conducting Fresh Survey 
In pursuance of the resolution of the National Advisory Council (NAC) of October, 
2010, and recommendations of a Consultation Meeting organized by this Ministry j ointly 
with Ministries of Housing and Urban Development and Urban Development in January, 
2011, a Task Force was constituted by the M/o SJ&E, on 10.2.2011, to recommend 
detailed modalities for undertaking a fresh survey of manual scavengers and their 
dependents who are yet to be rehabilitated. The Task Force submitted its report on 6.5.11. 
The modalities for the proposed survey, as recommended by the Task Force were 
slightly modified in the Ministry in the light of NAC's  further recommendations dated 
25.5.11. These modalities were approved by the Government on 14.7.2011, and 
accordingly, a Scheme for Survey of Manual Scavengers and their Dependents, after 
appraisal by Standing Finance Committee in its meeting held on 11.10.11, was approved 
by the Government on  2nd  December, 2011.   
Thereafter,  „Expressions of Interest‟ (EoI) were invited  from  8 reputed intuitions, and 
also by publishing an advertisement in a national daily and on the website of this Ministry,  
for appointment of a National Level Technical Agency (NTA) for the country-wide survey of 
manual scavengers, in December, 2011. In response to the above EoI notice, 16 
institutions expressed their interest in the proposal. The Committee constituted for 
evaluation of the proposals, shortlisted 3 ins titutions for inviting technical and financial 
proposals, by 8.2.2012. However, finally only one of the three institutions submitted its 
techno-financial proposal, which also was not found to fulfil the minimum prescribed 
technical benchmark and was theref ore recommended to be rejected by the above 

 
 
27 
 
committee. As no suitable agency could be identified for taking up the work of the National 
Technical Agency (NTA) for the Survey, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, was requested  on 17.2.2012, that his Ministry may agree to 
function as the NTA for the Survey.  Thereafter 3 rounds of discussions were held 
between the Secretary, SJ&E, and Secretary MoSPI, on this issue, on 21.2.2012, 
27.2.2012 & 28.3.2012. During  discussion in the above  meetings,  the following two 
important developments were highlighted which had not been taken into account by the 
Task Force constituted earlier, under the Economic Advisor of M/o SJ&E, for working out 
the methodology for the Survey:-  
i) The Registrar  General of India (RGI) released „House Listing and Housing 
Census 2011‟ data on 13.3.2012, which, inter -alia, included national and state -
wise data on various types of latrines including the categories mentioned below: 
a) Latrines from which night-soil is disposed into open drain; and 
b) Service latrines in which night-soil is : 
(i)  Removed by humans; and 
(ii)   Serviced by animals. 
ii) Data on manual scavengers in rural areas is being canvassed as part of the Socio 
Economic and Caste Census, 2011 (SECC), which is at an advanced stage. Thus 
the rural SECC data would yield information on persons engaged in manual 
scavenging in rural areas. 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation is doing the SECC survey for urban 
areas. However, its schedule does not provide for collection of information on households 
having persons engaged in manual scavenging or any other information in this respect. It 
merely captures information about sanitation workers and sweepers. 

 
 
28 
 
Secretary, MOSPI, advised in the above meetings that, now th at the Census, 2011, 
data on insanitary latrines is available and SECC data would become available in the near 
future, the methodology for Survey of manual scavengers must take these into account, 
and build upon them, rather than start from scratch, as the  recommendations of the Task 
Force set up earlier by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment had envisaged. 
In view of the above, a Committee was constituted on 4.4.2012   with a mandate to make 
fresh recommendations regarding modalities for conduct ing survey of manual scavengers 
taking into account the data becoming available from Census, 2011, and SECC.  The 
Committee was chaired by Secretary, MoSPI with Secretary, SJ&E as its co -chair, and 
consists of RGI, Officers from NSSO, CSO, HUPA, MoD, and r epresentatives from NGOs-
Safai Karmachari Andolan, Garima Abhiyan and Sulabh International. 
The idea was to use the Census 2011 and SECC data as an entry point for conducting the 
survey, in a smart, fast and practical manner focusing on the most potential pockets. The 
Committee has submitted its report on 19.6.2012. The recommendations of the Committee 
have since been accepted by the Ministry and further steps for finalizing the modalities for 
the Survey are being taken up by the Ministry. 
New Legislation 
The proposal to introduce “The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers 
and Their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012‟ in Parliament was approved by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 23.8.2012. The Bill has been introduced in the Lok Sabha during the 
Monsoon Session on 03.9.2012.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 8, Para No. 3.34) 
2.9 The Committee have been informed that to abolish the practice of untouchability 
and curb the incidence of crimes and atrocities against Scheduled Castes efforts are being 
made by the Ministry for effective implementation of the Protection of Civil Rights ( PCR) 
Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 with the help of 30 Special Courts.  A central assistance of Rs. 72.05 crore has been 
released against an allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 2011 -12, and the mi nimum scale of 
relief to atrocity victims has been enhanced by 150% vide gazette notification dated 
23.12.2011.  The Committee feel that funds under the scheme should not be a constraint 
and the victims should be adequately compensated and as also some fun ds should be 
utilized for rehabilitation of the atrocity victims i.e. for providing jobs or assistance for self 
employment. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Consequent upon increase in quantum of relief, vide the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) (Amendment) Rules, 2011, under Ministry‟s 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for implementation of the Protection of Civil Rights (PCR) 
Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989, budgetary allocation under the Scheme has been increased to Rs. 100 crore in 
2012-13 from Rs. 70 crore in 2011-12.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Depa rtment of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
      
                                     Recommendation (S. No.11, Para No. 4.30) 
2.11 The Committee also find a very substantial hike in the BE (2012 -13) u nder the 
Special Central Assistance in Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan (SCSP) i.e. Rs. 1200.00 crore 

 
 
30 
 
from the Actual expenditure of 2011 -12 which was Rs. 656.40 crore.  The Committee has 
been informed that the scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Cas te Sub-
Plan (SCA TO SCSP) was last revised in 1998 under which the subsidy amount of Rs. 
10,000/- per beneficiary was adopted.  The working group on 'Empowerment of Scheduled 
Castes for formulation of Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -17) has recommended that 
maximum subsidy under the scheme should be enhanced to Rs. 50,000/ - per family and 
should be regularly revised in future.  Also the Planning Commission has taken up 
evaluation of the scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan and 
the study has been awarded to National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad.  The 
report of which is still awaited.  After evaluation studies of the scheme, the same is to be 
reviewed in 12th Plan.  The Committee desire that Ministry should impress upon th e 
Planning Commission for early revision of the scheme so that funds earmarked under 
2012-13 i.e. Rs. 1200.00 crore can be utilized effectively for the development of the 
Scheduled Castes.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 An evaluation study on “Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan (SCSP)” has been awarded by Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO), 
Planning Commission to National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad. The 
draft report of NI RD has been received and is under consideration. Based on the 
recommendations of the Evaluation Study, revision of the Scheme covering, inter alia, 
enhancement in subsidy being given to BPL families under the Scheme is also under the 
consideration of the Ministry. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 

 
 
31 
 
Recommendation (S. No.12, Para No. 4.31) 
2.13 The Committee are given to understand that many of th e States are also not 
allocating funds in proportion to the guidelines in their Annual Plan to SCSP outlay.  The 
Committee take serious view of this and desire that the same may be conveyed by the 
Ministry to the Planning Commission as the approval of Stat e Plans and approval of the 
Central Assistance for State Plans vests with the Planning Commission.  The Planning 
Commission needs to make some efforts to enforce compliance of its guidelines for 
implementation of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The matter of shortfall in SCSP earmarking by 12 States/UTs has been taken up 
with the Chief Ministers of the concerned States/UTs and the Deputy Chairman, Planning 
Commission by the Minister (SJ&E) vide his D.O. letter dated 12.03.2012 and 09.03.2012, 
respectively, requesting them to ensure that such shortfall does not recur in their Annual 
Plans, 2012-13.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No.16, Para No. 5.12) 
2.15 The Committee feel that the Pre -Matric scholarship scheme for OBCs is an 
important scheme for the education of OBCs.  However the Committee feel that income 
ceiling under the scheme i.e. Rs. 44,500/ - per annum is ve ry low and therefore, the 
number of students who can avail the benefit remains restricted.  The Committee 
recommend for enhancement of the income ceiling under the Pre -matric scholarship for 
OBCs so that more students can be covered under the scheme. 

 
 
32 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Based on the recommendations of the Working Group set up for formulating the XII 
Plan for OBCs/DNTs etc , the Ministry has also initiated the action for revising the Pre -
matric Scholarship Scheme. The Scheme is being revised to enhance the income limits, 
scholarship rates and also to change the funding pattern to 100% from the existing 50:50 
between the Cent re and States.  The demand for additional allocation of Rs.1950 crore  
under the Scheme has already been projected to Planning Commission for the current 
year (2012 -13) and similar projections are also made to the Commisison for the year, 
2013-14.                          
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No.17, Para No. 5.13) 
2.17 The Committee are dismayed to note that despi te the revision of the scheme of 
Hostels for OBC Boys and Girls i.e. w.e.f 2010 -11 the expenditure under the scheme has 
been only Rs. 16.07 crore during 2011 -12 against an allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore.  The 
number of Hostels sanctioned was 33. The reasons  for less expenditure vis -à-vis 
allocation has been as informed by the Ministry are mainly due to non -receipt of proposals 
from the States/UTs.  The Committee desire that the Ministry take up the matter in review 
meetings with the State Governments/UT Admi nistrations so that the scheme can be 
successfully implemented and Hostel facilities for OBC Boys/Girls can be made available 
especially to enable them to pursue Secondary and Higher education.  
Reply of the Government 
2.18 For the effective monitoring of the all the schemes, Ministry has designated Bureau 
Heads and Divisional Heads as Nodal Officers for various regions and States/UTs. During 

 
 
33 
 
the field visits of Officers of this Ministry to States/UTs discussions are held in order to 
identify constraints and to take corrective measures.   
 
 Ministry also organizes Biannual Conference of State Social Welfare Ministers and 
the Annual Conference of State Welfare Secretaries wherein, inter alia, all the schemes of 
the Ministry are reviewed. The annual review Mee ting with State Social Welfare 
Secretaries were convened in October -November, 2010, which was followed by a States 
Social welfare Ministers‟ Conference convened in June, 2011. In view of the special 
problems being faced by the North -eastern States and to g ive focused attention to their 
issues at the highest level, States‟ Social Welfare Conference for NE States was 
convened in May, 2012. In all these meetings, all the schemes including the Scheme of 
Hostels for OBC Boys and Girls especially in those states where the expenditure has been 
abysmally low were discussed and the concerned States were advised to take corrective 
actions.   
 States/UTs have also been advised to strengthen their own monitoring mechanism 
for the schemes/programmes of this Ministry.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 18, Para No. 6.22) 
2.19 The Committee are happy to note that some achievements have been made in the 
Disability sector which include setting up of Indian Sign Language, Research and Training 
Centre (ISLRTC), two new Composite Regional Centres established at Ahmedabad and 
Kozhikode, 33 new DDRCs, online Braille Library launched on 4.1.2012, proposal of 
creation of a separate Department for Disability Affairs in the Ministry for more intensive 
attention to Disability issues.  However, as per the allocation of funds and the expenditu re 
of the Ministry in the Disability Division expenditure of only Rs. 292.02 crore has been 

 
 
34 
 
incurred against an allocation of Rs. 480.00 crore.  The reasons enumerated by the 
Ministry include inadequate number of proposals of NGOs and States/UTs, lesser 
investment in NHFDCs share capital, and unsatisfactory response of States to SIPDA 
scheme.  The Committee desire that the Ministry take up these issues with the State 
Governments/UTs/NGOs and other implementing agencies so that they are able to utilize 
the funds properly in the financial year i.e. BE (2012-13) which is Rs. 500.00 crore.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 To ensure better utilization of plan outlays allocated under disability sector 
schemes, Ministry has communicated the notional allocations to St ates/UTs as per the 
details given below: 
S. 
No. 
Scheme Date of 
Communication of 
Notional allocation 
to States/UTs 
Date by Which 
the proposals 
required to be 
Submitted 
1 Deendayal Disabled 
Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) 
14th May, 2012 30.6.2012 
2 ADIP Scheme 23.5.2012 25.7.2012 
3 SIPDA* 21.8.2012 15.9.2012 
 * The Ministry is also in the process of  requesting  the Ministry of HRD and 
other Central Government institutions to avail the central assistance for 
making their buildings disabled friendly and send the proposals to the 
Ministry accordingly.   
 
 Ministry also organizes Biannual Conference of State Social Welfare Ministers and 
the Annual Conference of State Welfare Secretaries wherein, inter alia, all the schemes of 
the Ministry are reviewed. The Annual Review Meeting with State Social Welfare 
Secretaries including the NE States are proposed to be convened in September -
November, 2012 to discuss the constraints being faced by them in implementation of the 

 
 
35 
 
Schemes and for suggesting corrective actions.   In view of the special problems being 
faced by the North -eastern States and to give focused attention to their issues at the 
highest level, States‟ Social Welfare Conference for NE States was convened in May, 
2012. In all these meetings, all the schemes including the Schemes related to disability 
sector were discussed and the concerned States were advised to take the corrective 
actions.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No.19, Para No. 6.23) 
 
2.21 The Committee have found that the expenditure under the scheme of Assistance to 
Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fitting Aids and Appliances (ADIP) has been less, 
although BE for 2011-12 was Rs. 100.00 crore, the RE under the scheme was kept at Rs. 
80.00 crore and actual expenditure was Rs. 75.00 crore.  The reason for less expenditure 
under the scheme during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 has been non -receipt of adequate 
complete proposals from the implementing agencie s in time.  The Ministry have also 
informed that the scheme is to be revised in respect of income ceiling for eligible 
beneficiaries and ceiling of the cost of assistance devices during the Twelfth Plan.  Efforts 
are being made for seeking the approval of CCEA for the revised scheme.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to pursue for an early revision of the scheme so as to 
increase the income ceiling for eligibility of the beneficiary and also the appropriate 
increase in the ceiling of cost of Assistance Device as per the inflation and consumer price 
index.   
Reply of the Government 
2.22 The ADIP Scheme is under revision with regard to the income ceiling for the eligible 
beneficiaries, ceiling of the cost of assistive devices and also for streamlining the 

 
 
36 
 
provisions in the Scheme. A Draft EFC Note was circulated to various concerned 
Ministries/ Departments for comments. The comments have been received and the final 
EFC Note is under consideration.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S. No.21, Para No. 6.25) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme is an 
important scheme of the Ministry in which gr ant-in-aid is sanctioned to the voluntary 
organizations for encouraging voluntary action, creating conducive environment for 
disabled to ensure equal opportunities and social justice to the disabled persons and their 
families.  The BE under the scheme was Rs. 120.00 crore in 2011 -12 however the Actual 
Expenditure was 86.16.  The Committee note the there has been less expenditure under 
the scheme for the last three years.  The reasons explained by the Ministry are late receipt 
of proposals from NGOs, incompl ete and inadequate number of proposals received from 
States and UTs etc.  The Committee find that the number of beneficiaries in 2011 -12 had 
gone down in the States of Delhi, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh 
as against 2010 -11.  The Mini stry propose to review the cost norms of the scheme in the 
XII Plan.  As this scheme is supposed to reach the masses at ground level, the Committee 
recommend that the scheme should be revised at the earliest and also efforts should be 
made to increase the number of beneficiaries under the scheme.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The Ministry has set up a committee for recommending changes in the present 
norms of DDRS scheme. The Committee, besides Officers of the Central/State 
governments and the National Institutes, has representatives of eminent NGOs working in 

 
 
37 
 
the field of disa bility.  The Committee is expected to give its report with recommendations 
by 30.9.2012.   
  
All the State Governments, including the States of Delhi, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh, Oddisha and Uttar Pradesh have been informed about the notional allocation 
made under the scheme for the year 2012 -13 vide letters dated 14 th & 15 th May, 2012. 
They have been requested to send proposals for release of grant -in-aid in respect of 
„ongoing‟ cases as well as „new‟ cases cleared by the screening committee of the Ministry 
in the year 2011 -12 expeditiously so that claims of a maximum number of organisations 
could be processed for released of grant- in- aid during the year, resulting in an increase in 
the number of beneficiaries. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Recommendation (S.No.23, Para No. 7.11) 
 
2.25 The Committee are dismayed to note that the performance of the Ministry has not 
been so good in the Social Defence Division. Out of a Budget Estimate of Rs. 122.00 
crore, the ac tual expenditure was only 85.75 crore.  The Committee are dismayed at the 
fact that project for construction of Old Age Homes could not take off in the Eleventh Plan 
period despite the repeated efforts of the Ministry.  The Twelfth Plan Working Group on 
Social Welfare, constituted by the Planning Commission has recommended introduction of 
the scheme.  However, Planning Commission's approval is still pending.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with the Planning Commission fo r 
early approval and work out the modalities of the scheme, so that the same can be 
launched in the first year of the Twelfth Plan period. 
 

 
 
38 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 It is submitted that under Social Defence, budgetary estimates for Information and 
Mass Education Cell (Rs 25 crore) and for Research and Evaluation Studies (Rs 1 crore) 
are also included, thus making the total BE under Social Defence to Rs 122 crore.  The 
details of Plan outlay allocated for Social Defence Bureau of the Ministry for the yea r 
2011-12 vis-a-vis actual expenditure is as follows: 
Amount in Rs Crore 
 
         
SD Bureau 
2011-12  
2012-13 BE RE Expenditure  Exp as 
% to RE 
1 DP Div. 46.00 34.00 35.33 113.97 45.00 
2 Ageing Div. 40.00 25.00 19.99 79.96 40.00 
3 NISD 10.00 7.00 5.00 71.42 10.00 
 Total 96.00 66.00 60.32 91.39 95.00 
 
It may therefore be seen that Social Defence Bureau has actually utilised 91.39 per 
cent of revised plan outlay allocated for the year 2011 -12.  Efforts are being made to 
achieve higher level of utilisation in the current year.  
 With a view to assist State Governments in the discharge of their statutory 
responsibility under Section 19 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007, a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of 
Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens with integrated Multi -facility Centres of varying 
capacity (25, 60 and 120) to cover all the 640 districts in the XII FYP is proposed to be 
implemented from 2013 -14.  It is, however , submitted that the Ministry had consistently 
requested the Planning Commission during the XI Plan (2007 -2012) to accord its „ín 
principle‟ approval to the scheme, but Planning Commission, due to one reason or the 

 
 
39 
 
other did not grant the approval during t he 11th Plan period and asked the Ministry to place 
the demand before the Working Group on Social Welfare constituted by it for formulating 
the 12th Plan for the sector. Based on the recommendation of the Working Group, Minister 
(SJ&E) has taken up the proposal again with the Planning Commission vide his letter dated 
23.8.2012 for granting its „ín principle‟ for the implementation of the proposed scheme from 
the year, 2013-14.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
  

 
 
40 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
 
Recommendation (S.No.4, Para No. 3.30) 
4.1 The Committee find that the   Ministry   had sought an allocation of Rs. 12,500.00 
crore from the Planning Commission during the year 2012 -13 however an allocation of 
only Rs. 5915.00 crore was made.  The main areas where there had been a slashing of 
funds was in the Other Backward Classes Development i.e. from Rs. 3525.00 crore to Rs. 
900.00 crore.   The Secretary informed the Committee during evidence that the schemes 
in the OBC sector have unfortunately not got the requisite funds and the Ministry is 
therefore requesting States to restrict their expenditure unless they could meet any 
additional requirement out of their own resources.  Keeping in mind the financial 
performance of the Ministry in the XI Plan period, against an allocation of Rs. 16776.00 
crore the expenditure for the five years has been Rs. 16171.48 crore, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to vigorously pursue with Planning Commission to increase allocation 
of funds especially in schemes for OBC sector.  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The Ministry is constantly pursuing the Planning Commission for allocation of more 
funds for the OBC sector at the highest level viz. Minister (SJ&E) vide his letter dated 
27.7.2012 addressed to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, has requested to 
increase the bud getary allocation under Pre -matric and Post -matric scholarship schemes 
for OBC students  as due to budgetary constraints, it has not been possible to provide 
scholarships to all the eligible students under these schemes. It is also proposed to revise 

 
 
42 
 
the scholarship rates and income ceiling under the Pre -matric Scholarship Scheme, as it 
has not been revised ever since its inception in 1998 -99. Planning Commission has 
accordingly been requested to take urgent action for allocation of minimum additional 
funds of Rs 1400 crore for Post -matric Scholarship and Rs 1950 crore for Pre -matric 
Scholarship Schemes for OBCs during the current year and also similar allocation for the 
remaining period of the 12th Plan (2012-17)                               
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 5, Para No. 3.31) 
4.3 The Committee have been informed that the Planning Commission constituted four 
Working Groups in April, 2011 for formulation of the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17) of the 
Ministry i.e. Improvement of Scheduled Castes, empowerment of persons with disabilit ies, 
Social Welfare/Social Defence and Empowerment of   Backward   Classes,   EBCS   
Nomadic, Semi-Nomadic and De-notified Tribes.  These groups submitted their Reports to 
the Planning Commission in October, 2011.  The 12th Five Year Plan outlay 
recommended by the Working Groups is Rs. 9.55 lakh crore.   The Working Groups have 
recommended rationalization/consolidation of existing schemes/programmes for their 
effective implementation, which includes consolidation of SC related schemes of the 
Ministry into a  composite Centrally Sponsored Scheme called 'National Programme for 
Empowerment of Scheduled Castes', consolidation of most disability related schemes of 
the Ministry into a composite Centrally Sponsored National Programme called 'National 

 
 
43 
 
Programme for E mpowerment of Persons with Disabilities (NPEPWD)‟. The Working 
Groups have also suggested that some educational/scholarship schemes being 
implemented for Scheduled Castes be extended to OBCs and PwDs.  The Committee are 
of the view that as these are good p roposals and the Planning Commission should give 
adequate funding to the Ministry so that concrete steps can be taken to improve the 
working of schemes and to benefit maximally the target groups.  The Committee have also 
been told that Rs. 1048.00 crore ha ve been allocated in the year 2012 -13 for new 
schemes of the Ministry.  However, the new schemes are yet to take off although 'in 
Principle' approval has been obtained for Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwDs. A 
Concept Note on National Overseas Schol arships for OBC has been sent to the Planning 
Commission for 'in Principle' approval.   The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry pursue with the Planning Commission for clearance of the proposals so that the 
new schemes of the Ministry for which Rs. 1048.00 crore has been earmarked in the year 
2012-13 can take off in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 As regards the status of the new schemes proposed for 2012 -13, the Pre -matric 
Scheme for SC Students studying in Class IX and X has already been launched with effect 
from 1.7.2012, and the Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwDs is under consideration 
of Standing Finance Committee, the meeting of which is scheduled to be held in 
September, 2012.  The ín principle‟ approval for the Sche me of National Overseas 
Scholarship for OBC students, is being pursued with Planning Commission. Other new 
schemes proposed for 2012-13 are still at the conceptual stage and being examined in the 
Ministry.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Depa rtment of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 

 
 
44 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 6, Para No. 3.32) 
4.5 The Committee find that the lump sum allocation for the NE region and Sikkim was 
Rs. 213.50 crore which was revised to Rs. 190.80 crore, the expenditure has been shown 
as Rs. 117.22 crore.  Further an enhanced allocation of Rs. 248.00 crore has been made 
in the year 2012 -13.  The Committee find that although the Ministry is making efforts by 
holding meetings with officers of Social Welfare Department and representatives of NGOs 
in the region besides giving publicity to their schemes, the financial performan ce in the 
year 2011-12 was not good as no money was spent in North Eastern region and Sikkim 
under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme, ALIMCO, National Handicap Finance 
and Development Corporation, Employment of Physically Challenged etc.  The Committ ee 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments in the 
North-Eastern Region to send viable proposals for implementing the various schemes and 
also exhort NGOs working for disadvantaged section to take benefit of the sche mes.  The 
Committee also recommend that TV and Radio programmes on the various schemes run 
by the Ministry should be made and telecast in the regional languages so that people can 
avail the benefit of the schemes run by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The reasons for the low or nil expenditure under  Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship 
Scheme, ALIMCO, National Handicap Finance and Development Corporation, 
Employment of Physically Challenged are given below: 
(i) As for the Scheme of Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC candidates, it 
is submitted that it is a Central Sector Scheme which is implemented through 
the University Grants Commission (UGC). There is no state -wise release of 

 
 
45 
 
funds. The total number of fe llowships to be awarded under the scheme to 
the Scheduled Caste students every year is 2000. The numbers of 
fellowships have been distributed state -wise based on percentage of SC 
population in that State. The funds are released to UGC as per their 
demand. The funds utilized under the Scheme also include funds used for 
candidates selected from NE states. There is no separate demarcation for 
NE States. 
 
(ii) In case of NHFDC, it is informed that at the beginning of the current year, 
NHFDC conveys the notional allocation of funds to the SCAs, in proportion to 
the disabled population of the state/UT and considering disbursement in 
preceding three years. All SCAs are also advised to draw 50% of the 
notional allocation as advance to expedite the implementation of N HFDC 
schemes in the states. However, majority of SCAs in North East do not come 
forward to draw the allocated funds from NHFDC despite repeated 
persuasions by NHFDC. During 2011 -12, SCAs from Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura  did not avail funds 
against their notional allocations. Many State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) 
of North Eastern States are not providing adequate Block Government 
Guarantee (BGG) in time, which makes it extremely difficult for NHFDC to 
release funds to these SCAs. 
 
(iii) ALIMCO could not organize the ADIP and ADIP -SSA Camps in a number of 
NE States due to non -response from the concerned State Governments. 
Besides, wherever camps were organized, turnout of persons with 
disabilities particularly when assessment a nd distribution camps are held 
separately is extremely poor owing to problems in commuting due to 
geographical distances and difficult terrain. 
 
The following steps have been taken to improve utilization of funds in the NE region: 
(i) In order to provide publi city, various schemes implemented by the Ministry 
have been put on its website. Further, a radio programme namely „Sanwarti 
Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen‟ is being broadcast in all regional languages of the 
NE States through All India Radio.   
 
(ii) The Ministry has al so been seeking help of the Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region (DONER) and the North Eastern Council, to impress 
upon the NE States for sending complete proposals on adequate scale 
under the various schemes implemented in the region by this Ministry.  
 
(iii) To boost the expenditure in the region and to identify the problems being 
faced by the State Governments in utilizing the funds, we have been 
organizing the meetings with Social Welfare Secretaries &  other officers of 
Social Welfare Departments of NER States as well as representatives of 
non-Government organizations in the region for the last three years.   
 
Besides above, in view of the special problems being faced by the North -eastern 
States and to give focused attention to their issues at the highest level, States‟ Social 

 
 
46 
 
Welfare Conference for NE States was convened in May, 2012 wherein the 
schemes/programmes with low expenditure in NE States were discussed and the 
participating States requested to  take necessary action for expediting the proposals under 
these schemes during the current year. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
                                 Recommendation (S. No.10, Para No. 4.29)      
4.7 The Committee note  that the Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan (SCSP) is an umbrella 
strategy to ensure earmarking of funds for development of Scheduled Castes in proportion 
to their population by the Central Ministries/Departments and States/UTs.   The Committee 
have been told that out of an outlay for 2011 -12 of Rs. 3.36 lakh crore, an amount of Rs. 
0.31 lakh crore (9.4%) was earmarked by 25 Ministries/Departments as against the 
stipulated amount of Rs. 0.54 lakh crore (16.2%).  The defaulting Ministries/Departments 
in terms of earm arking funds as per guidelines circulated by the Planning Commission 
were the Department of Rural Development (Rs. 14000.00 crore) Ministries of Panchayati 
Raj (17.81 crore), Ministry of Science and Technology (58.73 crore) and Rs. 3.82 in case 
of Ministry of DONER.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take up the 
matter with the Planning Commission at the highest level so that important Ministries of 
Government i.e. especially the Ministry of Rural Development which plays a vital role in 
the d evelopment of Scheduled Castes allocates funds in proportion to the laid down 
guidelines under the Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan. 
 

 
 
47 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The matter was taken up again by the Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
vide his d.o . letters dated 24.03.2011 with the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission 
and the Minister, Rural Development.  The matter was followed up with them, thereafter, 
on regular basis. The issue of shortfall in allocation of funds under SCSP was also taken 
up by Minister (SJ&E) with Prime Minister vide letter dated 01.4.2011 with the request to 
suitably advise the Planning Commission on the issue.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No.20, Para No. 6.24) 
 
4.9 The Committee are  given to understand that monitoring teams have found that 
Grants-in-Aid are not being properly used for implementation of ADIP scheme and they 
have given suggestions like physical verification of beneficiaries of each implementing 
agency, issue of invento ry card with full address and contact number of beneficiaries, 
computerization of the list of beneficiaries etc.  The Committee recommend that in the 
revision of the scheme, Stringent Monitoring Mechanisms should be adopted so that the 
Aids and Appliances are given to the genuine beneficiaries.  The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry should try to rope in Central Government and State 
Government Hospitals in the important disability related schemes so that it reaches the 
masses.  Also the officers of  the Health Department, as suggested by the Ministry, should 
be authorized to do fast track checking of aids and appliances given under the scheme. 
 

 
 
48 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10        The ADIP Scheme is under revision with regard to the income ceiling for  the 
eligible beneficiaries, ceiling of the cost of assistive devices and also for streamlining the 
provisions in the Scheme. The suggestions of the Committee are noted and shall be 
considered at the time of the revision of the Scheme. 
                         
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
                                    Recommendation (S. No. 22, Para No. 6.26) 
 
4.11 The Committee note that the Indian Spinal Injury Centre, New Delhi, a Non -
Governmental Organization provides comprehensive rehabilitation management services 
to patients with spinal injuries and related ailments.  Rs. 2.00 crore was made available to 
the centre during 2011 -12 and expenditure was only 50% i.e. Rs. 1.00 crore.  The 
Government has approved the support to 30 free beds for treatment of poor patients.  The 
Ministry is reimbursing the cost of 25 free beds and cost of 5 beds is being borne by the 
Centre.  During 2011-12, cost of free bed was Rs. 5,780/- per bed per day.  Since the ISIC 
is a specialized centre catering to patients with spinal cord injuries, the Commit tee 
recommend that the Ministry should generate awareness so that poor people can actually 
use the facilities available with the ISIC and there is full occupancy of the free beds.  Also, 
rather than surrendering the funds, free OPD facilities can also be p rovided so that more 
patients can avail the much needed medical expertise available with the Indian Spinal 
Injury Centre.  

 
 
49 
 
Reply of the Government 
  4.12 The Indian Spinal Injury Centre (ISIC), New Delhi, a Non -Governmental 
Organization, provides comprehensive rehabilitation management services to patients with 
spinal cord injuries and related ailments. These include intervention in the form of 
reconstructive surgery, stabilization operations, physical rehabilitation, psycho -social 
rehabilitation, and vocat ional rehabilitation services. As against the BE of Rs 2 crore, the 
ISIC was released only  Rs one crore during  2011 -12, as there are some issues relating 
to laying of Annual Reports of ISIC in Parliament and audit observations pertaining to 
2007-08 and 2008-09. However, amount released was fully utilized by the ISIC during the 
year. Efforts are made to reimburse the expenditure on 25 free beds to the maximum 
extent. As per bills submitted by ISIC, free beds are almost occupied at all times. 
(Ministry of S ocial Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
  

 
 
50 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 9, Para No. 3.35) 
5.1 The Committee feel that Monitoring of the various schemes of the Ministry at all 
levels i.e. Central, State and district levels is very much required for keeping a track on the 
flow of funds and the beneficiaries of the various schemes so that it reaches t he masses 
for whom the schemes are envisaged.  The Ministry have informed that Rs. 8.00 crore has 
been provided in a new scheme/programme for monitoring the schemes of the Ministry 
though State and District level Vigilance Monitoring Committees.  The Commi ttee hope 
that Ministry will take up the matter with the Planning Commission to obtain approval of the 
same as soon as possible so that Vigilance Monitoring Committees are made functional at 
the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 For details about existing mechanism of monitoring of the schemes in the Ministry, 
please see reply given to the Recommendation at S No 3, Para 3.29. The Ministry is 
regularly pursuing the matter with Planning Commission for obtaining the „in principle‟ 
approval of the proposed new scheme for setting up of State and District level Vigilance 
Monitoring Committees. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
 
 

 
 
51 
 
Recommendation (S. No.13, Para No. 4.32) 
5.3 The Committee are dismayed to note that the expenditure for Girls Hostels and 
Boys Hostels under the Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana has been very low.  As 
against a BE of Rs. 95.00 crore in Girls Hostel s, expenditure is only Rs. 38.31 crore and 
for Boys Hostels against a BE of Rs. 50.00 crore actual expenditure has been Rs. 27.60 
crore, the main reasons for under utilization has been due to non -receipt of complete 
proposals from State Governments/UT Admi nistrations/Universities.  The Committee are 
given to understand that no evaluation study has been commissioned after the revision of 
the scheme took place w.e.f. 01.01.2008 and evaluation of the scheme is to be done in the 
12th Plan period.  The Committee  recommend that since the scheme in its previous form 
is not able to achieve its physical and Financial targets there is an urgent need to revamp 
the scheme with more involvement of the State Education Departments for execution of 
the schemes as more hoste l facilities are required in both school and university level for 
education of the Scheduled Caste population.  
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Ministry has conducted an inspection of all the hostels sanctioned under Babu 
Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana dur ing the 11 th Plan period (2012 -17) through its team 
of officers during May -July, 2012. Based on the outcome of these inspections and the 
recommendations contained in the 12 th Plan Document, which is finalized by the Planning 
Commission, Ministry is contemplating a revision in the Scheme during the 12 th Plan 
period.       
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
 

 
 
52 
 
Recommendation (S. No.14, Para No. 4.33) 
5.5 The Committee note that the National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for SC 
students for higher studies abroad and Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowships for Scheduled 
Castes are two important schemes of the Government for pursuing higher education and 
studies.  However there has been no increase in the Budget Estimates of the schemes 
from 2010-11 onwards and expenditure in the schemes has also been on the lower side.  
The Committee recommend that the number of slots in these important schemes should 
be increased so that more number of students can avail the scholarships.  The Committee 
also recommend that wide publicity needs to be given to these two schemes especially in 
the various universities and colleges so that more students can apply for higher studies 
under these schemes.  
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The number of fresh fellowships to be awarded under the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship Scheme for SC students has been increased from 1333 to 2000 each year with 
effect from academic session 2010 -11. Simultaneously, the rates of fellowship under the 
scheme have also been enhanced from 1.4.2010. Further increase in fellowship under the 
scheme will be considered during the XII Plan period (2012 -17) subject to enhanced 
allocation of funds by the Planning Commission to the Ministry.   
 
This Scheme is implemented through University Grants Commission (UGC) and 
funds are released to it on the basis of demand made by the Commission every year. 
UGC had unspent balance of previous grant of 2010 -11, which has been adjusted during 
2011-12. This resulted in release of less funds during 2011 -12. The Budget provision 
under the Scheme during 2012 -13 has been kept on the basis of actual expenditure 
incurred under the Scheme during previous years(s). The requirement of additional funds, 

 
 
53 
 
in excess of bu dget provision, if any, can be met through Re -appropriation of Savings 
under other Schemes.  
 
The Scheme of National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for SC etc. candidates is 
implemented through the Ministry of External Affairs and its Indian Missions abroad.  
During each financial year, the funds are placed at the disposal of the Ministry of External 
Affairs and that Ministry utilizes the amount as per requirements received from Indian 
Missions. As per the provisions of the Scheme, the selected candidates have  to join any 
foreign University within a period of 3 years. The less expenditure is mainly due to the 
reason that not all the selected candidates take admission abroad for availing this 
scholarship.  
Following steps are taken by the Ministry for wide publi city of “National Overseas 
Scholarship Scheme for SCs etc. candidates”(NOS)  and “Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship Scheme for SC students” (RGNF):- 
 
(a) Details of the Schemes are available on the website of the Ministry; 
 
(b) Advertisements inviting applications under NOS Scheme are published in 
Employment News and other leading national and regional dailies; 
 
(c) University Grants Commission (UGC) widely publicizes the scholarships under 
RGNF through their website and leading newspapers; 
 
(d) The Schemes are also publicized through the weekly radio programme of the 
Ministry names “Sanwarti Jayein Jeevan ki Raahein‟. 
 
The suggestion of the Committee for increasing the number of fellowships under 
these schemes will be considered during the XII Pl an period (2012 -17) subject to 
enhanced allocation of funds by the Planning Commission to the Ministry.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
                      

 
 
54 
 
Recommendation (S. No.15, Para No. 5.11) 
5.7 Under the scheme of Post-Matric scholarship for OBC students, in the year 2012-13 
the Budget Estimates have been enhanced from the year 2011-12 by only about Rs. 90.00 
crore.  In 2011-12, out of an allocation of Rs. 535 crore expenditure was Rs. 527.99 crore.  
The scheme has been revised w.e.f. 1.7.2011 in terms of maintenance allowance and 
income ceiling.  Since the scheme has been revised recently more funds would be 
required for the scheme, the Committee therefore, recommend for enhancement of funds 
so that more OBC students can avail the benefit under the scholarship scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 Based on the demand for the additional funds by the State Governments under Pre-
matric and Post-matric Scholarship Schemes for OBCs, the Ministry has already taken up 
the matter for enhancement in allocations under these schemes (Rs.1400 crore for Post -
matric Scholarship Scheme and Rs. 1950 crore for Pre -matric Scholarship Sc heme)  at 
the highest level with the Planning Commission for the current year, 2012 -13 and similar 
allocations during the remaining years of the XII Plan (2012-17).                       
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  Social Jus tice and 
Empowerment O.M. No. 1-8/2012/(PS)/PREM dated 17th September, 2012). 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      HEMANAND BISWAL    
17 December, 2012       Chairman, 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
  

 
 
55 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
Statement showing the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants for the year 2011-12 of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
 
S. 
No 
Para 
No. 
Recommendation Status of Implementation 
1 3.24 
 
The Committee note that 
against the plan allocation of 
Rs. 4524.04 crore (BE) which 
was reduced to Rs. 4300 crore , 
at RE stage, the Ministry has 
achieved an expenditure of Rs. 
4185.93 crore. The Committee 
find that two important 
divisions of the Ministry i.e. 
the Disability Division and the 
Social Defence Division could 
not utilize full funds allocated 
to them (utili zation of Rs. 
314.19 crore out of Rs. 450.01 
crore and 76.12 crore out of 
Rs. 222.01 crore respectively). 
Also there was a saving due to 
non-receipt of sufficient 
proposals from State 
Governments/ voluntary 
organizations located in the 
North Eastern region . The 
budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry for the year 2011 -12 
has been enhanced to Rs. 5375 
crore and the Committee are 
given to understand that the 
additionality of fund 
requirement in 2011 -12 is 
mainly for post -matric 
scholarship for SCs and OBCs 
and a  new scheme on pre -
matric scholarship for SCs. 
The Committee while 
expressing their unhappiness 
over the Ministry's not -so-
satisfactory performance in 
various schemes due to which 
there was underutilization and 
surrender of funds during the 
year 2010 -2011 recommend 
The Ministry is continuously making efforts to 
further improve its utilization of Plan outlay 
especially in the Disability and Social Defence 
sectors.  As a step in that direction, sanctioning 
powers deleg ated to Joint Secretary/Special 
Secretary/Secretary of the Ministry were doubled in 
November, 2011. These powers are further revised 
upwards especially at the level of Minister of State in 
August, 2012.  
 
The expenditure under Plan Schemes during 2011-12 
was Rs. 5006.39 crore against the Plan RE of Rs. 
5123.00 crore which was 97.72% of RE.  Main 
reasons for a shortfall in Plan Schemes were (i) 
Delay by Planning Commission in according first ‘in 
principle’ a pproval and then full Planning 
Commission approval to the new Pre -matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SCs, and (ii) Non receipt of 
sufficient proposals from the State 
Governments/Voluntary Organizations especially 
from those located in NE Region including Sikkim.  
With the creation of a new Department of Disability 
Affairs in the Ministry, it is expected that with the 
focused attention, the level of utilization of fund will 
increase adequately.  
 
In view of the suggestion of the Committee, it has 
been decided by the Ministry, to endorse a copy of 
the sanction letters of Grant in aid released to 
NGO(s), to the concerned MPs, in whose 
constituency the particular NGO is working, vide 
letter no.1-9/2011/(PS)/PREM dated 13.2.2012 

 
 
56 
 
that the Ministry should make 
maximum efforts to utilize the 
entire funds allocated to them 
for the year 2011 -12. Adequate 
precautionary steps in way of 
review of utilization of funds at 
suitable intervals, tight 
monitoring of various schemes 
and persuading the States to 
send the proposals well in 
advance etc. should be 
undertaken so as to avoid 
surrender of funds. The 
Committee strongly 
recommends that the Ministry 
should focus itself in key areas 
like Disability sector and 
Social Defence sector where 
the financial and physical 
performance has been slow in 
the past. The Ministry while 
allocating funds to various 
NGOs should also intimate 
about the same to concerned 
MPs in whose constituency the 
NGO is working so that they 
can also monitor the 
implementation of the scheme 
and utilization of funds. 
  

 
 
57 
 
2 3.26 The Committee note that the 
scheme for Post -matric 
Scholarship to students 
belonging to SCs has been 
revised with effect from 1st July, 
2010 which has raised the 
parental income ceiling for 
eligibility from Rs. 1.00 lakh to 
Rs. 2.00 lakh and also there is a 
proposal to increase the income 
ceiling and scholarship rates 
under the scheme of Post -matric 
scholarship for OBCs. The 
Committee desire that parental 
income ceiling for availing the 
scholarships in both the schemes 
of Post -matric Scholarship for 
SCs and Post-matric Scholarship 
for OBCs should be revised 
upwardly to Rs. 3.00 lakh so that 
more students can avail the 
scholarships. 
Parental income ceiling under the scheme of PMS 
for OBCs has been revised from Rs.44,500/ - to 
Rs.1.0 lakh p.a. w.e.f. 1.7.2011.  Further revision of 
the Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC & 
OBC students would be undertaken in the XII Plan. 
 
3 3.30 The Committee observe that a 
large number of utilization 
certificates are outstanding in 
respect of grants released to the 
States upto March, 2008. The No. 
of UCs outstanding as on 
31.12.2009 stood at 11708 and 
the amount involved was Rs. 
835.27 crore. Despite the best 
efforts of the Ministry in 
monitoring the receipt of the 
utilization certificates, this 
remains a major problem area 
for the Ministry. The Ministry 
have informed that no further 
grants are released by the 
Ministry to the voluntary 
organizations/implementing 
agencies without obtaining and 
accepting the UCs of the grants 
released in the previous year. 
The Committee are dis mayed to 
note that during 2010 -11, funds 
to many States/UT could not be 
released due to non -receipt of 
UCs under various schemes of 
the Ministry like Pre -matric 
scholarship scheme for OBCs, 
Post-matric scholarship for 
The requirement of obtaining due Utilization 
Certificates from implementing agencies is a pre -
requisite under General Financial Rules (GFRs) of 
the Government of India, for release of further 
grants-in-aid/ financial assistance to implementing 
agencies. All the implementing Agencies are 
periodically requested to send pending Utilization 
Certificates for previous releases.  Further grant is 
considered for release after receiving satisfactory 
report on utilization of funds released in the past.  
The matter is  regularly pursued with states, so that 
the interests of the target groups are not adversely 
affected.  The requirement of obtaining UCs under 
GFRs cannot, however, be dispensed with. 
 
This matter was taken up in the three regional 
review meetings with the  State Governments held 
in 2010 -11, and reiterated in the State Social 
Welfare Ministers’ Conference held in 17 -18 June, 
2011. It will be further discussed in the ensuing 
Regional Meetings with the State Secretaries of 
Welfare/Social Justice during 2012. The Ministry 
will continue to closely monitor the pendency of 
utilization of certificates, and take appropriate 
action for its reduction.  
 

 
 
58 
 
OBCs, construction of Hostels 
for OBCs , SCA to SCSP etc. 
However, in the opinion of the 
Committee, when the Ministry 
do not release funds to the 
States/UTs ultimately it is the 
disadvantaged section who suffer 
because they are the target 
groups and the funds under 
various schemes are meant for  
their betterment. Therefore, the 
Committee would like the 
Ministry to take a more 
pragmatic and judicious 
approach in the matter of 
withholding the release of funds 
to States. The steps taken in the 
matter should be more 
persuasive in nature rather than 
stringent, specially in the 
scholarship schemes which 
directly affect the educational 
development of SC/OBC 
students. As for the pendency of 
UCs, the Committee recommend 
that special drives should be 
undertaken State -wise to obtain 
utilization certificates as this is 
also a method of evaluation of 
the proper/utilization of funds 
available under the scheme. 
 
4 4.12 The Committee note  that the 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan 
(SCSP) is an umbrella strategy to 
ensure earmarking of funds for 
development of Scheduled Castes 
in proportion to their population 
by the Central 
Ministries/Departments and 
States/UTs. The Ministry provide 
Special Central Assistance (SCA) 
to States as an additive to their 
own Scheduled Castes Sub Plan 
(SCSP). At present 27 States/UTs 
having sizable SC population are 
implementing Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan. The allocation made is 
based on the percentage of SC 
population as per 2001 census. 
The Committee are unhappy to 
I. Allocation of Population -proportionate Funds 
by States under SCSP.   
 
The outlays earmarked by the concerned 
States/UTs under SCSP vis -à-vis proportion of SCs 
in respective States’ population from 2007 -08 to 
2010-11 is enclosed at Annexure- The Statement at 
the Annexure brings out that, in the year 2010 -11, 
of the 27 States/UTs which need to earmark outlay 
under SCSP:- 
 
(i) 15 States/UTs did so to the required extent 
or more, 
(ii)  in the case of 6 States/UTs, the shortfall 
was less than 15%, and  
(iii) in the case of  6 States/UTs, the shortfall 

 
 
59 
 
note that the percentage of 
expenditure over the outlay of 
the SCSP scheme has been 
hovering at around 14.5% since 
2008-09 and not all the States are 
allocating funds in proportion to 
their SC population. In so me 
States such as Karnataka, 
Gujarat, Assam, Haryana, 
Sikkim etc., the percentage of 
SCSP outlay over plan outlay 
falls far short of their percentage 
of SC population. The 
availability of data on the No. of 
BPL families who have been 
assisted is also very limited. Only 
2 States have furnished the 
figures for the number of BPL 
families who were assisted and 
who crossed the poverty line in 
the year 2007-08. The Committee 
have taken a serious note of this 
and desire that they should be 
informed why the data co uld not 
be collected and furnished by the 
other States. The Committee 
further recommend that the 
Ministry should take up the 
matter with States not allocating 
funds in proportion to SC 
population and persuade them to 
allocate funds as per the laid 
down nor ms. Attempts should 
also be made to collect data on 
BPL families who have crossed 
the poverty line after getting 
assistance under SCSP.  
 
was more than 15% 
 
In this regard the Chief Minster’s of the 
Assam, Gujarat,  Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Delhi and Pud ducherry 
were requested vide d.o. letter dated 12.3. 2012 to 
take suitable corrective action to ensure that such 
shortfall, do not happen in 2012-13.  
 
II. Data on Beneficiaries of SCA to SCSP who 
have crossed the Poverty Line  
 
The Ministry is constantly pursuing 
concerned States/UTs to furnish data on the 
number of beneficiaries of the years 2005 -06, 
2006-07,  2007-08 and 2008-09, who have crossed 
the pover ty line. The list of States which have 
furnished the data on BPL beneficiaries under SCA 
to SCSP for the years 2005 -06, 2006-07, 2007-08, 
2008-09 and 2009-10 is enclosed at Annexure-IV, 
the abstract of which is given below: 
 
The year of 
extending 
assistance 
No. of States, UTs (out of a 
total of 27 concerned 
States/UTs) from which 
information regarding number 
of beneficiaries who were able 
to cross the poverty line, has 
been received 
2005-06 22* 
2006-07 16*** 
2007-08 14# 
2008-09 9** 
2009-10 4@ 
* Partial information from 5 States,** Partial 
information from 3 States.***Partial information 
given by 4 States. # Partial information given by 
4 States. @ Partial information given by 1 State 
 
The matter is being regularly pursued 
with defaulting States at various levels, 
including through letters from the Union 
Minister, SJ&E, to the Chief Ministers. 
 

 
 
60 
 
The Ministry had also requested the Programme 
Evaluation Organization, Planning Commission, to 
conduct a national level evaluation of the flagship 
programmes of the Ministry, including Scheme of 
Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled 
Caste Sub Plan (SCSP). The Programme Evaluation 
Organization has informed that the evaluation of the 
SCA to SCSP scheme has been entrusted to the 
National Institute of Ru ral Development (NIRD), 
Hyderabad.  NIRD has submitted the draft Report 
on the Evaluation Study to the Planning 
Commission, which is under examination.    
 
5 4.13 Regarding the funds under SCA 
to Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan the 
Committee have been informed 
that the matter has been 
continuously taken up by the 
Minister (Social Justice and 
Empowerment) with the Deputy 
Chairman of the Planning 
Commission and also the Finance 
Minister for enhanced allocation. 
The budgetary allocation for the 
scheme has also been enhanced 
from Rs. 600 crore in 2010 -11 to 
Rs. 775 crore in 2011 -12 i.e. an 
enhancement of Rs. 175 crore. 
The Committee note that the 
main objective of the plan is to 
give thrust to the development 
programmes for SCs with 
reference to their occupational 
pattern and the need for 
increasing the productivity of 
and income from their limited 
resources. Under the scheme, the 
State Governments have been 
given the flexibili ty to use the 
funds for subsidy against loan to 
the SC BPL persons for self 
employment and training and 
development of infrastructure. 
The scheme is proposed to be 
revised in the 12th plan by 
enhancing the maximum amount 
of subsidy admissible under the 
scheme from the present Rs. 
10,000/- per beneficiary and also 
Recommendations of the Committee will be kept 
in mind while revising the Scheme of SCA to 
SCSP in the 12th Plan.  
 

 
 
61 
 
to make villages having 40% or 
more SC population eligible for 
infrastructure development 
programmes rather than 50% 
SC population villages. The 
Committee feel that there are 
loopholes in the imple mentation 
of the scheme as data on the No. 
of families who have crossed the 
poverty line is very vague. The 
Committee recommend that the 
scheme be revamped in the 12th 
plan period by enforcing strict 
guidelines on the State 
Governments for implementation 
of the scheme. Certain 
benchmarks and guidelines need 
to be fixed for selecting the 
beneficiary as also some definite 
feedback mechanism also needs 
to be fixed as to how the scheme 
has elevated the BPL families in 
the States. The Committee also 
recommend that there should be 
a reassessment of the SC 
population villages eligible for 
infrastructure development 
programmes and the ceiling of 
40% population for eligibility 
should also be reviewed. 
   
6 4.28 The Committee note  that the 
primary objective of the scheme 
is to provide hostel facilities to 
SC Boys and Girls studying in 
middle schools, higher secondary 
schools, colleges and universities 
with broader vision of retention 
and reduction of their dropout 
rate in education al institutes. 
The State Governments/UTs and 
the Central and State 
universities/Institutions are 
eligible for central assistance for 
construction of hostels or 
expansion of hostel facilities 
while NGOs and deemed 
universities get grants only for 
expansion. The actual 
expenditure under both heads of 
boys hostels and girls hostels has 
The matter of accelerating progress under BJRCY 
is being regularly pursued with the concerned 
States/UTs during the annual conference of States’ 
Social Welfare Secretaries. The position  was also 
reviewed in the Social Welfare Ministers’ 
Conference held in June, 2011.  Keeping in view 
the special problems of the NE States, the position 
was also reviewed separately in States’ Social 
Welfare Ministers’ Conference of NE States in 
May, 2012. 
 
Besides, the Ministry has initiated the process of 
reviewing the status of construction of 524 hostels 
sanctioned during the Eleventh Plan period (2007 -
12) through the seven duly constituted teams under 
its Joint Secretary level officers. Based on the 
Reports submitted by Teams, matter is being taken 

 
 
62 
 
been comparatively less than the 
allocation made in 2010 -11 
(against allocation of Rs. 80.00 
for girls hostels only Rs. 43.91 
crore could be utilized and 
against allocation of R s. 50.00 
crore for boys hostel only Rs. 
34.28 crore was utilized). During 
the last two years against 53 girls 
hostels and 61 boys hostels 
sanctioned the number of hostels 
completed is 'Nil'. Even if the 
two year gestation period for 
completion of hostels i s taken 
into account, the achievement 
during the year 2008 -09 has not 
been satisfactory since out of 64 
and 45 hostels sanctioned 
respectively for girls and boys 
only one and four hostels 
respectively could be completed. 
The Committee take serious note 
of this and desire that since funds 
under the scheme are not a 
constraint, the Ministry should 
impress upon the State 
Governments to take expeditious 
action to ensure that hostel 
accommodation for SC boys and 
girls is developed at the earliest 
as per target date.  
 
The Committee further feel that 
rates of subsistence allowance 
given to the hosteller/students 
staying in hostels is far too less 
even after its revision on 31 -12-
2010. The Committee 
recommend that these rates 
should be suitably revised 
upwardly esp ecially to meet the 
needs of the students who are 
staying far away from their 
houses in hostel accommodation 
for pursuing their education. 
 
up at the highest level of the concerned State 
Governments where the position is not reported to 
be satisfactory.     
 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding 
further revision of subsistence allowance for  
hostellers would be considered at  the time of next 
revision of the Scheme of Post -matric Scholarship 
for SC students during the 12th Plan period. 
 
7 6.11 Further the Committee note that 
the setting up of District 
Disability Rehabilitation Centres  
(DDRCs) and Composite 
Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs) is 
Setting up of DDRCs involves a number of steps, 
including identification of suitable implementing 
agency possessing requisite expertise,  at the 
District level, which  is to be done by the concerned 
State Government, and as such, appointment of a 

 
 
63 
 
one of the areas where funds 
have been earmarked under the 
scheme of SIPDA. In pursuance 
with the Finance Minister's 
Budget speech (2010 -11), 50 
District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centres (DDRCs) and 2 
Composite Rehabilitation 
Centres(CRCs) were proposed to 
be set up during the year, 
however against the above target 
only 21 DDRCs could be 
sanctioned. Apart from non -
receipt of proposals from State 
Governments non -availability of 
rent free accommodation have 
been cited as problems for 
DDRCs. Also, the District 
Management Team headed by 
the District Collector finds it 
difficult to identify the 
implementing agency suitable for 
such work as also non -
availability of skilled manpower. 
The Committee are given t o 
understand that some of the 
guidelines for assistance to 
DDRCs have been revised to 
address the above problems. 
However, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry need to find a 
solution to other major concerns 
like finding implementing 
agencies and skilled m anpower 
for setting up DDRCs. The 
Committee recommend that a 
specific team/task force should 
be appointed for the purpose so 
that it can help to resolve the 
local issues and the requisite 
number of DDRCs as per target 
are set up and made functional 
with al l infrastructure and 
manpower facilities covering 
maximum number of districts in 
the States.  
task force at the Central level may not serve the 
desired purpose. However, the concerned State 
Governments are regularly pursed to expeditiously 
send their complete propo sals.  A focused attention 
was drawn on this issue during the States’ Social 
Welfare Ministers’ Conference held in June, 2011. 
Keeping in view the special problems being faced 
in the North-eastern region, a States’ Social Welfare 
Ministers’ Conference of N E States was also 
organized in May, 2012 wherein, the issues being 
faced by these states in setting up the new DDRCs 
were specifically discussed and the Ministry 
requested them to rectify the deficiencies in their 
proposals, as advised, at the earliest.  
 
During 2010 -11 and 2011 -12, funds were released for 
setting up 21 and 12 DDRC respectively.  During the 
current year, funds have been released to set up a new 
DDRC at Sivanagar  in Assam. Thus, so far, 34 new 
DDRCs have set up by the Ministry across the 12 States. 
The matter has been taken up, for setting up DDRC in 
unserved districts, with other States from wh om the 
proposals are still awaited or whose proposals are 
deficient in many aspects.  
 
8 7.9 The Committee observe that the 
Ministry has been running 
Scheme of Integrated 
Programme for Older Persons 
since 1992 under which grants -
(i) Integrated Programme for Older Persons 
 
The scheme was revised in 2008 to include new 
projects like maintenance of Respite Care Homes 
and Continuous Care Homes, running of Multi 

 
 
64 
 
in-aid is given to Non -
Government organizations for 
running of Old Age Homes 
(OAH), Day Care Centres (DCC) 
and Mobile Medicare Units 
(MMU). The scheme was revised 
in 2008 to include new projects 
like maintenance of Respite Care 
Homes and Continuous Care 
Homes, running of Multi Service 
Centres for older persons, 
running of Day Care Centres for 
Alzherimer's Disease/Dementia 
patients, physiotherapy clinics 
for older persons, training of 
care givers etc. However, the 
Committee observe that despite 
the revision of the scheme 
widening its scope, only 50% of 
the funds released could be 
utilized during the  year 2010-11, 
the reason being non -receipt of 
adequate number of proposals, 
incomplete proposals and late 
proposals. The Committee desire 
that matters concerning the older 
persons need to be given proper 
attention in India as 
Governments in other countrie s 
of the world have taken a step 
forward to provide basic 
facilities to older persons as the 
responsibility of the State and 
implementation of programmes 
concerning older persons in 
States should be addressed with 
utmost priority. The Committee 
are dismaye d to note that an 
important scheme of the 
Ministry i.e. the scheme of 
Construction of Old Age Homes 
for Senior Citizens could not be 
launched during 2010 -11, even 
though an allocation of Rs. 100 
crore had been made specifically 
for the purpose during 2010 -11. 
It is more disheartening to note 
that the scheme has been pushed 
to further uncertainty as no 
funds have been kept for the 
scheme during 2011-12. With the 
Service Centres for older persons, running of Day 
Care Centres  for Alzheimer’s Disease/Dementia 
patients, physiotherapy clinics for older persons, 
training of care givers etc. However, the pace of 
expenditure under the Scheme has not improved 
much, though concerted efforts are being made by 
the Ministry to get adequa te number of project 
proposals from the State Governments. Financial 
norms prescribed under the Scheme have not 
attracted enough number of NGOs to submit 
proposals for financial assistance under it. 
Therefore, keeping in view the rise in cost of the 
living index, revision in the fin ancial norms under 
the scheme are under consideration of the 
Government at present. 
 
(ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of Assistance for 
Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent 
Senior Citizens:  
 
Sub section (i) of Section 19 of the  
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007 reads as follows:- 
 
“The State Government may establish and 
maintain such number of old age homes at 
accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a 
phased manner, beginning with at least one in each 
district to accommodate in such homes a minimum 
of one hundred fifty senior citizens who are 
indigent” 
  
To assist State Governments in the discharge of the 
above statutory responsibility, the Ministry had 
initially formulated a Centrally -sponsored Scheme 
of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age Homes 
for Indigent Senior Citizens for construction of old 
age homes for indigent senior citizens in 300 
districts of the country during the XI Plan, at a cost 
of Rs 635 crore so as to cover at least 50% of the 
districts in the country during the  XI Plan.  The 
Ministry’s XI Plan, however, had a provision of 
only Rs. 60 crore for this new Scheme. On the 
advice of the Planning Commission the scheme was 
then recast to fit within the allocation of Rs. 60 
crore with a physical target of only 100 old age 
homes in the 11 th Plan, and a reduced pattern of 
central assistance. A lthough the Ministry did so as 
per the advice given by the Planning Commission, 
when the revised scheme was sent for the 
Commission’s approval, it conveyed vide its letter 
dated 30th July, 2009, that the scheme has not been 

 
 
65 
 
Rs. 100 crore allocation during 
the year 2010 -11, the Ministry 
should have taken up the matter 
with Planning Commission for 
launching of the scheme at least 
on a pilot basis with smaller 
targets. Under Section 19 of the 
Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 
2007 the care of older persons 
and senior citizens is the primary 
responsibility of the Government 
and hence their basic needs can 
be catered to a great extent by 
construction of Old Age Homes 
in each district. Therefore, the 
Committee desire early and 
expeditious action in the matter. 
Now that the preparations for 
12th plan al locations are under 
way, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment will 
appropriately take up the matter 
with the Planning Commission 
and work on a viable proposal to 
be launched during the 12th 
plan. 
approved on the ground that a to ken approach for 
setting up old age homes would not serve any 
purpose and the position would be reviewed during 
mid-term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. 
Accordingly, the Ministry  took up   the matter with 
the Planning Commission during the Mid -term 
appraisal of the XI Plan discussion.  
Pursuant to a substantial increase in the Ministry’s 
overall Plan outlay in 2010 -11, Rs.100 crore was 
allowed for the above Scheme in that year’s budget.  
Assuming that the same amount of Rs. 100 crore 
would be allocated for 2011-12 a fresh proposal to 
cover 200 old age homes in the remaining two years 
of the XI Plan, was sent for the approval of the 
Planning Commission on 9.8.2010. The 
Commission however again rejected the proposal 
saying that it would be conducting a zero ba se 
budgeting exercise in the terminal year of XI plan 
and advised this Ministry to take up the proposal 
before the XII Five Year Plan Working Group.  
 
The XII Plan Working Group on Social Welfare, 
constituted by the Planning Commission, has also 
recommended introduction of the above scheme 
during the XII Five year Plan, and its Report is 
under consideration of the Planning Commission.  
 
An outlay of Rs 80 crore has been kept for the 
Scheme in 2012 -13 so as to initiate the process 
afresh for launching the sc heme during 12 th Plan 
period, if it is included in the 12 th Plan document as 
recommended by the Working Group.   The 
implementation of the Scheme of construction of 
Old Age Homes will depend on the approval of the 
Planning Commission.  The Ministry is purs uing 
the matter with Planning Commission vigorously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
66 
 
               
APPENDIX-I TO ANNEXURE-I 
SCSP Outlay/Expenditure during  Eleventh Plan 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11  
 
      
 
 
   
(In crores) 
 Sl. 
No. 
State/U.T %  of SC 
Population 
(2001 
Census) 
Annual Plan 2007-08   Annual Plan 2008-09   Annual Plan 2009-10 Annual Plan 2010-11 
Total State 
Plan Outlay  
SCSP Outlay SCSP 
Expndr. 
Percent-age 
to Col.5 to 4 
Total 
State 
Plan 
Outlay  
SCSP 
Outlay 
SCSP 
Expndr. 
Percent-age to 
Col.9 to 8 
Total 
State 
Plan 
Outlay  
SCSP 
Outlay 
SCSP 
Expndr. 
Percent-
age to 
Col.13 
to 12 
Total 
State 
Plan 
Outlay  
SCSP 
Outlay 
Percent-
age to 
Col.17 
to 16 
1 2 3 4 
5 6 7 
8 
9 10 11 
12 
13 14 15 
16 
17 18 
1 
Andhra 
Pradesh 16.20 30500.00 4355.90 NR 14.28 44000.00 7630.42 NR 17.34 33496.75 5243.17 5455.84 15.65 36800.00 6131.39 16.66 
2 Assam 6.90 3800.00 81.09 49.88 2.13 5011.51 100.72 84.38 2.01 6000.00 115.67 100.70 1.93 7645.00 140.27 1.83 
3 Bihar 15.70 10200.00 2131.21 NR 20.89 13500.00 2428.26 2131.21 17.99 16000.00 2721.02 2721.02 17.01 20000.00 3375.12 16.88 
4 Chattisgarh 11.60 7413.72 2722.31 800.78 36.72 9600.00 1103.68 568.59 11.50 10947.76 1271.66 1206.89 11.62 12277.83 1612.13 13.13 
5 Goa 1.80 1430.00 26.95 11.66 1.88 1737.65 19.42 8.47 1.12 2240.00 16.15 15.50 0.72 2710.00 24.51 0.90 
6 Gujarat 7.10 16000.00 1134.40 NR 7.09 21000.00 1200.00 408.27 5.71 23500.00 1294.94 822.65 5.51 30000.00 1363.46 4.54 
7 Haryana 16.40 5300.00 1023.00 939.23 19.30 6650.00 1433.27 1385.28 21.55 10000.00 1493.21 1385.28 14.93 18260.00 2148.30 11.77 
8 
Himachal 
Pradesh 24.70 2100.00 231.00 170.36 11.00 2400.00 594.00 594.00 24.75 2700.00 668.00 594.00 24.74 3000.00 742.00 24.73 
9 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 7.60 4850.00 368.60 NR 7.60 4500.00    - NR 0 5500.00 319.73 NR 5.81 6000.00 455.65 7.59 
10 Jharkhand 11.80 6676.00 729.96 536.67 10.93 8015.00 1012.75 648.37 12.64 8200.00 852.86 852.86 10.40 9240.00 956.94 10.36 
11 Karnataka 16.20 17782.58 2916.00 1972.28 16.40 26188.83 3232.00 2575.68 12.34 29500.00 4779.00 2916.59 16.20 31050.00 3866.60 12.45 
12 Kerala 9.80 6950.00 681.80 545.73 9.81 7700.00 746.63 650.63 9.70 8920.00 875.12 848.57 9.81 10025.00 983.45 9.81 
13 
Madhya 
Pradesh 15.20 12011.00 1832.60 1709.58 15.26 14182.61 2209.81 1832.58 15.58 16174.17 2499.60 2000.91 15.45 19000.00 2918.00 15.36 
14 Maharashtra 10.20 20200.00 2060.00 488.43 10.20 25000.00 2332.80 1890.66 9.33 35958.94 2651.99 1285.28 7.38 33934.53 3461.00 10.20 
15 Manipur 2.60 1374.31 33.04 23.81 2.40 1660.00 48.30 33.24 2.91 2000.00 58.06 50.71 2.90 2600.00 62.40 2.40 
16 Orissa 16.50 5105.00 843.96 787.79 16.53 7500.00 1239.75 1123.63 16.53 9500.00 1563.03 1410.72 16.45 11000.00 1817.90 16.53 
17 Punjab 28.90 5111.00 1330.00 749.73 26.02 6210.00 1792.00 1235.87 28.86 8600.00 2488.31 2124.19 28.93 9150.00 2640.00 28.85 
18 Rajasthan 17.20 11950.00 1787.77 1998.95 14.96 14020.00 2179.31 2352.35 15.54 17322.00 2735.49 2735.49 15.79 24000.00 3896.10 16.23 
19 Sikkim 5.02 691.14 34.70 15.33 5.02 852.00 42.60 24.53 5.00 1045.00 NA 24.53 0 1175.00 30.77 2.62 
20 Tamil Nadu 19.00 14000.00 1649.85 2903.62 11.78 16000.00 2379.20 3453.35 14.87 17500.00 2721.22 2618.56 15.55 20068.00 3827.84 19.07 
21 Tripura 17.40 1220.00 205.22 NR 16.82 1450.00 242.19 183.19 16.70 1680.00 280.11 280.11 16.67 1860.00 308.25 
16.57 
 
22 Uttar Pradesh 21.10 25000.00 5307.00 4340.78 21.23 35000.00 7403.00 6789.41 21.15 39000.00 8275.00 8057.54 21.22 42000.00 8881.00 21.15 
23 Uttaranchal 17.90 4378.63 749.82 350.19 17.12 4775.00 854.73 300.67 17.90 5800.81 1044.15 332.52 18.00 6800.00 1224.00 18.00 

 
 
67 
 
24 West Bengal 23.00 9150.00 2328.83 2328.00 25.45 11602.38 2677.83 1929.97 23.08 14150.00 3258.37 3258.37 23.03 17985.00 4142.40 23.03 
25 Chandigarh 17.50 269.91 46.72 31.58 17.31 304.65 45.91 40.55 15.07 319.22 55.92 NR 17.52 450.91 79.15 17.55 
26 Delhi 16.90 9000.00 1525.13 1534.05 16.95 10000.00 1694.15 1725.00 16.94 10000.00 1782.39 2094.30 17.82 11400.00 1901.56 16.68 
27 Puducherry* 16.20 1455.00 150.15 149.73 10.32 1750.00 2.83 152.72 0.16 2250.00 176.83 176.83 7.86 2500.00 354.96 14.20 
  ALL INDIA 16.20 233918.29 36287.01 22438.16 15.51 300609.63 44645.56 32122.60 14.85 338304.65 49241.00 43369.96 14.56 390931.27 57345.15 14.67 
  
Source: State Plan approval letters and SCSP documents of the State Govts. 
        
  
* Include TSP allocation  
  
NA: Not Available. 
 
NR: Not 
Reported. 
        
                  
                  
                  
                  
 
  

 
 
68 
 
 
APPENDIX II TO ANNEXURE I 
 
                States/UTs-wise BPL families assisted and crossed the poverty line during 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09 
and 2009-10 
            
S.  
No. 
States 2005-06  2006-07  2007-08  2008-09  2009-10  
  No. of BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of 
BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Andhra Pradesh 96213 21496 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR  
2 Assam 34595 96 6752 1130 9957 1554 10323 811 17954 480 
3 Bihar NR NR NR NR NR NR     
4 Chhattisgarh 1082 915 1181 1040 1457 1157     
5 Gujarat 5260 2363 6187 2961 11989 5888 8303 4668   
6 Goa NR NR NR NR NR NR     
7 Haryana 15664 13229 15896 13512 16327 NA 12589  13537  
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 
25590 56 23414 37 21145 22 95772 24943 27560 NR 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
526 526 NR NR NR NR     
10 Jharkhand NR NR NR NR NR NR     
11 Karnataka 13985 13985 NR NR NR NR     

 
 
69 
 
12 Kerala 499 38 3239 2199 14298 10008     
13 Madhya Pradesh 7444 4914 8273 4130 9211 4516 8393 4417   
14 Maharashtra 23357 15645 NR NR NR NR     
15 Manipur NR NR NR NR NR NR     
16 Odisha 9151 N.A. NR NR NR NR     
17 Punjab 6435 2767 8250 3712 NR NR     
18 Rajasthan 2645 1908 2470 1623 NR NR     
19 Sikkim 120 N.A. 98 N.A. NR NR     
20 Tamil Nadu 168492 67397 229020 91608 80302 45611     
21 Tripura 1991 211 1066 118 2877 281 1798 215 2170 235 
22 Uttar Pradesh 67016 36857 82040 61530 111084 77836 82084 62088   
23 Uttarakhand 5282 NR 3776 NR 1503 NR     
24 West Bengal 15443 8030 NR NR 34858 17976     
25 Chandigarh N.A. 65 99 70 121 115 108 100 155 127 
26 Delhi 253 N.A. 77 NA 366 NA 339 339   
27 Pudducherry 774 N.A. NR NR NR NR     
 Total 501817 190498 391838 183670 315495 164964 219709 97581 61376 842 
N.R: Not reported.          
N.A: Not available           
 
 
                  
                   
 

 
 
70 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-III  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 17th DECEMBER, 
2012 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Room No. 116 
(Chairman's Chamber),  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
11. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
13. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
14. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
 
2. Shri Kusal Sarkar - Additional Director 

 
 
71 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble  Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft Thirtieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants,  2012-13  of  the  Ministry  of  Tribal Affairs and Thirty -first Report on 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations  contained in the 
Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands  for  Grants,  2012 -13 of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirtieth and Thirty -first 
Reports with slight modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  

 
 
72 
 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   TWENTY-FOURTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
 Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 23  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos.  2.3,  3.28, 3.29, 3.33, 
3.34, 4.30, 4.31, 5.12, 5.13, 6.22,  6.23. 
6.25 and 7.11. 
 
13 56.52 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies - Nil 
0 0 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph Nos.  
3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 4.29, 6.24 and 6.26). 
6 26.09 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos.  3.35, 4.32, 4.33 and 
5.11). 
4 17.39 
 