1 
 
7 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
on Demands for Grants for the year 2009-2010 of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Asadha, 1932 (Saka) 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on Demands 
for Grants for the year 2009-2010 of the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.8.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      19.8.2010 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Asadha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
7 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                 
PAGE
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….             
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                                  
        
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by              
the Government……………………………………………………                      
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not                
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……                      
                                         
 CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies                   
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..                               
     
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies         
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                                   
     
ANNEXURE 
    
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee  on   
Social  Justice and Empowerment held on   8th July, 2010………..             
        
APPENDIX 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                              
recommendations contain ed in the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)……………                                           
                                         

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2009-2010) 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri T.R. Baalu# 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal* 
4. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
5. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
6. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
7. Smt. Rama Devi 
8. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
9. Shri Premchand Guddu  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri Baliram Jadhav   
12. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
13. Shri Mohan Jena  
14. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
15. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Shri Yashvir Singh**  
18. Dr. N. Sivaprasad  
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
21. Vacant  
22. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
23. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya$ 
24. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya$$ 
25. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
26. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
27. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
28. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee@ 
30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav@@ 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
#Shri T.R. Baalu nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.1.2010. 
*Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 23.9.2009. 
**Shri Yashvir Singh ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 13.10.2009. 
$Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya expired on 21.12.2009. 
@Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement  from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
2.4.2010. 
$$ Smt. Jharna Das Baidya nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26.4.2010. 
@@ Shri Nand Kishore Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
4.7.2010. 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri. A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Under Secretary 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized b y the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants – 2009-2010 relating to the Ministry of Minority  Affairs. 
  
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 th December, 
2009.  The Ministry of Minority Affairs furnished their replies indicati ng action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 9.4.2010.  The Report was considered and adopted 
by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 8 th July, 
2010. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by G overnment on the recommendations contained in the 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
8 July, 2010          Chairman, 
17 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment. 

7 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the G overnment on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2009-10 relating to the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs.  
1.2 The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th 
December, 2009.  It contained 18 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government 
in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Paragraph Nos.  1.5, 3.20, 3.21, 4.17, 4.19, 5.14, 5.15, 6.10, 6.11, 7.14, 
8.17, 8.18, 9.7 and 9.8). 
(Total 14  - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committe e do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 (Nil - Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I: 
Paragraph Nos.  2.12 and 5.16.   
(Total 2 - Chapter IV) 
 

8 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos.   4.18 and 9.9 
  (Total 2  - Chapter V)  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government  which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Filling up of vacant posts in the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para 2.12) 
1.5 In paragraph 2.12 of the original Report t he Committee had observed that though 
the Ministry of Minority Affairs was created in January, 2006 and is going to enter the 
fourth year of its existence, yet the organizational set up of the Ministry is still incomplet e 
with a number of posts lying vacant.  The Committee had noted with concern that out of 97 
sanctioned strength as on date only 66 posts have been filled and 31 posts at various 
levels are still vacant.  The Committee ha s further learnt that the matter reg arding framing 
of recruitment rules in respect of Urdu posts are still being finalized.  The non -filling of so 
many posts in the Ministry has a direct bearing on the prompt and efficient handling of 
issues in the Ministry.  India with a vast man -power resource centre with so many qualified 
people in various fields, the non -availability of adequate expert staff should not come in 
the way of smooth and efficient functioning of t he Ministry.  The Committee felt  that it is 
only when all the posts are filled up and the Ministry have a dedicated staff that the 

9 
 
Ministry will be able to carry out its mand ate effectively.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
urged the Ministry to urgently look into the matter relating to staff strength and take all 
necessary steps for filling up of all vacant posts at the earliest.  If need arises, the Ministry 
of Finance should also be approached at the appropriate level.  Meanwhile, the available 
staff may be effectively utilized for successful implementation of various welfare schemes 
launched/to be launched by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have informed that the present sanctioned 
strength of the Ministry is 93  and 27 posts as shown below are vacant as on date.  The 
Ministry thus carries a vacancy of nearly 30% in core cadres and despite this, performs its 
work with great difficulty. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the post Number 
of 
vacant 
posts 
Action Taken for filling up the posts 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Director/Deputy 
Secretary 
01  DoPT has nominate d one officer for filling up 
the vacant post shortly. 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
Under Secretary 
 
Section Officer 
 
Stenographer  
Gr. „D‟ 
03 
 
04 
 
06 
 
The Ministry has been making consistent efforts 
to fill up the vacant posts. The matter has been 
taken up with DoPT / MHRD , the cadre 
controlling authorities, for filling up these vacant 
posts.  The Ministry had issued a Vacancy 
circular on 08/12/2009 to different 
Ministries/Departments besides posting the 
same in the website of this Ministry inviting 
applications from the pr ospective candidates for 
filling up the 3 posts of Under Secretaries , 4 
posts of Section Officers and 6 posts of 
Stenographer Gr. „D ‟on adhoc -short term 
deputation basis as the posts sanctioned vide 
orders dated 26/10/2009 are yet be en -cadred 

10 
 
by DoPT (f or US and Stenographer posts) and 
MHRD (for Section Officer posts). Ministry has 
received only 01 eligible application against 03 
vacant posts of Under Secretaries and two 
applications for four vacant posts of  Section 
Officer. No application has been rece ived 
against Stenographer posts. 
 The applications received are under process 
now.  
5. 
 
 
6. 
 
 
7. 
 
Assistant 
Director(Urdu) 
 
Senior Translator 
(Urdu) 
 
 
Typist (Urdu) 
01 
 
 
01 
 
 
01 
An Urdu cell has been created in this Ministry 
with one post each of  (i)Assi stant Director 
(Urdu), ii)Sr. Translator (Urdu)     and  iii)Typist 
(Urdu) .      
  Advertisement inviting applications for filling up 
of above posts on an adhoc deputation basis, 
was published in the Employment News 
(English, Hindi & Urdu edition) dated 1 8-24 July, 
2009 for the applicants working in 
Government/PSUs/Govt. Autonomous Bodies.   
While 03 applications were received for the post 
of Asstt. Director (Urdu) from officers working in 
Government/Autonomous Bodies, applicants for 
Senior Translator/Typi st were not working in 
Government. Therefore, their candidatures 
stand cancelled. Regarding appointing Assistant 
Director (Urdu), the matter is under process and 
will be finalized shortly.   
8. Assistant 01 Ministry of HRD has been requested to fill up the 
post . 
9. 
 
 
10. 
Senior Research 
Investigator 
 
Senior 
Investigator 
 
01 
 
 
03 
At present, the Ministry has 04 sanctioned posts 
of Sr. Research Investigator and 04 posts of Sr. 
Investigator.  
In order to fill up the vacancies, the Ministry had 
issued vacancy circular for filling up these posts  
on deputation basis. An advertisement was also 
published in the Employment News dated 23 -29 
May, 2009 besides posting the vacancy circular 
on the Ministry‟s website.  
The Ministry received only one eligible 
application in response to the advertisement. 

11 
 
One post of Senior Investigator has thus been 
filled up in December, 2009. Ministry‟s efforts to 
en-cadre the above posts with either 
subordinate Statistical Service Cadre or 
subordinate Economic Service Cadre could not 
materialize. 
The Ministry again proposes to advertise the 
above vacant posts shortly. 
11. Peons 04 In pursuance of Sixth Pay Commission‟s Report 
regarding ban on further recruitment in Group D 
posts, the Ministry has engaged 04 persons 
against vacant posi tion of 04 Peons through 
outsourcing.     
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
1.7   The Committee had observed that the organisational set up of the Ministry 
was inadequate and incomplete with a large numb er of posts lying vacant  and had 
recommended the Ministry to take necessary steps for filling up the vacant posts at 
the earliest.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has informed that  the Ministry 
carries vacancy of nearly 30% in core cadres and pe rforms its work with great 
difficulty. In spite of their best efforts in advertising and inviting applications from 
prospective candidates, the Ministry has received only 1 eligible application against 
3 vacant posts of Under Secretaries, two applications for four vacant posts of 
Section Officer and 1 eligible application against 3 posts of Sr. Investigator. Further, 
for six posts of stenographers, not a single application was received.  Similarly, 
though applications were invited for filling up the posts o f Asstt. Director s (Urdu), 
Sr. Translators (Urdu) and Typists (Urdu), only 03 applications were received for the 
posts of Asstt. Director (Urdu) from officers working in Government/Autonomous 
Bodies, whereas applicants for Senior Translator/Typist (Urdu) w ere not working in 
Government for which  their candidature was cancelled.  Further the Ministry’s 

12 
 
efforts to encadre posts of Senior Research Investigator and Senior Investigator  
with subordinate statistical service/Economic Service Cadres  could not materialize 
and the Ministry  again propose to advertise the same.   From the reply of the 
Ministry which reflect very poor response for filling up the vacancies where only few 
applicants applied for various posts, the Committee can not but conclude that the 
publicity (through advertisements) given to these vacancies among the prospective 
candidates has been limited, inadequate and not enough.  It also appears that  
enumeration of strict eligibility criteria for selection has  also led to poor respo nse 
from the appli cants. Therefore, t he Committee desire that apart from giving wide 
publicity through electronic media, newspapers among applicants in the 
Government services/PSUs and Autonomous Bodies, the Ministry should review the 
selection criteria for all the above po sts and relax the same wherever possible  so 
that these do not lie vacant for too long . The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should take up the matter of staff strength with the Ministry of HRD and 
DoPT for urgent filling of the vacant posts to en sure smooth functioning of Ministry 
and the effective implementation of minority welfare schemes.  
B. Data on Below Poverty Line/Double Poverty Line of Minority Communities  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.21) 
1.8 The Committee had noted with concern that the  Ministry of Minority Affairs did  not 
have data pertaining to Minority communities living below the poverty line and they were 
depending on the data on BPL as maintained by the Ministry of Rural Development.  The 
Committee had noted that the BPL  data as it was being maintained by the Ministry of 
Rural Development was more of a generalized nature which d id not give specific 
information relating to the economic condition of the minority communities separately on 
the basis of religion.  Unless the Ministry have specific data on economic status of enlisted 
minority communities of Muslims, Sikhs, Christians etc., it is difficult to formulate the 

13 
 
programmes and also assess the programmes/schemes over a period of time.  In this 
regard, the Committee were given to understand that the Ministry is depending on the 
income certificates only.  But in the opinion of the Committee income certificates is not 
reliable and could be easily manipulated where the already affluent persons get the benefit 
of a particular  scheme while the poorest of the poor were still deprived of the benefits.  
Therefore, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry, besides coordinating with 
the Ministry of Rural Development on BPL data, should try on their own to collect and 
maintain the data on the economic status of the enlisted minorities so that the benefits of 
the schemes could go to the target population and the number of beneficiaries of minority 
communities could be assessed properly. 
Reply of the Government 
1.9  The Ministry of Minority Affairs in their reply have stated that t he Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) is the nodal Ministry for rural poverty alleviation and collection of 
BPL data in rural areas. The methodology of MoRD surveys has several parameters 
including income. However, as seen on their website, MoRD does not maintain religion –
wise BPL data. It requires huge administrative exercise and substantial financial and 
human resources for such a vast survey. For the BPL Census conducted in 2002 , the 
MoRD had incurr ed an expenditure of Rs.79.34 crore. The estimated expenditure for the 
BPL Census 2009 is likely to  be Rs.312 crore. It would thus not be advisable for other 
Ministries to carry out such a detailed survey as this would be a duplication as the MoRD 
conducts such surveys. 
Schemes of Ministry of Minority Affairs are based on income criteria and not on BPL 
status of beneficiaries. NMDFC is the only Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSE), 
under the Ministry of Minority Affairs which extends financial assistan ce to the persons 
belonging to minorities living below double the poverty line. Coverage of NMDFC schemes 

14 
 
is very small compared to the overall usage of BPL data and they depend on the MoRD 
list plus income certificate from competent authorities. 
 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) undertakes detailed house -hold survey 
for identification of BPL families.  The Ministry of Rural Development had informed the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs in the month of September 2009, that they are conducting the 
BPL Cen sus 2009, for which MoRD had constituted an expert group to suggest the 
methodology for conducting the survey. On 17.12.2009, this Ministry had requested the 
Ministry of Rural Development to collect the information / data on religious parameters in 
the BPL  survey in respect of the five notified Minorities viz.  Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, 
Buddhists and Parsis.  Further, the Ministry of Rural Development had also been 
requested to collect the detailed family data on minority community basis (notified religio us 
minorities), in respect of BPL families. Repeated reminders have since been sent to the 
Ministry of Rural Development seeking information on the outcome of the request made. 
 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA), has also been 
requested to collect information/data for identification of BPL families on religious basis in 
urban areas, so that in the BPL lists, the minority community to which a person belongs to 
is indicated. 
  Conducting a survey of BPL and DBPL families in the coun try is a mammoth task 
requiring substantial human and financial resources. Since the survey is already being 
carried out by Ministry of Rural Development, duplication of the same may not be 
advisable. There are dedicated Ministry/organizations such as Mini stry of Rural 
development that carry out such surveys. They have the requisite competence and 
manpower and have been conducting such surveys periodically. Therefore in view of 
the huge cost, manpower and efforts required for conducting such an exercise it has been 
considered advisable to approach them for this work. Ministry of Minority Affairs will follow  

15 
 
up with  Ministry of Rural Development  and  Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation for providing data pertaining to minority communities liv ing below the poverty 
line.  
1.10 The Committee had noted with concern that the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
did not have data pertaining to Minority communities living below the poverty line 
and they are depending on the data on BPL as maintained by the M inistry of Rural 
Development.  Since the data collected by the Ministry of Rural Dvelopment are 
more of a general nature not giving any specific details with regard to BPL status of 
minorities, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry besides coordi nating 
with the Ministry of Rural Development on BPL data, should try on their own to 
collect and maintain the data on the economic status of the enlisted minorities so 
that the benefits of the schemes could go to the target population and the number 
of beneficiaries of minority communities could be assessed properly. The Ministry 
in their Action Taken Note have stated that the Ministry of Rural Development are  
already conducting BPL survery 2009 and have been requested to collect 
information/data on religious parameters in BPL survey in respect of five notified 
minorities and also the detailed family data on minority community basis (notified 
religious minorities), in respect of BPL families. The Ministry have also informed 
that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA)  has also been 
requested to collect information/data for identification of BPL families on religious 
basis in urban areas, so that in the BPL lists, the minority community to which a 
person belongs to is indicated.   The Ministry has contended that since BPL survey 
is already be ing carried out by Ministry of Rural Development, duplication of the 
same may not be advisable.  The Committee w hile agreeing with the Ministry’s 
reasoning desire that the Ministry to closely co -ordinate with Ministry of Rural 
Development along with the Ministry of Housing and U rban Poverty Alleviation 

16 
 
(HUPA) to ensure   inclusion in the BPL survey  the collection of requisite data 
pertaining to minority communities living below the poverty line /double below the 
poverty line . The Committee would like to be apprised of the   parameter finally 
selected by Ministry of Rural Development for inclusion in the  BPL survey and how 
far they meet the requirements of Ministry.   
C. Conferment of the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Literacy Award 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 10, Para No.  5.16) 
1.11 The Committee had  noted that the Maulana  Abul Kalam Azad Literacy award  
which was introduced in 2003 -04 was being given to institutes who were doing 
considerable work to promote educa tion amongst educationally backward minorities.  The 
Committee had observed that  upto the year 2005, the award used to be given regularly.  
However, in the year 2006 three institutions ha d  been selected but hadn‟t been conferred 
the award as yet.  Moreov er, from the year 2006 onwards this award ha d not  been 
sanctioned to any institution for reasons not known to the Committee.  Since the award is 
a way of recognizing the work/efforts of institutions in the field of promoting education 
among the minorities  and encouraging more and more institutions to come forward and 
work for the cause of development of minorities, the discontinuation of this award is not at 
all advisable.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should look 
into the matter urgently for identifying  and sorting out the problems/hurdles being faced in 
this regard and all necessary steps should be taken for resuming the conferment of this 
award as early as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 The Ministry of Minority Affa irs in their reply have stated that t he scheme of 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Literacy Award is given to institutions, those who have done 
commendable work to promote   education amongst educationally backward minorities. 

17 
 
This award was discontinued from the y ear 2005 -06 due to poor response given to the 
scheme by Vice -chancellors, and people‟s representatives to whom request had been 
made to recommend institutions for this award.  
 Perforce there arises a need to review the existing procedure in respect of thi s 
scheme. Accordingly, the Ministry has advised the MAEF to devise certain parameters, on 
the basis of which the eligibility of an advised /or individual for consideration for this award, 
can be decided. The MAEF in consultation with its Governing Body is working on the need 
of a better mechanism to make this scheme effective and purposeful.  
 
1.13 The Committee had noted that the Maulana  Abul Kalam Azad Literacy award  
which was introduced in  the year 2003-04 used to be given to the institutes doing 
considerable work to promote education among educational ly backward minorities. 
However, from the year 2006 onwards this award had not been sanctioned to any 
institution. Therefore, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should 
look into the matter urgen tly for identifying and sorting out the problems/hurdles 
being faced in this regard and take necessary steps   for resuming the conferment 
of this award as early as possible.   From the action taken reply of the Ministry the 
Committee are given to understan d that this award was discontinued from the year 
2005-06 due to poor response given to the scheme by Vice -chancellors, and 
people’s representatives to whom request had been made to recommend 
institutions for this award  and as such there is a need to review  the existing 
procedure in respect of this scheme .  The Ministry has advised the MAEF to devise 
certain parameters, on t he basis of which the eligibilit y of an advised/or individual 
for consideration for this award can be decided . The MAEF in consultation with its 
governing body is working on the need of a better mechanism to make the scheme 
effective and purposeful. The Committee are unhappy to note that though the award 

18 
 
has been discontinued from 2005 -06 and four years have since pas sed its last 
conferment, the Ministry/MAEF are still in the process of devising the parameters of 
eligibility criteria etc. for the award.  The Committee feel that remedial action should 
have been initiated immediately  after non-conferment of award in 2005-06 so that it 
should have been resumed by the next year.  Therefore, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to advice the MAEF to finalize the eligibility parameters urgently so that 
there is no delay in resuming the  award  and it is conferred from the next year itself.  
 

19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE  
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.5) 
2.1 The Committee are not satisfied with the implementation aspect of the 
recommendations contained in their Twenty sixth and Thirt y fifth Reports on Demands for 
Grants 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 respectively.  The Committee desire that  the Government 
should implement all the  remaining recommendations of the Committee  contained in their 
Twenty-sixth and Thirty -fifth Reports  expeditiously and they should be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in implementation of the specific recommendations which 
are yet to be implemented. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The  Ministry of Minority Affairs have stated in their written reply that  Ministry has 
implemented or is in the process of implementing all the observations/recommendations 
contained in 26th  Report and 35th Report. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 3.20) 
2.3 The Committee observe that there has been huge variation in the BE &RE as well 
as gross under utilization of allocated funds under both Plan and Non-Plan heads.  Against 
the planned budgetary allocation of Rs. 500 crore in 2007 -08 and Rs. 1000 crore in 2008-
09 the actual expenditure was only Rs. 196.65 crore and Rs. 618.62 crore  respectively.    
Similarly, there was surrender of funds to the tune of Rs. 303 crore in 2007-08 and Rs. 30 
crore in 2008 -09 under the plan heads.  The reasons cited by the Mi nistry that 
underutilization and surrender  took place due to late approval of designated schemes, 

20 
 
unavoidable procedural delays, non -receipt of sufficient number of proposals from 
States/UTs under the Coaching and Allied Schemes, all three scholarship sche mes and 
the Multi Sectoral Development Programme and non -submission of utilization certificates 
by the States,  do not seem to be convincing  to the Committee.   They feel that these 
issues could have been tackled effectively with better planning and co -ordination with 
States.  Th e Committee feel that  the Ministry is already  3 years  old for completion of 
procedural formalities with regard to the schemes.  As regarding procedural delay the 
Committee desire that t he procedures of various schemes should be strea mlined and 
simplified to avoid the undue delay.  The Committee find that even the Ministry themselves 
have accepted that the procedures for some schemes were cumbersome and the 
timelines were such that these schemes could not take off as per schedule.  In this regard, 
the Committee regret to note that funds crucial for the development of minorities which 
should have been released on time could not be released due to sheer negligence & 
inaction on the part of  the Ministry and also to some extent  State Governments/UTs.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry should take concrete steps to 
impress upon the State Governments to utilize all the unspent balances lying with them 
and also submit utilization certificates on time so that funds for on- going schemes are not 
withheld.  The Committee also advise the Ministry to make Budgetary projections under 
various schemes more accurate and realistic in order to avoid reduction of funds at the RE 
stage, under utilization and surrender of funds. 
Reply of  the Government 
2.4 As envisaged in the Prime Minister‟s New 15 Point Programme for the Welfare of 
Minorities three scholarship schemes, namely, merit –cum-means scholarship, Post-matric 
scholarship and Pre - matric scholarship were formulated and laun ched on 21.06.2007, 
29.11.2007 (2007-08) and 01.04.2008 (2008 -09) respectively. Also, a Free Coaching and 
Allied Scheme for candidates and students belonging to the Minority Communities was 

21 
 
revised in 2007-08 and modified further in 2008 -09 has also been launched. Multi-sectoral 
Development Programme (MsDP) for 90 Minority Concentration Districts (MCD) is also 
being implemented since 2008 -09. Pace of implementation of all the scholarship schemes 
and others schemes/programems launched by this Ministry , has now picked up as would 
become evident from the following statement:-   
Schemes 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Financial 
Achievement 
Financial 
Achievement 
Financial 
Achievement 
1. Pre-matric    Rs. 62.20 
crore 
Rs.202.94 
crore 
2. Post- matric   Rs. 9.63 crore Rs. 70.63  
crore 
Rs148.74 
crore 
3. Merit –cum-means Rs. 40.80 
crore 
Rs.64.73  
crore 
Rs. 97.51 
crore 
4.Free coaching and Allied 
scheme 
Rs. 5.74 crore Rs.7.30 
crore 
Rs. 11.22 
crore 
5.Multi-sectoral Development 
Programme (MsDP) 
- Rs.270.85 
crore 
Rs.973.02 
crore 
6. Research/studies, Monitoring & 
Evaluation of development 
schemes for minorities  including 
publicity 
Rs.10.48 crore Rs.7.97 
crore 
Rs.12.00 crore 
7.Maulana Azad Education 
Foundation 
Rs.50 crore Rs.60 crore Rs.115 crore 
8.National Minorities Development 
and Finance Corporation 
Rs. 70 crore Rs.75  crore Rs.125 crore 
9.Grants–in-aid to State 
Channelising Agencies 
Rs. 10 crore Rs.00 crore Rs.2.0 crore 
10. Maulana Azad National 
Fellowship for Minority Student 
……  …… Rs.14.90 crore 
11. computerization of records of 
State Wakf Boards 
---- --- Rs.8.06 crore 
12.  Leadership Development of 
Minority Women 
----- --- 0.00 

22 
 
Secretariat  --- Rs. 0.34 
crore 
Rs.0.50 crore 
Total  Rs. 196.65 
crore 
Rs,619.02 
crore  
Rs.1710.89 
crore 
 
The performance of the Ministry during the year, 2009-10 is much better than that in 
the last financial year 2008 -09 as the actual expenditure is  more than 98% of the plan  
outlay of Rs.1740 crore for the  financial year 2009-10.  
Funds are released to the States/UTs/implementing agencies on receipt of utilization 
certificates. After release of funds, the States/UTs are exhorted to utilize the funds and 
implement the schemes/programmes in a time bound manner.  
Three new schemes namely , (i) Maulana Azad National Fellowship for Minority 
Student (ii) Grants-in-aid for computerization of records of State Wakf Boards (iii) Scheme 
for Leadership Development of Minority Women have been formulated and launched. 
Implementation of first two schemes has commenced. However the implementation of the  
third scheme, namely , Scheme  for Leadership Development of Minority Women  would 
pick up during the  year 2010 -11, as the process of inviting applications from 
organization/institutes to impart   training to  women has been initiated  by publishing   
advertisements in various newspapers all over the country in March 2010.   
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 4, Para 3.21) 
 
2.5 The Committee note with concern that the  Ministry of Minori ty Affairs do not have 
data pertaining to Minority communities living below the poverty line and they are 
depending on the data on BPL as maintained by the Ministry of Rural Development.  The 
Committee note that the BPL data as it is being maintained by th e Ministry of Rural 

23 
 
Development is more of a generalized nature which does not give specific information 
relating to the economic condition of the minority communities separately on the basis of 
religion.  Unless the Ministry have specific data on economic  status of enlisted minority 
communities of Muslims, Sikhs, Christians etc., it is difficult to formulate the programmes 
and also assess the programmes/schemes over a period of time.  In this regard, the 
Committee are given to understand that the Ministry is depending on the income 
certificates only.  But in the opinion of the Committee income certificates are not reliable 
and can be easily manipulated where the already affluent persons get the benefit of a 
particular scheme while the poorest of the poor ar e still deprived of the benefits.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, besides coordinating with the 
Ministry of Rural Development on BPL data, should try on their own to collect and maintain 
the data on the economic status of the enliste d minorities so that the benefits of the 
schemes could go to the target population and the number of beneficiaries of minority 
communities is also assessed properly. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) is the nodal Ministry  for rural poverty 
alleviation and collection of BPL data in rural areas. The methodology of MoRD surveys 
has several parameters including income. However, as seen on their website, MoRD does 
not maintain religion –wise BPL data. It requires huge administra tive exercise and 
substantial financial and human resources for such a vast survey. For the BPL Census 
conducted in 2002 , the M oRD had  incurred an expenditure of Rs.79.34 crore. The 
estimated expenditure for the BPL Census 2009 is likely to  be Rs.312 crore. It would thus 
not be advisable for other Ministries to carry out such a detailed survey as this would be a 
duplication as the MoRD conducts such surveys. 

24 
 
Schemes of Ministry of Minority Affairs are based on income criteria and not on BPL 
status of bene ficiaries. NMDFC is the only Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSE), 
under the Ministry of Minority Affairs which extends financial assistance to the persons 
belonging to minorities living below double the poverty line. Coverage of NMDFC schemes 
is very small compared to the overall usage of BPL data and they depend on the MoRD 
list plus income certificate from competent authorities. 
 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) undertakes detailed house -hold survey 
for identification of BPL families.  The Mi nistry of Rural Development had informed the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs in the month of September 2009, that they are conducting the 
BPL Census 2009, for which MoRD had constituted an expert group to suggest the 
methodology for conducting the survey. On 17.12.2009, this Ministry had requested the 
Ministry of Rural Development to collect the information / data on religious parameters in 
the BPL survey in respect of the five notified Minorities viz.  Muslims , Christians, Sikhs, 
Buddhists and  Parsis.  Furthe r, the Ministry of Rural Development had also been 
requested to collect the detailed family data on minority community basis (notified religious 
minorities), in respect of BPL families. Repeated reminders have since been sent to the 
Ministry of Rural Development seeking information on the outcome of the request made. 
 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA), has also been 
requested to collect information/data for identification of BPL families on religious basis in 
urban areas, so that in the BPL lists, the minority community to which a person belongs to 
is indicated. 
  Conducting a survey of BPL and DBPL families in the country is a mammoth task 
requiring substantial human and financial resources . Since the survey is  already being 
carried out by Ministry of Rural Development, duplication of the same may not be 
advisable. There are dedicated Ministry/organizations such as Ministry of Rural 

25 
 
development that carry out such surveys. They have the requisite competence and 
manpower and have been conducting such surveys periodically. Therefore in view of 
the huge cost, manpower and efforts required for conducting such an exercise it has been 
considered advisable to approach them for this work. Ministry of Minority Affairs will follow  
up with  Ministry of Rural Development   and  Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation for providing data pertaining to minority communities living below the poverty 
line.  
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 5, Para 4.17) 
 
2.7 The Committee regret to note that under the scheme of Multi -sectoral Development 
Programme (Ms DP), though 90 minority concentration districts have been identified for 
overall development based on parameters of e conomic backwardness, as on 31 st March, 
2009, plans of only 47 minority concentration districts in Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal have been approved and an amount of  only Rs. 270.85 crore as against the 
allocated Rs. 539.80 crore have been expended.  The reply of the Ministry in this regard  
that plans of all minority concentration districts were not received from States/UTs  seems 
to be casual and non -convincing because t he Committee feel that considerable time has 
been lost in getting the plans of all the districts approved as a result of which funds 
allocated at BE stage are being reduced drastically at the RE stage for successive years.  
The Committee desire that during the current year itself plans of all the minority 
concentration districts should be approved expeditiously so that the funds allocated during 
the current financial year is utilized gainfully with in stipulated time period.  In this direction, 
the Ministry instead of merely directing the remaining States for sending the plans, have to 
proactively orient, inform and guide these States for early finalization of their plans.  A time 
schedule has to be framed in this regard so that the process does not go on indefinitely.  

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The scheme of Multi -sectoral Development Pr ogramme (MsDP) for 90 identified 
Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs) could be implemented only from 2008 -09 as the 
scheme was approved only on 28 th of March, 2008 and no expenditure could be incurred 
in 2007-08. The budget provision under MsDP was redu ced to Rs.280 crore at RE stage 
only in 2008 -09 as it was the first year of implementation  and district plans had to be 
approved before release of funds . For 2009-10, the BE and RE figures remain u nchanged 
and an amount of Rs.973  crore (98%) has been utili zed out of  budgetary allocation of 
Rs.990 crore under MsDP.  
District plans are required to be prepared in such a manner that the development 
deficits of the districts are addressed in the order of priority ranked by a baseline survey, 
so that various int erventions under the MsDP would result in the improvement of 
backwardness parameters of MCDs and bring them at par with the national averages.  
The Ministry has been approving proposals in the district plans which are prepared in 
accordance with the provis ions of MsDP and addressing the identified development 
deficits. For proposals not made in accordance with the MsDP guidelines and not 
addressing the identified development deficits, the States/UTs are advised to submit 
revised plans.   
80 minority concentration districts have been approved up till March, 2010.  In order 
to ensure that the district plans are approved in full during 2010 -11, the Chief Secretaries 
and Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the concerned departments of the State 
Governments/UT administrations have been advised to submit the districts plans at the 
earliest.   
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 

27 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 7, Para 4.19) 
2.9 The Committee have learnt that as an action plan for addressing the issues relating 
to housing, health and civic amenities to improve the living conditions and employment 
prospects of minorities for implementation of PM‟s New 15 point programme , the 
Government has formulated the Multi-Sectoral Develo pment Programme .  Under the 
scheme, multi-sectoral district development plan of a district ha s to be prepared in such a 
manner that these districts are saturated with schemes included in the Prime Minister‟s 
New 15 Point Programme for the welfare of minori ties within the 11 th Plan period.  The 
Committee have been informed that State level Committee and District level Committee 
constituted for implementation of the Prime Minister‟s New 15 point programme also serve 
as oversight Committee for this Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) at State 
and District level.  The Committee note that as on date 23 States/UTs have constituted 
Committees under the new 15 point programme.  The Committee understand that the 
Ministry have a very prestigious and flagship p rogramme in the form of  Multi-Sectoral 
Minority Development Programme w hich is very vast and all inclusive.   Keeping in view  
the scope and reach of the programme , the Committee desire that more State level and 
District level Committees should be constitute d for implementation of the Prime Minister 
New 15 Point Programme.  The Committee also desire that the Budgetary provision made 
for 2009-10 for this programme should be utilized optimally so that the goal of  improving 
the living condition of minority popul ation and bringing them in the national mainstream is 
achieved without much delay. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 State Governments/UT administrations have been advised to prepare the district 
plans in such a manner that the development deficits of the distr icts are addressed in the 
order of priority ranked by a baseline survey, so that various interventions under the Multi 

28 
 
sectoral Development Programme would result in the improvement of backwardness 
parameters of minority concentration districts and bring t hem at par with national 
averages. They have also been requested to constitute expeditiously the State level and 
District level committees for implementation of Prime Minister‟s New 15 Point Programme 
for the Welfare of Minorities, which also serves as the  State/district level committees for 
implementation of MsDP. As per information received from State Government /UT 
administration such committees have already been constituted in 19 State/UT out of 20 
States/UT where these minority concentration districts are located. Information in respect 
of Arunachal Pradesh has not been made available by the State Government. The 
implementation of Multi sectoral Development Programme in minority concentration 
districts has been taken up with earnest by the Ministry and the States/UTs concerned and 
an amount of Rs.97 3 crore has been utilized out of budgetary allocation of Rs.990 crore 
for 2009-10.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 8, para 5.14) 
 
2.11 The Committee observe that the Maulana Azad Education Foundation (MAEF) was 
registered in the year 1989 with the objective of formulating and implementing educational 
schemes and plans for the benefit of educational backward minorities.  However, even  
after 20 years of its existence, the Foundation has so far assisted only 9 NGOs for 
construction of residential schools exclusively for girls and that too covering only 8/9 
States.  When a number of NGOs are working in the field of minority development, t he 
Committee fail to understand why such a less number of NGOs have been assisted by the 
Foundation.  Similarly the State -wise details of number of girl students enrolled in the 
educational complexes availing financial assistance by MAEF is very discouragi ng where 

29 
 
only 2,72,105 girl students covering only 18 States have been enrolled upto 2007 -08.  
MAEF‟s efforts in the field of strengthening vocational/technical training centres are also 
not satisfactory where a total of only 3211 girls have been enrolled in various 
vocational/training centres aided by MAEF.  The Committee have also learnt of 
discrepancies in sanction of building grants.  From this the Committee conclude that at the 
moment it seems that MAEF is working directionless, without any purpose and  set targets.  
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to reinvigorate the foundation by instilling 
greater sense of responsibility in order to make it target oriented and pro-active.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Grant of financial assistance from MAEF is considered only for those NGOs whose 
applications are received complete in all respects and who meet all the eligibility criteria as 
given in the grants -in-aid scheme of the Foundation. Since its inception and till date the 
MAEF has sanctioned gra nt-in-aid to 18 NGOs specifically for construction of residential 
schools, where girl students are not debarred and also get enrollment. However, 
assistance given to 09 NGOs is exclusively for girls. Thus the statistics indicate that the 
MAEF has assisted more number of NGOs under the grants -in-aid scheme for 
construction of residential schools where girls also get enrollment. Applications for 
construction of the residential school building, exclusively for girls being very limited, the 
MAEF has assisted only 09 NGOs for this purpose.  
 The MAEF provides financial assistance to NGOs for one purpose at a time; either 
for construction of school building or for construction of hostel building separately. The 
number of beneficiaries is indicative, based on data collected from the assisted NGOs 
during the last 5 years only. However, the actual number of beneficiaries would be higher 
as the MAEF since its inception and till 31.03.2010 has sanctioned grants -in-aid 
amounting to Rs. 130.34 crore to 998 NGOs all over the country covering 25 States/UT.  

30 
 
 The scheme of grant -in-aid of MAEF has created a sound infrastructure base of 
institutions run by the NGOs all over the country. The evaluation and impact study of the 
schemes of the Foundation, conducted by M/s ORG Ltd. , an independent agency, has 
also revealed this. 
  
Efforts are on to give wide publicity to these schemes through newspapers as well 
as through website. The State Government/UT administrations are also being requested to 
further publicize these schemes in their respective states/UTs. Further, in order to ensure 
smooth functioning, increased accountability and transparency the following additional 
steps have been taken:- 
 (i) Organizational infrastructure is being strengthened by restructuring of staff. 
  
(ii)  A Senior Administrative Grade (SAG) level Officer of the Central Government 
has been posted on deputation, as Secretary to the Foundation to ensure 
better management and accountability. 
  
(iii) The organization is being fully computerized. All importan t information with 
regard to grants-in-aid to NGOs  and scholarship to girl child  are available in 
the website of MAEF ,i,e,www.maef.nic.in 
. 
(iv) An evaluation study by an independent agency (ORG Ltd) on the functioning 
of the Foundation was conducted du ring 2006-07. The study was aimed at 
assessing the impact of the schemes run by the MAEF on the target group 
and how it has benefited them. The evaluation report was submitted in 
November, 2007. Based on the recommendation of the evaluation report, 
necessary action has been taken to enhance the coverage of the 
Foundation, all over the country and also additional funds have been 

31 
 
provided to its corpus fund for effective implementation of the scheme and 
programms run by the MAEF. 
 
(v)  The resources of MAEF h ave been distributed in State wise manner in order 
to make sure that every State/UT is covered under the scheme and 
programme of the Foundations. Prior to 2008 -09, no physical and financial 
targets were set by the MAEF for its Grants -in-aid scheme to NGOs.  From 
the year 2008-09 the MAEF has started setting targets for this scheme.    
(vi) Review meetings on the schemes and programmes of MAEF are being held 
at periodic intervals at the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 9, para 5.15) 
 
2.13 The Committee are constrained to note that the scheme of Maulana Azad National 
Scholarship for meritorious girls students of the Ministry is not doing very well.  The 
Committee find that in the States of Andaman & Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, Goa, Lakshadweep and Mizoram not a single beneficiar y was given 
scholarship during 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09.  Similarly no scholarship was awarded 
in other States like Chandigarh and Punjab during 2006-07 and Daman & Diu, Pondicherry 
during 2006-07 and 2007 -08.  The States of Himachal Pradesh and Nagaland have not 
sanctioned any scholarship during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.  What is more 
distressing to the Committee is that the MAEF could not sanction scholarships in the 
above States/UTs in last three years because eligible applications were not received from 
these States. The Committee feel that publicity being given to this scheme by the MAEF in 
National/regional news papers is not adequate .  Therefore, the Committee recommend 

32 
 
that the Ministry should advise the MAEF for forwarding the information about the scheme 
directly to all the minority schools, coll eges and educational institutions in order to creat e 
awareness amongst the meritorious girls students, so that sufficient number of 
applications are received from these States/UTs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 Scholarships are sanctioned to meritorious girl students on the basis of receipt of 
eligible applications. The MAEF couldn‟t sanction  scholarships in these States/UTs in the 
last three years i.e., 2006 -07, 2007-08 & 2008 -09, because eligible applications were not 
received from these States. However, during 2009 -10, the MAEF has distributed 15070 
scholarships covering 27 States/UTs. Thus there is a increase in the coverage of 
scholarships in 2009-10 so far as States/UTs are concerned, in comparison to last couple 
of years when only 25 / 26 States / UTs were being covered.   
 This achievement has become  possible due to sustained publicity given by the 
Ministry/MAEF to the schemes and programmes of the Foundation .  As a result the MAEF 
has till date distributed scholarships to 41977 beneficiaries throughout the country since 
the inception of this scheme. In year 2008 -09, the MAEF has distributed only 12064 
scholarships; in 2009-10, the number of scholarships has gone up as is evident from the 
figures given above. By the end of the 11th Five Year Plan period, it is planned to distribute 
higher number of scholarships all over India. 
Foundation has not only publicized its scheme in various national newspapers but 
has also requested the Secretaries (Minority Welfare) of all State Governments to 
publicize the same in their respective states ensuring receipt of sufficient number of 
applications from these States. 

33 
 
As a result of the efforts, MEAF has adequate number of applications available to 
fully utilized the financial resources at its disposal.  
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11 and 12, Para 6.10 and 6.11) 
 
2.15 The Committee observe that under  the scheme of grants -in-aid to State 
Channelizing Agencies ( SCAs) for implementation of the National Minority Development 
and Finance Corpor ation (NMDFC) programme, assistance in the form of aid is provided 
to them mainly by the Ministry.  The Committee note that grants to the tune of Rs. 10 crore 
released by the Ministry during 2007-08 could not be fully utilized by the SCAs of NMDFC.  
Similarly, in the absence of Utilization Certificates from NMDFC, no funds under Grants -in-
aid scheme could be released to NMDFC during the year 2008 -09.  The Committee note 
with concern that out of Rs. 10 crore released by the Central Government under the 
scheme, an amount of Rs. 2.66 crore is still unutilized and p ending with the SCAs at 
present.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary 
steps to ensure uninterrupted progress in the implementation of Grants -in-aid scheme so 
that funds earmarked do not remain unutilized with SCAs for long and  prudently utilized 
within the stipulated time.   
2.16 The Committee are given to understand  that assistance under Grants -in-aid 
scheme is on matching basis with the Central and the State G overnment contributing in 
the ratio of 90:10.  Central  Government funds are released in two installments.  However, 
some of the SCAs were not given second installment of funds as their State Governments 
did not release the 10% contribution.  The Committee  were also informed that the States 
contribution so far which ought to  be at Rs. 260 crore, is only Rs. 134 crore and it is not 
forthcoming very easily from the State Governments despite repeated requests from the 

34 
 
Government and the Corporation.  The Minis try have further informed that in some cases , 
the State  Government‟s guarantees are not forthcoming and grass root level recoveries 
are very poor.  The Committee are disappointed to note that despite repeated requests 
from the Government and the Corporatio n, the  State Governments are not pa ying any 
attention towards their share of contribution. The Committee urge the Ministry to inform the 
State Governments on the serious implications of their casual approach on the overall 
performance with regard to Grants-in-Aid to State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) engaged 
for implementation of National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC) 
Programme. The Committee recommend that Ministry should impress upon the State 
Governments to co-operate, be more su pportive and act as State guarantor.  The State 
Governments should be advised  to release their share of 10% contribution in time  for 
effective implementation of this NMDFC scheme so that intended benefits reach the target 
groups.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.17 The Ministry had taken necessary steps to ensure uninterrupted progress in the 
implementation of grants-in-aid (GIA) scheme so that funds earmarked do not remain 
unutilized with SCAs for long and are prudently utilized within the stipulated time. 
Balance amount of Rs.1 , 35, 61,000 /- lying unutilized with NMDFC under the GIA 
Scheme 2007-08 was surrendered to the Ministry on 29.10.2009. Matter regarding early 
utilization of funds, already released to the State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) under 
grants-in-aid scheme for the year 2007 -08 is being regularly followed up by NMDFC and 
the Ministry. In this regard, letters have been written to the individual SCAs on 16.11.2009, 
21.11.2009, for submitting the utilization certificates. Letters dated 30.11.2009 hav e also 
been sent to the respective State Governments requesting them to seek utilization 
certificates under GIA scheme 2007 -08 from the respective SCAs and submit the same to 

35 
 
NMDFC immediately. Besides, the issues of equity contribution to NMDFC and 
Government guarantee have also been taken up with the State Governments. The State 
Governments who have not contributed their 10% share in the GIA scheme 2007 -08, have 
been advised to  immediately contribute the same to the SCAs. This issue of early 
utilization of funds under GIA scheme 2007 -08 and contribution of 10% share of the State 
Government was also discussed with the representatives of the SCAs during Mid Term 
Review meeting held from 14 -17th December 2009. The SCAs have assured that the UCs 
will be submitted at the earliest along with the assurance from the State Governments for 
contribution of their 10% share in GIA scheme.   
The entire amount of Rs. 2 crores for the year 2009 -10 under Grants-in-aid scheme 
had been released to NMDFC by the Ministry.  The Ministry ha d also written to the 
respective State Govts. on 8.2.2008,  29.2.2008, 12.9.2008 and  25.11.2008 to provide 
their matching contribution and comply with other issues regarding Grant-in-Aid assistance 
Scheme. A D.O. letter dated 19.1.10 to Princip al Secretaries of the States ha d been 
issued impressing upon the State Governments to release their share of 10% contribution 
in time for effective implementation of the NMDFC scheme. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13, Para 7.14) 
2.18 The Committee note with concern that under the Free Coaching and Allied 
Assistance scheme during 2007 -08 no beneficiaries were imparted training in the 
States/UTs of Chandigarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, K erala, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Tripura 
and West Bengal.  Similarly during the year 2008 -09 there were no beneficiaries in Assam 
and Jammu & Kashmir.  The Committee  are further surprised to note that the number of 
students benefited under the scheme  in Rajasthan, Punjab, Orissa  have drastically come 
down in 2008-09 compared to 2007 -08.  The Committee in this regard  are not convinced 
by these  reasons advanced by the Ministry that this is a demand driven scheme  and 

36 
 
proposals are sanctioned by the Ministry only when they are received complete in all 
respects fulfilling the eligibility conditions from the respective State Governments.  Since 
proposals are not forthcoming during the start of the financial year, t he Committee desire 
that the Ministry should direct the State Governments to send the proposals complete in all 
respect well in advance preferably  right at the beginning of the financial year itself so that 
deficiencies if any in the proposals can be corrected at that stage itself.  The Committee 
also desire that wide publicity should be given about this scheme in the print media and 
information of this scheme should also be forwarded directly to all minority schools, 
colleges and educational institutions to create awareness among the poor students of the 
minority communities so that they could secure admission in technical and professional 
courses as well as  get employment in Government service, public sector undertakings 
and the private sector.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.19 The Free Coaching & Allied Schem e does not provide for State –wise allocation of 
funds/students. 
 The Committee has observed that number of students benefited under the Scheme 
is Rajasthan, Punjab and Orissa have drastically come down in 2008 -09 compared to 
2007-08. In this context, it i s mentioned that in other Sates/UTs (like Andhra Pradesh, 
Chandigarh Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) number of students 
benefited are more in 2008 -09 as c ompared to 2007 -08. However, during 2009 -10, the 
number of students, who benefited from Rajasthan, Punjab  and Orissa are 682, 90, and 
230 respectively, as against the respective figures of 75,50 and 75 during 2008-09. Hence 
there is no uniform trend  in this regard among the States. 

37 
 
  Wide publicity was given to the scheme by publishing advertisements in 
newspapers in English, Hindi, Urdu and other Indian languages for inviting proposals from 
coaching institutes/organizations through State Government s. As a  result thereof 74 
proposals from various coaching institutes/organizations through State Governments  were 
received in this Ministry before 31st October, 2009.   
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 14 and 15, Para No.  8.17 and 8.18) 
 
2.20 The Committee are happy to note that during the year 2008 -09, against the target 
of disbursing  3 lakh  scholarships under the  Pre-matric Scholarship scheme, the 
Government have disbursed 5.13 lakh s cholarships and an amount of 62.21 crore was 
released for this purpose.  Similarly , under the Post-matric Scholarship scheme , against 
the target of 1.25 lakh scholarships, the Government have disbursed 1.83 lakh 
scholarships. The Committee are equally satisfied to note that in both  the scholarship 
schemes, the girl students got more than 5 0 percent share.  This is perfectly in tune with 
the objective s of the scheme that the muslim girls being more underprivileged need 
special attention. The Committee hope that during the current financial year  also both the 
schemes will be implemented with same level of  commitment and the target s will be 
achieved fully. 
2.21 The Committee further appreciate that  as against a proposal of Rs. 100 crore for 
the Pre -matric schol arship scheme for the year 2009 -10, the Planning Comm ission has 
sanctioned an enhanced allocation of Rs. 200 crore.  The Committee , however, observe 
that as against the target of Rs. 22 lakh for 2009-10, the Ministry have disbursed only Rs. 
6.44 lakh scholarships as on 21.10.2009.  Though the Ministry appear contended with the 
above progress stating that they have already achieved more  than what they had 

38 
 
achieved during 2008-09, the Committee feel that the Ministry should not show any laxity  
and complacency  in achieving this  year‟s target which is slightly on the higher side .  
Efforts should be made to utilize the entire amount during the current year so as to avoid 
any surrender of funds.  
Reply of the Government 
2.22 The comments of the Hon‟ble Committee h ave been not ed for compliance. As 
directed by the Hon‟ble Committee, this Ministry has utilized an amount of Rs. 202.94 
crore as against the allocation of Rs. 200 crore under Pre -matric scheme during the year 
2009-10 and sanctioned 17.29 lakh scholarships to the States/UTs as against 5.13 lakh 
scholarships sanctioned during the previous year 2008 -09.Agaisnt the revised target of 15 
lakh scholarships for 2009 -10, as indicated in the Outcome Budget – 2010-11, year to 
year increase in physical achievement is 337%.    
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 9.7) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that a new Central sector scheme of National Fellowship for 
Minority Students is proposed to be introduced with the objective of providing fellowship to 
the minority communities for pursuing higher studies such as M.Phil and Ph.D.  There is a 
budgetary provision of Rs. 15 crore  in 2009 -10 and a target of 750 fellowships to be 
awarded for improvement  of academic output and research ability of students of minority.  
In this regard, the Committee have been informed that proposals are being processed for 
seeking approval of the competent authority i.e. MOS (IC), Ministry of Minority Affairs and 
Finance Minister.  Hoping that the Ministry of Minority Affairs will be successful in getting 
early clearance/approval for the scheme, the Committee recommend that efforts should be 
made for full utilization of the allocated amount during the current financial year  and the 

39 
 
target of 750 scholarship s should be achieved.  At the same time , the Committee desire 
that budgetary allocation under the scheme should be enhanced so that  more minority 
students are able to pursue higher studies such as M.Phil and Ph.D. 
Reply of  the Government 
2.24 The objective of the scheme is to provide Fellowship in the form of financial 
assistance to students from the minority communities pursuing higher studies such as 
M.Phil and Ph.D. The scheme will cover all Universities, institutions,  recognized by 
University Grants Commission (UGC) under Section 2(f) and Section 3 of the UGC Act 
and will be implemented by the Ministry of Minority Affairs for minority community students 
through UGC. 30% of the fellowships are earmarked for female scholars. The scheme has 
been named as “ Maulana Azad National Fellowship for Minority Students”. After due 
approval, the new scheme has been launched in December 2009. The scheme is being 
implemented by University of Grants Commission (UGC). Out of the provisio n of Rs. 15 
crore for 756 fellowships for 2009 -10, an amount of Rs.14.90 crore was released to UGC 
for the purpose.  UGC has published the  advertisement for the scheme in leading 
newspapers for inviting applicat ions from eligible candidates. Under the schem e, every 
year 756 fresh fellowships will be added in addition to the eligible re newals of the previous 
year. Financial allocation during 2010-11 is Rs.30 crore. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 9.8) 
 
2.25 The Committee have been informed that another new scheme on Computerization 
of Records of State Wakf Boards is to be implemented in pursuance of the 
recommendation of the Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) on Wakfs i n their 9th Report.  
Under the scheme financial assistance would be released to the State Wakf Boards for 

40 
 
computerization of their records through the Central Wakf Council who would oversee and 
remain accountable for proper utilization.   While welcoming t he initiative of the Ministry, 
the Committee desire that the Government should pursue with the State 
Governments/State Wakf Boards to discuss the details of the project Report so that 
proposal is formulated for its appraisal.  The Committee hope that this scheme would be 
implemented soon and the Computerization of Records of State Wakf Boards is achieved 
in a time bound manner. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.26 This scheme is being implemented in pursuance of the recommendations of the 
Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) on Wakf. Under the scheme, the financial assistance 
would be provided for computerization of Wakf records of the State Wakf Boards. The 
scheme is being implemented through National Informatics Centre and State Wakf 
Boards. The details o f the Pr oject Report were considered  in consultation with State 
Governments/ State Wakf Boards.   An amount of Rs.480.92 lakh has been released to 
the NICSI for purchase of hardware/development of software on behalf of the National 
Informatics Centre. Further than  amount of Rs. 325.20 lakh @ Rs. 27.10 lakh per State 
Wakf Boards has been released to 11 State Wakf Boards and the Central Wakf Council.   
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
- NIL- 

42 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No.  2.12) 
4.1 The Committee observe that though the Ministry of Minority Affairs was created in 
January, 2006 and is going to enter the fourth year of its existence, yet the organizational 
set up  of the Ministry is still incomplete with a number of posts lying vacant.  The 
Committee note with concern that out of 97 sanctioned strength as on date only 66 posts 
have been filled and 31 posts at various levels are still vacant.  The Committee have 
further learnt that the matter regarding framing of recruitment rules in respect of Urdu 
posts are still being finalized.  The non -filling of so many posts in the Ministry has a direct 
bearing on the prompt and efficient handling of issues in the Ministry.  I ndia with a vast 
man-power resource centre with so many qualified people in various fields, the non -
availability of adequate expert staff should not come in the way of smooth and efficient 
functioning of the Ministry.  The Committee feel that it is only wh en all the posts are filled 
up and the Ministry have a dedicated staff that the Ministry will be able to carry out its 
mandate effectively.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to urgently look into the 
matter relating to staff strength and take al l necessary steps for filling up of all vacant 
posts at the earliest.  If need arises, the Ministry of Finance should also be approached at 
the appropriate level.  Meanwhile, the available staff may be effectively utilized for 
successful implementation of various welfare schemes launched/to be launched by the 
Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The present sanctioned strength of the Ministry is 93  and 27 posts as shown below 
are vacant as on date.  The Ministry thus carries a vacancy of nearly 30% in cor e cadres 
and despite this, performs its work with great difficulty. 

43 
 
 
  Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
post 
Number 
of 
vacant 
posts 
Action Taken for filling up the posts 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Director/Deputy 
Secretary 
01  DoPT has nominated one officer for filling up 
the vacant post shortly. 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
Under Secretary 
 
Section Officer 
 
Stenographer  
Gr. „D‟ 
03 
 
04 
 
06 
 
The Ministry has been making consistent efforts 
to fill up the vacant posts. The matter has been 
taken up with DoPT / MHRD, the cadre 
controlling authorities, for filling up these vacant 
posts.  The Ministry had issued a Vacancy 
circular on 08/12/2009 to different 
Ministries/Departments besides posting the 
same in the website of this Ministry inviting 
applications from the prospective candidates for 
filling up the 3 posts of Under Secretaries , 4 
posts of Section Officers and 6 posts of 
Stenographer Gr. „D ‟on adhoc -short term 
deputation basis as the posts sanctioned vide 
orders dated 26/10/2009 are yet be en -cadred 
by DoPT (for US and Stenographer posts) a nd 
MHRD (for Section Officer posts). Ministry has 
received only 01 eligible application against 03 
vacant posts of Under Secretaries and two 
applications for four vacant posts of  Section 
Officer. No application has been received 
against Stenographer posts. 
 The applications received are under process 
now.  
5. 
 
 
6. 
 
 
7. 
Assistant 
Director(Urdu) 
 
Senior Translator 
(Urdu) 
 
 
Typist (Urdu) 
01 
 
 
01 
 
 
01 
An Urdu cell has been created in this Ministry 
with one post each of  (i)Assistant Director 
(Urdu), ii)Sr. T ranslator (Urdu)     and  iii)Typist 
(Urdu) .      
 Advertisement inviting applications for filling up 
of above posts on an adhoc deputation basis, 
was published in the Employment News 
(English, Hindi & Urdu edition) dated 18 -24 July, 
2009 for the applican ts working in 
Government/PSUs/Govt. Autonomous Bodies.   

44 
 
 While 03 applications were received for the post 
of Asstt. Director (Urdu) from officers working in 
Government/Autonomous Bodies, applicants for 
Senior Translator/Typist were not working in 
Government. Therefore, their candidatures 
stand cancelled. Regarding appointing Assistant 
Director (Urdu), the matter is under process and 
will be finalized shortly.   
8. Assistant 01 Ministry of HRD has been requested to fill up the 
post . 
9. 
 
 
10. 
Senior Resear ch 
Investigator 
 
Senior 
Investigator 
 
01 
 
 
03 
At present, the Ministry has 04 sanctioned posts 
of Sr. Research Investigator and 04 posts of Sr. 
Investigator.  
In order to fill up the vacancies, the Ministry had 
issued vacancy circular for filling up these posts  
on deputation basis. An advertisement was also 
published in the Employment News dated 23 -29 
May, 2009 besides posting the vacancy circular 
on the Ministry‟s website.  
The Ministry received only one eligible 
application in response to the advertiseme nt. 
One post of Senior Investigator has thus been 
filled up in December, 2009. Ministry‟s efforts to 
en-cadre the above posts with either 
subordinate Statistical Service Cadre or 
subordinate Economic Service Cadre could not 
materialize. 
The Ministry again proposes to advertise the 
above vacant posts shortly. 
11. Peons 04 In pursuance of Sixth Pay Commission‟s Report 
regarding ban on further recruitment in Group D 
posts, the Ministry has engaged 04 persons 
against vacant position of 04 Peons through 
outsourcing.     
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

45 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 10, Para No.  5.16) 
4.3 The Committee further note that t he Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Literacy awards 
which was introduced in 2003 -04 is being given to institutes who are doing considerable 
work to promote education amongst educationally backward minorities.  The Committee 
observe that  upto the year 2005, the awa rd used to be given regularly.  However, in the 
year 2006 three institutions have been selected but haven‟t been conferred the award as 
yet.  Moreover, from the year 2006 onwards this award has not  been sanctioned to any 
institution for reasons not known to the Committee.  Since the award is a way of 
recognizing the work/efforts of institutions in the field of promoting education among the 
minorities and encouraging more and more institutions to come forward and work for the 
cause of development of minorit ies, the discontinuation of this award is not at all 
advisable.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into the 
matter urgently for identifying  and sorting out the problems/hurdles being faced in this 
regard and all necessary steps should be taken for resuming the conferment of this award 
as early as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The scheme of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Literacy Award is given to institutions, 
those who have done commendable work to promote   education among st educationally 
backward minorities. This award was discontinued from the year 2005 -06 due to poor 
response given to the scheme by Vice -chancellors, and people‟s representatives to whom 
request had been made to recommend institutions for this award.  
 Perforce there arises a need to review the existing procedure in respect of this 
scheme. Accordingly, the Ministry has advised the MAEF to devise certain parameters, on 
the basis of which the eligibility of an advised /or individual for consideration for this award, 
can be decided. The MAEF in consultation with its Governing Body is working on the need 
of a better mechanism to make this scheme effective and purposeful.  

46 
 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

47 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.18) 
5.1 The Committee are also unha ppy to  note  non  receipt of  adequate number of  
complete proposals  from  the UTs and North Eastern States for  Multi -sectoral 
Development  Programme.   According to  the  Ministry  out of  90 MCDs, 30 MCDs  are  
located  in  the North  Eastern States  and  2 MCDs   are  located in UTs.  While the 
Committee can well understand that the remotest States of Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Mizoram did not submit their district plans, the Committee fail to understand as to why the  
States like Delhi and Jammu & Ka shmir which constitute  substantial  minority  population 
and  are  eager  to implement  some sort  of  schemes  for minorities  have  not  submitted  
their district  plans.   This merely  reflects  lack of  action and  initiative  on  the  part   of  
the  Ministry  in persuading  and  guiding  these  States  in  preparation  of  plans for their 
districts.  The Committee  desire  that  being  the  nodal  agency  in  the Government of 
India to look after the needs of the minority population, the Ministry hav e to constantly 
monitor the progress, guide and persuade these States. The Chief Ministers and the Chief 
Secretaries of these States should be briefed in the right earnest about the urgent need for 
formulation and approval of the district plans without muc h delay so that the minority 
population in these States are not deprived of availing benefits of the scheme for long. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 In the Chief Secretaries Conference held in February, 2010 the States/UT which 
had not submitted the district plans of their MCD were advised to submit their plans. The 
matter has also been taken up at the level of Chief Secretaries and Chief Ministers of the 
State Governments. These efforts are in addition to the follow -up action with the Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of minority welfare, workshops held with the district officers in the 

48 
 
States/UTs and review meetings in the Ministry. All district plans have been received 
except for seven districts of Arunachal Pradesh and two of Assam. District plans of Leh 
(Jammu & Kashmir), Mamit and Lawngtlai (Mizoram), Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), North 
East Delhi (Delhi), Ranchi (Jharkhand) have been approved. North Sikkim district plan 
could not be taken up as the State and district officials from Sikkim did not attend the 
Empowered Committee meeting. District plans of Arunachal Pradesh and Assam are still 
awaited. The state governments are regularly being approached to expedite the district 
plans. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 9.9) 
 
5.3 The Committee find that the Scheme of Leadership Development of Minority 
Women which has been transferred from Ministry of Women & Child Development is being 
examined afresh in the Ministry of Minority Af fairs and details of the scheme are being 
formulated/worked out.  The Committee note that the scheme is true to the letter and spirit 
of the observation of the Sachar Committee which had highlighted that India‟s biggest 
minority group, the muslim numbering 13.83 crore having been left out of the development 
trajectory need to be uplifted and within this group muslim women being doubly 
disadvantaged need to be empowered urgently.  Keeping in view the likely pivotal role to 
be played by such a scheme to ensur e that the benefits of growth reach these deprived 
women, the Committee hope that the scheme would be implemented soon and adequate 
budgetary allocation would be made under the scheme.  The Committee also desire that 
until the new scheme is made fully oper ational, the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development should be advised to continue the existing scheme by ensuring adequate 
funds for the benefit of deprived women of the minority community. 
 

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 With a view to improve the status of women in the country, the Ministry of Women & 
Child Development in consultation with National Commission for Women launched a 
scheme of Leadership Development of Minority Women. The scheme has been 
transferred by the Planning Commission from Ministry of WC D to Ministry of Minority 
Affairs in 2009 -10. A provision of Rs. 8 crore was made for 2009 -10 in the budget of this 
Ministry. 
 The scheme had been suitably recast in consultation with various Ministries 
/Departments including the Planning Commission and wa s formally launched on 
27.1.2010. Advertisements inviting Expression of Interests (EOIs) were issued in March, 
2010 and after receipt of proposals, suitable organizations would be shortlisted to 
implement the scheme. Eligible organizations shortlisted by t he Ministry would submit 
projects for consideration and approval by the Ministry. The scheme envisages imparting 
Leadership development training in the village/locality and in residential training institutes 
covering a total of 56850  women during 2010 -11. Financial assistance would be given to 
organizations for implementing the scheme.  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2009-10-Budget dated April 9, 2010) 
 
 
NEW DELHI        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
8 July, 2010        Chairman 
17 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
         Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
 

50 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 8th JULY, 2010. 
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
8. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
9. Shri Mohan Jena 
10. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A. Mukhophadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr.(Smt.) Sagarika Dash  -  Under Secretary 

51 
 
******     ******     ****** 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the following two draft Reports 
without any amendment :- 
 
(i)  Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report on Demands 
for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
(ii)  ******      ******    ******  
 
 
 The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize these draft Reports and present 
the same to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
4. ******     ******     ***** 
 
5. ******     ******     ***** 
 
6. ******     ******     ***** 
 
7. ******     ******     ***** 
 
8. ******     ******     ***** 
 
9.      ******     ******     ***** 
 
******   ****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

52 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
           Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations         18 
II. Observations/Recommendations which          14     77.78% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 1.5, 3.20, 3.21, 4.17, 4.19,  
5.14, 5.15, 6.10, 6.11, 7.14, 8.17, 8.18, 9.7  
and 9.8) 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which           Nil              0% 
 the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
   
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in         2   11.11%  
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 2.12 and 5.16) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in          2  11.11% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 4.18 and 9.9) 
 
 
 
 