1 
 
 
 
18 
  
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2011 - 2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  the subject "Implementation of 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 – rules made there under" pertaining to the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December,  2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  the subject "Implementation of 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 – rules made there under" pertaining to the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on     22.12.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December,  2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                       
PAGE 
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                (iv) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………… …….    (vi) 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………     1                                
        
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by            13  
the Government……………………………………………………                      
  
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not              35 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……                       
                                         
  
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies                  37 
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..                                
     
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies        46 
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                                    
     
 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
  
ANNEXURE I Government  of Orissa's letter dated 10.12.2010.       55 
 
ANNEXURE II Government  of Orissa's letter dated 23.12.2010.       63 
 
ANNEXURE III  Minutes of the third Sitting of the Standing Committee  on             98 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 20.12.2011.             
        
   
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the  100                    
recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………… 
 
     
                                                                       
             
  

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2011-2012) 
       
 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
13. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana  
14. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
17. Shri Kabir Suman 
18. Smt. Usha Verma  
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
*27. Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28. Shri Baishnab Parida 
29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
* Dr. Ram Dayal Munda was expired on 30.9.2011. 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chair man of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (F ifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on  the subject "Implementation of Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 – rules made there under"  pertaining to the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
  
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16th 
November, 2010.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in that Report on 17.3.2011.  The Report was considered and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
20.12.2011. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment ( Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
20 December, 2011        Chairman, 
29 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
  

7 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth L ok Sabha) on the subject "Implementation of Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 – 
rules made there-under" relating to Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16th November, 2010.  It contained 23 recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the recommendations have been received and are categorized as under :  
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 1.9, 1.43, 1.44, 1.74, 1.75, 1.76, 1.77, 1.79, 1.80, 1.97, 
1.99 and 1.104.  
(Total 12 – Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government : 
 
Paragraph No.  1.47. 
(Total 1 – Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter I : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 1.45, 1.46, 1.81 and 1.83.  
(Total 4 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature :  
Paragraph Nos. 1.41, 1.42, 1.78, 1.82, 1.96 and 1.103 
(Total 6 – Chapter V) 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 

8 
 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of 
the Report. 
1.4 The committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6,  Para No. 1.45) 
 
1.5 The Committee were constrained to note that out of a total number of 28,49,000 
claims re ceived from 17 States as many as 12,67,928 claims ha s been rejected after 
initial verification and scrutiny. The Committee also observe d that the Ministry did  not 
have the information as to at which level i. e., Gram Sabha, Sub -Divisional level or 
District level the rejections were more. The Ministry ha d maintained that many people 
had mistaken the Act as a land distribution drive and ha d applied in a large number 
which was the main cause for rejection of these applications. On the rejection of genuine 
claims under the Act though the Ministry ha d maintained that adequate safeguards were 
in- built in the procedure itself and there was little scope for rejection of genuine claims, 
the Committee were apprehensive that large number of rejections might had occurred 
due to procedural reasons where genuine claims of genuine beneficiaries might ha d 
been overlooked and rejected on ground of not  fulfilling the requirements in the claim 
procedure such as non -filling of the claim forms properly, non -furnishing of releva nt 
documents etc.  Large scale rejections at the Gram Sabha level only where the Gram 
Sabha takes a decision in an improper way without further hearing of the case at next 
levels of Committees is totally against the spirit of the Act.. The Committee, there fore, 
recommended the Ministry to instruct the States to review the rejected cases on their 
merit so that any genuine claimant was not debarred from recognition of his rights.  The 
Committee desire d that a sample survey of the rejected claims should also b e 
undertaken at once to ascertain the specific causes for rejections at such a large scale 

9 
 
which would enable the Ministry to streamline the procedure and make it transparent as 
far as possible.   
 
1.6 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
"As earlier intimated to the Standing Committee, the Ministry ha ve written to the 
State Governments, vide Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 15 th July 2010, to initiate 
action, on a statistically acceptable sampling basis, at the level of Gram Sabha  
and Sub -Divisional Level Committees for categorizing all rejections, with their 
numbers, in different categories, like (a) non -availability of written records; (b) 
non-availability of other criteria specified in Rule 13; (c) non -possession of forest 
land; (d) non-occupation of the sate relevant to the Act; (e) doubtful tribal status 
etc. and to include this information in the monthly progress report being sent to 
this Ministry. The Ministry ha ve conveyed the apprehensions of the Standing 
Committee about th e large number of rejections and requested the State 
Governments to expedite the action, as suggested in the Secretary (TA)‟s letter 
dated 15th July 2010, to ascertain the specific causes for rejections at such a large 
scale and apprise this Ministry of th e out -come. As regards the review of the 
rejected cases, it may be stated that as per the Act and the Rules framed there -
under, the claims filed are adjudicated at three levels, namely, the Gram Sabha, 
Sub-Divisional Level Committee and finally by the Dist rict Level Committee. The 
decision of the District Level Committee on the record of the forest rights is final 
and binding. There are provisions for filing petitions by an aggrieved party before 
the SDLC & DLC.  The Act does not contain any provision for r eview of the claims 
rejected by the District Level Committee".          
 
1.7   Keeping in view large scale rejection of claims received, the Committee 
had expressed their concern that genuine claims of genuine beneficiaries might 
have been overlooked and recommended that the Ministry should instruct the 
States to review the rejected cases on their merit and also undertake an exercise 
of sample survey of the rejected claims.  The Committee have been informed that 
the Ministry have written to State Governments on 15.7.2010 to initiate action on a 
statistically acceptable sampling basis at the level of Gram Sabha and Sub -
Divisional Level Committees for categorizing all rejections their numbers such as 
non-availability of land record, non -possession of forest land and doubtful tribal 
status etc. and to include the information in their mont hly progress Report.  
However, the Committee are dismayed to see that the Ministry in their action taken 

10 
 
reply, have not mentioned anything about the outcome of the feedback from the 
States and what course of action have been taken by the Ministry to tackl e the 
issue of large scale rejections. The Committee feel that if the Ministry takes 
suitable remedial action on the basis of the feedback received from States, large 
scale rejections can be avoided, the process of distribution of titles can be 
streamlined and improvement can be made in many States where the progress of 
distribution of title deeds has been slow.  Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry, over and above impressing upon the States to send the monthly 
report on a regular basis by i ncluding the information on specific causes for 
rejection, should also take necessary action for improvement in the procedure 
with more coordination between the Revenue, Tribal and Forest Departments on 
the basis of the feedback received so that there is t ransparency and pick up in the 
title distribution process.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken on 
the feedback from the States within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 1.46) 
 
1.8 The Committee were pained to note that though the Act was notified in the year 
2007 and three years ha d since elapsed the implementation of the Act was still far from 
satisfactory.  Hon‟ble President of India had emphasized the need to ensure the 
distribution of all tit le deeds to all eligible claimants by end of December, 2009 and 
though nearly a year has passed since the above direction of the Hon‟ble President, the 
process of distribution of titles was not completed even 50 percent.  The Ministry‟s plea 
that the Act d oes not prescribe any time limit for recognition and vesting of forest rights 
and hence a target date for completion of distribution of title deeds cannot be fixed was 
not acceptable to the Committee since in the opinion of the Committee the success of 

11 
 
implementation of the Act is absolutely dependent on working within a time schedule.  
Also, the Committee were of the opinion that when the Act had come into force, at the 
initial stage the Ministry did not have any idea as to how many claims would actually b e 
filed and title deeds to be distributed.  However, having completed three years in the 
implementation process, the Ministry now had a fair idea about the magnitude of number 
of claims which ha d to be processed and cleared. Therefore, the Committee 
recommended the Ministry to fix achievable targets with timeline and chalk out clear -cut 
and definite strategy for completion of different stages of implementation such as 
constitution of committees, processing of claims, declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, 
planning for developmental initiatives etc. and put forth the same before the States to 
achieve. In this effort, the Ministry in -stead of simply maintaining the data on States‟ 
progress on paper, the progress on the ground/field should also be reviewed  and 
corrective steps be taken to remove the deficiencies in the States. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps taken in this direction within three months of presentation of the 
Report.  
1.9 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
"The Ministry has been emphasizing on the State/UT Governments from time to 
time for speedy and time -bound implementation of the provisions of the Act and 
dovetailing all development and welfare programmes for bringing about socio -
economic development  and livelihood security of all the beneficiaries under the 
Act. Though the Act does not prescribe any time limit for recognition and vesting 
of forest rights, the Hon‟ble Minister of Tribal Affairs had addressed the State 
Chief Ministers on 31 st August 20 10 and again on 10 th November 2010 for 
ensuring disposal of all the pending claims expeditiously and distribution of title 
deeds to the eligible claimants.  States have again been directed to fix achievable 
targets with timeline and chalk out a clear cut a nd definite strategy for completion 
of different stages of implementation, such as, constitution of committees, 
processing of claims, declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, planning for 
developmental initiatives etc. They have also been advised to rev iew the progress 
on the ground/field and take corrective steps to remove the deficiencies. While 
reviewing the progress during their visit to the States the officers also discuss and 
address the related issues". 
1.10 Having observed the extreme slow progre ss in recognition of titles even 
after Hon'ble President's direction emphasizing that the process should be 

12 
 
completed by end of December, 2009, the Committee had recommended the 
Ministry to work within a time schedule, fix achievable targets with timelines, chalk 
out clear cut and definite strategy and put the same before the States for 
completion of different stages of implementation of the Act such as constitution of 
Committees, processing of claims, planning for developmental initiatives etc.  The 
Committee had asked the Ministry to apprise them of the progress made by the 
States/UTs after fixation of such deadlines. The Committee are, however, 
distressed to note that apart from merely directing the States/UTs to fix achievable 
targets with timeline for c ompletion of different stages of implementation the 
Ministry have not taken any positive steps on their own to improve the situation.  
The Committee feel that unless the Ministry/Central Government chalks out a 
strategy with achievable targets and timeline s and assists the States to work 
towards achieving these with fixed time lines, there will be no progress on the 
ground in states/UTs where the title distribution has been nil or insignificant.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to fix achiev able deadlines for 
States/UTs for completion of different stages of title recognition process, direct 
and assist them to achieve those targets for completion of title distribution 
process within a fixed time frame.  Steps taken in this direction may be apprised to 
the Committee within three months of presentation of the Report. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 1.81) 
 
1.11 On the declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, National Parks and Sanctuaries 
under Section 2 (b) of the Act, the Committee obser ved that as on date not a single 
Critical Wild Life Habitat has been declared.  On this issue while the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs had tried to put the onus on the Ministry of Environment and Forests by saying 
that it was they who ha d to take a decision on the matter, the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests had tried to justify the delay by saying that the scientific/expert Committees 

13 
 
required for the purpose ha d not yet been constituted in all the States and the whole 
thing was a time  consuming process.  While expressing their dissatisfaction on the 
inordinate delay in declaring the protected area or Critical Wild Life Habitats, the 
Committee were of the view that in the absence of clear demarcation of areas protected 
for wild life hab itats, undue advantage/leverage was given to the Forest Department for 
forceful eviction and harassment of the tribes in the name of protected areas/Critical Wild 
Life Habitats.  Since the Act clearly provide d that no eviction and re -location of villagers 
from protected areas should be allowed to take place till the completion of the process of 
Forest Rights Committees formation, receipt and verification of claims and recognition of 
rights, the Committee recommended the Ministry to act swiftly in the matter , put a time 
frame for the States and direct the States to identify and list out the protected areas 
within that time frame.  The Ministry should also co -ordinate with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for an early decision on the declaration of Crit ical Wild Life 
Habitats preferably within a period of six months.  
1.12 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
"The Ministry has conveyed the observations/recommendations of the Standing 
Committee to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 2 nd February, 2011 which 
is primarily responsible for determination and notification of critical wildlife habitats 
in the National Parks and Sanctuaries under Section 2(b) of the Act, for taking 
action on priority basis. The Ministry has also co mmunicated the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee to the State/UT Governments, 
inviting their attention to the clarification given by the Ministry  that the rights of the 
forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers occupyi ng 
forest land in the National Parks and Sanctuaries have to be recognized first 
under the Act before undertaking any exercise for resettlement and that no 
eviction and resettlement is permissible till all the formalities are completed. Their 
attention has  also been invited to the instructions issued by the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests, vide their letter dated 21 st June 2010, addressed to the 
Principal Chief Conservators of Forests, Department of Forests of all States/UTs, 
to the effect that before tak ing any decision on displacement of Scheduled Tribes 
from the National Parks and Sanctuaries, the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
should be duly complied with. The State Gove rnments have been requested to 
ensure that the provisions of the Act are followed in letter and spirit in this regard 
and the critical wildlife habitats are determined and notified at the earliest".  
 

14 
 
1.13 The Committee are dismayed to note that in spite of their insistence on early 
declaration of critical wildlife habitats in National Parks and sanctuaries under 
provision of Section 2(b) of the Act, there has been no progress with regard to 
declaration of these protected areas.  While the Ministry of Triba l Affairs have tried 
to fix the responsibility for  determination and notification of critical wildlife 
habitats in National Parks and sanctuaries on the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest, the Committee feel that since the declaration of protected areas i s in the 
interest of the tribals, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should come forward and take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Environment and Forests  for early declaration of 
wild life habitats so that there is no displacement of Scheduled Tribes from forest 
areas endangering their lives and habitat.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and advise the Ministry to constantly co -ordinate with 
Ministry of Environment and Forests on the issue and impress upon them the 
urgency of  the matter so that protected areas are declared and notified at the 
earliest.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs should also keep a vigil over harassment of 
innocent tribes in the name of protected zone and intervene wherever necessary 
so that tribal people are not displaced and harassed unnecessarily.   Stringent 
action should be initiated on officials who harass the tribal population in these 
zones.    
Recommendation (Sl. No 18, Para No. 1.83) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that Minor Forest Produce is central to the existence of 
tribal communities and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 is an important milestone which recognizes the 
ownership rights of these pe ople of Minor Forest Produce for the purpose of access, 
processing and trade.  After the enactment of the Act, the Right of Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers to procure and process Minor Forest produce has now 

15 
 
become an indispensable p art of the Act and accordingly the Ministry should have 
redoubled their efforts in ensuring the protection of this primary right of the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers. The Committee were, however, distressed 
to note that in addition  to the existing efforts which are grossly inadequate, the Ministry 
had hardly taken any additional initiatives/steps in the area of Minor Forest Produce in 
the aftermath of the enactment of the Act. The Committee were of the view that the 
existing potenti al of Minor Forest Produce needs to be exploited economically and 
scientifically so that they continue to remain as a sustainable and renewable source of 
income/livelihood for the tribal families; more so after the enactment of the Act, the 
Ministry have become morally obligated and duty bound to ensure that this is done more 
effectively so that benefits accrue to the needy tribals. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Ministry should pursue with the States to prepare specific action plans 
under the ab ove Act for harnessing the existing potential in their respective States in a 
scientific manner, providing technical assistance for value addition to Minor Forest 
Produce and undertaking procurement activities with improved and up -to-date methods.  
The Com mittee further desire d that the Ministry should take concrete steps in the 
direction of creating facilities in the form of Cooperative Societies in States where 
maximum number of title deeds have been distributed so that the tribal people in these 
States g et assistance/support relating to procurement and marketing of their Minor 
Forest Produce for which they have been given rights under the Act. 
 
1.15 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
"The Ministry agrees with the observations  of the Standing Committee that the 
Minor Forest Produce (MFP) is central to the existence of the tribal communities 
and the existing potential of MFP needs to be exploited economically so that they 
continue to remain as a sustainable and renewable source of income/livelihood for 
the tribal families. The Ministry has, therefore, been emphasizing on the State/UT 
Governments, from time to time, the need for taking steps for inviting more 
community rights claims and vesting more title deeds on such claims.  Th e 
Ministry has brought the observations of the Standing Committee to the notice of 

16 
 
the State/UT Governments on 8 th February, 2011 and they have been advised to 
prepare specific action plans for (i) harnessing the existing potential of MFP in 
their respective States in a scientific manner, (ii) providing technical assistance for 
value addition to Minor Forest Produce, and (iii) undertaking procurement 
activities with improved and up -to-date methods so that the benefits accrue to the 
needy tribals. The States  where maximum number of title deeds has been 
distributed have been requested to undertake concrete steps for creating facilities 
in the form of Cooperative Societies so that the title holders get 
assistance/support relating to procurement and marketing of  their Minor Forest 
Produce". 
 
1.16 On the ownership rights of the tribal people with regard to minor forest 
produce, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to work with States and 
prepare specific action plans for harnessing the potentials of minor forest 
produce.  The Committee are, howe ver, disturbed to note that the Ministry have 
not taken any concrete action in this regard.  The Committee feel that merely 
advising the States to prepare action plans for harnessing the potentials of minor 
forest produce, its scientific procurement and ma rketing without giving them 
proper direction and ways and means to work on the above would not suffice as 
States on their own would not be motivated to do anything in the field/area of 
minor forest produce unless there are clear instructions and directions  in this 
regard from the Centre.  The procurement and harnessing of Minor Forests 
Produce (MFPs) is an important right recognized under the Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forests Rights) Act, 2006 and 
several States/ UTs have dense forests with unique MFPs which needs 
Governmental intervention as far as scientific procurement and their harnessing is 
concerned.   The Committee also recommend that the States should be guided to 
form co-operative societies for procuring a nd marketing of Minor Forest Produce 
(MFP) in the lines of those already existing in some States like Andhra Pradesh 
etc.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
recommend that the Ministry in coordination with the States shoul d prepare 

17 
 
specific action plans keeping in mind the State specific conditions for better 
harnessing, procurement and marketing of minor forest produce and implement 
these so as to benefit the tribals whose rights have been recognized under the Act.     

18 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.9) 
 
2.1 The Committee are  happy to note that after a long time an all encompassing Act 
i.e. the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006 has been enacted to give recognition to the rights of the Scheduled 
Tribes and other Trad itional Forest Dwellers whose rights could not be recognized for 
generations.  With the enactment of the Act, the long felt needs and aspirations of these 
groups of people have been fulfilled.  The Committee are given to understand that the 
Act, while maki ng conservation of forests more effective and transparent, aims at 
providing tenurial security and legislative protection to the rights of the Scheduled Tribes 
and other Traditional Forest Dwellers. The Act with its multiple dimensions also aims at 
addressing several issues affecting these people.  The Committee strongly feel that the 
Act, if implemented in letter and spirit, will go a long way in redressing the historical 
injustice meted out to the Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs being the nodal 
Ministry should accord topmost priority to implementation of the Act in the most effective 
manner. Concerted efforts, in close coordination with State Governments, should  be 
made to implement every aspect/provision of the Act so as to achieve the objectives 
enshrined in Act and bring relief to the Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers.  The momentum gathered around the Act should not be allowed to wither, the 
pace of its implementation expedited and no laxity in implementation of the Act either on 
the part of Central Government or the State Governments should be allowed.  For this 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to take proactive steps by coordinating the 

19 
 
activities of other Departments such as Environment and Forests, Revenue 
Departments, Panchayati Raj and Local Bodies apart from involving various 
Governmental Organizations and NGOs as well as People‟s Representatives. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Ministry is according topmost priority to the implementation of every 
aspect/provision of the Act so as to achieve the objectives enshrined in Act. With this 
very objective in mind, the Ministry has issued a number of instructions to the State/UT 
Governments, during the past one year, covering the aspects relating to (i) categorization 
of all rejections to find out the reasons for rejection of claims at the Gram Sabha and 
Sub-Divisional level; (ii) launching a special campaign for generating wide -spread 
awareness about community rights if necessary by retraining field level functionaries 
engaged in processing of such applications and instructing the Gram Sabhas to facilitate 
the collection of more community right claims; (iii) providing the Gram Sabhas with all 
necessary assistance by the authorities in the State in the discharge of it functions; (iv) 
providing the Gram Sabhas and the Sub -Divisional Level Committees with the 
assistance of facilitators for  their capacity building; (v) facilitating  collection  and 
processing of the claims of members of the PTGs or pre -agricultural communities; (vi) 
convening of the meetings of the State Level Monitoring Committees (SLMCs) regularly 
to take stock of field level problems; (vii) communication of the resolutions of  the Gram 
Sabha/ decision of the SDLC to the claimant within 60 days from the date of 
resolution/decision and also the rejection of the claim by the DLC to enable him to seek 
redressal as provided in the Act; (viii) taking action for formal recording of th e rights 
following the settlement rules prescribed to each State; (ix) just processing, and not re -
examining, the recommendations of the Gram Sabha for settling rights over minor forest 
produce (both individual and community), for quick acceptance; (x) rec ognition of the 

20 
 
rights in the National Parks and Sanctuaries without waiting for determination and 
notification of „critical wildlife habitats‟ in these areas under Section 2(b) of the Act and 
ensuring that the provisions of the Act are duly complied with before any decision on 
displacement of Scheduled Tribes form the National Parks and Sanctuaries is taken; (xi) 
formulation of a strategy for implementation of the Act in a time bound manner and 
ensuring that title deeds are distributed to all the eligible claimants without delay; (xii) 
dovetailing of the development and welfare programmes for the uplift of potential title 
holders; (xiii) ensuring that the prescribed guidelines and procedure, including the time 
lines, are strictly followed while processing t he cases for diversion of forest land under 
Section 3(2) of the Act, and so on. The Ministry is thus making concerted efforts and 
taking all necessary steps to ensure that the implementation of the Act is expedited. The 
Ministry has also been involving the  other Departments, such as Environment & Forests, 
Panchayati Raj etc. in the implementation process, wherever considered necessary.    
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 1.43) 
 
2.3 The Committee observe that though „individual rights‟ under the Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 have 
been recognized in large number, the recognition of „community rights‟  have been 
minimal under the Act. The Committee also observes that not even a single claim under 
community rights has been received in many States such as Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. In other States where the claims have been re ceived 
under the category of „community rights‟ these are not in sufficient number. The 
Committee are of the view that the Act is not solely about individual land claims and 
many of the rights under the Act such as right to Minor Forest Produce, grazing an d 
rights of nomadic people are to be exercised as a community.   Since the most powerful 
sections/clauses of the Act concern community‟s right to manage, protect and conserve 

21 
 
forests – the first step towards a genuinely democratic system of forest management, the 
Central and State Governments should make every effort to recognize the „community 
rights‟.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry not to reject the community 
claims on insufficient grounds, expeditiously process all the pending community  claims, 
and take necessary steps for conferment of more number pattas to communities who 
have filed the claims. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Recognizing the importance of „community rights‟, the Ministry had already issued 
instructions to the State Governm ents vide Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 20 th July 2010, 
to launch a special campaign for generating wide -spread awareness about the 
community rights, if necessary, by re -training field level functionaries engaged in the 
processing of such applications. The  State Governments were also advised to enlist the 
support of local resource institutions under the State Government for this purpose.   The 
observations of the Standing Committee have again been conveyed to the State/UT 
Governments on 8 th February, 2011 w ith the request to take necessary steps under the 
Act and the Rules for inviting more claims for community rights and their expeditious 
disposal.  They have also been requested to take steps for expeditious processing and 
disposal of all the pending community claims.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011] 
   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5,  Para No. 1.44) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that there is a „75 years/three generations‟ stipulation kept in 
the Forest Rights Act as an eligibility criteria for the Other Traditional Forest Dwellers.  
However, many tribals who are living in and are dependent on the forest land for their 
livelihood are being deprived of applying for title deeds/ pattas due to the above criteria 
since it is extremely difficult on their part to produce documentary evidence/proof of their 
existence for three consecutive generations.  The Committee also observe that a lo t of 

22 
 
governmental institutions will have to be involved for ascertaining the veracity of „three 
generations‟ of existence of these people.  As such, there are potential beneficiaries who 
are left out of the recognition of the rights process.  Therefore, in  order to do justice to 
these people and provide the rights due to them the Committee recommend the Ministry 
to co-ordinate with all concerned agencies, take adequate steps in facilitating their claims 
and extend all kinds of assistance needed so that righ ts of these people are recognized 
in a smooth and  hassle-free manner bringing minimum trouble to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 As per the Forest Rights Act, 2006, the eligibility criteria of at -least three 
generations (75 years) residence prior to th e 13 th day of December 2005 and 
dependence of the forest or forests land for bonafide livelihood needs, prescribed in 
Section 2 (o) of the Act, is required to be fulfilled by „other traditional forest dwellers‟ only. 
This criterion is not applicable to the  forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and they are not 
required to produce evidence/proof of their residence for three generations prior to the 
13th day of December 2005 for their eligibility for recognition and vesting of forest rights 
under the Act. The Mini stry has given instructions to the State Governments, vide 
Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 20 th July 2010, to provide the Gram Sabhas with the 
assistance of facilitators in order to (a) overcome the difficulties experienced by the 
claimants in accessing the requisite evidence in support of their claims; (b) avoid the 
delays in preparation of a map delineating the area of each recommended claim; (c) 
facilitate claims, especially those of PTGs; (d) enhance capacity building of the Forest 
Rights Committees const ituted by the Gram Sabha for assisting the Gram Sabhas etc. 
The States have also been advised that, as in the case of Gram Sabha, the Sub -
Divisional Level Committees may also be provided with the assistance of facilitators for 
due discharge of functions assigned to them.         

23 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]  
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 1.74) 
 
2.7 The Committee observe  that as on date only 13 States have established the 
prescribed structure and procedure for implementation of the Act. Similarly the 
formation/constitution of Sub Divisional Level Committees (SDLCs), District Level 
Committees (DLCs) and State Level Monitor ing Committees (SLMCs) are not complete 
in all the States.  Many States also don‟t have the Forest Rights Committees resulting in 
non-implementation of the Act in these States.  Since the constitution of requisite 
Committees is the first step towards imple mentation of the Act and without these, the 
implementation process of the Act cannot inch/move forward, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to impress upon all the States to constitute the Sub Divisional Level 
Committees (SDLCs), District Level Committees  (DLCs) and State Level Monitoring 
Committees (SLMCs) as well as the Forest Rights Committees wherever these have not 
yet been constituted.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry to prepare a 
comprehensive plan for skill capacity development of the Gra m Sabhas, Forest Rights 
Committees and the SDLCs, DLCs and SLMCs within a time frame so that these function 
most efficiently.  Skill development and capacity building of the implementation agencies 
connected with implementation of the Act should be enhance d on a repeated and 
continuous basis.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 As per the information collected by the Ministry from the States/UTs, till 31 st 
January 2011, only the States of Goa, Manipur and Meghalaya have not yet constituted 
the prescribed Committees under the Act, namely, the Sub -Divisional Level Committees 
(SDLCs), District Level Committees (DLCs) and State Level Monitoring Committees 
(SLMCs). The UT Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands has constituted the 
SDLCs and DLCs but is yet to consti tute the SLMC. The Ministry has conveyed the 

24 
 
observations of the Standing Committee to the State Governments of Goa, Manipur and 
Meghalaya and the UT Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands to take steps for 
constituting the prescribed Committees immed iately and initiate the process of the 
implementation of the Act thereafter.  
As regards skill capacity development of the Gram Sabhas, Forest Rights 
Committees, SDLCs , DLCs and SLMCs, as already indicated in the reply to 
recommendation at SL. NO. 5 Para 1 .44 above, the Ministry has already given 
instructions to the State Governments, vide Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 20 th July 2010, 
to provide the Gram Sabhas with the assistance of facilitators in order to (a) overcome 
the difficulties experienced by the claimants in accessing the requisite evidence in 
support of their claims; (b) avoid the delays in preparation of a map delineating the area 
of each recommended claim; (c) facilitate claims, especially those of PTGs; (d) enhance 
capacity building of the For est Rights Committees constituted by the Gram Sabha for 
assisting the Gram Sabhas etc. The States have also been advised that, as in the case 
of Gram Sabha, the Sub -Divisional Level Committees may also be provided with the 
assistance of facilitators for du e discharge of functions assigned to them. The Ministry 
has also conveyed the observations of the Standing Committee to the State/UT 
Governments and they have been advised to prepare a comprehensive plan, on priority 
basis, for skill capacity development of the Gram Sabhas, Forest Rights Committees and 
the SDLCs, DLCs and SLMCs within a time frame. They have also been requested to 
repeat and continue this process periodically.   
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 1.75) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the States of Manipur, Sikkim and Daman & Diu have 
not appointed any nodal officers to look into the issues relating to implementation of the 

25 
 
Act.  As per the Ministry‟s submission because of the peculiar situation of holding of 
ownership of forest land and ancestral land in the State of Manipur and Scheduled Tribes 
already holding revenue land in their own name in the State of Sikkim, the Act does not 
seem to b e of much importance and relevance in these two States.  However, the 
Committee are of the view that in the present circumstances though the implementation 
of the Act seems to be irrelevant and not much of importance in these States, the 
existence and pre-eminence of the tribal groups in all these States essentially require the 
appointment of nodal officers to look after the issues relating to their living in forest 
areas.  The nodal officers may be assigned the responsibility of mitigating and 
addressing i ssues concerning the settlement and livelihood needs of these people in 
future also in case these arise.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
direct the above State Governments/UT Administrations to appoint their respective nodal 
officer during the ongoing process of implementation of the Act only, so that there is an 
authority at place to address the present as well as future concerns/needs of the tribal 
people in the domain of the Act in these States/UTs. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The ob servations of the Standing Committee have been conveyed to the State 
Governments of Manipur and Sikkim on 8 th February, 2011 and they have been directed 
to appoint their respective nodal officers who may be assigned the responsibility of 
mitigating and addressing issues concerning the settlement and livelihood needs of tribal 
groups in these States in the domain of the Act in these States. As regards Daman & 
Diu, it may be stated that the UT Administration of Daman & Diu has since appointed a 
nodal officer for implementation of the Act in the Union Territory. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 1.76) 
 

26 
 
2.11 The Committee observe that while implementing the Act many States are facing 
problems viz relating to land records, un-surveyed forest land, non-availability of detailed 
maps/records, inadequate manpower & funds and forest areas being affected by left 
wing extremism, etc.  The Committee are also given to understand that for capacity 
building of Gram Sabhas and Forest Rights Committees, the State Governments as per 
the provision under Rule 4 & 6 of the Act, may provide the assistance of facilitators, the 
expenses of which can be made out of Grants under Article 275 (1).  However, the 
Committee observe that while some States such as Andhra Pradesh, Orissa have made 
good use of the above provision to avail the facilities of facilitator, many states are still 
ignorant of the provisions and hence lagging behind due to the above problems in their 
States. States are also not able to use the advanced technologies such as GPS for 
survey of the forest areas because of resource/funds constraints due to which the 
progress of implementation of the Act in many States has been tardy and not so 
phenomenal. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Government to urgently identify 
the States where the implementation has been affected due to above 
problems/constraints and persuade these States to come forward and take the benefits 
of funds under Article 275 (1) for implementing the Act in their States. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The Ministry, vide Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 20th July 2010, has already 
requested the State Gover nments for providing all necessary assistance to Gram 
Sabhas by the authorities in the States and for providing the Gram Sabhas with the 
assistance of facilitators in order to avoid the delays in preparation of a map delineating 
the area of each recommende d claim. The State Governments have also been informed 
that the Ministry is providing funds to the State Governments under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution to the extent of 10% of their total allocation for activities involving 

27 
 
implementation of the Act. The States which are lagging behind in implementation of the 
Act due to problems relating to land records, un -surveyed forest land, non -availability of 
detailed maps/records, inadequate manpower & funds and forest areas being affected by 
left wing extremi sm, etc.  have been advised  to take the benefit of funds under Article 
275(1) for implementing the Act in their States.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 1.77) 
 
2.13 On the mis-utilization of the Act where vested interests/non -tribal people claiming 
and getting the rights and the harassment of the tribal people, though the Ministry have 
maintained that no such case has come to their notice, the Committee d uring their on -
the-spot study visit to some States found many beneficiaries complaining about 
harassment by the forest officials. The Committee are also aware of deliberate attempts 
being made in many States by the vested interests to influence the decisio ns at Gram 
Sabhas and Committees constituted under the Act and cases of non -tribal people 
swallowing all the benefits in the name of tribals.  Considering the fact that the main 
target group of the Act are the innocent native tribes who are naïve and prone  to be 
easily harassed, the Committee strongly feel that such an Act needs to be strictly 
protected from misuse by vested interests and Mafias and the influence of Forest 
Department.  Therefore, to avoid any kind of misuse of the Act, efforts should be made to 
deal with the vested interests with tough hands and keep them out of  the recognition 
process. Counter verification have to be made by field officials as far as possible to 
ensure that title deeds/ pattas are conferred only to genuine beneficiaries. St rict punitive 
action may also be taken against the people/ forest officials who are found to be flouting 
with the provisions of the Act and also harassing the innocent tribals.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 

28 
 
2.14 The Ministry has brought the above observations of the Standing Committee to 
the notice of all the State/UT Governments on 8 th February, 2011 and they have been 
advised to take all necessary steps to ensure that (a) there is no mis -utilization of the Act 
by the vested interests/ineligible p ersons; (b) there is no harassment of tribal people and 
the ineligible people claiming and getting the rights in the name of tribal people; (c) the 
vested interests are dealt with tough hands and kept out of  the recognition process; (d) 
the title deeds/ pattas are conferred only to genuine beneficiaries, and (e) strict punitive 
action is taken against the people/ officials who are found to be flouting with the 
provisions of the Act and harassing the tribal people. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 1.79) 
 
2.15 The Committee observe that the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 envisages convergence of welf are and 
developmental initiatives where all the development and welfare programmes of other 
Ministries have to be coordinated and synergized  so as to achieve planned development 
for tribal areas.  However, the Committee are constrained to note that even a fter Prime 
Minister‟s direction emphasizing the need for such a synergy/coordinated approach and 
the establishment of  the Task Force by the Ministry of Rural Development for 
convergence of programmes concerning Education, Health and Agriculture sectors wi th 
MGNREGA, coordination among the Ministries/Departments pertaining to tribal 
development programmes is hardly forthcoming/happening as Ministries/Departments 
continue to work in total isolation to each other resulting in detachment of tribal pockets 
from developmental mainstream.  The Committee are of the strong view that the present 
Act has been brought in with the specific purpose of elevating the livelihood of the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers who have been neglected and 
underprivileged for years. In order to do justice to this provision and achieve this crucial 

29 
 
objective enshrined in the Act, the Committee recommend the ministry to make special 
provisions/steps for developmental initiatives in the tribal areas in the fields of education, 
health, basic infrastructure and also keep a close watch on the working of other 
Ministries by formulating an action plan for achieving convergence of welfare and 
developmental initiatives. For this, the Committee also direct the Ministry of Tri bal Affairs 
to immediately put in place a national level coordinating Committee with top officials of all 
concerned Ministries as members who should meet at regular intervals to review the 
progress/status of various schemes on areas outlined above and iden tify critical gaps in 
developmental initiatives for taking suitable remedial actions. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 seeks to recognise and vest the forest ri ghts and occupation in 
forest land in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who 
have been residing in such forests for generations but whose rights could not be 
recorded. In addition to various social sectors and infrastruc ture development 
programmes/schemes being implemented by various sectoral Ministries, which also 
cover/benefit tribal areas/people, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs implements various Central 
Sector/Centrally Sponsored schemes/programmes for the socio -economic development 
of the tribal people in the country. The schemes of the Ministry relate to income and 
employment generation infrastructure development, education development and 
improvement in literacy of tribal people, besides the promotions of voluntary e ffort in the 
area of tribal welfare. These schemes are implemented through the State/UT 
Governments which are required to ensure that the benefits of the schemes reach the 
target groups/areas. 
 As regards the suggestion of the Standing Committee for puttin g in place a 
National Level Coordination Committee with top officials of all concerned Ministries as 

30 
 
members for reviewing the progress/status of various schemes having a bearing on 
development of tribal areas, it may be mentioned that the Ministry has rec ently, on 3 rd 
September 2010, constituted a National Council for Tribal Welfare, headed by the 
Hon‟ble  Prime  Minister  and  comprising  the  Ministers  of  Tribal  Affairs,  Finance, 
Agriculture, Home Affairs, Health and Family Welfare, Environment & For ests, Human 
Resources Development, Women and Child Development, Culture, Mines, Coal, Power, 
Deputy Chairperson, Planning Commission and Chief Ministers of Fifth and Sixth 
Schedule States as members. The mandate of the National Council is to (i) provide 
broad policy guidelines to bring about improvement in the lives of the Scheduled Tribes 
community in the country, (ii) review the implementation of the Forest Rights Act, (iii) 
review the implementation of Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule of the constitutio n, (iv) 
monitor the implementation of Tribal Sub -Plan, and (v) monitor programmes aimed at 
protecting Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups. In addition to the above Council, the 
Ministry has constituted a Standing Committee for Tribal Welfare also, headed  by the 
Hon‟ble Minister of Tribal Affairs and having the Ministers of Tribal Affairs of the Fifth and 
Sixth Schedule States, Finance Secretary, Home Secretary, Secretaries of Ministries of, 
Environment & Forests, Agriculture, Human Resource Development, Rural Development, 
Health & Family Welfare, Women and Child Development, Culture, Member -Secretary, 
Planning Commission etc. as its members, to deliberate on the issues mentioned above 
and recommend the agenda for discussion at the National Council for Trib al Welfare. 
The Standing Committee for Tribal Welfare held its first meeting on 12 th January 2011 
and, among other agenda items, discussed the issue relating to „Implementation of 
Forest Rights Act, 2006‟ in the various states. 
 The Ministry is quite alive  to the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee 
and is taking all necessary steps to ensure that there is all -round socio -economic 
development of the tribal areas.  

31 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]  
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 1.80) 
 
2.17 The Committee observe that under Section 3(2) of the Act relating to provision of 
the diversion of the forest land for developmental activities/facilities such as schools, 
dispensaries, hospit als, roads, community centres and minor irrigation canals etc.  
though the procedure has been issued on 18.5.2009, neither the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
nor the Ministry of Environment and Forests have received any information from the 
State Governments a nd there are no details of such diversion available with both these 
Ministries.  The Committee, however, during their study visit to the States of Karnataka 
and Andhra Pradesh in June, 2010 interacted with many beneficiaries who complained 
the Committee ab out the authorities not allowing/permitting the diversion of land for 
these activities.  The Committee further observed that the key functionaries responsible 
for implementation of the Act were not even aware of the provision/procedure for 
diversion of lan d due to lack of information passed on to them and the inadequate 
publicity of the Act.  Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that the functionaries 
responsible for implementation need to be informed and made aware of the provision 
and advised to strictl y follow the procedure laid down for diversion of land so that the 
tribal people who face re -location elsewhere due to such diversion are adequately 
compensated and rehabilitated and also their rights in the new forest areas respected 
and recognized under the Act. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Ministry has conveyed the observations of the Standing Committee to all the 
State/UT Governments on 8 th February, 2011.  The State/UT Governments have, 
therefore, being advised to take all necessary steps to ensure  that the functionaries 
responsible for implementation are informed and made aware of the above provisions of 
Section 3(2) of the Act relating to diversion of forest land for developmental 

32 
 
activities/facilities such as schools, dispensaries, hospitals, roa ds, community centres 
and minor irrigation canals etc. and  that they should strictly follow the procedure laid 
down on 18th May 2009 for this purpose. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 1.97) 
 
2.19 On the issue of monitoring of the Act, though the Ministry have maintained that 
monitoring of the implementation of the Act is being ensured by review meetings with the 
States and visit to States/UTs by high level of ficials, the Committee observe that these 
are not quite sufficient as is evident from the slow progress of the Act in many States.  
Therefore, the Committee, apart from advising the Ministry to insist all the States to 
strictly send their status of impleme ntation every fortnight, should make the field visit of 
its officials to the low performing pockets more frequent with visible outcomes.  The 
Ministry should think in the line of placing a standing monitoring cell for thorough and 
meticulous monitoring of the implementation of the Act at every stage which may review 
and monitor the progress of implementation of the Act and advise follow up actions to the 
Ministry.  The Committee are also of the view that with the kind of staff the Ministry have 
at their disposal at present it is practically impossible to monitor the Act.  Therefore, the 
Ministry should evolve a mechanism wherein they take the help of Officers from the State 
Governments to implement the Act.  Apart from ensuring the translation of the Act in all 
regional languages and making available to States all information on the Act including 
Circulars, Letters, Guidelines, Orders, Memoranda of instruction concerning the Act in 
the form of a compounded volume, more and more training programmes, workshops and 
awareness campaigns should be conducted at various levels by involving all the stake 
holders.  In this effort, besides ensuring participation of NGOs and involvement of social 
activists, the Ministry should direct the States to also involve the State Tribal Institutes. 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Standing Committee and 
would ensure frequent field visit of its officials to the States where the progress of 
implementation of the Act is slow. As regards placing a standing monitoring cell for 
thorough and meticulous monitoring of the implementation of the Act at every stage, it 
may be difficult to do so due to constraint of man -power in the Ministry. It is also not 
feasible to take the help of officers from the State Governments for implementation of the 
Act as the Ministry does not exercise any administrative control over State Government 
officers. The Ministry is, however, preparing a compendium of all information including 
Circulars, Letters, Guidelines, Orders, Memoranda of instructions concerning the A ct. 
This will be sent to State/UT Governments for taking necessary action of translating it 
into regional languages and circulating to all concerned with the implementation of the 
Act. The State/UT Governments would also be asked to conduct more and more t raining 
programmes, workshops and awareness campaigns at various levels by involving all the 
stake holders and also make use of the said compendium during such programmes. The 
State/UT Governments have also been requested to consider participation of NGOs and 
involvement of social activists and the State Tribal Institutes, in this effort. They have 
been informed that the expenses on above activities may be met out of allocated grants 
under Article 275(1) proviso of the Constitution of India.   
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 1.99) 
 
2.21 On the evaluation/impact assessment of the scheme for getting feedback on the 
implementation of the Act, the Ministry have in formed that they had requested the State 
Governments of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh to undertake studies on the Act. However, 
both the States are yet to initiate the study on the Act. In the meantime, only a short term 
study on the Act has been done in the S tate of Orissa which has revealed crucial 

34 
 
facts/findings about the Act. The Committee are of the view that both the States having a 
thick cover of forest with large density of population of Scheduled Tribes and other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers, the studie s, if conducted, would provide deep insight into 
issues relating to implementation of the Act which, in turn, would help the Ministry to fill 
critical gaps in the implementation process in these States as well as the rest of the 
country.  Therefore, the Co mmittee desire that these studies should be completed at the 
earliest so that inconsistencies and lacunae in the implementation process are corrected 
and the Ministry is able to carry out the task of implementation more vigorously. 
Assistance, if any requi red, in way of funds/resources, logistics and technical 
input/support etc. should also be extended to these two States for conducting the above 
studies.  Steps taken in this direction may be apprised to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of the Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 As desired by the Standing Committee, the Ministry has directed both the State 
Governments of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh on 8 th February, 2011 to complete the 
evaluation/impact assessment studies of the Act at the earliest.  The Ministry has 
advised the other State Governments also to initiate similar studies on the 
performance/impact of the implementation of the Act and the Rules in the field in their 
States. They had been informed that the expenses on these st udies may be met out of 
the grants under article 275(1) proviso of the Constitution of India. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 1.104) 
 
2.23 The Committee take  a strong objection to the displacement of the primitive tribal 
groups i.e. the Dongoria Kandhas and the Kutia Kandhas settled in the Niyamgiri Hlls in 
the State of Orissa and destruction of undisturbed forest land endangering and harming 

35 
 
their self sufficient forest livelihood due to the proposed Bauxite Mining Project.  The 
Committee are given to understand that the project has been recalled at an advanced 
stage after uproars and objections from several quarters and also non -clearance of the 
project by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) on grounds of violations of 
the Forest Rights Act, violations of Forest Conservation Act and violations of the 
Environment Protection Act (EPA). The Committee, while deprecating the inaction on the 
part of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in guarding the interests and rights of these aboriginal 
people due to which the project could move ahead to such an advanced stage, advise 
the Ministry to be watchful and keep a constant vigil in ensuring that ri ghts and interests 
of such people are always looked after, safeguarded and protected. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24 In connection with the proposal of the Government of Orissa for grant of forest 
clearance in Kalahandi and Rayagada districts in favour of O rissa Mining Corporation 
Ltd. (OMC) for Bauxite Mining in Lanjigarh Bauxite Mines, the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests had constituted a four member committee on 29.06.2010, composed of 
specialists, including Dr. N. C. Saxena, for looking into (i) sett lement of the rights for 
forest dwellers and the „Primitive Tribal Groups‟ under the FRA, 2006; and (ii) Impact on 
wildlife and biodiversity in the surrounding areas. The said committee had submitted its 
report to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 1 6.08.2010 wherein it found serious 
violations of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980,  Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 etc by the OMC. As a result, the prop osal of the State Government for forest 
clearance for the OMC and Sterlite bauxite mining project on the Niyamgiri Hills in 
Lanjigarh, Kalahandi and Rayagada districts of Orissa was rejected by the MoS (I/C) 
Environment & Forests, vide his order dated 24.0 8.2010,. The Ministry had accordingly 

36 
 
called for the comments of the Government of Orissa on the violations of the Forest 
Rights Act, 2006, pointed out by the four member committee and action the State 
Government proposed to take in the matter. 
 The Ministry has now received a letter dated 10.12.2010 from the Government of 
Orissa wherein the State Government, while not agreeing with the inferences drawn by 
the Saxena Committee, has stated that the implementation of the FRA, 2006 with 
respect to forest right s claims of tribals, PTGs and other forest dwelling communities of 
villages around the proposed bauxite mining area in forests of Kalahandi and Rayagada 
districts were carried out in accordance with due process laid down under Rule 11 of 
FRA Rules. Steps w ere also taken to provide full administrative and financial support 
required under law to the Gram Sabha in determining eligible forest right claims for 
individual & community rights and the result is evident from the large number of 
individual claims havi ng been settled in Kalahandi and Rayagada as elsewhere in the 
State. Further, the State Government has been attaching utmost importance to disposal 
of all pending claims, whether around the villages of project area, or outside, in 
accordance with the law. There are some existing claims which are being dealt as per 
due process of law. 
The Government of Orissa has also addressed another letter dated 23.12.2010 to 
Inspector General of Forests, Ministry of Environment & Forests, with a copy to this 
Ministry, conveying the views of the State Government on the decision of the Hon‟ble 
Minister (I/C), Ministry of Environment & Forests vide his order dated 24.08.2010, 
rejecting the Stage -II forest clearance of Lanjigarh Bauxite Mining Project of M/s Orissa 
Mining Corporation Ltd. in Niyamgiri hills of Rayagada and Kalahandi districts of Orissa. 
In the said letter, the State Government has furnished their comments on different 
aspects raised in the orders dated 24.08.2010 of Hon‟ble Minister, MoEF, including the 
views of the State Government on the purported violations of Forest Rights Act, 2006, 

37 
 
and requested the Ministry of Environment & Forests to reconsider the matter and 
communicate its decision, permitting Stage -II clearance for the above project at an early 
date. The Ministry has written to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 11.02.2011 to 
intimate the decision taken by the Ministry in the matter.  On 7 th March 2011, the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests has informed that the matter is still under considerati on.  No 
decision on the matter has been taken so far.  
Copies of the Government of Orissa‟s letters dated 10.12.2010 and 23.12.2010, 
referred to above, are enclosed at  Annexures I & II  for perusal of the Standing 
Committee.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 1.47) 
 
3.1 The Committee observe that as many as 14 cases challenging the vires of the Act 
are at present pending in different High Courts which has stalled the process of 
distribution of title deeds. The Committee find that filing of writ petitions in the States of 
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala etc. had 
a damaging effect on the progress of the Act in these States. The Committee view the 
non-implementation of the Act due to restrictive court orders is a deprivation of the r ights 
of Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers and there is an urgent need to 
dispose the court orders at the earliest.  Therefore, while endorsing the decision of the 
Ministry for filing a special leave petition in the Supreme Court to fi ght the cases at one 
place, the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry may also take up the matter of 
constituting special courts/tribunals for speedy disposal of the cases to bring relief to the 
STs and other Traditional Forest Dwellers in those States  where the court cases are 
pending. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 As earlier intimated to the Standing Committee, the Ministry has filed two transfer 
petitions on 05.04.2008 and 19.01.2009 for transferring the Writ Petitions filed in the High 
Court at Andhra  Pradesh, Chennai, Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court, Bombay, 
Karnataka and Orissa for combined hearing along with the Writ petition filed in the 
Supreme Court. The Ministry has also written to Central Agency Section, Ministry of Law 
& Justice for fil ing another Transfer Petition in the Supreme Court for transferring three 
new Writ Petitions filed before the Principal Bench of MP High Court at Jabalpur against 

39 
 
the Act for combined hearing along with the Writ Petition filed in the Supreme Court. The 
Ministry is taking all steps necessary for defending and early disposal of the Writ 
Petitions filed in different High Courts and in the Supreme Court challenging the vires of 
the Act. The Ministry does not consider it necessary to constitute special courts/tr ibunals 
for disposal of these cases, as suggested by the Standing Committee.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED 
UPON IN CHAPTER – I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.45) 
 
4.1 The Committee are constrained to note that out of a total number of 28,49,000  
claims received from 17 States as many as 12,67,928 claims have been rejected after 
initial verification and scrutiny. The Committee also observe that the Ministry do not have 
the information as to at which level i. e., Gram Sabha, Sub -Divisional level or  District 
level the rejections are more. The Ministry have maintained that many people have 
mistook the Act as a land distribution drive and have applied in a large number which is 
the main cause for rejection of these applications. On the rejection of gen uine claims 
under the Act though the Ministry have maintained that adequate safeguards are in - built 
in the procedure itself and there is little scope for rejection of genuine claims, the 
Committee are apprehensive that large number of rejections may have occurred due to 
procedural reasons where genuine claims of genuine beneficiaries might have been 
overlooked and rejected on ground of not  fulfilling the requirements in the claim 
procedure such as non -filling of the claim forms properly, non -furnishing of  relevant 
documents etc.  Large scale rejections at the Gram Sabha level only where the Gram 
Sabha takes a decision in an improper way without further hearing of the case at next 
levels of Committees is totally against the spirit of the Act.. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to instruct the States to review the rejected cases on their merit 
so that any genuine claimant is not debarred from recognition of his rights.  The 
Committee desire that a sample survey of the rejected claims should als o be undertaken 
at once to ascertain the specific causes for rejections at such a large scale which will 

41 
 
enable the Ministry to streamline the procedure and make it transparent as far as 
possible.   
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 As earlier intimated to the Standing Committee, the Ministry has written to the 
State Governments, vide Secretary (TA)‟s letter dated 15 th July 2010, to initiate action, 
on a statistically acceptable sampling basis, at the level of Gram Sabha and Sub -
Divisional Level Committees for c ategorizing all rejections, with their numbers, in 
different categories, like (a) non-availability of written records; (b) non-availability of other 
criteria specified in Rule 13; (c) non -possession of forest land; (d) non -occupation of the 
sate relevant to the Act; (e) doubtful tribal status etc. and to include this information in the 
monthly progress report being sent to this Ministry. The Ministry has conveyed the 
apprehensions of the Standing Committee about the large number of rejections and 
requested the State Governments to expedite the action, as suggested in the Secretary 
(TA)‟s letter dated 15th July 2010, to ascertain the specific causes for rejections at such a 
large scale and apprise this Ministry of the out -come. As regards the review of the 
rejected cases, it may be stated that as per the Act and the Rules framed there -under, 
the claims filed are adjudicated at three levels, namely, the Gram Sabha, Sub -Divisional 
Level Committee and finally by the District Level Committee. The decision of the D istrict 
Level Committee on the record of the forest rights is final and binding. There are 
provisions for filing petitions by an aggrieved party before the SDLC & DLC.  The Act 
does not contain any provision for review of the claims rejected by the Distric t Level 
Committee.       
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 1.46) 

42 
 
4.3 The Committee are  pained to note that though the Act was notified in the year 
2007 and three years have since elapsed the implementation of the Act is still far from 
satisfactory.  Hon‟ble President of India had emphasized the need to ensure the 
distribution of all title d eeds to all eligible claimants by end of December, 2009 and 
though nearly a year has passed since the above direction of the Hon‟ble President, the 
process of distribution of titles is not completed even 50 percent.  The Ministry‟s plea that 
the Act does n ot prescribe any time limit for recognition and vesting of forest rights and 
hence a target date for completion of distribution of title deeds cannot be fixed is not 
acceptable to the Committee since in the opinion of the Committee the success of 
implementation of the Act is absolutely dependent on working within a time schedule.  
Also, the Committee are of the opinion that when the Act had come into force, at the 
initial stage the Ministry did not have any idea as to how many claims would actually be 
filed and title deeds to be distributed.  However, having completed three years in the 
implementation process, the Ministry now have a fair idea about the magnitude of 
number of claims which have to be processed and cleared. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend t he Ministry to fix achievable targets with timeline and chalk out clear -cut 
and definite strategy for completion of different stages of implementation such as 
constitution of committees, processing of claims, declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, 
planning for developmental initiatives etc. and put forth the same before the States to 
achieve. In this effort, the Ministry in -stead of simply maintaining the data on States‟ 
progress on paper, the progress on the ground/field should also be reviewed and 
corrective steps be taken to remove the deficiencies in the States. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps taken in this direction within three months of presentation of the 
Report.  
Reply of the Government 
 

43 
 
4.4 The Ministry has been emphasizing on the S tate/UT Governments from time to 
time for speedy and time -bound implementation of the provisions of the Act and 
dovetailing all development and welfare programmes for bringing about socio -economic 
development and livelihood security of all the beneficiaries under the Act. Though the Act 
does not prescribe any time limit for recognition and vesting of forest rights, the Hon‟ble 
Minister of Tribal Affairs had addressed the State Chief Ministers on 31 st August 2010 
and again on 10 th November 2010 for ensuring disposal of all the pending claims 
expeditiously and distribution of title deeds to the eligible claimants.  States have again 
been directed to fix achievable targets with timeline and chalk out a clear cut and definite 
strategy for completion of different stages of implementation, such as, constitution of 
committees, processing of claims, declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, planning for 
developmental initiatives etc. They have also been advised to review the progress on the 
ground/field and take corrective steps to remove the  
deficiencies. While reviewing the progress during their visit to the States the officers also 
discuss and address the related issues. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 1.81) 
 
4.5 On the declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats, National Parks and Sanctuaries 
under Section 2 (b) of the Act, the Committee observe that as on date not a single 
Critical Wild Life Habitat has been declared.  On this issue while the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs have tried to put the onus on the Ministry of Environment and Forests by saying 
that it is they who have to take a decision on the matter, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests have tried to justify the delay by saying that the scientific/expert C ommittees 

44 
 
required for the purpose have not yet been constituted in all the States and the whole 
thing is a time consuming process.  While expressing their dissatisfaction on the 
inordinate delay in declaring the protected area or Critical Wild Life Habita ts, the 
Committee are of the view that in the absence of clear demarcation of areas protected 
for wild life habitats, undue advantage/leverage is given to the Forest Department for 
forceful eviction and harassment of the tribes in the name of protected are as/Critical Wild 
Life Habitats.  Since the Act clearly provides that no eviction and re -location of villagers 
from protected areas should be allowed to take place till the completion of the process of 
Forest Rights Committees formation, receipt and verific ation of claims and recognition of 
rights, the Committee recommended the Ministry to act swiftly in the matter, put a time 
frame for the States and direct the States to identify and list out the protected areas 
within that time frame.  The Ministry should also co -ordinate with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for an early decision on the declaration of Critical Wild Life 
Habitats preferably within a period of six months.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 The Ministry has conveyed the observations/recomm endations of the Standing 
Committee to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 2 nd February, 2011 which is 
primarily responsible for determination and notification of critical wildlife habitats in the 
National Parks and Sanctuaries under Section 2(b) of the Act, for taking action on priority 
basis. The Ministry has also communicated the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee to the State/UT Governments, inviting their attention to the clarification given 
by the Ministry  that the rights of the forest dw elling Scheduled Tribes and other 
traditional forest dwellers occupying forest land in the National Parks and Sanctuaries 
have to be recognized first under the Act before undertaking any exercise for 
resettlement and that no eviction and resettlement is pe rmissible till all the formalities are 

45 
 
completed. Their attention has also been invited to the instructions issued by the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests, vide their letter dated 21 st June 2010, addressed to the 
Principal Chief Conservators of Forests, D epartment of Forests of all States/UTs, to the 
effect that before taking any decision on displacement of Scheduled Tribes from the 
National Parks and Sanctuaries, the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 should be duly 
complied with. The State Governments have been requested to ensure that the 
provisions of the Act are followed in letter and spirit in this regard and the critical wildlife 
habitats are determined and notified at the earliest.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 1.83) 
 
4.7 The Committee note that Minor Forest Produce is central to the existence of tribal 
communities and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 is an important milestone which recognizes the 
ownership rights of these pe ople of Minor Forest Produce for the purpose of access, 
processing and trade.  After the enactment of the Act, the Right of Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers to procure and process Minor Forest produce has now 
become an indispensable p art of the Act and accordingly the Ministry should have 
redoubled their efforts in ensuring the protection of this primary right of the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers. The Committee are, however, distressed to 
note that in addition to the existing efforts which are grossly inadequate, the Ministry 
have hardly taken any additional initiatives/steps in the area of Minor Forest Produce in 
the aftermath of the enactment of the Act. The Committee are of the view that the 

46 
 
existing potentia l of Minor Forest Produce needs to be exploited economically and 
scientifically so that they continue to remain as a sustainable and renewable source of 
income/livelihood for the tribal families; more so after the enactment of the Act, the 
Ministry have become morally obligated and duty bound to ensure that this is done more 
effectively so that benefits accrue to the needy tribals. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry should pursue with the States to prepare specific action plans 
under the above  Act for harnessing the existing potential in their respective States in a 
scientific manner, providing technical assistance for value addition to Minor Forest 
Produce and undertaking procurement activities with improved and up -to-date methods.  
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should take concrete steps in the direction 
of creating facilities in the form of Cooperative Societies in States where maximum 
number of title deeds have been distributed so that the tribal people in these States get 
assistance/support relating to procurement and marketing of their Minor Forest Produce 
for which they have been given rights under the Act. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Standing Committee that the 
Minor Forest Produce (MFP) is central to the existence of the tribal communities and the 
existing potential of MFP needs to be exploited economically so that they continue to 
remain as a sustainable and renewable source of income/livelihood for the tribal families. 
The Ministry has, therefore, been emphasizing on the State/UT Governments, from time 
to time, the need for taking steps for inviting more community rights claims and vesting 
more title deeds on such claims.  The Ministry has brought the observations of the 
Standing Committee to the notice of the State/UT Governments on 8 th February, 2011 
and they have been advised to prepare specific action plans for (i) harnessing the 
existing potential of MFP in their respective States in a scientific manner, (ii) providing  
technical assistance for value addition to Minor Forest Produce, and (iii) undertaking 

47 
 
procurement activities with improved and up -to-date methods so that the benefits accrue 
to the needy tribals. The States where maximum number of title deeds has been 
distributed have been requested to undertake concrete steps for creating facilities in the  
form of Cooperative Societies so that the title holders get assistance/support relating to 
procurement and marketing of their Minor Forest Produce. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]  
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER  - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 1.41) 
 
 
5.1 The Committee are unhappy to note the dismal/tardy progress of implementation 
of the Act where out of a total number of 28,49000 claims received so far only 9,93,988 
title deeds have been distributed in various States which works out to be a mere 32.36%. 
In this regard the Secretary during the evidence before the Committee sounded much 
contended with the achievement of the Ministry by saying that originally when the Act 
came into operation, the Ministry had expected only about three to four lakh claims to be 
distributed, against which they have distributed almost 10,00,000 claims which far 
exceeds the expectation.  The Committee, however, observe that in many of the States 
though claims have been re ceived in large numbers, the number of certificates of title 
deeds actually distributed is far less than the claims filed.  The Committee also observe 
that the implementation of the Act has not been uniform in all the States.  While the 
progress in some St ates has been satisfactory and palpable, in many other States, the 
Act does not seem to have made much headway.  The contention of the Ministry that the 
onus of implementation of the Act lies squarely on the States does not seem to be 
convincing because th ough the States have to implement the Act, the ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring the effective implementation of the Act throughout the country 
lies with the Central Government. The Act being a Government of India Act enacted by 
the Union Government,  it is the Ministry of Tribal Affairs which has to see that States are 
respecting the Act and progressing well in it‟s implementation. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry, apart from persuading the States, should proactively involve 

49 
 
itself in the implementation process, orient, assist and guide appropriately the States for 
gearing them up for implementation of the Act. Emphasis should be given to non -
performing States where the implementation has been insignificant and negligible by 
taking up specific steps and reviewing their progress at regular intervals. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 As per the information collected by the Ministry from various States/UTs till 31 st 
January 2011, a total number of 30,39,955 claims were filed against which 11,09,748 title 
deeds have been distributed, 34,324 titles were ready for distribution and 14,43,567 
claims were rejected. A total number of 25,53,315 claims were thus disposed of, which 
works out to disposal of nearly 84.00% of the total claims filed. A total of 4,86,640 claims 
were only pending for disposal. While the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh 
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tripura and 
Uttar Pradesh have achieved a disposal rate of more than 80% of claims filed,  the 
disposal of the claims in the States of Assam, Gujarat, Jharkhand and Kerala ranges 
between 26% to 45%. The remaining States are lagging behind in the implementation of 
the Act for various reasons. The Ministry has accordingly given instructions to al l the 
State Governments   to take immediate steps for implementation of the Act and for 
expeditious disposal of all the pending claims. The States where the implementation of 
the Act is insignificant and negligible have been requested to analyse the 
reasons/impediments for the slow progress and take remedial steps for expediting the 
implementation process.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011] 
   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 1.42) 
 
5.3 The Committee note with concern the extremely slow progress of implementation 
of the Act in the States of Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Uttarakhand where out of a total 

50 
 
number of 16314, 2179 and  182 claims received respectively, not a single title deed has 
been d istributed so far in these States.  The Committee take a serious view of less 
number of claims received in these States as well as the non -distribution of any title 
deeds in these States and the consequent denial of inherent rights of the Scheduled 
Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers. While the Committee understand the slow 
progress of the Act in the State of Tamil Nadu due to the interim Court  order, they are 
not at all convinced by the reasons cited by the Ministry with regard to the States of Bihar 
and Uttarakhand where it has simply been stated by the Ministry that these States have 
not intimated the reasons for slow progress of implementation of the Act.  The 
Committee are apprehensive there might be some underlying reasons for which these 
States in spite of having innumerable Scheduled Tribe population are reluctant and not 
showing any interest in implementing the Act. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry instead of routinely persuading these States to implement the Act should take up 
the matter at the highest level for identifying and sorting out the impediments/hurdles in 
way of implementation of the Act in these States.  State Governments of these States 
should be sensitized about their obligation towards the Act and persuaded to initiate 
action at the earliest so that the work of distribution of title deeds takes off in these States 
without further delay.   The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in these 
States within three months of presentation of this Report.   
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Ministry has conveyed the observations of the Standing Committee to the 
Chief Secretaries of the Governments of Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Uttarakhand on 8 th 
February, 2011 and advised them to identify and sort out the impediments/hurdles in way 
of implementation of the Act and take remedial measures so that the work of distribution 
of title deeds takes off in these States without further delay. 

51 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 1.78) 
 
5.5 During their on -the-spot study visit to some States while interacting with the 
beneficiaries, the Committee have noticed that pattas are being given to the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers to a lesser extent than what is under actual 
cultivation, boundaries are not being fixed properly and the land being recognized are not 
fit for cultivation.  The Committee are n ot happy with the above situation because in the 
opinion of the Committee unless the above concerns are suitably addressed and land 
made cultivable, the very thrust/purpose of the Act relating to rights of Schedules Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwel lers to hold and live in forest for habitation or self -
cultivation for livelihood is defeated.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
to take urgent necessary steps such as deputation of trained officials, surveyors and 
expert staff for demarcati on and survey of land and field inspection in approachable 
areas to remedy the above situation. The Ministry should also draw an action plan for the 
States for taking measures to associate their land recognition programmes with the on -
going as well as futu re rural development schemes.  Funds under different schemes 
should be pooled, converged and utilized for development of land distributed to the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers beneficiaries under the Act.  
Agro-forest based activities for income generation should be encouraged and undertaken 
to enable the beneficiaries a respectable livelihood. Action taken in this direction may be 
communicated within three months of presentation of this Report.  
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The Ministry has brought the above observations of the Standing Committee to 
the notice of all the State/UT Governments on 8 th February, 2011 and they have been 
advised to take steps for deputation of trained officials, surveyors and expert staff for 
demarcation and survey of land. The State/UT Governments have also been requested 

52 
 
to draw an action plan for taking measures to associate their land recognition 
programmes with the on -going as well as future rural development schemes; pooling, 
convergence and utili zation of funds under different schemes for development of land 
vested in the Scheduled Tribes and OTFDs beneficiaries under the Act; encouragement 
and undertaking of Agro -forest based activities for income generation to enable the 
beneficiaries a respectable livelihood. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 1.82) 
 
5.7 The Committee are happy to note that the State of Orissa has responded well  to 
the provision relat ing to declaration of „Critical Wildlife Habitats‟ and sent  proposals 
pertaining to Gahirmatha Critical Wildlife Habitat, Chilika Nalaban Critical Wild Life 
Habitats and Chandaka Damapara Sanctuary to the Ministry for notification under the 
Act.  The Comm ittee desire that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in coordination with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests should consider these proposals on their merit and 
an early decision is taken on declaration of these protected areas in the State. The 
Committee feel that while there is an urgent need to conserve the forests along with its 
flora and fauna, the principle of co -existence and co -habitation of the tribal people with 
nature and its resources should be given utmost priority and efforts should be made no t 
to evict/re-locate the tribal forcefully from the forests.  Since many of our critical wildlife 
are becoming extinct due to lack of their proper preservation and this particular provision 
under the Act gives an opportunity to do so, the Committee advise the Ministry to 
impress upon other States also to follow the footsteps of Orissa and take necessary 
action in identifying and locating the protected areas by sending their proposals to the 
Government for an early declaration of Critical Wild Life Habitats.   
Reply of the Government 

53 
 
5.8 As stated in reply to Recommendation at Sl. No. 16 Para 1.81, the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests is primarily responsible for determination and notification of 
critical wildlife habitats in the National Parks and Sanctuari es under Section 2(b) of the 
Act. The Ministry has, therefore, conveyed the above observations/recommendations of 
the Standing Committee to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 2 nd February, 2011 
for taking action on priority basis. The State Govt. have also been suitably advised in this 
regard as indicated in reply to Recommendation at Sl.No. 16, Para 1.81. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 1.96) 
 
 
5.9 The C ommittee express their concern over the fact that the States/UTs of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Sikkim, 
Uttarakhand, Andman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli are 
not sending any monthly pro gress on the status of the implementation of the  Act in their 
respective States/UTs.  Similarly, at present only 9 States are uploading the information 
on the implementation of the Act on the website http://forestrights.gov.in and not all the 
States are regularly uploading the information. Apart from giving a clear picture on the 
status of the Act in the States/UTs, sending of monthly progress reports and uploading 
the information on a regular basis wo uld in a way act as a binding factor for these 
States/UTs to implement the Act in their areas.  Therefore, the Committee desire the 
Ministry should earnestly pursue and urge the State Governments/UT Administrations of 
the above States to send the monthly p rogress reports and also upload the information 
on the status of implementation of the Act in their respective States/UTs on a regular 
basis.   
Reply of the Government 
 

54 
 
5.10 The Ministry has written to all the State/UT Governments, including the above 
mentioned States/UTs of  Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, Andman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu 
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli  to ensure that the monthly progress reports on the status of 
implementation of the Act in their respective States/UTs are sent to this Ministry on time  
and the requisite information is uploaded on the Ministry‟s website on a regular basis. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 1.103) 
 
 
5.11 The Committee observe that a Joint Committee of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests has been constituted to study in detail the 
implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Ac t, 2006.  This Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Shri N.C. Saxena has already started the review of different aspects of implementation of 
the Act.  Having observed the mandate of the Committee which includes recommending 
necessary policy changes in futu re management of the forestry sector, identifying 
opportunities   and recommending measures to ensure convergence of various 
beneficiary oriented programmes for forest rights holders, holding public consultation on 
all relevant issues etc., the Committee a re of the  opinion that formation of such as 
Committee is definitely a step forward in addressing the issues concerning the 
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers.  The above Committee may 
prove to be an ideal platform for the Ministry of E nvironment and Forest and the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs to coordinate and mitigate the unresolved issues relating to the Act 
resulting in its smooth and effective implementation.  Therefore, while welcoming the 

55 
 
constitution of the above Committee, this Co mmittee recommend the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs to make best use of this forum for safeguarding and protecting the interests of the 
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers. The Committee also direct the 
Ministry to place before themselves the Report of the „Saxena Committee‟ as and when it 
is presented for their consideration.  
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.12 The Joint Committee of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, constituted under the Chairmanshi p of Shri N.C. Saxena has 
since submitted its Report. The Ministry is examining the report and will take appropriate 
action.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs O.M. No. 23011/45/2009-SG-II (FRA) (Vol. II) dated 14.03.2011]   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:         DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
20 December, 2011         Chairman,  
29 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)       Standing Committee on 
         Social Justice and Empowerment 
   
        
 
 
  

56 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY, 20TH DECEMBER, 2011 
 
The Committee met from 0930 hrs. to 1015 hrs. in Committee Room 'D' , PHA, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
6. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
7. Shri G. V. Harsha Kumar 
8. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
9. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana 
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
11. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
12. Shri Lalit Mohan Sulabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA   
 
13. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Anita Jain - Director 
2. Shri P.C. Choulda - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble  Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft 18 th Report on Action Taken on 10 th Report on the subject 
“Implementation of Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006- Rules made thereunder”. 
 

57 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 18 th Report and adopted 
the same with some additions.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to  finalize the 
draft Report and present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  

58 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE  TENTH  REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
          Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations         23 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations which         12  52.17% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 1.9, 1.43, 1.44, 1.74, 1.75,  
1.76, 1.77, 1.79, 1.80, 1.97, 1.99 and 1.104) 
III. Observations/Recommendations which        1  4.35%      
 the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
  (Paragraph No. 1.47) 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in        4  17.39% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 1.45, 1.46, 1.81 and 1.83) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in       6  26.09% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.41, 1.42, 1.78, 1.82, 
1.96 and 1.103) 
 
 