1 
 
 
16 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2011-2012) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
 
              
   
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Shravana, 1933(Saka)  


2 
 
16 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
(2011-2012) 
 
            
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  4.8.2011 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on  4.8.2011 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Shravana, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE(s) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
INTRODUCTION  
   
 REPORT  
 INTRODUCTORY  
CHAPTER I STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010 -
11) OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
CHAPTER II      A. GENERAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY  
B. SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSISTANCE (SCA) TO TRIBAL 
SUB-PLAN (TSP) 
 
C. GRANTS UNDER FIRST PROVISO TO ARTICLE 275 (1) 
OF THE CONSTITUTION 
 
D. SCHEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMITIVE  TRIBAL 
GROUPS (PTGs) 
 
E. NATIONAL OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR 
HIGHER STUDIES ABROAD 
 
F. SCHEME OF STRENGTHENING EDUCATION AMONG 
SCHEDULED TRIBES  (ST) GIRLS IN LOW LITERACY 
DISTRICTS 
 
G. IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEDULED TRIBES AND 
OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST DWELLERS 
(RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. STATEMENT SHOWING AMOUNT SURRENDERED 
UNDER PLAN, SCHEME -WISE ALONGWITH 
REASONS DURING 2010-11.  
 
 
II. DR. MUNGEKAR COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATION 
IN IMPROVING THE DELIVERY SYSTEM. 
 
 
III. MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 20.4.2011. 
 
 
IV. MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMIMTTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT HELD ON 20.6.2011 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
       
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2 Shri T.R. Baalu 
3 Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
4 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
5 Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8 Shri Premchand Guddu 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav   
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath   
11 Shri Mohan Jena  
 #12. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
13. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
14. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
15. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
16. Dr. Niramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
  ***19. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede  
 ##20. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
 
22  Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23  Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
                      *25.  Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
         **26.  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.  Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
29.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30.  Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31.  Shri Nandi Yelliah 
__________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Mahmood A. Madani nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
**  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
*** Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27.9.2010 
# Shri Baliram Kashyap was expired on 10.3.2011. 
## Shri Om Prakash Yadav nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 1.6.2011. 

5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri. Radhey Shyam - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2010 -2011) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs on Demands for Grants, 2011-2012. 
 
2. The Committee consid ered the Demands for Grants pertaining   to   the   
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the current year i.e. 2011 -2012 which was laid on the 
Table of the House on 11.3.2011.  Thereafter, the   Committee   took   evidence   of   
the representatives of the Minis try of Tribal Affairs on 20.4.2011. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on  20.6.2011. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry   
of   Tribal Affairs for placing before them the detail ed written notes on the subject 
and furnishing the information the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the Demands for Grants and tendering evidence before the 
Committee. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations a nd 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of 
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to 
the Report.   
   
 
NEW DELHI;       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
                  Chairman, 
20 June, 2011                                                     Standing Committee on 
30 Jyaistha, 1933 (Saka)               Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
 
  

7 
 
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 Ministry of Tribal Affairs was constituted in October, 1999 with the objective of 
providing a more focused attention on the integrated socio -economic development of 
the most underprivileged section of the Indian society, the Scheduled Tribes (STs) in a 
coordinated and planned manner.   The Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for 
overall policy, planning and coordination of programmes for development of the 
Scheduled Tribes.  To this end, Ministry of Tribal Affairs undertakes activities that flow 
from the subjects allocated under the Government of India (Allocation of Business ) 
Rules, 1961.  These include : 
 
1. Social security and social insurance with respect to the Scheduled Tribes; 
2. Tribal Welfare – Tribal welfare planning,  project formulation , research, 
evaluation, statistics and training; 
3. Promotion and development of voluntary efforts  on tribal welfare;  
4. Scheduled Tribes, including scholarship to students belonging to such 
tribes  
5 (a) Development of Scheduled Tribes; 
 (b) All matters inclu ding legislation relating to the rights of forest 
dwelling Scheduled Tribes on forest lands; 
6.  (a) Matters relating to Autonomous districts of Assam excluding roads 
 and bridge works and ferries thereon; and 
(b)  Regulations framed by the Governors of St ates for Scheduled 
Areas and for Tribal Areas specified in part `A‟ of the Table 

8 
 
appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution. 
7. (a) Commission to report on the administration of Scheduled                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes; and 
(b) Issue of directions regarding the drawing up and execution of 
schemes essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in any 
State. 
 8. The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. 
        9. Implementation of the „Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955)‟ 
and the „Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989‟ (33 of 1989), excluding administration of criminal 
justice in regard to offences in so far as they relate to Scheduled Tribes. 
1.2 At item 5 (b)   of the above mandate, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has also been 
given the responsibility in respect of  “The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006” which seeks to recognize and vest 
the forest rights and occupation in forest land in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and 
other traditional forest dwellers who have been residing in such forests for generations 
but whose rights on ancestral lands and their habitat were not adequately recognized in 
the consolidation of State forests during the colonial period as well as in independent  
India resulting in historical  injustice to them. 
 
1.3 Article 366 (25) of the Constitution of India refers to Scheduled Tribes as those 
communities, who are scheduled in accordance with Article 342 of the Constitution.  
This Article says that only those communities who have been declared as such by the 

9 
 
President through an initial public notification or through a subsequent amending Act of 
Parliament will be considered to be Scheduled Tribes.   
1.4 In order to protect the interests of Scheduled Tribes with regard to land and other 
social issues, various provis ions have been enshrined in the Fifth Schedule and the 
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. 
1.5 There are over 700 Scheduled Tribes notified under Article 342 of the 
Constitution of India, spread over different States and Union Territories of the country.  
Many tribes are present in more than one State.  The largest number of Scheduled 
Tribes are   in the State of Orissa, i.e. 62.  
1.6 The Tribal population of the country as per the 2001 census, is 8.43 crore  
constituting  8.2% of the total population.  Mor e than half of the Scheduled Tribes 
population is concentrated in the States of  Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Jharkhand and Gujarat. 
1.7 The Ministry have also informed that tribal communities live in about 15% of the 
country‟s areas, in various ecological and geo -climatic conditions ran ging from plains 
and forests to  hills and inaccessible areas.  Tribal groups are at different stages of 
social, economic and educational development.  Some tribal communities have adopted 
the mainstream way of life.  At the other end of the spectrum, there are certain 
scheduled tribes (75 in number) known as Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs),   
who are characte rized by - (a) a pre -agricultural level of technology, (b) a stagnant or 
declining population, (c) extremely low literacy and (d) a subsistence level of economy.  
1.8 The Demands for Grants asked for by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs are given 
under Demand No.94.   The Committee have attempted to scrutinize these demands to 

10 
 
the extent poss ible within the limited time and the conclusions drawn by them have 
been highlighted in succeeding Chapters.    

11 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS ( 2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
2.1 The Fifth Report ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment on Demands for Gr ants (2010-11) pertaining to the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs was presented to Parliament on 20th April, 2010  and the related Action 
Taken Report i.e. Fourteenth (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) was  presented to Parliament on 
9th March, 2011. 
2.2 The status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Fifth  
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) could not be assessed as 
the Minister of Tribal Affairs is yet to lay a statement in Parliament under Direction 73A 
of Directions by the Speaker. 
2.3 The Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  contained 23 recommendations out of 
which the Government accepted 14 recommendations, 3 recommendations were 
commented upon by the Committee and 6 replies of the Government  with respect to 
the recommendations of the Committee were interim in nature.  
2.4 Fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants, 2010 -11 of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs was presented to Parliament on 20th April, 2010.   
Although the Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry, the 
Committee regret to observe that as per Direction 73A of 'Directions by the 
Speaker' necessary statement regarding the status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the original Report has not been made by the 

12 
 
Minister in the House.  While deprecating this inordinate delay, the Co mmittee 
desire that requisite action in this connection should be taken expeditiously. 
  
 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
A. GENERAL  PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY 
 
3.1 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished the following statement showing the 
Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure for the last three  years 
along with the Budget Estimate for the current year showing separately Plan and Non -
Plan Expenditure: 
    
Plan 
                                                                                          (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Exp. 
% age of 
Expenditure 
over BE 
2008-09 2121.00 1970.00 1805.2723 85.11 
2009-10 3205.50 2000.00 #1996.75 62.29 
2010-11 3206.50 3205.70 *3134.16 97.74 
2011-12 3723.01 - - - 
 
           Non-Plan  
                                                             (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Exp. 
% age of 
Expenditure 
over BE 
2008-09 12.55 14.16 12.9747 103.38 
2009-10# 14.61 16.17 #13.13 89.87 
2010-11* 13.87 15.71 *15.27 110.09 
2011-12 17.00    
 
#As per appropriation accounts stage III 
*Provisional 
 
3.2 It has been observed from above that during the year 2010 -11 an expenditure of 
Rs.3134.16 c rore has been incurred against RE (Plan) of Rs.3205.70 crore. Against 
Non-Plan Revised Estimates of Rs.15.71 crore, an expenditure of Rs.15. 27 crore has 
been incurred during the year.   The budgetary outlay of the Ministry for the year 2011 -

14 
 
12 has been enhanced  to Rs. 3723.01 crore as compared to last year‟s budgetary 
outlay of Rs. 3206.50 crore (plan).  
3.3 On the performance of the Ministry during 2010 -11 the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs stated during evidence as under:- 
" I am happy to inform that ag ainst an outlay of the order of Rs. 3220.37 crore, 
which includes both plan and non -plan, we could achieve Rs. 3149.43 crore, 
which is about 97.7 9 per cent; this is against a figure of nearly Rs. 2000 crore 
last year; we have been nearly able to do the bud get which was provided to us.  
In the current year, it is about 15 per cent extra from the previous year.  We are 
quite confident that by good liaison work and good follow up in our own Ministry, 
we will be   able to do it.  I must tell you that all my off icers have really worked 
with zeal and a mission that we must achieve the budget figures that have been 
given to us so that we spend it properly.  With the same spirit, zeal and 
commitment we would be doing so.  We are aware that there are shortcomings 
and we are aware that there are limitations.  But during the current year, we will 
be taking steps and actions which would improve our performance further". 
 
Reduction of BE Funds at RE Stage  
3.4 The Committee observed that with lone exception of the year 2010-11, there has 
been a trend in the Ministry of BE funds substantially reduced at RE stage i.e. reduction 
of BE funds from Rs. 2121 crore to Rs. 1970 crore in 2008 -09 and from Rs. 3205.50 
crore to Rs. 2000 crore during 2009 -10.  When the Committee desir ed to know why it 
has been so, the Ministry informed that n on-submission/delayed submission of 
proposals alongwith physical and financial progress report by the States, non -
submission of proper utilization certificates for the previous releases, lack of co mplete 
proposals, non -receipt of recommendation for continuation of NGO/Institute  from the 
State Level Committee were some of the reasons for reduction of BE funds at RE stage 
during 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
3.5 On being enquired about corrective measures take n by the Ministry to address 
these issues and also for ensuring that funds allocated at BE stage are not reduced at 

15 
 
RE stage during 2011 -12, the Ministry in their written reply have stated that State 
Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to send proposals under various 
schemes along with the Utilisation Certificates of the previous years grants. Besides 
written reminders, the concerned officials of State Governments have been reminded 
verbally/telephonically to furnish utilisation certificates of previous grants. 
 
3.6 The Ministry further informed that r egular monitoring of the expenditure position 
during 2010 -11 ensured that the budget of the Ministry was not reduced at RE level. 
Regular monitoring of expenditure position shall continue during 2011-12 also. Ministry 
proposes to hold discussions with the State Governments from time -to-time as per 
requirement so that the entire allocated funds are released during the year. 
 
Surrender of Funds 
 
3.7 On the issue of surrender of funds, the Ministry h ave informed that an amount to 
the tune of Rs. 72.9733 crore were surrendered by the Ministry under various schemes 
during the year 2010 -11. A detailed statement of amount surrendered, scheme -wise 
alongwith reasons is given at Annexure-I. 
 
3.8 On being ask ed about the measures taken or proposed to be taken by the 
Ministry to overcome the problem of surrender of funds, the Ministry stated that during 
2010-11 against RE allocation (Plan) of Rs. 3205.70 crore, expenditure was Rs.3134.16 
crore (97. 74%). To overcome the problem of surrender of funds, Secretary (TA) has 
taken a meeting and following decisions have been taken to minimize the position of 
surrender. 

16 
 
 Divisional Heads to write to all States/ UTs Governments for submitting 
the proposals for the year 2011-12. 
 Joint Secretaries must monitor the progress by holding quarterly review 
meeting of their Division and with the States/ UTs representatives. 
 Every officer must visit a State in a month to review the scheme(s). 
Divisional Heads have already written  to the State Governments/UT 
administrations to send proposals for 2011-12. 
3.9 In this context, Secretary Ministry of Tribal Affairs during evidence stated as 
under: 
"I would put it in a simplistic manner that a lot of our schemes are demand driven.  
That is, States have to come forward and we persuade them to come forward.  
We ask them to please give their proposals; we take other funds; but at times we 
do not get them.  Then what we do is, here is an area where you are spending 
better.  Here, you are giv ing the proposal, but we do not have the money.  We 
will surrender here; we will get a supplementary grant or we will get it 
reappropriated.  That means there may not be an absolute surrender.  If it was 
Rs. 3200 crore last year, we have been able to spend  Rs. 3100 crore plus.  We 
dropped here; we added there; we removed from here and we supplemented 
there.  That kind of a thing we keep watching and we keep spending.  That is we 
tried to maximize the expenditure and keep the surrenders at minimum possible 
level.  Our effort would be that Rs. 3700 crore or so that we are going to get next 
year we will be spending.  I am quite confident of it.  The type of commitment I 
have seen from the people here and a positive response from the States, with 
whomsoever we h ave interacted is excellent.  I assure you that this Rs. 3700 
crore would be spent and with better monitoring, better evaluation, I am sure the 
quality will also improve."    
 
Shortage of Staff 
3.10 Having observed the acute shortage of staff in the Minist ry, the Committee  in 
their previous Demands for Grants (2010 -11) had  recommended the Ministry to 
earnestly pursue the matter with concerned Ministries at appropriate levels to 
strengthen the staff at the earliest.  In this context, the Committee desired to  know the 
latest position with regard to the creation of the separate cadre in the Ministry including 
the steps taken by the concerned cadre controlling authorities of the Ministry to fill the  

17 
 
existing vacancies.  To this the Ministry in their written rep ly stated that t he issue of 
creation of a separate cadre for this Ministry for filling up of the vacancies in an effective 
manner is still awaited from DOP&T.  DOP&T has been reminded a number of times for 
communicating the final decision.   Regular persua sion with the Cadre Controlling 
Authorities is being made by this Ministry for filling up of existing vacancies in various 
grades. A proposal for creation of some additional posts was turned down by Ministry of 
Finance. The same has again been taken up wit h the Integrated Finance Division, 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for reconsideration of the said proposal by M/o Finance.   
3.11 When enquired   the grounds on which the Ministry of Finance has turned down 
the above proposal and what are the views of the Mini stry of Finance on creation of 
additional posts, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under:- 
"With regard to creation of 27 posts in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of   
Finance, Department of Expenditure vide their I.D.No. 774794/E.Coord.1(2)/2010 
dated 13.7.2010  has stated that “Department of Expenditure has recently agreed 
to the creation of 11 posts in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for Policy 
Implementation Cell. In view of the extant austerity instructions, further creation 
of posts, within 4 months of approval of earlier proposal, would not be possible 
without matching savings. It is advised that as far as the posts of 
Dy.Directors/SOs and Assistants are concerned, the Ministry may function on the 
desk pattern instead of conve ntional pattern. This would enable the Ministry to 
manage the work with the existing staff.”  
 
Dr. Mungekar Committee Report 
3.12 In their action taken note on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants  (2010-11) (Recommendation Para No.2.35), 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs had informed that Dr. Mungekar Committee has given some 
important recommendations for improving the delivery sys tem in the States and the 
State Governments shall be sensitized accordingly.  

18 
 
3.13 The Committee wanted to know the major  recommendations made by Mungekar 
Committee Report and at what stage these recommendations stand at present.  To this, 
the Ministry furnished the relevant excerpts of the Dr. Mungekar Committee  
recommendations which are reproduced at Annexure-II.   
3.14 Having observed that Dr. Mungekar Committee Report contained  several 
important recommendations for improving the delivery system such as the need for re -
strengthening and revamping of ITDPs and flow of SCA funds through ITDPs, selection 
of district level officers in tribal majority districts, addressing the health issues in tribal 
areas in a mission mode etc.,  the Committee wanted to know the Ministry's programme 
of action for implementing the recommendations of  the Mungekar Committee Report on 
delivery system of various schemes.  To this , the Ministry in their written reply stated 
that the recommendations of Dr. Mungekar Committee‟s report are to be discussed in a 
Committee of Secretaries meeting for which notes are being submitted. 
3.15 Elucidating further on the issue, the Secretary during evidence stated as under : 
"You referred to the Mungekar Committee Report, the point is here.  This 
Report has been examined and we are drafting a note for the Committee 
of Secretaries.  In the light of that, we will be making changes.  Your point 
is very valid that delivery system has got to be effective and only then the 
money would be spent better."  
Xxx   xxx   xxx    xxx 
3.16 On this issue the representative of the Ministry further added :- 
"This Committee gave many recommendations about the structural 
changes, decentralization, set up at the Ministry level.  Many good 
suggestions are there.  Mungekar Committee Report was given to inter -
Ministry and their comments have bee n issued.  Some recommendations 
of the Planning Commission are still to come.  Then, the Committee 
Report with the comments of the relevant Ministries would be put before 
the Committee of Secretaries.  Once the recommendations are accepted, 
then, the same will be implemented.  That is the stage". 
 
  

19 
 
 
 
Controlling the Expenses of NGOs and Measures to Ensure NGOs Accountability 
 3.17 It has been recognized that the task of the development of Scheduled Tribes 
cannot be achieved by Government efforts only.  The  role of voluntary or non -
governmental organizations, with their local roots and sense of service has become 
increasingly important.  They supplement the efforts of the State in ensuring that the 
benefits reach to large number of populations.  In certain c ases, it is the voluntary 
organizations who are in better position to implement the schemes of the Government in 
a more efficient and objective manner than the Government itself.   There are four 
ongoing schemes of the Ministry, which are open to the parti cipation of voluntary/non -
governmental organizations  and substantial amount of funds are flowing to NGOs for 
implementation of these schemes.  
3.18 During the evidence the Committee desired to know   about the mechanism for 
monitoring of the expenses being  made by NGOs from grants of the Ministry for 
implementation of welfare schemes for STs and whether the Ministry are proposing to 
frame/incorporate certain guidelines and norms for controlling the office/travel expenses 
of NGOs.  To this, the Ministry info rmed  that NGOs are required to submit their audited 
accounts for each financial year.  The grants are released as per the financial norms 
laid down in the scheme document. 
3.19 To a query as to  how grants are released to NGOs, the Secretary during 
evidence responded as under:- 
"There was also a point made about the manner the NGO s cases are processed.  
I would say that we do not entertain any case unless it is recommended by the  
  

20 
 
State Government and the State level disciplinary committee.  The State 
Government officials are expected  to send  an annual inspection report which 
comes to us, at the proposal stage itself; we are very careful.  At times, when we 
get information ourselves, we get some projects inspected by our own offic ers 
also.  This is how we are trying to streamline the release of grants to NGOs." 
 
 
National Tribal Policy 
3.20 According to the Ministry the process of formulation of National Tribal Policy was 
started during 2006 and a draft was ready in May, 2007.  The  draft covers all important 
issues that concern tribals such as alienation of Tribal Land; Tribal Forest Interface; 
Displacement, Resettlement & Rehabilitation; Enhancement of Human Development 
Index, Creati on of Critical Infrastructure, v iolent Manifestat ions; Conservation & 
Development of particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups(PTGs) TSP strategy; 
Administration of Tribal Areas etc.   The Ministry have further informed that t he Draft 
Policy was referred to Group of Ministers (GoM) for harmonization with R&R  Policy. The 
draft National Tribal Policy was discussed in the meeting of the Standing Committee for 
Tribal Welfare held on 12.1.2011 and the draft policy will now be placed before the 
National Council for Tribal Welfare. 
 3.21 The Committee enquired   as to why such a long time is being taken to 
implement „National Tribal Policy‟  and   by what time the policy will be ready for 
implementation to which the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
"The draft Policy wa s referred to Group of Ministe rs (GoM) as per direction of 
Cabinet.  The final report of the GoM was received on 5.3.2008.  The draft 
Policy was submitted to Cabinet Secretariat on 7 th November 2008.  Cabinet 
Secretariat asked to obtain the approval of additional post for Policy 
Implementation Cell from the Department of Expenditure and for further 
consultation with Prime Minister‟s Office (PMO).  The approval of Department of 
Expenditure was obtained for 11 posts for Policy Implementation Cell on 
5.4.2010.  After this, the draft Policy was sent to PMO on 17.5.2010. The PMO 
asked the Ministry to place it before the National Council for Tribal Welfare in  
  

21 
 
the first instance.  The matter  was placed before the Standing Committee for 
Tribal Welfare at its meeting held on 12.1.2011 and the draft Policy will be 
placed before the National Council for Tribal Welfare.  The matter is under 
process for consideration of the National Council for Tri bal Welfare as per 
directions of PMO. The Policy will be ready for implementation after the 
approval of the Cabinet".  
  
3.22 Adding further on the issue the Secretary, during evidence stated as under:  
 "Coming to the draft National Tribal Policy, around 2007, it was drafted; it 
has gone through various levels.  It is now to go to the National Tribal 
Welfare Council, headed by the PM, and thereafter, it   will go to the 
Cabinet.  I am hopeful that we should be able to do it in very near futur e or 
may be during the current year; will try to do it.  I would say that the 
Department is conscious of its responsibilities and we will not be looking 
back."  
  
Tribal Advisory Councils 
3.23 The Committee observed that there are Tribes Advisory Councils in States 
having scheduled Tribal Area.  There have been suggestions from various quarters for 
National Tribal Advisory Council under the Prime Minister at Central level to review the 
schemes for development of STs.  
3.24 On being asked  what are the consid ered v iews of Ministry in this regard, the 
Ministry stated that National Council for Tribal Welfare (NCTW) has been constituted 
under the chairmanship of Prime Minister. Chief Ministers of Fifth Schedule States and 
Sixth Schedule States are also members of  this body. Constitution of  National Council 
for Tribal Welfare (NCTW) fulfils the need of a body under the Prime Minister at Central 
level to review the schemes for development of STs. 
Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee for issues concerning Tribals 
3.25 The Committee in their Report on Demands for Grants, 2010-11 had emphasized 
the need for the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to have better coordination with line Ministries 

22 
 
and had recommended for a Coordination Committee.  When the Committee desired to 
know what concrete action has been taken by the Ministry in this regard, the Ministry in 
their post evidence reply stated as follows :- 
"A Coordination Committee, chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs has 
been constituted for monitoring, planning, progress of the schemes/programmes 
being implemented for overall development of Scheduled Tribes. 
Representatives ( not below the rank of joint secretary) from the Ministry of HRD, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Depar tment of Drinking Water Supply, 
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Rural Development  and Advisor, Planning 
Commission are members of this Committee".   
  
 Monitoring of Schemes 
3.26 When the Committee enquired about    the number of visits undertaken by the 
officials of the Ministry during the last one year ,   what kind of issues came up during 
these visits and steps   taken to resolve these issues, the Ministry in their written reply 
have stated as under: 
(a) The visits of officials of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is an on -going and 
continuous process to discuss/inspect the projects sanctioned to State 
Governments. If any shortcoming is noticed regarding the implementation of the 
scheme, the officer who visits the State Govt. informs the concerned section 
about the said short-coming.  
(b) Officials of the Ministry visited Forest Villages in Chhattisgarh alongwith 
representatives of Planning Commission and NCST during February, 2011 for 1 st 
hand feedback for implementation of the programme and progress thereof. Th e 
feedback received was satisfactory.  Official also visited the State of Uttar 
Pradesh & Rajasthan to review Forest Rights Act implementation.  

23 
 
(c) Officials also visited States of Meghalaya and Mizoram during 14 th to 17 th 
December, 2010 for examining the iss ue relating setting up of TRI in North 
Eastern States. However, it was found that TRIs have been in existence in these 
two States since when the States were bifurcated from the State of As sam 
therefore, State Government  authorities were appraised of the fa cilities they can 
avail from Ministry of Tribal Affairs and were requested to send proposals 
according to the Schemes of the Ministry. 
(d) Officials also visited State of Karnataka during January, 2011, to review the 
implementation of scheme of Top Class Education. 
3.27 When the Committee pointed out about inadequate monitoring the Secretary 
during evidence stated as under: 
"One important point which was fairly common in the observations of all the 
Members was inadequate monitoring and evaluation.  I think  I do concede that it 
needs to be improved and in fact I would say that our more effective coordination 
with States telephonically and whenever they visited impressing upon them and 
when some of my officers went to the States they impressed upon and a good  
team work at the headquarters has helped us take the expenditure from a level of 
about Rs. 2000 crore during the financial year  2009-10 to nearly Rs. 3135 crore 
during the financial year 2010-11. "  
 
Awareness of Schemes 
3.28 Asked as to  what other traditional/innovative methods of generating awareness 
about the schemes apart from advertisements in local and regional newspapers have 
been taken, the Ministry in  their written reply have stated that a part from inserting 
advertisement about the schemes in local and regional newspapers, the Ministry also 
conducts workshops/seminars through Universities/Non -Government Organisations 
(NGOs) and various TRIs specifically aimed at generating awareness about the various 
schemes it implements for the  benefit of the Scheduled Tribes.  A revised brochure 

24 
 
containing information about the schemes and programmes for the welfare of tribals has 
been published in the form of Pamphlet.  In order to make the awareness campaign 
regarding various welfare and deve lopment schemes under implementation for the 
Scheduled Tribes more effective, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  has proposed to 
outsource a study entitled “Impact assessment of awareness programme and 
methodologies adopted by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs with recommendations for 
making these more effective.”  The findings of the study would facilitate planners and 
implementers in designing appropriate awareness campaigns using different media and 
fora, including traditional methods, to reach those residing in far flung areas and 
facilitate them to claim the benefits of Government‟s welfare and development 
schemes/programmes. 
 
3.29 It was also informed that s ome education -oriented Schemes are being 
implemented through State Governments, one through Top Class Institutes like IIT s, 
IIMs, NIT etc., one through UGC. These schemes are publicized in leading New s 
Papers and apart from this Ministry also insert these schemes on Ministry‟s web -site. 
Most of the schemes of Education Section are for highly qualified ST s tudents who 
generally use the internet.  
3.30 When asked as to how much funds were allocated by the Ministry during 
2010-11 for the purpose of generating awareness and how  much was actually utilized, 
the Ministry in their written submission stated as under:- 
"Under the Scheme of Advertising and Publicity a separate provision is kept for 
advertising schemes of Ministry for welfare of Scheduled Tribes. This year during 
2010-11 a provision of Rs 3.00 crore was kept for giving advertisement in 
National and regi onal newspapers in the states where tribal population is more. 
This year we have released an amount of Rs 2.89 crores as L.O.A to DAVP for  
  

25 
 
Advertisement and publication through DAVP.  Information about the Actual 
expenditure by DAVP will be known during the first quarter of the next financial 
year." 
 
  

26 
 
3.31 The Committee note that during the year 2010 -11 an expenditure of 
Rs.3134.16 crore has been incurred against RE (Plan) of Rs.3205.70 crore i.e. in 
terms of percentage the expenditure has been 97.7 4%.  The Committee also note 
that the budgetary outlay of the Ministry for the year 2011 -12 has been enhanced 
to Rs. 3723.01 crore as compared to last year‟s budgetary outlay of Rs. 3206.50 
crore.  The Committee are happy to note that unlike the previous year s where BE 
funds had been substantially reduced at RE stage i.e. from Rs. 2121 crore to Rs. 
1970 crore in 2008 -09 and from Rs. 3205.50 crore to Rs. 2000 crore in 2009 -10, 
there ha s been no reduction of BE funds at RE stage in the year 2010 -11.  The 
Committee are given to understand that this has been possible because of 
regular monitoring of the expenditure position .  While expressing their happiness 
over the above development the Committee hope that the Ministry would 
continue with their initiatives so as to avoid slashing of BE funds at RE stage 
during the year 2011 -12. The Committee also urge the Ministry to plan and incur 
their expenditure in a phased manner so that it is evenly  spread throughout the 
year and also persuade State Governments/UT Administrations to send proposals 
under various schemes along with the Utilization Certificates of the previous 
years grants so that there is 100% utilization of funds under all the schemes.   
3.32 The Committee  observe that although there has been significant 
improvement in utilization of funds during 2010 -11, funds to  the tune of Rs. 
72.9733 crore were surrendered by the Ministry under the crucial schemes of SCA 
to Tribal Sub Plan (Rs 10.2373 crore), Grant under Proviso to Article 275(1) of the  
  

27 
 
Constitution (Rs.26.6690 crore) and Development of Primitive Tribal Groups (Rs. 
10.3179 crore).  The Committee are not convinced with the Ministry's reasoning 
that the surrender of funds by the Ministry is not always absolute as surrender in 
one scheme  is re-appropriated in another; funds are dropped in one or added/ 
supplemented in another leading to maximization of expenditure and 
minimization of saving.   In the op inion of the Committee, once funds are 
earmarked for the schemes the Ministry should strive to achieve 100% utilization 
and funds  in each and every scheme should be utilized with utmost care and 
financial prudence so that individual schemes do not suffer.  The Committee 
desire that an exhaustive review of guidelines of the various schemes should be 
undertaken to make them more flexible so that State Governments can implement 
the schemes as per their local condition s.  At the same time some accountability 
should also be fixed on State Governments for implementation of the schemes as 
well as utilization of allocated funds. The Committee feel that it will go a long way 
in improving utilization of funds.  
 
3.33 The Committee in their previous Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) 
had recommended the Ministry to earnestly pursue the matter relating to filling up 
of vacant posts with concerned authorities at appropriate levels to strengthen the 
staff at the earliest.  The Committee are disturbed to see the reply of the Ministry 
in this regard that   Department of Expenditure has recently agreed to the creation 
of only 11 posts in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  for Policy Implementation Cell  
and as far as the posts of D eputy Directors/SOs and Assistants are concern ed, 
the Ministry has been asked to function on the desk pattern instead of 

28 
 
conventional pattern which would  enable the Ministry to manage th e work with 
the existing staff.  The Committee also observe that a proposal for creation of 
some additional posts wa s turned down by Ministry of Finance .  The Committee 
are of the view that the Ministry are at present running several important schemes 
and the creation of mere 11 posts against the required 21 posts will not serve  the 
purpose.  The Committee also feel tha t the Ministry have failed in convincing the 
DOP&T and Ministry of Finance the urgent need for creation of additional posts 
for efficient and smooth functioning of the Ministry.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to once again take up the mat ter of expansion of staff 
strength with the competent Authority at the earliest so that  requisite sanction 
for additional posts are obtained and all the vacant posts are filled up without 
further delay. Meanwhile, the available staff may be efficiently ut ilized for 
successful implementation of various welfare schemes. 
3.34 The Committee observe that  Dr. Mungekar Committee has given several 
important recommendations to improve the delivery system in States which 
include inter-alia the need for re -strengthening and revamping of ITDPs and flow 
of SCA funds through ITDPs, selection of district level officers in tribal majority 
districts, addressing the health issues in trib al areas in a mission mode etc.  
However, on the status of implementation of these recommendations, the 
Ministry have informed that the Report is yet to be discussed in a Committee o f 
Secretaries meeting for which notes are being submitted.  The Committee feel 
that the recommendation s of Dr. Mungekar Committee have f ar reaching 
implications as far as the implementation and improvement of the schemes of  
  

29 
 
this Ministry are concerned.  In the opinion of the Committee unless the delivery 
system are improved, schemes will not be implemented effectively and it is 
absolutely necessary that some structural changes are brought in at the grass 
root level.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to pursue 
for early discussion of the Report at the Committee of Secretaries meeting and its 
acceptance by the Gove rnment so that the much needed improvement can be 
made for effective the implementation of schemes.   
3.35 The Committee find that there are four ongoing schemes of the Ministry  
which are open to the participation of voluntary/non -governmental organizations 
and substantial amount of funds are flowing to NGOs for implementation of these 
schemes.  On the office expenses of NGOs t hough the Ministry have maintained 
that the grants ar e released as per the financial norms laid down in the scheme 
document and they do not entertain any case unless it is recommended by the 
State Government and the State level disciplinary committee, cases of misuse of 
grants by some NGOs have come to the n otice of the Committee which are 
reflected in exorbitant office/travel expenses of NGOs. There is need to 
streamline and control the office/travel expenses of NGOs by devising stricter 
norms/guidelines of expenditure for them.  Therefore, t he Committee str ongly 
recommend the Ministry to devise/frame stringent norms/guidelines for control of 
office/travel expenses of NGOs  so as to avoid misuse of public money.   The 
Committee desire that   the Ministry should also furnish a detailed statement on 
the funds released to the NGOs and expenditure made by them under the various 
heads. 
 

30 
 
3.36 The Committee are unhappy to note that though the process of formulation 
of National Tribal Policy had been started during 2006 and a draft was ready as 
early as  May, 2007 yet  the draft policy has not been finalized and is still under 
consideration.  The Committee are given to understand that the draft National 
Tribal Policy aims at addressing  several important issues that concern tribals 
such as alienation of Tri bal Land; Tribal Forest Interface; Displacement, 
Resettlement & Rehabilitation; Enhancement of Human Development Index, 
Creation of Critical Infrastructure, Violent Manifestations; Conservation & 
Development of particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups(PTGs) T SP strategy; 
Administration of Tribal Areas etc. The Committee also find that t he draft policy 
has already been discussed and considered at numerous platforms and the 
Ministry now propose to place it before the National Council for Tribal Welfare . 
The Committee feel that the process of finalization of the Draft Tribal Policy has 
been stretched too far and it is high time the policy is given its final shape , made 
ready with clear perspective s on several key issues concerning tribals.  
Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the matter and get the 
final nod for the National Tribal Policy  at the earliest so that the benefit of this 
important Policy really accrue to the needy and poor tribals.   
 
3.37 The Committee are happy to note that the constitution of the National 
Council of Tribal Welfare (NCTW) under the chairmanship of  Prime Minister at the 
central level to review the scheme for development of Scheduled Tribes.  The 
Committee are given to  understand that the constitution of the above Council 
fulfills the long felt need of a body under the Prime Minister at central level to 

31 
 
review the schemes for development of STs.  The Committee hope that the above 
step will definitely go a long way in en suring effective implementation of various 
schemes for welfare of tribal people.    
 The Committee also not e with satisfaction that in pursuant to  the 
Committee's earlier recommendation relating to inter Ministerial coordination, the 
Ministry have constituted a Coordination Committee with representatives from 
Ministries of Human Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare, Rural 
Development etc. for monitoring , planning and  progress of the 
schemes/programmes being implemented  for overall development of Scheduled 
Tribes. While congratulating the Ministry for the above initiative, th e Committee 
recommend the Ministry to ensure that the above Coordination Committee meets 
at regular intervals to address and sort out issues and hel ps in bridging critical 
gaps in the developmental process.   
3.38 As far as monitoring of schemes of the Ministry is concerned, the 
Committee are given to understand that there is provision of  visits of officials 
which is an on -going and continuous process  to discuss/inspect the projects 
sanctioned to State Governments. The Committee have also been informed that i f 
any shortcoming is noticed regarding the implementation of the scheme, the 
officer who visits the State Governments  informs the concerned Section about 
the said short-coming.   However, the underutilization of funds in three important 
schemes of the Ministry i.e. scheme under Tribal Sub Plan, scheme under Proviso 
to Article 275(1) of the Constitution and scheme for Development of Primitive 
Tribal Groups (PTGs) point to the fact that there are areas where monitoring 
needs to be strengthened and made more effective.  Even the Secretary, Ministry 

32 
 
of Tribal Affairs admitted during evidence that monitoring needs to be improved.  
In the opinion of the Committee over and above the steps already taken, setting  
up of a monitoring Cell in the Ministry would ensure regular and strict monitoring 
of various schemes.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should think in the line of setting up a Monitoring Cell to ensure continuous and 
meticulous monitoring of the various welfare schemes in a concerted and 
focused manner.   
3.39 On the issue of awareness about various schemes, the Committee observe 
that apart from inserting advertisement about the schemes in local and regional 
newspapers, the Ministry also conducts workshops/seminars through 
Universities/Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and various TRIs specifically 
aimed at generating awareness about various schemes it implements for the 
benefit of the Scheduled Tribes.  A revised brochure containing information about 
the schemes and programmes for the welfare of tribals has also been published 
in the form of Pamphlet.  The Committee have been informed  that i n order to 
make the awareness campaign regarding various welfare and development 
schemes under implementation for the Scheduled Tribes more effective, the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs  has proposed to outsource a study entitled “Impact 
assessment of a wareness campaigns with recommendations for making 
campaigns more effective.”  It is also anticipated that t he findings of the study 
would facilitate planners and implementers in designing appropriate awareness 
campaigns using different media and fora, including traditional methods, to reach 
those residing in far flung areas and facilitate them to claim the benefits of 

33 
 
Government‟s welfare and development schemes/programmes.  While welcoming 
the above move, the Committee desire the Ministry to get the aforesaid study  
conducted in a definite time frame .  In addition to this, the Committee also desire  
that the Ministry should launch a Multi media campaign using print, broadcast 
and electronic media as well as outdoor publicity for dissemination of information 
to generate awareness relating to various welfare schemes for tribals. 
  

34 
 
B. SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSISTANCE (SCA) TO TRIBAL SUB-PLAN (TSP) 
3.40 This is a major programme administered by the Ministry and under this  grant is 
provided to the State  Governments based on annual allocation made by the Planning 
Commission.  This is treated as an additive to the  State Plan, for areas where State 
Plan provisions are not normally forthcoming to bring about economic development to 
tribals.  The programme was launched during 1974 and till the end of the IX th Five year 
Plan, the SCA to TSP was meant for filling up cri tical gaps in the family -based income-
generating activities of TSP. 
3.41 From the Tenth Five Year Plan period the objective and scope of SCA to TSP 
has been expanded to cover employment -cum-income generation activities and 
infrastructure incidental thereto .  Besides family -based activities, other activities run by 
the Self-Help Groups (SHGs)/community can also be taken up.   
3.42 Special Central Assistance is provided to the 22 Tribal Sub -Plan States including 
the North Eastern States of Assam, Manipur, Sik kim and Tripura and two Union 
Territories. 
3.43 The Ministry provides 100% grant -in-aid to the State Governments from the 
funds made available for the purpose annually by the Planning Commission. 
3.44 The Ministry have furnished the following statement showing the Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure incurred under the scheme of 
SCA to TSP for the last three years as well as BE for 2011-12 as under:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
Expenditure 
 
2008-09 900.00 860.50 780.8683 

35 
 
2009-10 900.50 481.24 481.24 
2010-11 960.50 941.96 931.73 
2011-12 1096.01   
 
3.45 On being asked to state  the reasons for actual expenditure being less than 
Revised Estimates during 2008-09, the Ministry stated that  during 2008-09, the balance 
could not be released due to non-receipt of complete proposals in the prescribed format 
and also due to non -submission of utilization certifi cates for earlier fund releases  by 
some of the States.     
3.46 The Committee enquired the  reasons for huge variation between Budget 
Estimates and Revised Estimates during 2009 -10 to which the Ministry in their written 
submission stated as under:- 
"During 2009-10 there was sluggish offtake of  funds during the 1st  half of the 
year by the State Governments due to belated submission of complete proposals 
along with Physical & Fina ncial progress report. Keeping in view the relatively 
poor release during the 1 st two quarters, the Ministry of Finance reduced the 
outlay of the Ministry at RE stage." 
 
3.47 When asked to state   the reasons for enhancing the Budget Estimates for 2011 -
12 to Rs. 1096.01 crore , the Ministry in their written reply have stated that the 
endeavour of the Ministry is to increase the outlay for the programme on annual basis 
so as to ensure that the direct funding for the poor STs is done by the Ministry keeping 
in view the need for factoring inflation also. As a result of efforts made, Ministry released 
an amount of Rs. 931.73 crore during 2010-11 for SCA to TSP.  
3.48 The Committee have been informed  that  70% of the SCA is to be used for 
primary schemes supporting family/SHG/Community based employment and income 
generation in sectors such as Agriculture/Horticulture, Land Reforms, Watershed 

36 
 
Development,  Animal Husbandry, Ecology, Environment, Development of Forests and 
Forest Villages, Development of entrepreneurship in SSI etc. and 30% for development 
of infrastructure incidental thereto.  
3.49 When enquired whether any target has been fixed for assisting the ST s 
families/SHGs/Community based workers etc. during th e Eleventh Five Year Plan , 
including the achievement made so far, the Ministry stated that the norms laid down 
prescribe that not more tha n 30% of SCA can be permitted for the purpose of 
developing infra structure. This is to ensure that the funding is utilized for the primary 
schemes for employment/income -generation activities. However, no Physical targets 
are fixed under the programme as the funding made under the programme is to be 
utilized for filling up critical gaps under the schemes taken up in the States, the number 
of beneficiaries being primarily family oriented and as the schemes taken up by the 
States are to be implemented in conjunction with other schemes of Central/ State 
Governments it is not possible to fix the target of number of beneficiaries. 
 
3.50 The Committee   observed that some State s have not been allocated funds  
under SCA to TSP during the last three years. 
 
3.51 On being asked to   give details of such State s and what action has been taken 
against these defaulting States, the Committee have been   informed that Ministry 
allocates funds under SCA to TSP annually to all the 22 States covered under the 
programmes.  The details of the States which have not availed  the entire allocation of 
funds during the last three years are in the table below:-  
 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 

37 
 
Assam Andhra Pradesh Assam 
Bihar Assam  Bihar  
Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh Goa 
Goa Goa Jammu & Kashmir 
Gujarat Gujarat Kerala 
Jammu & Kashmir Himachal Pradesh Tamil Nadu 
Jharkhand Jammu & Kashmir Uttarakhand 
Maharashtra Jharkhand Uttar Pradesh 
Uttarakhand Kerala  
 Madhya Pradesh  
 Maharashtra  
 Manipur  
 Orissa  
 Rajasthan  
 Sikkim  
 Tamil Nadu  
 Tripura  
 Uttarakhand  
 Uttar Pradesh  
 West Bengal  
 
In such cases, meetings are held to sensitize the States and they are impressed to 
submit proposals complete in all respects so that Ministry can consider release of funds.  
The onus is on the States to submit proposal s in accordance with the prescribed 
procedure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
Development of Forest Villages 
 
 
3.52 Presently there are 2,474 forest villages/habitations spread over 12 States and 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has approved proposals covering 2,413 forest villages in 12 
States and also released Rs. 62376.26 lakh. Under the programme, infrastructure work 
relating to basic services and facilities viz. approach roads, healthcare, primary 
education, minor irrigation, rain water harvesting, drinking water, sanitation, co mmunity 
halls, etc. are taken up for implementation. As on 31.03.2011, 2424 villages have been 
covered, (including 10 new villages of UP and one of Chhattisgarh). A total of Rs. 
63879.36 lakh has been released as on 31.03.2011. 
3.53 The Committee enquired about the   difficulties being faced by the Union 
Government to cover these villages   and measures taken to cover the remaining forest 
villages early  to which the Ministry in their written reply have stated that from the 
responses received from the concern ed States, there is less likelihood of receiving 
proposal for new villages. The reasons for not covering all the 2474 villages can be 
attributed to factors like village being un -inhabited, inaccessible due to naxal problem 
etc. However, as a result of inte raction with State Governments, 11 more villages have 
been covered during 2010-11. 
 
3.54 The Committee find that under the scheme of Special Central Assistance 
(SCA) to Tribal Sub Plan ( TSP) launched during 1974 grant is provided to the 
State Governments based on annual allocation made by the Planning 
Commission.  This is treated as an additive to the State Plan, for areas where 
State Plan provisions are not normally forthcoming to bring about economic 

39 
 
development to tribals.  The Committee also find that from the Tenth Five Year 
Plan period the objective and scope of SCA to TSP has been expanded to cover 
employment-cum-income generation activities and infrastructure incidental 
thereto.  The Committee have been   i nformed that the Ministry allocates funds 
under SCA to TSP annually to all the 22 States covered under the programmes. 
However, the Committee   note with concern   that some States have not availed 
the   entire allocation of funds  during the last three yea rs.  During 2008 -09  as 
many as nine States, during 2009 -10 twenty States and during 2010 -11 eight 
States have not availed the entire allocation  resulting in gross under utilization of 
funds earmarked for the scheme .  The Committee also observe that some S tates 
such as Assam, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala , Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh etc. have not availed any funds consecutively for two years.  The 
scheme of SCA to TSP has a lot of potential for uplifting the tribal people and it is 
necessary that  SCA funds which are crucial for welfare of tribal people should 
flow to all States. Therefore, the committee strongly recommend that the matter 
should be taken up with the concerned State Chief Secretaries at the earliest  and 
these States should be persuaded to send viable proposals for availing the funds 
for the benefit of tribes .  The progress made in this regard may be conveyed to 
the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
  

40 
 
C. GRANTS UNDER FIRST PROVISO TO ARTICLE 275 (1) OF THE 
CONSTITUTION  
 
 
3.55 Article 275 (1) of the Constitution of India guarantees grants from the 
Consolidated Fund of India each year for promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes 
and in pursuance of this Co nstitutional obligation, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs provides 
funds through the Central Sector Scheme “Grants under Article 275 (1) of the 
Constitution of India”. 
 
3.56 The objective of the Scheme is promotion of the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and 
upgradation of the levels of administration in Scheduled Areas. The programme covers 
all 22 Tribal Sub Plan States and 4 tribal majority States of the country (total 26 states) .  
Under this Special Area Programme, 100 percent grant is provided by the Ministry to 
meet the cost of such projects for tribal development, undertaken by State Government, 
for (1) raising the level of administration of Scheduled Areas, and (2) for welfar e of the 
tribal people to bring them at par with the rest of the State.  The grants are prov ided to 
the States on the basis of the percentage of ST population in the state.  While the 
guidelines for release and utilization of grants under Article 275(1) of  the Constitution of 
India was last revised in the year 2002, this has been further modified in January 2008 
indicating the following procedural changes for the XIth Plan: 
(i) Focus to be for generation of community welfare assets like schools, skilled 
teaching, nutritional support, drinking water, etc.; 
(ii) Innovative grants strictly meant for innovative schemes  – in terms of final 
output/outcome or methods of delivery; 

41 
 
(iii) Every State to formulate and operate efficient monitoring of the programmes 
on their own, since Ministry cannot play such a large role in these; 
(iv) Ministry to do secondary level monitoring 
3.57 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished a statement showing the Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure incurred under the above -
mentioned scheme during the last three years as well as B E for the year 2011-12 as 
under:-  
 
                                                                                             (Rs. In crore)  
Year Budget  
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates  
Actual 
Expenditure 
  
2008-09 416.00 392.00 339.7841 
2009-10 1000.00 399.10 399.10 
2010-11 1046.00 1030.00 999.89 
2011-12 1197.00   
 
3.58 The Committee enquired the  reasons for reduction of Budget Estimates at 
Revised Estimates stage during the last three years to which the Ministry in their written 
reply have stated that during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, there was reduction of planned 
budgetary allocation at RE stage. Due to non -submission of proper proposals, 
Utilization Certificates and physical progress reports of the p revious releases by the 
States, there was less release of funds in first two quarters, as a result of which, 
Ministry of Finance reduced the budget at R.E stage. 
3.59 When   enquired   as to why full amount of funds could not be incurred under the 
scheme   during 2010-11, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under : 
"The reasons for  non-release of full amount was non submission/belated 
submission of complete proposal s along with requisite utilization certificates etc. 
by the states of Andhra Pradesh,  Assam, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir , Meghalaya, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand." 

42 
 
 
3.60 On being asked to state   the reasons for increasing the Budget Estimates for 
2011-12 to Rs. 1197 crore and w hether any new scheme or component thereof has 
been added,   the Ministry stated that in view of the trend of expenditure incurred by the 
Ministry by the end of IInd and IIIrd quarter of 2010 -11 which was 61.61 % and 70 % of 
BE respectively, it was proposed to enhance BE for 2011 -12. Also, capital cost for 
construction of new EMRS was increased from Rs.2.5 crore per EMRS to Rs. 12.00 to 
16.00 crore per EMRS from the year 2010 -11. Setting up of EMRS is one of the 
components of the scheme.  With this increase, it is expected to have more demand of 
funds by the States.  
3.61 The Committee have informed that under the programme at least 30% projects 
are to be targeted to benefit women.   When asked to  furnish details of the projects 
targeted at women, the amount allocated  during each of the last three years and how 
many tribal women have been benefited under each project during each of the last three 
years, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under:- 
 
"As per guidelines of grants under Article 275(1), the concerns/ issues 
effecting women should occupy central position in preparation of 
projects/schemes, including the involvement of women right from planning 
to the implementation stage. The programme provides for that projects 
should be so planned that substantial benefits, at least 30 % in proportion, 
are targeted for women. Under the scheme, since infrastructure projects are 
undertaken for the welfare of tribal, tribal populace including women living in 
and around the area in respective States where projects are created get 
benefited.  The scheme is imp lemented in conjunction with other schemes 
of Central / State Governments no quantification is done and specific details 
are not maintained." 

43 
 
 
3.62 With the objective of providing quality education to the tribal students, it was 
decided during 1997 -98 to u tilize a part of the grant under Article 275(1) of the 
constitution of India for setting up of 100 Model Residential Schools from Class VI of 
Class XII. Till the end of Xth plan 100 schools were sanctioned to 22 States, of which 90 
are reported to be functional. 
 
3.63 The Committee enquired by what time the remaining 10  schools will become 
functional, the Ministry have informed that State Governments have been requested to 
make the schools functional at the earliest. As a result of persuading, Government of  
Rajasthan has reported that 2 EMRS will be made functional by the end of 2010-11. 
 
3.64  When enquired what facilities are provided to the students in Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools, the Ministry stated that in addition to free education including 
boarding & lodging for ST students from class VI to XII, facilities like library, Computer 
Lab, Laboratory, play ground etc. are also provided in the EMRSs.   
3.65 The Committee enquired whether inspection teams of th e Central/State regularly 
inspect the Eklavya Model Residential Schools  and if so, what shortcomings have been 
noticed during inspections and the remedial action thereon, the Ministry in their written 
reply have stated that officers as and when they visit  States visit EMRS also to see the 
functioning of the schools.  State Governments have been requested to inspect and 
take remedial action. 
 
3.66 The Committee observe  that during 2010-11 under the scheme of provision 
of Article 275(1) of Constitution out of the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1046.00 

44 
 
crore, an amount of Rs. 999.89 crore ha s been spent.  Though the actual 
expenditure under the scheme h as shown remarkable improvement over the 
previous two years still the actual expenditure falls short of the budgetary 
allocation.  N on submission/belated submission of complete proposals along 
with requisite utilization certificates etc. by the states of A ndhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Goa, J&K, Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand have been cited as 
the reasons for non -release of amount and saving under the scheme.  In view of 
the fact that an enhanced amount i.e. Rs. 1197.00 crore has been proposed un der 
the scheme during the year 2011 -12, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should vigorously pursue with all State Governments/UTs 
Administrations to ensure timely submission of fresh proposals alongwith 
utilization certificates of previous  years so as to avoid major savings under the 
scheme.  

45 
 
D.  SCHEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF PARTICULARLY VULNERABLE  TRIBAL 
GROUPS (PTGs) 
 
3.67 The Ministry have  informed that among scheduled tribes, there are certain tribal 
communities who have declining or stagnant population, low level of literacy, pre -
agricultural level of technology and are economically backward.  75 such groups in 17 
States and 1 Union Terri tory of A & N islands have been identified and categorized as 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups.  Since PTGs constitute the most vulnerable 
section among scheduled tribes,  it becomes necessary to allocate adequate funds from 
Central Sector/Centrally S ponsored and State Plan schemes for the sociao -economic 
development of PTGs.  However, it was observed that funds provided under schemes 
for STs were not reaching the PTGs adequately.  Therefore, in 1998 -99, a separate 
100% Central Sector Scheme for exclus ive development of PTGs was started.  Th e 
scheme was revised in 2008-09 to make it more effective.   
 
3.68 The Ministry have furnished the following statement showing the BE, RE and 
actual expenditure during the last three years as well as BE for 2011-2012 :- 
                                                                                  Rs. (in crore) 
Year  BE RE  Actual Expenditure 
2008-09 173.00 189.00 192.0678 
2009-10 155.00 79.00 83.62 
2010-11 181.00 240.20 232.45 
2011-12 240.00   
 
 
3.69 On being asked to state the reasons for enhancing the budgetary allocation for 
the year 2011 -12 to Rs. 240.00 crore and what extra projects/developmental works 
proposed to be taken u p with this enhanced allocation, the Ministry stated that t he 
provision during 2011-12 is mainly to accommodate the requirement of CCD Plans and 
to meet the liabilities pertaining to previous years. 

46 
 
 
 
3.70 The Ministry have furnished the following statement showing release of financial 
assistance and expenditure reported under Central Sector Scheme of Development of 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs) in respect of States/UTs (including NGO 
Component) during  2007-08 to 2010-11:-    
 (Rs.in Lakhs) 
S.No Name of the 
State 
2007-08       2008-09                          2009-10                         2010-11                         
Amount 
Released 
Amount 
Utilized 
Amount 
Released 
Amount 
Utilized 
Amount 
Released 
Amount 
Utilized 
Amount 
Released 
1  Andhra 
Pradesh  
860.00 860.00 985.000 985.000 0.00 0.00 2292.40 
2 Chhattisgarh 701.95 701.95 615.330 612.330 17.589 17.589 2257.61 
3  Gujarat 500.00 500.00 1943.220 1943.220 0.000 0.000 0.00 
4 Jharkhand 239.37 239.37 1299.979 230.049 272.031 272.031 218.68 
5 Kerala 0.00 0.00 960.000 960.000 10.000 10.000 0.00 
6 Karnataka 200.00 200.00 3246.275 3246.275 20.474 20.474 6000.00 
7 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1044.58 1000.00 3754.900 3754.900 5067.800 5067.800 5428.20 
8  Maharashtra 546.78 546.78 2007.980 2007.980 584.319 583.749 3487.61 
9 Orissa 1000.00 1000.00 1243.000 1243.000 1228.700 1228.700 1226.68 
10 Rajasthan 0.00 0.00 1120.490 1120.490 0.000 0.000 1280.28 
11 Tamil Nadu 59.22 59.22 725.870 725.870 61.663 61.663 553.58 
12 Tripura 185.00 185.00 403.000 403.000 461.800 461.800 315.70 
13 Uttrakhand 0.00 0.00 0.000 0.000 100.140 100.140 0.00 
14 West Bengal 300.00 300.00 901.740 901.740 537.235 537.235 0.00 
15 A&N Islands 149.00 149.00 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 184.00 
GRAND TOTAL 5785.90 5741.32 19206.78
4 
18133.854 8361.751 8361.181 23244.74 
 
 
3.71 It has been observed from above that during 2008-09  Rs. 19206.784 lakh were 
released to States/UTs for the development of PTGs out of which Rs. 18133.854 lakh 
were utilized whereas during 2009 -10, Rs. 8361.751 lakh were released out of which 
only Rs. 8361.181 lakh were utilized.   

47 
 
3.72 The Committee enquired as to why the allocated funds were not utilized by the 
States during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the Ministry in their written reply have stated that 
for funds released during 2009-10 under the „Development of PTG s‟ scheme, UCs from 
West Bengal and Tripura are pending. Since the grant to West Bengal was released in 
March,2010 the UC s has not become due. Grant to Tripura was released in 
January,2010 . Out of the tot al grant of Rs. 461.80 lakhs, UC s for Rs. 313.20 lakh ha ve 
been provided. The State Government has informed that the remaining UC s shall be 
provided. During 2008 -09, 13 states were given grants under the „Development of 
PTGs‟ scheme. UCs from Kerala, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh 
are pending. Maharashtra Government has utilized the fund barring one component of 
land distribution. This unutilized amount of Rs. 157.66 lakh has been adjusted in the 
grant of su bsequent year. Chhattisgarh government has provided UC for an amount of 
Rs. 612.33 lakh out of the total Rs. 615.33 lakh released and the remaining amount of 
Rs. 3.00 lakh has been adjusted in the subsequent grant. Gujarat has also provided 
UCs for an amount of Rs. 1562 lakh out of the total released grant of Rs. 1943.22 lakh 
during 2008 -09. The unutilized fund is mainly due to lack of progress in providing 
agricultural land to PTGs families. Jharkhand and Kerala government have not informed 
about the progress under this scheme despite repeated reminders.  
3.73 The Committee further enquired u nder the head „Development of PTGs‟, no 
funds were released to as many as nine states during 2009 -10.  Asked to   state the 
reasons for the same , the Ministry stated th at during 2009-10, the RE got reduced to 
Rs. 83.62 Crore from Rs. 160.00 Crore.  Therefore, due to paucity of funds and also 

48 
 
due to u navailability of Utilization certificates of previous grants, funds could not be 
released. 
 
3.74 The Committee desired to know about  the   efforts made by the Government for 
the protection, development and checking the declining trend of population of PTGs of 
UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Ministry informed that a s reported by the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration, there is no decline in the population of 
Onges and Andamanese. Specific data on  Shompens and Sentinelese is not available 
as no contact is made with these tribes as per Government Policy. 
 
3.75 When asked whether the Ministry have formulate d an action plan to impart 
necessary training to PTGs members in order to enable them to effectively participate in 
the programmes being run for their development , the Ministry stated that t here is no 
such training programme envisaged in the scheme. 
3.76 During the Study Visit of the Standing Committee on Social Ju stice and 
Empowerment to the UT  of Andaman & Nicobar islands in February, 2011, it was 
brought to the notice of the Committe e that the policy on the Jarawa  tribe of Andaman 
Island notified by the  Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India in December, 2004 
is being implemented strictly to ensure protection and welfare of Jarawas. Recently the 
UT of Andaman & Nicobar islands has taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs for a 
review of the Jarawa Policy. 
3.77  When the Committee desired to know about the current status of the review of 
the Jarawa Policy, the Ministry stated that t he Hon‟ble High court of Kolkata (Circuit 
Bench at Port Blair) in its Order dated 9 -4-01 in W.P.No. 048 of 1999 (PIL) – Ms. 
Shyamali Ganguli, Advocate V/s Union of India had directed the Central Government for 

49 
 
formulation of Policy for the Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands.  In pursuance of the 
directions, a „Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands‟ has been formulated by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, which had 
been published in the Andaman & Nicobar Gazette on 21-12-04.  
3.78 In the year, 2007, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has setup an Expert Committee 
under the Chairmans hip of Secretary, Tribal Affairs for preparation of Policies for 
remaining PTGs for A&N Islands and monitoring of implementation of Jarawa Policy.  In 
pursuance of the provision of clause VI (e) of the policy on Jarawa Tribe, a Sub-
Committee of the Expert Committee to review the existing “Policy on Jarawa Tribe of 
Andaman Islands, 2004” has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Tribal Affairs on 27.9.2010.  A meeting of this Sub-Committee of Expert Committee was 
held on 8.4.2011.  Detailed discussions in this regard were also held with the Chief 
Secretary of Andaman & Nicobar Administration on 4.4.2011. 
3.79 Elucidating further on the issue, the Secretary during evidence responded as 
under:  
"Certain points were made about the Jarawa policie s.  In 2004, under the 
orders of the Hon. Calcutta High Court, a group was set up to evolve a 
policy for Jarawas.  This group had specialists on subjects like 
Anthropology, Members of the civil society, scholars and officials.  
Thereafter, the policy was w idely debated in seminars and public opinions 
were sought.  After a good amount of consultation with all stakeholders, a 
policy was evolved.  This policy was finally notified by Andaman and 
Nicobar Administration and the essence of the policy was that they  be 
allowed to evolve at their own part.  Our approach should be of minimal 
interference.  If they need something and we feel it so, it should be done in 
a manner that it does not harm them." 
  xxx    xxx     xxx 
   
"Over a period, this is a 2004 policy, t hey said that this exposure was 
mainly because of ATR, which is known as Andaman Trunk Road, which 

50 
 
cuts through the heart of Andaman Islands from southern side, right up to 
north, beyond the J arawa tribal reserve area.  Under the policy, these 
vehicles go as a convoy; they are escorted; they are not supposed to stop 
on the way.  Yet, the human curiosity, it is something akin to a child in a 
village seeing a plane going over; they do come near the road, then, 
perhaps some interaction takes place and these ch anges are happening.  
This evolution in the way of their life is happening." 
  
"This 2004 policy included a clause also for review of the policy.  There is 
human curiosity and perhaps they want change.  May be, we enable them 
to cope with the outside world  so that they are able to realize their 
potential and at the same time, they do not get harmed by the outsiders.  
So, a small Group has been set up and this Group has held a meeting 
with the Chief Secretary and subsequently a meeting where 
anthropologists were also involved.  I would say that still the experts feel 
that protection needs to be continued.  There are people who feel, no, like 
anybody else, they have the right to look for a change, what they feel and 
want and that includes if they want to come out, by all means.  We are 
looking into all this and as to what changes in the present policy should be 
brought.  It is like a small child in a family and there is a road and in front 
of the road, child would go to the road but the elders in the house woul d 
try to keep a watchful eye to see that he is not harmed.  I am sure  that this 
Group would come out with its prescription as to what changes are 
required and how changes should be gone about.  This small Group is 
meeting and it has met and ou r Ministry ha d talks with the Chief 
Secretary." 
xxx     xxx    xxx   
 
"This review of 2004 Policy is under way, I would like to share with the 
Hon. Members here Andaman & Nicobar some Members of the review 
group very strongly feel that we have to empower them.  That is  they are 
made capable or skilled enough so that they can interact very confidently 
with the outside world.  The moment this becomes the essence or the 
theme of the policy, which is being deliberated.  I would say that there are 
two strongly opposite views  at the moment.  A group feels th at they still 
need protection, the present policy must continue.  There is another group 
which feels, no, like any other human being, the aspirations should win.  
We empower them. I am sure that this policy would address th e concerns 
you have raised also.  We would keep the concerns expressed at the back 
of our mind and the feedback we have got from various other Members on 
the subject.  I am sure this review of the policy would help us come out 
with prescription which would help and answer various concerns raised." 
3.80 The Committee note with concern  that during 2008 -09, Rs. 19206.784 lakh 
were released to States/UTs for the development of PTGs out of which Rs. 

51 
 
18133.854 lakh were utilized whereas during 2009 -10, Rs. 8361.751 lakh were 
released out of which only Rs. 8361.181 lakh were utilized.  The Ministry have 
stated the unutilized fund is mainly due to lack of progress in providing 
agricultural land to PTG s families and UCs are also pending from some of the 
States.  The Committee also find that   no funds were released to as many as nine 
states during 2009 -10.  The Committee have been informed that t he slashing of 
BE funds at RE stage  is the main reason for non  release of funds to these States 
during 2009-10.  In the opinion of the Committee "Development of Primitive Tribal 
Groups (PTGs)" being an important scheme of the Ministry wherein lot of funds 
flow to several States for the welfare of PTGs , funds should not have been 
reduced under the scheme.  Since an enhanced allocation of Rs. 240 crore has 
been made under the scheme  for 2011-12, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
take adequate steps for full utilization of funds.  Also under no circumstance 
funds should be allowed to be redu ced at the RE stage so that the scheme does 
not suffer due to paucity of funds.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the 
State Governments to immediately provide agricultural land to PTG s families so 
that funds which are released for the welfare of  PTGs do not remain unutilized.   
 
3.81 During the Study Visit of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment to the UT of Andaman &  Nicobar islands in February, 2011, it was 
brought to the notice of the Committee that the policy on the Jarawa tribe of 
Andaman Island notified by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India in 
December, 2004 is being implemented strictly to ensure protection and welfare of 

52 
 
Jarawas. The Committee also find that in the year, 2007, the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs has set  up an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Tribal Affairs for preparation of Policies for remaining PTGs for A&N Isla nds and 
monitoring of implementation of Jarawa Policy.  In pursuance of the provision of 
clause VI (e) of the policy on Jarawa Tribe, a Sub -Committee of the Expert 
Committee to review the existing “Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands, 
2004” has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Tribal Affairs 
on 27.9.2010.   The Committee also observe that divergent views are being 
expressed on the review of  the “Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands,  
2004".  The Committee feel that   the Jarawa tribes have been living in the 
Andaman forests for years and with time they have become  part of our rich 
cultural heritage.  However, at this juncture when many of the Jarawas 
themselves are now willing to come to the mainstream and live modern lifestyle, 
it would not be appropriate to suppress their voice and leave them in total 
isolation, unattended and without care.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to review the policy of Jarawa tribes keeping the above fact in 
perspective and bring neces sary changes in the above policy which  should aim 
at facilitating a slow and smooth process of transition i.e. bringing the Jarawas 
into the mainstream  with minimum damage to the cultural heritage as well as the 
Jarawas themselves.  
 
 

53 
 
E. NATIONAL OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR HIGHER STUDIES 
ABROAD 
  
3.82 The scheme has been in operation since 1954 -55.  This was a Non -Plan 
Scheme, which has become a Plan scheme of the Ministry from 2007-08.   The objective 
of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to selected ST students pursuing higher 
studies (Master, Doctoral and Post -Doctoral level) in certain specified fields of 
Engineering, Technology and Science only.  13 Scheduled Tribe candidates and 2 
candidates belonging to PTGs can be awarded the scho larship annually for pursuing 
Post Graduate, Doctoral and Post -Doctoral level courses.  The scholarship is not 
awarded for pursuing Graduate courses.    Grants are given to the selected candidates 
on 100 percent basis directly by the Ministry through the Indian Mission. 
3.83 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished a statement showing the Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure incurred under the scheme of 
National overseas Scholarship Scheme during the last three years as well as Budget 
Estimates for the current year as under :- 
                                                                                                            [Rs. in crore] 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual Expenditure 
2008-09 2.00 0.15 0.0118 
2009-10 0.50 0.31 0.3080 
2010-11 1.00 0.50 0.30 
2011-12 1.00   
 
 
3.84 The Committee enquired the  reasons for less expenditure incu rred during 2008 -
09 and 2009-10 to which the Ministry informed that as per Scheme of NOS, the selected 
candidate would have to take admission into a foreign, accredited University within 
three years from the date of issue of the Provisional Award.  Out of the 29 selected 

54 
 
Candidates in previous selection years i.e. from 2004 -05 to 2009 -10, only seven 
selected candidates have actually got admission to foreign accredited Universities 
during the year 2006-07 to 2009-10.   Therefore, the amount could not be fully utilized.   
 
3.85 The Committee pointed out  as to why only seven s tudents could get admission 
out of the 29 selected candidates in previous selection yea rs i.e. from 2004-05 to 2009-
10, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under: 
"As per Scheme of NOS, the selected candidate would have to take 
admission into a foreign accredited University within three years from the 
date of issue of the Provisional Award.   On expiry of this specified period 
of time, the award will automatically get cancelled and come to an end.  
Due to some personal reasons, some select ed candidates could not get 
the admission into a foreign accredited University within a stipulated 
period." 
 
3.86 On being a sked whether the Ministry is giving training/counseling to students to 
get admission into foreign accredited Universities , the Committee have been informed 
that t he Ministry does not give any training/counseling to the students for getting 
admission into foreign accredited University because the selected candidates who are 
selected under the scheme are highly qualified and meritor ious students who are well 
versed in using the net and exploring the feasibility of admission in foreign Universities 
themselves.  No selected candidate has ever asked about the need of the said 
counseling. 
3.87 The Ministry have informed that u nder the scheme during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 
the target was set for 15 students while the achievement was 2 and 8 students 
respectively. During 2010-11 the target was set for 15 students and the achievement is 
under process. 
 

55 
 
3.88 On being asked to  state the reasons as to why  targets were not being achieved 
during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted as 
under:- 
"During the year 2008 -09, 21 number of applications were received from 
the ST students, after screening the applications, seven number of 
students were found eligible for attending the interview.   Out of this, only 
two candidates attended the interview and both candidates wer e selected 
for awarding of NOS."   
 
3.89 When enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to achieve the target during 
2010-11, the Ministry stated that t he scheme has been advertised in the various 
National and Regional Newspapers and also posted on Ministry‟s web -site for calling 
the applications from the eligible candidates for the selection year 2010-11.   
3.90 To a specific query, have the Ministry go t conducted any evaluation study of this 
scheme during the last three years, it was  informed that no evaluation study of this 
scheme is conducted. 
3.91 The Committee are unhappy to note that under the scheme of National 
Overseas Scholarship for Higher Studies Abroad against the budgetary 
allocations of Rs. 2.00 crore, Rs.0.50 crore, and Rs. 1.00 crore respectively, the 
actual expenditure incurred have been Rs. 0.0118, Rs. 0.3080 and Rs. 0.30 crore 
during the years  2008-09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  The Committee are also 
constrained to note that out of the 29 selected candidates in previous selection 
years only seven got admission to foreign accredited Universities during 2006 -07 
to 2009 -10.  Moreover, there was shortfall in achieving physical targets as the 
number of candidates who actually got admission  into foreign  accredited 
Universities  was  2  and  8  during  2008-09 and 2009 -10 against the annual 
targets of 15.  The Ministry have  stated that they do not give any 

56 
 
training/counseling to the students for getting admission into foreign accredited 
University because the selected candidates who are selected under the scheme 
are highly qualified and meritorious students who are well vers ed in using the net 
and exploring the feasibility of admission in foreign Universities themselves.  
However, the Committee view that the admission process in foreign Universities 
is a cumbersome process and because of this many students are not able to 
manage admission  for themselves  even if  they are highly qualified and 
meritorious.  In the opinion of the Committee  the Government, besides the issue 
of award for pursuing higher studies abroad, should also give requisite 
training/counseling so as to prepar e them for getting admission into foreign 
accredited Universities so that target set under the scheme are achieved.  
3.92 The Committee find that no evaluation study of the scheme has been  
conducted during the last three years.  The Committee feel  that there is a strong 
need to get the evaluation study done in order to assess the progress made and  
also to find out the difficulties being faced by the students in getting admission in 
foreign accredited Universities.  The Committee, therefore, urge th e Ministry to 
undertake an evaluation study of the scheme for ascertaining the impact of the 
scheme at the earliest so that the corrective measures can be taken at the 
beginning of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.    

57 
 
F.        SCHEME OF STRENGTHENING EDUCATION AMONG SCHEDULED TRIBES  
(ST) GIRLS IN LOW LITERACY DISTRICTS. 
 
3.93 This gender -specific scheme was introduced in 1993 -94 for ST girls in low 
literacy pockets.  The scheme has been revised in 2008 -09, which became effective 
from 1st April, 2008.   
3.94 The scheme aims to bridge the gap in literacy levels between the general female 
population and tribal women, through facilitating 100% enrolment of tribal girls in the 
identified Districts or Blocks, more particularly in naxal affected areas and in areas 
inhabited by PTGs, and reducing drop -outs at the elementary level by creating the 
required ambience for education.  The Scheme lays emphasis on providing hostel 
facilities to enable the ST girls to attend regular schools and wherever schools are not 
available within five km distance, both schooling and hostel facilities are provided.  
Improvement of the literacy rate of tribal girls is essential to enable them to participate 
effectively in and benefit from socio-economic development. 
3.95 The scheme is implem ented through Voluntary Organizations (VOs)/Non -
Governmental Organizatio ns (NGOs) and autonomous societies /institutions of State 
Government/Union Territory   Administration. 
3.96 It is a central sector gender specific scheme and the Ministry provides 100% 
funding. 
 
3.97 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished the following statement showing the 
BE, RE and Expenditure incurred under the scheme of strengthening education among 
scheduled Tribes (ST) girls in low literacy districts during the last three y ears as well as 
Budget Estimates for the current year as under:- 
                                                                            

58 
 
                                                                            Rs. (in crore) 
Year  BE RE  Actual Expenditure 
2008-09 60.00 40.00 40.00 
2009-10 50.00 33.50 33.50 
2010-11 40.00 39.70 37.56 
2011-12 40.00   
 
3.98 It has been observed from above that budgetary allocation of Rs. 60 crore and 50 
crore for the year 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 had been  reduced to Rs. 40 crore and Rs. 
33.50 crore and for the year 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 allocation of only Rs. 40 crore has 
been made.   
3.99 When asked to  state the reasons for drastic reduction of budgetary allocation in 
2008-09 and 2009 -10 at RE stage, the Mi nistry in their written reply have stated that 
approval of competent authority for revised scheme was received during the end of 
financial year 2008-09.  Also, due to election process, the revised scheme could not be 
implemented which resulted in less expe nditure.  Thus the Revised Estimates  was 
reduced to Rs. 40.00 crore during 2008-09. 
3.100 Due to delayed receipt of recommendations from many State Level Committees, 
there was less expenditure upto the end of second quarter.  Hence the R E was reduced 
to Rs.33.50 crore during 2009-10.  During 2010-11 and 2011 -12 the budget provision 
has been kept as Rs. 40.00 crore based on the previous year‟s trend of expenditure. 
 
3.101 The Ministry have  furnished a statement showing the number of low literacy 
districts identified and the number of ST girls enrolled therein during each of t he last 
three years, State-wise as under: 
 
 
 

59 
 
S.No. Name of the 
State/ Union 
Territory 
Name of 
Districts 
2007-
08 
2008-09 2009-
10 
1 Andhra Pradesh Khammam 
 11034 12705 7771 
2 Jammu & Kashmir Rajouri 0 0 0 3 Punch 
4 Rajasthan Dungarpur 
742 309 632 5 Banswara 
6 Udaipur 
7 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Tawang 
0 100 0 8 East Kameng 
9 Lower Subansiri 
10 Tirap 
11 Nagaland Mon 0 0 0 
12 Tripura Dhalai 0 0 0 
13 Jharkhand Sahibganj 
50 100 50 
14 Pakaur 
15 Dumka 
16 Paschimi 
Singhbhum 
17 Purbi 
Singhbhum 
18 Lohardaga 
19 Orissa Gajapati 
2493 6550 11449 
20 Kandhamal 
21 Naupada 
22 Kalahandi 
23 Rayagada 
24 Nabarangapur 
25 Koraput 
26 Malkangiri 
27 Debgarh 
28 Keonjhar 
29 Mayurbhanj 
30 Balangir 
31 Chhattisgarh Surguja 
160 180 180 
32 Korba 
33 Bastar 
34 Dantewada 
 
35 Bilaspur 
36 Madhya Pradesh Umaria 
715 1811 722 
37 Shehdol 
38 Sidhi 
39 Ratlam 
40 Jhabua 
41 Dhar 
42 West Nimar 
43 Barwani 

60 
 
44 East Nimar 
45 Betul 
46 Harda 
47 Dindori 
48 Mandla 
49 Gujarat Dahod 
0 4517 200 50 Panchmahals 
51 Vadodara 
52 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 0 0 0 
53 Maharashtra Nandurbar 284 0 142 54 Dhule 
 
 
3.102 It has been observed  from above   that beneficiaries have not been covered in 
the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Tr ipura and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli.  When asked to state the reasons for non -coverage of beneficiaries in 
these States during 2009 -10, the Ministry stated that the State Governments of Jammu 
& Kashmir, Nagaland, Tripura and Dadra & Nagar Haveli did not send the proposals of 
NGOs under the scheme of Strengthening Education Among Scheduled Tribe (ST) Girls 
in Low Literacy Districts during 2009 -10. On the request of Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
three proposals were recommended by the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh. 
These proposals were considered in the Ministry and grant -in-aid was released for the 
year 2010-11. 
3.103 The target set under the above scheme during 2009 -10 was 28000 ST girls for 
135 projects while the achievement was 21146 for 67 projects.   During 2010 -11, the 
target set was 22400 ST girls for 110 projects while the achievement is only 14131 ST 
girls for 73 projects as on date.  The target for 2011-12 is 20000 ST girls for 67 projects. 
On being asked to state  the reasons for lowering the target contin uously for the last 
three years, the Ministry stated that the number of projects funded are as recommended 
by State Level Committee, subje ct to fulfillment of eligibility conditions as prescribed in 

61 
 
the scheme. Amount released under this scheme may vary from year to year but all the 
projects funded by this Ministry are running continuously and benefiting ST Girls. 
3.104 The Committee enquired   as to why the target was not achi eved during 2009-10 
and 2010 -11 to which  the Ministry in their written submission stated that the revised 
scheme has prescribed conditions of eligibility for receiving grant -in-aid under the 
scheme.  The grants to NGOs are considered by the Ministry to those projects fulfilling 
those conditions only.  Moreover, the projects in Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat have not 
picked up as per their original proposal.    
3.105 The Committee further enquired about the steps taken/proposed to be taken to 
ensure that the target/physical  output for 2010 -11 is achieved to which  the Ministry 
informed that Review Meeting with the State Government is proposed to be taken to 
ensure proper utilization of funds as well as achievements of targets. 
3.106 Asked about the steps taken to promote awareness among parents towards th e 
importance of girls education, the Ministry stated that the scheme envisages setting up 
of District Educational Support Agency to be established by State Governmen ts in each 
of 54 identified low literacy districts which inter alia promote awareness among parents 
towards the importance of girls education.  The State Government s concerned have 
already been requested to set up DESA for the purpose.   Gujarat Government  has 
established DESA. 
 
3.107 When the Committee desired to know  whether all the States have set up their 
respective Distr ict Education Support Agency , the Ministry in their written reply have 
stated that so far, Gujarat alone has set up DESA.  The other States have been 
reminded.     

62 
 
3.108 The Committee note that the scheme of Strengthening Education among 
Scheduled Tribes (ST s) Girls in Low Literacy Districts aims to bridge gap in 
literacy levels between the general female population and tribal women, through 
facilitating 100% enrolment of tribal girls in the identified Districts or Blocks, 
more particularly in naxal affected areas and in areas in habited by PTGs.  The 
Committee note with   concern that initially in  2008-09 though the  budgetary 
allocation under the scheme had been kept at Rs. 60.00  crore, slowly it has come 
down to Rs. 40.00 crore during 2010 -11 and 2011-12.   Late receipt of approval of 
competent authority for revised scheme , election process and  delayed receipt of 
recommendation from many State Level Committees  have been cited as the 
reasons for scaling down of the budgetary allocation over the years . The 
Committee feel that being an important scheme aiming at bridging the  gap in 
literacy between general  female population and tribal woman, the budgetary 
allocation for the scheme should have increased instead of reduced allocation 
and the scheme should have picked up by now.  Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should project for higher budgetary allocation under the scheme 
so that more and more tribal girls are benefited under the scheme.  
3.109 The Committee observe  that the Scheme of Strengthening Education 
among Scheduled Tribes (ST s) Girls in Low Literacy Districts envisages setting 
up of District Educational Support Agency by the respective State Governments 
in each of 54 identified low literacy districts which  would inter-alia promote 
awareness among parents towards the importance of girls education.  However, 
the Committee are unhappy to note that till now except the State of Gujarat none 

63 
 
of the other State s have established the District Educational Support Agencies.  
On the steps taken in this regard the Ministry have simply stated that other States 
have been rem inded for setting up  of DESA.  However, i n the opinion of the 
Committee merely reminding the States to set up these agencies will not suffice 
and there is a need to sensitize the States about the intensity of the issue that 
unless DESAs are set up awarenes s about the girl's education can not be 
promoted among the parents .  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to 
take urgent necessary steps to sensitize and motivate the State Governments 
about the dire need and importance of DESAs and impress upon them   to set up 
DESAs in their States at the earliest.     
   

64 
 
G. IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL 
FOREST DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006 
 
3.110 The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 which is being administered by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
seeking to recognize and vest the forest rights and occupation in forest land in forest 
dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who have been residing 
in such forests for generations but whose rights could not be recorded, has been 
notified for operation with effect from 31.12.2007.  The Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Rules, 20 08 for implementing 
the provisions of the Act have also been notified on 1.1.2008.  As per the Act and the 
Rules notified there under, the responsibility for recognition and vesting of forest rights 
and distribution of land rights rests with the State/UT Governments. 
3.111 The progress of implementation of the act is being monitored by the office of the 
Prime Minister, Cabinet Secretariat and Planning Commission through monthly 
progress reports being sent by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  The Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs is also reviewing the progress of implementation of the Act periodically by 
convening review meetings of State Secretaries/Commissioners of Tribal 
Welfare/Development Departments. 
3.112 The Ministry have informed that a s per the information collected upto 28 th 
February, 2011, a total number of  30,56,468 (30,0 3,617 individual and 5 2,851 
community) claims have been received at the level of Gram Sabha . Out of these  
11,27,400 (11,23,731 individual and 3,669 community) titles have been distributed so 
far. The State-wise statement on claims received by the Gram Sabha (individual and 
community) and title deeds actually distributed under the Scheduled Tribes and Other 

65 
 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, as on 28.02.20 11, 
is given below:  
Sl.No. States No. of Claims received 
by the Gram Sabha 
No. of title deeds 
distributed 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
3,30,143  
(3,23,439 individual and 
6,704 community) 
1,67,605  
(1,65,502 individual and 
2,103 community) 
2. Assam 1,14,857  
(1,10,019 individual and 
4,838 community) 
29,885 
3. Bihar 2,291 - 
4. Chhattisgarh 4,91,374  
(4,87,332 individual and 
4,042 community) 
2,14,918 
 (2,14,668 individual and 
250 community) 
5. Gujarat 1,92,045  
(1,83,136 individual and 
8,909 community) 
25,771 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
5,648  
(5,355 individual and 293 
community) 
19  
(7 individual and 12 
community) 
7. Jharkhand 29,551  
(29,097 individual and 454 
community) 
6,079  
(6,022 individual and 57 
community) 
8. Karnataka 1,62,960  
(1,60,175 individual and 
2,785 community) 
6,394   
(6,393 individual and 1 
community) 
9. Kerala 37,494  
(36,125 individual and 
1,369 community)  
15,705 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
4,27,749  
(4,19,179 individual and 
8,570 community) 
1,15,082 
11. Maharashtra 3,39,689 
 (3,35,701 individual and 
3,988 community) 
1,04,767 
 (1,04,344 individual and 
423 community) 
12. Orissa 4,36,061  
(4,33,914 individual and 
2,147 community) 
2,54,400  
(2,53,738 individual and 
662 community) 
13. Rajasthan 60,353  
(60,019 individual and 334 
community) 
30,083  
(30,038 individual and 45 
community) 
14. Tamil Nadu 21,781 - 
15. Tripura 1,75,606  
(1,75,329 individual and 
1,18,827 

66 
 
Sl.No. States No. of Claims received 
by the Gram Sabha 
No. of title deeds 
distributed 
277 community) 
16. Uttar 
Pradesh 
91,406  
(91,089 Individual and 317 
community)  
10,092  
(10,084 individual and 8 
community) 
17. Uttarakhand 182 - 
 
18. West Bengal 1,37,278  
(1,29,454 individual and 
7,824 community) 
27,773  
(27,665 individual and 108 
community)  
 Total 30,56,468 ( 30,03,617 
individual & 52, 851 
community) 
11,27,400 (11,23,731 
individual & 3,669 
community 
  
3.113 The Committee enquired whether the National Advisory Council‟s working group 
on tribal concerns has stated that the Forest Rights Act is being poorly implemented 
and its rules plagued by loopholes  to which  the Ministry in their written submission 
stated as under :- 
"A Working Group on Tribal Affairs, constituted by National Advisory 
Council, had suggested certain amendments to rules of Forest Rights Act 
and guidelines for effective implementation of the Act . Some suggestions 
had already been taken care of by the Ministry by issuing suitable 
instructions to the State/UT Governments. Some issues concern the 
Ministries of Environment & Forests, Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj." 
  
3.114 To a query on  whether National Advisory Council had recommended pro -active 
measures for implementation of the Forest Rights Act including imposing penalties on 
officers who are negli gent towards its implementation, the Ministry stated that i n its  
Tenth meeting held on 26 th February, 2011, the National Advisory Council, has 
recommended for issue of operational guidelines by the Central Government under 
Section 12 of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 in respect of following issues: 

67 
 
(i) calling of Gram Sabha meetings at the level of actual compact 
settlements of the hamlet or village; 
(ii) admissibility of diverse forms of evidence in support of claims and 
provision for giving opportunity to the claimants for bei ng heard at 
sub-divisional or district levels before rejection of their claims; 
(iii) specific procedures for claiming and recognizing community forest 
resource rights, and to prevent eviction, forced relocation or 
diversion of forest land in violation of people ‟s rights, or where the 
gram sabha has not certified the process to be complete; 
(iv) provision of guaranteed minimum support price to the collectors of 
minor forest produce with freedom to sell either to state agencies or 
outside, widening and expansion of the procurement net by the state 
agencies to cover all forms of minor forest produce, and review of 
the practice of leasing of minor forest produce (such as bamboo) by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests; 
(v) need to promote awareness and facilitate continued  filing of claims 
by removing deadlines, the removal of procedur al obstacles to 
recognition of other community rights, and the need for effective 
monitoring and grievance redressal; 
The National Advisory Council has also proposed changes in the 
Scheduled T ribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Rules, 2008 to: 
(i) increase the mandatory tribal membership of Forest Rights Committees 
from the  present one-thirds to two-thirds [Rule 4(2)]; 
(ii) reduce the present requirement of quorum of two-thirds in the gram sabha 
meetings to one-half [Rule 3(1)]; 
(iii) clarify that the term „sustenance‟ includes fulfillment of livelihood needs of 
self and family, including the sale of any produce [Rule 2(b)]; and  

68 
 
(iv) allow transportation of minor forest prod uce through „locally appropriate 
means of transport for use of such produce or sale by the gatherer or their 
cooperatives/federations or the community for livelihood in accordance 
with the gram sabha‟s rules for sustainable use, if any‟[Rule 2(d)]. 
The Min istry have further informed that t he recommendations of the National 
Advisory Council are under examination in this Ministry. 
3.115 When asked about the progress/development  with regard to declaration of 
Critical Wildlife Habitats,  the Ministry in their w ritten reply have stated that  under 
Section 2(b) of the Act, the Ministry of Environment & Forests is responsible for 
determination and notification of „critical wildlife habitats‟ in the National Parks and 
Sanctuaries as per the procedure laid down in the said Section. 
3.116 The Ministry of Environment and Forests had, on 30.08.2007, communicated the 
constitution of State Level Committee s for identification/declaration of critical wildlife 
habitats to the Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs, and requested the State/UT 
Governments to constitute the State Level Committees at the earliest. The guidelines 
for delineation of critical wildlife h abitats were also notified by that Ministry on 
25.09.2007.   In the meantime, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs also, on 27.09.2007, 
nominated the Secretary in -charge of the Tribal Welfare Department/Administrator in 
the UT Government to act as a member of th e State Level Committee to be constituted 
for identification/declaration of critical wildlife habitats. 
3.117 The Ministry of Environment & Forests, vide their letter dated 04.08.2009, had 
intimated that 18 States, viz, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, H imachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal and 2 

69 
 
Union Territories, viz, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Dadra & Nagar Haveli ha d 
constituted State level Committees while the Union Territory of Chandigarh and 
Lakshadweep had mentioned that there was no need to constitute State Level 
Committees. That Ministry had also informed that Secretary (E&F) and Hon‟ble Minister 
of State (Inde pendent Charge) for Environment & Forests had written to the Chief 
Ministers for expediting the constitution of State Level Committees where such 
Committees had not yet been constituted, and to identify Critical Wildlife Habitats and 
forward detailed proposals to the Ministry for notification. 
3.118 Since many States/UT s Governments had expressed difficulties in adopting 
these guidelines for implementation on ground, the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
issued revised (simplified) guidelines for identifica tion/notification of Critical Wildlife 
Habitats on 7 th February, 2011. However, on receipt of representations expressing 
concerns on some technical, scientific, social and ecological issues related to the 
process of identification and notification of Criti cal Wildlife Habitats and the consequent 
process of relocation of people from such areas, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests have withdrawn these revised guidelines on 4th March, 2011.   
 As per the information available with this Ministry, the „criti cal wildlife habitats‟ in 
the National Parks and Sanctuaries are yet to be identified and notified in various 
States.  
3.119 When the  Committee enquired w hether the Ministry has received complaints of 
eviction of tribals from National Park s and Sanctuaries without settling their rights under 
the Forest Rights Act and w hat action  has been  taken to ensure that tribals are not 
evicted till their rights are settled, the Ministry have informed that s ome reports were 
received in the Ministry that some Scheduled Tribe persons living in National Parks and 

70 
 
Sanctuaries were being forced to leave these areas without their rights, under the Act 
being decided one way or the other. The Ministry had accordingly taken up the matter 
with the Ministry of Envi ronment & Forests for issuing instructions to all State Forest 
Departments to faithfully implement the provisions of the Forest Rights Act before taking 
any decision to evict the Scheduled Tribes living in these areas. 
3.120 Consequently, the Ministry of E nvironment & Forests has requested all the State 
Governments on 21.06.2010 to ensure that before taking any decision on displacement 
of Scheduled Tribes from National Parks and Sanctuaries, the provisions of the 
Scheduled Tribes and other traditional fores t dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006 should be duly complied with.  Hon‟ble Minister of Tribal Affairs also wrote to 
the State Governments in this regards on 30th August, 2010. 
3.121 Asked as to whether any  proactive steps have been taken by  Ministry to 
safeguard the rights of tribals in view of proliferation of devel opment projects in tribal 
areas, the Ministry in their written reply have stated that t he proposals for diversion of 
forest land for developmental projects are considered under t he Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980, administered by Ministry of Environment & Forests. In order to safeguard the 
rights of forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes, the Ministry of Environment & Forests has 
issued instructions to all State s/UTs Governments on 3 rd August, 2009 to ensure 
compliance of the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest 
dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights)Act, 2006 before submitting proposals for 
diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.  
3.122 The Committee observed that the Joint Committee of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
and the Ministry of Environment & Forests, constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
N.C. Saxena to study the implementation of Scheduled Tribes and other traditional 

71 
 
forest dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 has submitted its Report  in 
which it has given some important recommendations. 
3.123 When enquired about   the present status of the implementation of the S axena 
Committee recommendations and steps taken or proposed to be taken by the Ministry 
to implement the same, the Committee have been informed that t he Report of the Joint 
Committee of Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Environment & Forest, constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena contains recommendations/suggestions 
relating to (i) process and Institutions of the FRA, (ii) Implementation of FRA for grant of 
individual and Community Forest Rights, (iii) Implementation of Development Projects, 
(iv) Implementation for special g roups, namely, Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups, 
Nomadic Pastoralists, Shifting Cultivators, and Forest village s, (v) Protected Areas and 
Critical Wildlife Habitats, (vi) Future Structure of Forest Governance, (vii) Enhancing 
Livelihoods through Non -Timber Forest Produce, (viii) Convergence of Development 
Programmes for Tribals and Forest Dwellers, etc. The recommendations/suggestions of 
the Committee are under examination for appropriate action.   
 
3.124 The Committee observed that s everal development projects coming up in forest 
areas ha ve resulted in displacement of tribal people .  In this context, the Committee 
wanted to know about the role being played by the Ministry in safeguarding the interests 
of these tribals and ensuring a good rehabilitation package for them  to which the 
Ministry stated that   at present this Ministry considers clearance of those irrigation/flood 
control projects where STs are affected/displaced. Clearances are issued subject to the 
condition that all measures contained in RR  Policy, 2007 and policy of the concerned 
State Govt. are taken into consideration for rehabilitation of displaced STs. 

72 
 
3.125 The Committee are unhappy to note the slow progress with regard to 
distribution of title deeds under the Scheduled Tribes and Othe r Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 as against 30,56,468 lakh 
(30,03,617 individual & 52,851 community) claims received only 11,27,400 lakh 
(11,23,731 individual & 3,669 community) title deeds have been distributed.  The 
Committee also observe that in many of the States though the claims have been 
received in large numbers, the number of certificates of title deeds distributed is 
far less than the claims received.  The Committee note with serious concern that 
the implement ation of the Act has not progressed at all in the States of Bihar, 
Tamil Nadu and Utt arakhand where out of a total number of 2291, 21781 and 182 
claims received respectively not a single ti tle deed has been distributed so far in 
these States.  In the opinion of the Committee  the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  being 
at the helm of affairs as far as the tribal rights are concerned should see and 
ensure that States are progressing well in implementation of the Act  and 
issues/problems in way of implementation are addressed and cleared  on time .  
Therefore, the  Committee recommend the Ministry to take up the issue of early 
distribution of rights with the above three States at the earliest so that the 
distribution process kicks off without any further delay.  The  Committee also 
desire the Ministry to persuade and facilitate the implementation process in all 
other States where the implementation has been slow by taking up specific steps 
and reviewing their progress at regular intervals. 
 
3.126 The Committee observe  that the Joint Committee of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs and the Ministry of Environment & Forests, constituted under the 

73 
 
Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena to study the implementation of Scheduled 
Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 
2006 has submitted its Report in which it has given  some important 
recommendations (i) process and Institutions of the FRA, (ii) Implementation of 
FRA of grant of individual and Community Forest Rights, (iii) Implementation of 
Development Projects, (iv) Implementation for special groups, namely, 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups, Nomadic Pastoralists, Shifting Cultivators, 
and Forest villagers, (v) Protected Areas and Critical Wildlife Habitats, (vi) Future 
Structure of Forest Gov ernance, (vii) Enhancing Livelihoods through Non -Timber 
Forest Produce, (viii) Convergence of Development Programmes for Tribals and 
Forest Dwellers, etc. The Committee have also been informed that t he 
recommendations/suggestions of the Committee are under  examination for 
appropriate action. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take an 
early view on the Report after consulting all the stake holders and implement the 
recommendations/suggestions within a definite time frame.  T he Committee may 
be apprised of the precise action taken in this regard. 
3.127 The Committee note with concern  that several development projects 
coming up in forest areas ha ve resulted in displacement of tribal people.  The 
Ministry have informed that  at present this Ministry considers clearance of those 
irrigation/flood control projects where STs are affected/displaced and the Ministry 
do not have any role in clearance for other projects wherein tribal people are 
directly or indirectly affected.  Clearances are issued subject to the condition that 
all measures contained in RR Policy, 2007 and policy of the concerned State 
Governments are taken into consideration for rehabilitation of displaced STs.   

74 
 
However, the Committee feel that being the nodal Ministry looking after the needs 
of tribal people the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should have larger role in this regard.  
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Tribal Affair 's clearance 
should be made mandatory not only  in irrigation/flood control projects but in 
respect of all developmental projects which involve displacement of tribal people.   
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
                  Chairman, 
20 June, 2011                                                     Standing Committee on 
30 Jyaistha, 1933 (Saka)               Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
  

75 
 
Annexure - I 
 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs   
Surrender (Plan) 
2010-11 ( Demand No. 94 ) 
(Rupees in thousands) 
Head Name Surrender Reasons for surrender 
Scheme under Tribal Sub Plan 102373 Non submission of proposals alongwith Physical 
financial progress report by States 
Scheme under proviso to Article 275(1) of the 
constitution 
266690 Non submission of proper utilization certificates for 
the previous releases alongwith physical/financial 
progress by some States 34519 
Scheme of PMS, Book Bank and Upgradation 
of Merit of ST Students 7762 Non receipt of complete proposals from the State 
Government. 
Development of Primitive Tribal Groups 103179 Savings due to lack of complete proposals 
Scheme of PMS, Book Bank and Upgradation 
of Merit of ST Students 1 Non receipt of complete proposals from the State 
Government. 
Research information & Mass Education, 
Tribal Festivals and others 9400 
Out of 17 TRIs , funds could not be released to 3 TRIs 
due to non-receipt of proposals from those TRIs viz. 
Karnataka, TamilNadu and Utter Pradesh 
Support to National/State Scheduled Tribes 
Finance & Development Corporations 100 Investments is for equity capital and assets not 
applicable 
Information Technology- NCST 20 Due to less proposals 
Grant-in-aid to NGOs for STs including 
Coaching and Allied Scheme and award for 
exemplary service 
22826 Lack of complete proposals with Selection procedure 
Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for ST 
Student 68700 Demand of UGC was less than the allocation 
Scheme of Institute of Excellence /Top Class 
Education 48 Adequate number of proposals complete in all 
respects were not received from Institutions 
Development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Groups(PTGs) 5915 Lack of complete proposals   
Scholarship to the students of Scheduled Tribes 
for Studies abroad 1979 Selected Candidates had not taken admission 
Grant-in-aid to NGOs for STs including 
Coaching and Allied Scheme and award for 
exemplary service 
 
29008 Due to lack of complete proposals 
Research information & Mass Education, 
Tribal Festivals and others 1100 Shortfall due to some of the advertisements could not 
be released due to enforcement of code of conduct 

76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10522 
Proposals from NGOs not recommended by State 
Governments  were not considered keeping in view 
the revised guidelines. Many proposals for research 
studies and workshops/ seminars could not be 
considered for reasons such as unclear objective and 
methodologies; poor organizational capacities; etc.  .  
2 Based on actual proposals received . Selection for 
the froths COE could not be finalized. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
32 Due to less proposals 
1725 Study on Art. 275(1) of the Constitution could not be 
approved 
Strengthening of Education among ST Girls in 
Low literacy Districts 24333 Lack of complete proposals   
Vocational Training in Tribal Areas 20256 Lack of complete proposals   
      
    
Information Technology 615 Savings is due to non  materialization  of some major 
proposals due to  administrative reasons 
    
Research information & Mass Education, 
Tribal Festivals and others 10000 
Out of 17 TRIs , funds could not be released to 3 
TRIs, due to non -receipt of proposals  from some 
TRIs viz. Karnataka , Tamilnadu and Uttar Pradesh 
Grant-in-aid to NGOs for STs including 
Coaching and Allied Scheme and award for 
exemplary service 
100 Original BE was utilized,  Token supplementary not 
re-appropriated due to less amount and no proposals 
Development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Groups ( PTGs) 8530 Surrender due to lack of complete proposals  
      
   
 Total  729733   
   
 
  

77 
 
           Annexure II 
Dr. Mungekar Committee‟s recommendation in improving the delivery system 
 
 
6. Effective delivery mechanism 
6(i) For ensuring effective delivery mechanism there is a strong need to resuscitate ITDPs by 
re-strengthening and revamping for being able to be the implementing agencies for the 
new proposed deal. 
6(ii) The process of planning from below should begin with ITDPs.  It should move on to block 
unit in the form of a broad perspective along with annual plan exercise in not more than 
three years.  This preliminary exercise should pave the way for a real process  of planning 
from below for Scheduled Areas in the 12 th Plan.  Competent micro planning units  should 
be established at State and also ITDP levels. 
6(iii) A single line administration should be established at the level of ITDPs with a clear chain 
of command and specific wide -band functional domain.  While Panchayat Raj institutions 
at the District/intermediate level should have decision -making powers in relevant areas, 
implementation should be the exclusive domain of administration.  On the other hand, the  
domain of Gram Sabha should remain non -violable with administration playing a 
supportive role. 
6(iv) At the District level, all TSP funds flowing to the Scheduled Areas should be through the 
ITDPs.  Since the flow of funds at the district level for Sched uled Areas is in many cases 
likely to exceed Rs. 200 crore annually, an officer equal in rank and experience to that of 
the CEO (ZP) or Project Officer (DRDA)  should be provided with a fixed tenure as the 
District Tribal Welfare Officer or Project Director ITDP. 
6(v) At least for Tribal majority districts such district level officer should be selected by an 
Expert Committee headed by the Chief Secretary of the State Government. The district 
level office should be appropriately strengthened and the strengt h should be reviewed 
once in 5 years.  The entire personnel should be brought  under a special disciplinary 
regime.  The District level officer should be  vested with full authority, as in Andhra 
Pradesh, to coordinate with all line Departments, deal with delinquent staff, including 
termination of service contracts.  He/She should also be vested with the administrative 
authority in respect of regular Government employees upto class -II level officers 
posted/working in Scheduled Areas.  
6(vi) At the Block le vel, in Scheduled Areas, monitoring units should be created with modern 
office and communication facilities under the District Officer in charge of Tribal Affairs.  
As far as TSP  funds are concerned, BDOs should be answerable to the Project Director of 
the ITDP. 
6(vii) With a set of urgent tasks and need for effective implementation, the holistic frame of TSP 
should also be put in place immediately for Ministries of Government of India. The Central 
Ministries/ State Departments must assume their responsib ilities.  They should assess the 
lost ground and make good omissions in the 11 th and subsequent Plans.  It is necessary 
that a well defined structure is put in place with the backing of a formal order.  
6(viii) The unacknowledged health crisis in Tribal areas should be handled in a mission -mode in 
a holistic frame.  It should cover all aspects of people’s health from pauper -like diet status 
at one end and invasion of new diseases at the other.  The traditional he alers and trained 

78 
 
daies should be integral part of this Mission.  Comprehensive health coverage should 
begin with establishment of full facilities at the Primary Health Centres (PHC) and APHC 
level to be accomplished within 3 years. 
6(ix) The minimum popu lation norm or criterion, where -ever stipulated in any infrastructure 
scheme, should be relaxed where these facilities are to be extended to the Tribal 
population. 
6(x) In sparsely populated hilly or desert areas, villages may be very small or divided int o 
small hamlets.  In such cases, and Anganwadi may be set up in a village or a hamlet 
having a population of 300 or more. 
6(xi) A major special thrust is necessary to ensure that: 
 
(a) Elementary education of good quality is imparted to all free of cost. 
 
(b) Special handicaps are overcome and the great cultural heritage is used as the 
foundation of real education and 
6(xii) A time bound programme should be taken up comprising inter alia: 
 
(a) Universal enrolment in elementary stage as a campaign within 2 years. 
 
(b) A system of ‘academic linkage and guidance’ should be established right from the 
nursery to the University (from ‘n to u’) within 2 years so as to make the entire 
educational system vibrant and capable of moving in unison with a purpose; and  
 
(c) The school i n the village should become the hub of citizen education, equipped 
with a good library. 
6(xiii) Strengthening/reorienting/revamping of the implementing machinery.  There is strong 
necessity of formulating suitable personnel policies to make postings in th e Tribal areas 
as attractive and satisfactory rather than being considered as punishment postings as is 
the present opinion across the board with a few exceptions.  An effective system of 
postings, rewards and punishment should be worked out for the Schedu led Areas.  To 
start with all positions in the Ministries/Departments dealing with the Tribal affairs must 
be held by offices who may have worked in a Tribal area for not less than two years.  
6(xiv) Since no authentic data regarding the land use, including surface and the ground water 
availability in the Tribal/Scheduled Areas is available, support of the National Remote 
Sensing Agency (NRSA) may be taken to provide land use, surface and ground water 
availability in each of the 195 ITDAs of the cou ntry so that the specific development plans 
based on increasing the water regime of the Tribal land may be prepared resulting in 
enhanced productivity and income thereof.  Such periodic assessments, say at interval of 
two years, would provide comparative s tatus in a time series and form scientific basis of 
the concurrent review. 
 
 
6(xv) All markets should be suitably regulated under the aegis of ITDPs and the Panchayati Raj 
Institutions within a year. The entire Tribal produce, mainly MFP should be brought  under 
support price system with in 2 years. 
6(xvi) A single window system for credit, marketing and supply under the system of Large Sized 

79 
 
multipurpose Societies (LAMPS) should be established, or revamped where already 
established, with competent and reliable personnel under the unified control of the ITDP. 
7. Creation of Critical Infrastructure 
7(i) The first proviso to Article 275(1) is unique in the sense that it provides special 
dispensation for financing developmental programmes for STs and for raising the level 
of administration in SAs as grants-in-aid to the States. 
7(ii) The quality of administration is the firm foundation of planned economic development.  
This aspect has somehow been neglected notwithstanding the provisions in Article 
275(1).  Due to inbuilt exclusion of tribal areas on the basis of population norms and 
routine extension of general programmes without ST – centric planning to the 
Scheduled Areas, the level of funding continues to be inadequate and SAs suffer from 
utter neglect.  The potent provisions of the Fifth Schedule, and Article 275(1) read with 
Article 339 (2) need to be effectively used to avoid a situation of poorest infrastructure 
in the resource-rich Scheduled Areas. 
 
  
  

80 
 
ANNEXURE - III  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 20 TH 
APRIL, 2011 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI LALIT MOHAN SUKLABAIDYA  -  IN THE CHAIR 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
3. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
11. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
14. Shri Baishnab Parida 
15. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
16. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
17. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri Radhey Shyam   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash    -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

81 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation and              
Organisation 
 
1. Shri A.K. Chugh Secretary, M/o TA 
 
2. 
 
Shri A.N. Jha Joint Secretary & Financial 
Adviser,  M/o TA 
3. 
 
Dr. Bachittar Singh Joint Secretary, M/o TA 
4. Shri P.D. Meena Joint Secretary, M/o TA 
 
5. Shri S.K. Gupta DDG,  (Statistics) M/o TA 
 
6. 
 
Shri Amar Singh Economic Adviser, M/o TA 
7. Shri A.N. Bokshi Chief Controller of Accounts 
 
8. 
 
Shri Gur Saroop Sood CMD, NSTFDC 
9. 
 
Smt. Sneh Latha Kumar MD, TRIFED  
10. 
 
Smt. Prakriti Srivastava DIG, Wildlife Habitat 
11. 
 
Shri Subhash Chandra DIG, Forest Policy 
12. Shri P. UnniKrishan General Manager,  NSTFDC 
 
13. Shri J.K. Popli Director, M/o TA 
 
14. 
 
Shri A.K. Srivastava Director, M/o TA 
15. Shri Asit Gopal Director, M/o TA 
 
16. Smt. Santosh Director, M/o TA 
 
 
2. ******   ******    ******      ******. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and informed that the meeting had been 

82 
 
convened to discuss the Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
At the instance of the Chairman, the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs briefly narrated 
the details of various schemes/programmes undertaken by the Ministry and intimated 
the physical and financial targets achieved in that connection with the help of the power  
point presentation . 
4. The Members then raised points/questions, which inter-alia related to under 
utilization and surrender of funds under various schemes,  utilization of funds under the 
scheme of Development of Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs) and the progress on the 
review of Jarawa Policy, 2004, Action plan for bringing structural c hanges as per 
recommendations of Dr. Mungekar Committee, reasons for lack of receipt of viable 
proposals under various schemes, early finalization and implementation of National 
Tribal Policy, irregularities in distribution of title deeds under the Forest Rights Act, 
2006, strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effectiveness of the schemes and 
steps for ensuring accountability of NGOs etc.    
5. The representatives of the Ministry then responded to the queries put forth by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies to those 
points which could not be replied in the meeting. 
6. Hon‟ble Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and  expressing their views 
in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

83 
 
ANNEXURE - IV 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 20TH JUNE, 
2011 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1625 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Premchand Guddu 
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
10. Shri Mohan Jena 
11. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
13. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
14. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
15. Shri Om Prakash Yadav   
 
    RAJYA SABHA  
 
16. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
17. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
18. Shri Ahmad Sayeed Malihabadi 
19. Shri Baishnab Parida 
20. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
21. Shri Nandi Yelliah 

84 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Radhey Shyam  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  -  Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt 
the Three Draft Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pertaining 
to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of 
Minority Affairs. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following draft Reports 
with some modifications/amendments :- 
 
(i) Fifteenth Report  on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(ii) Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
(iii) Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2011-2012) of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chair man to finalize these draft Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
5. ******    ******   ******   ****** 
  The Committee then adjourned. 