1 
 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2011 - 2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  the subject 
"Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 


2 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  the subject 
"Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the M inistry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2012 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.3.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter- I. 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE I Revision in the Centrally sponsored scheme of Post -Matric Scholarship for 
students belonging to Scheduled Castes. 
 
ANNEXURE II Revision in the Centrally sponsored scheme of Post -Matric Scholarship for 
students belonging to OBCs (PMS-OBC). 
 
ANNEXURE III Planning Commission letter dated 17.2.2011 regarding Recommendation  of the 
Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
– Scholarship schemes for Scheduled Castes/Other Backward Classes, Para 
1.45. 
 
ANNEXURE IV Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment D.O. letter dated 5.10.2010.  
ANNEXURE V Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment D.O. letter dated 17.1.2011.  
ANNEXURE VI Setting up of Monitoring Committee for Scholarship Schemes for Scheduled 
Castes implemented by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
ANNEXURE VII Setting up of Monitoring Committee for Scholarship Schemes for Other Backward 
Classes implemented by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
ANNEXURE VIII* Changes in the Centrally sponsored scheme of Pre-Matric Scholarship to children 
of those engaged in 'unclean' occupations. 
 
ANNEXURE IX Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment D.O. letter dated 15.2.2011.  
ANNEXURE X Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Social J ustice and 
Empowerment held on 5.3.2012.                    
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
   * Will be available in printed version.                                      
                                            

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2011-2012) 
       
 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
13. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana  
14. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
17. Shri Kabir Suman 
  *18. Smt. Usha Verma  
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
**27. Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28. Shri Baishnab Parida 
29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
_______________________________________________________________ 
* Smt. Usha Verma ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 3.1.2012. 
** Dr. Ram Dayal Munda was expired on 30.9.2011. 

5 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject " Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs " pertaining to the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 th 
November, 2010.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 14.9.2011.  Th e 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 5.3.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report of the Standing Com mittee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their a ppreciation for the valuable assistance rendered 
to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
05 March, 2012        Chairman, 
15 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Scholarship Schemes for 
SCs/OBCs"  relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
1.2 The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha on 
30th November, 2010.  It contained 25 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Paragraph  Nos.  1.45,  1.56, 1.57, 1.139, 1.140, 1.141, 1.142, 1.143, 
1.144 and 1.145. 
 (Total 10  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
-Nil- 
 (Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I:  
Paragraph Nos.  1.44, 1.47, 1.48,  1.146 and 1.148. 
(Total 5 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
Paragraph Nos.   1.43, 1.46, 1.49, 1.50, 1. 51, 1.52, 1.53, 1.54, 1.55, and 
1.147. 
  (Total 10  - Chapter V)  

8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the repli es rece ived from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A.  Revision of   Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC/OBC students on the 
basis of consumer price index. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 1.44) 
1.5 The Committee were unhappy to note that there was a substantial delay in the 
revision of post -matric scholarship schemes for SCs/OBCs which was last revised 
during 2003.  On the status of the revision of the scholarship schemes, the Committee 
had been informed that the re vision was under consideration and was proposed to be 
effected by the end of the year.  Keeping in view the considerable price hike, the 
Committee felt that there was an urgent need to increase the rates as per the present 
consumer price Index.  Also with considerable increase in salaries of Government 
employees consequent to 6 th Pay Commission Report and with no increase in income 
ceiling many deserving SC students ha d been left out of the ambit of scholarship 
scheme. Since these scholarship schemes empowe red and sustain ed the interest of 
SC/OBC students towards formal education, the revision should be all -encompassing 
taking into account every parameter of the scheme viz. income criteria, rates of 
scholarship,  norms for award of scholarship, the time and the mode of payment, etc. 
The Committee had,  therefore, strongly recommend ed the Ministry to expedite the 
process of revising the schemes so that SC/OBC students are able to get enhanced 

9 
 
rates in the current academic year itself.  The Committee had further desired that the 
scholarship rates be linked with the consumer price index and reviewed at the beginning 
of each academic year so that in the event of increase in price index, the scholarship 
rates will suitably be increased.  
1.6 The Ministry of Social J ustice and Empowerment in their Action Taken Reply 
have stated  as under :- 
"The status of revision of Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SCs and OBCs is 
given below :-  
(i) Post Matric Scholarship Scheme to Students belonging to 
Scheduled Castes: The scheme has been revised with effect from 
1st July, 2010, vide this Ministry‟s Order dated 31.12.2010 (copy of 
the Order is at Annexure-I).  The Scheme has been revised so as 
to:-  
 raise the parental income ceiling for eligibility from Rs.1.00 lakh to 
Rs.2.00 lakh,  
 rationalize the grouping of Courses, and  
 upward revision of maintenance and other allowances by 
approximately 60%. 
(ii) Post Matric Scholarship to OBC students BE allocation under Post 
Matric Scholarship Scheme for OBC students in 2009 -10 was 
Rs.135.00 crore, which was enhanced to Rs . 350.00 crore and Rs. 
535.00 crore in 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 respectively.  In the light of 
the enhanced allocation, the scheme has been revised w.e.f. 

10 
 
1.7.2011 (Annexure II) to raise the income ceiling and maintenance 
and other allowances".  
1.7 Keeping in view the fact that substantial delay has occurred in the revision 
of Post -matric Scholarship schemes for SC/OBC students, t he Committee  had 
earlier  recommended the Ministry to expedite the process of revising the 
schemes so that SC/OBC students are able to get the benefits at enhanced rates 
from the current academic year itself.  The Committee  had also desired that the 
scholarship rates be linked with the consum er price index which should be  
reviewed at the beginning of each academic year so that in the event of increase 
in price index, the scholarship rates were suitably increased.   From the action 
taken reply furnished by the Ministry, t he Committee note that the Post -matric 
scholarship schemes for SC and OBC students have since been revised  w.e.f. 
July, 2010 and July, 2011 respectively.    The Committee are however constrained 
to observe that revision in scholarship rates specially in the maintenance 
allowance have fallen far short of the desired level.  Though there has been 60% 
increase in the monthly maintenance rates for SC students i.e. Rs. 550, Rs.530 
and Rs.300 for day scholars and Rs. 1200, Rs. 820 and Rs. 570 for hosteller s  for 
Group I, II & III , the revised rates are still too meager to give any worthwhile 
financial support to SC students.  In case of OBC students, the revised monthly 
maintenance rates i.e. Rs. 350, Rs. 335, Rs. 210 and Rs. 160 for day scholars and 
Rs. 750, Rs. 510 , Rs. 400 and  Rs. 260 for hostellers for Group A, B, C, and D  are  
also low.   While   expressing   their   displeasure the Committee once  again 
reiterate    their earlier recommendation  and re -emphasize that the scholarship 
rates should be linked with the consumer price index and  reviewed at the 

11 
 
beginning of each academic year so that in the event of increase in price index, 
the scholarsh ip rates are suitably increased . The Committee further desire that 
scholarships for all students belonging to Scheduled Caste and Other Backward 
Class should be brought at par in all the schemes run by the Ministry.  
B. Expansion of Scope of new Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme and give 
suitable incentive to all States till the implementation of scheme at Central 
level from Class I.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5 & 6, Para Nos.  1.47 & 1.48) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed that Pre -Matric scholarship scheme for SC 
students which could be instrumental into reducing the dropout rate was limited only to 
students of parents engaged in unclean occupations.  The Committee had therefore 
desired that t he Ministry should make concerted efforts to get requisite allocation for 
introduction of the pre -matric scholarship scheme for all SC students during the next 
financial year so that the scheme could  be fully implemented at the earliest or in the 
beginning of 12th plan.  The Committee had further desired that the Government should 
give suitable incentive to  all States to implement Pre -matric scholarship schemes at 
their own levels till the implementation of such scheme at Central level.  
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply on the above recommendations the Ministry of Social 
Justice & Empowerment have informed the Committee as under:- 
1. "With a view to bring down the dropout r ate of SC children, in general,  a new 
Centrally-sponsored “Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Caste 
Students” studying in Classes IX & X has been announced by the Finance 
Minister in his budget speech,  2011-12.  This would benefit an estimated 43 lakh 
SC students.  An allocation of Rs.200 crore has been provided for this purpose in 
this Ministry‟s budget for the year 2011 -12 which will need to be augmented.  
Further necessary action in this regard is being taken".  
 
2. "It may not be possible to provide any incentive/financial assistance to States for 
implementing their own Pre -matric scholarship schemes. However, launch of a 

12 
 
new Centrally-sponsored “Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for  Scheduled Caste 
Students” studying in Classes IX & X is already under consideration of the 
Government".  
 
1.10  The Committee had recommended the Ministry to make concerte d efforts 
to get requisite allocation for introduction of the pre -matric scholarship scheme 
for all SC students during the next financial year so that the scheme is fully 
implemented at the earliest or in the beginning of 12th plan.  Similarly, the 
Committee had also desired that the Government to give suitable incentive to all 
States to implement Pre -matric scholarship schemes at their own levels till the 
implementation of such scheme at Central level. The Committee note from the 
action taken reply  that the Ministry have introduc ed the Pre -matric scholarship 
scheme for SC students during the current financial year.  However, the 
Committee are given to understand that under the new scheme, scholarships are 
confined to class IX and X students  only.  The Committee have also been 
informed by the Ministry that i t may not be possible to provide any 
incentive/financial assistance to States for implementing their own Pre -matric 
scholarship schemes.  The Committee feel that since the dropout of students is 
more in lower classes, the new sche me aiming at awarding scholarship to only 
class IX and X students will not fully serve the purpose and there is a genuine 
need to provide scholarship to all pre-matric students i.e. from class I to X.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier reco mmendation and also as 
recommended in 15th Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) that the scope of 
the new Pre -matric scholarship for SC students should be expanded in order to 
cover all students from Class I to Class X and also to give suitable incentive to all 

13 
 
States to implement Pre -matric scholarship schemes at their own levels till the 
implementation of scheme at Central level from Class I. 
C.  Implementation aspects of Scholarship Schemes 
 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 7 to 13 and Para Nos. 1.49 to 1.55) 
 
1.11 The Committee in recommendation s Nos. 7 to 1 3 regarding implementation 
aspects of  Scholarship Schemes had made the following recommendations:- 
(i) The Ministry should sensitize the States to make payments of scholarships 
through Post Office/Bank   and vigorously pursue the opening of bank accounts of all 
the beneficiaries within a definite time frame.  
 
(ii) The Ministry should take up the matter of timely payment of scholarships with 
State Govern ments at Chief Secretary level and the  scholarships s hould be paid 
Quarterly positively beginning with first installment immediately after the admission.  
(iii) The Ministry should take up the matter with State Governments at the Chief 
Secretary level and ensure that full scholarship amount is paid to studen ts for 12 
months instead of 10 months. 
(iv) The Ministry should accord top priority to development of suitable e -governance 
module so that e-payment system of scholarship soon becomes a reality. 
(v) The Ministry should direct State Governments to issue instructions to private 
institutions not to demand tuition fee from SC/OBC students who fulfill the eligibility 
criteria for scholarship schemes, but charge it from State Governments as being done 
by Government institutions. 
(vi) The caste certificate issuing procedure be revamped and simplified so that the 
concerned students d o not face any difficulty in obtaining the same. The Committee 
would like proactive involvement of the Department in this regard. 
(vii) The Ministry should create a grievance Cell and also direct States/UTs to set up 
the same at State level so that there could be expeditious redressal of grievances of 
SC/OBC students. 

14 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply on the above recommendations the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment have informed the Committee as under:- 
(i) The Ministry is pursuing the matter with defaulting States/UTs on regular basis to 
ensure that a uniform system is adopted throughout the country at the earliest. 
Secretary (SJ&E) has writ ten to State Governments/UTs on 5 -10-2010 (Annexure-IV) 
and again on 17-1-2011 (Annexure-V) in this regard.  
(ii) Secretary (SJ&E) has taken up the matter at Chief Secretary level vide his demi -
official letters dated 5-10-2010 and 17-1-2011 inter-alia impressing upon them to ensure 
regular disbursement of scholarships to the students (Annexure-IV & V). 
(iii) The State Governments/UTs at Chief Secretary level have been requested to 
ensure disbursement of maintenance allowance to the students for 12 months un der the 
Scheme of “Post -Matric Scholarship for SC students”, vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s demi -
official letter dated 17.1.2011. (Annexure-V). 
(iv) The State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh 
demonstrated their e-payment systems during the  Conference held October-November, 
2010.  All other States have shown their willingness to implement the system in their 
respective States. The matter shall be pursued for expediting action on part of the 
remaining States. Secretary (SJ&E) has also taken up the matter at Chief Secretary level 
vide his demi -official letter dated 17 -1-2011 (Annexure-V) inter-alia requesting them to 
implement e-payment of scholarships in their respective State at the earliest. 
(v) This Ministry has issued a suitable advisory t o all the State Governments/UTs to 
issue necessary instructions to private institutions not to demand tuition fee from SC 
and OBC students who fulfill the eligibility criteria for scholarship schemes, but charge it 
from State Governments as was being done by Government institutions.  They have 
been requested to ensure compliance of these instructions vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s 
demi-official letter dated 17 -1-2011 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of the States/ 
Administrators of UTs.  (Annexure-V).  
(vi) Secretary (SJ&E) has taken up the matter regarding simplification of procedure 
for issue of caste certificate to SC/OBC students with the State Governments/UTs at 

15 
 
Chief Secretary/Administrator level vide his demi -official letter dated 17 -1-2011 
(Annexure-V).  
(vii) The Ministry has already taken up the matter with all the State Governments/UTs 
at Chief Secretary/Administrator level vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s d.o. letter dated 5 -10-
2010 (Annexure-IV)  and 17.01.2011 (Annexure-V) to set up Grievance Redressal Cells. 
The States have been requested to designate Grievance Redressal  Officers (GROs) at 
the State and District levels to redress students‟ scholarship -related grievances, 
publicize their details widely and give suitable instructions to them to implement a 
comprehensive scholarship grievance redressal  system.  The State Governments of 
Kerala, Haryana, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh 
and Tripura have confirmed suitable action in this regard. 
1.13 Having carefully considered the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry on the 
recommendations of the Committee on  opening of individual accounts of  
students in post -offices/banks for disbursement of scholarships , timely payment 
of scholarship s, ensuring payment of  scholarship amount for 12  months, 
implementation of  e-payment of scholarships, issuing instructions to private 
institutions not to demand tuition fee from SC/OBC students who fulfill the 
eligibility criteria for scholarship schemes, but charge it from State Governments, 
simplification of procedure for issue of caste  certificate to SC/OBC students  and 
setting up of Grievance Redressal Cells , the Committee feel that concrete steps 
have not been taken  for implementation of the above issues .  The Commi ttee 
have been given to understand that the Ministry vide their demi official letter 
dated 17th January, 2011 have written to all the State Governments asking them 
to send a point wise report on action  taken/being taken by 15.2.2011  along with 
copies of re levant instructions issued by the State Government s.   Though the 
Action Taken replies were submitted by the Ministry in September, 2011 six 
months after the last date of the instructions given to the States , the Committee 

16 
 
have not been informed of the replies received from the State Governments 
regarding Action Taken on the various issues.  The Committee feel that the 
Ministry can not wash their hand by simply writing letters to the State 
Governments.  The Committee take a serious view of this and once again reiterate 
that realization of the above matters may be taken up at highest level at their 
review meetings.  Concrete steps/action taken in this regard may be intimated to 
the Committee within three months of the presenta tion of the Report.  The 
Committee further desire that all transactions in regard to payment of 
scholarships should be th rough Bank/Post Office Accounts  and there should be 
no cash transactions.   
 
D. Taking   up positive steps for further increase of fellowships under Rajiv Gandhi 
National Fellowship for SC students  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 1.146) 
1.14 The Committee had found that under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC 
students every year 1333 fellowships were awarded for Scheduled Caste students.  The 
Committee were constrained to note that the number of applications received under the 
scheme i.e. 4372 during 2006 -07, 5909 during 2007 -08 and 6895 during 2008 -09 had 
been increasing while the number of awards per year ha d remained the same.  The 
Committee ha d been informed that a proposal to increase the number of fresh 
fellowships per year was under consideration.  Keeping in view the population of 
Scheduled Caste students and the number of applications reject ed every year, these 
fellowships were not sufficient, the Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommend ed 
that the number of fellowships m ight be increased immediately so that more and more 
number of students could get fellowships.   
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have inter-alia stated:- 

17 
 
"The number of fresh fellowships to be awarded under the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship Scheme for SC students has been increased from 1333 to 2000 each 
year with effect from 1-4-2010".  
 
1.16 Keeping in view the increasing number of application s for fellowships 
under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship scheme being received from SC students 
every year and the number of applications rejected every year and  the number of 
fellowships remaining the same,  the Committee had strongly recommended that 
the number of fellowships should be increased so that more and more number of 
students could be benefitted .  The Committee have been informed that the 
number of fresh fellowships to be awarded under t he Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship Scheme for SC students has been increased from 1333 to 2000 each 
year with effect from 1-4-2010.  The Committee feel that this increase is   not up to 
the desired level keeping in view the fact that large number of applications are 
rejected every year.   The Committee , therefore, strongly recommend  to the 
Ministry to take positive steps for further increasing the number of fellowships to 
at least u pto 6000 so that none of the deserving SC student is deprived of 
fellowship.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard.    
 
E. Examining   the feasibility of increasing funds under both the schemes and 
early revision of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for OBC students 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25,  Para No. 1.148) 
1.17 The Committee had observed that under the schemes of pre -matric and post -
matric scholarships for OBC students introduced during the year 1998 -99, the actual 
expenditure ha d been constantly on the higher side exceeding the Budget 
Estimates/Revised Estimates. In the case of pre -matric scholarships, the actual 

18 
 
expenditure had been high over Budget Estimates during 2006 -07 and 2008 -09 and in 
respect of post -matric scholarships, the actual expenditure ha d always been high over 
Budget Estimates during 2006 -07, 2007-08 and 2008 -09.   The Committee ha d been 
given to understand that the higher  expenditure had been due to high demand from the 
State Governments. The Committee had also observe d that under the pre -matric 
scholarship for OBC students very meager amounts i.e. Rs. 25/ - from Class I to V, 
Rs.40/- from Class VI to VIII and Rs. 50/ - from Class IX to X and under post matric 
scholarship for OBC students Rs. 190/ - for Group A,B,C, Rs. 120 for Group D and Rs. 
90/- for Group E for Day scholars were being awarded to the students which were 
grossly inadequate to meet the educational needs of the se students. The Committee  
had felt that for the large section of OBC students who were in dire need of financial 
support the existing rate of scholarships under both the heads of pre -matric and post -
matric was just not sufficient and there was correspondi ngly a need to increase the 
allocation of funds under both the scholarship  schemes for OBCs. The Committee  had, 
therefore, urged the Ministry to examine the feasibility of increasing funds under both 
the schemes by seeking an enhanced allocation in the bud getary estimates during the 
next financial year so that the above schemes did not suffer due to paucity of funds. 
1.18 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under :- 
"The PMS-OBC Scheme has been revised with effect from 01.7.2011 to raise the 
income ceiling and maintenance and other allowances. (Copy of Order is at 
Annexure II)  The allocation under PMS for OBCs has increased by about 53% 
from Rs.350 crore in 2010 -2011 to Rs.535 crore in 2011 -2012.  This increase is 
still far below the actual requirement of States for meeting the full demand of 
OBC students.  This issue is also being deliberated upon by the Working Group 
for the XII Five Year Plan set up by the Planning Commission and its 
recommendations would be placed before the Planning Commission. 
 
 The Ministry has regularly been taking up the matter of enhancement of plan 
budget of schemes for welfare of OBCs including Pre -Matric Scholarship for 

19 
 
OBCs.  Due to budget ary constraints, it has not been possible to revise the Pre -
Matric Scholarship Scheme for OBCs, so far". 
 
 
1.19 The Committee  had urged the Ministry to examine the feasibility of 
increasing funds under the schemes of pre -matric and post -matric scholarships 
for OBC students by seeking an enhanced allocation in the budgetary estimates 
during the next financial year so that the above schemes do not suffer due to 
paucity of funds.   The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that the 
allocation under PMS for OBCs had increased by about 53% from Rs. 350 crore in 
2010-11 to Rs. 535 crore in 2011 -12.  However, the Ministry have also admitted 
that this increase is still far below the actual requirement of States for meeting 
the full demand of O BC students.  The Committee have also been informed that 
due to budgetary constraints, it has not been possible to revise the Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for OBCs, so far.  The Committee do not accept the reply of 
Government and reiterate their earlier recommendation and recommend that the 
Ministry to examine the feasibility of increasin g funds under both the schemes 
and take immediate steps to revise the Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for OBC 
students.   

20 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 1.45) 
2.1 The Committee observe that there are different rates of scholarships as well as 
income ceiling limits for SCs/OBCs/STs and minorities. The Committee have  been 
informed that since these scholarship schemes are being run by three different 
Ministries, there is no coordinated view while effecting revisions under different 
schemes. The Committee are of the view that since all these schemes relate to 
disadvantaged sections of the society and therefore, it is desirable to have some 
uniformity in the various scholarship schemes. In this connection, the Secretary during 
evidence opined that there should be an umbrella authority to be named “National 
Scholarship Aut hority” which can take a coordinated view of the income ceiling limit, 
rates, etc. in the various scholarship schemes. The Committee while concurring with the 
above, desire the Government to consider setting up such an Authority under the 
Planning Commission/Ministry of HRD to go into the entire gamut of various scholarship 
schemes and take a well considered and coordinated view for determining scholarship 
rates, coverage etc. of all scholarship schemes pertaining to SCs/OBCs/STs and 
Minorities. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The recommendation of the Committee for setting up of a “National Scholarship 
Authority” has already been taken up with the Member-Secretary, Planning Commission 
and Secretary, Ministry of Human Resources Development on 3.1.2011 with a req uest 
to forward their responses to this Ministry in a time-bound manner.  

21 
 
 Planning Commission vide its letter dated 17 -02-2011 (Annexure-III) has 
informed that in its Mid -Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Year Plan (2007 -12), it has 
already been emphasized that there is a need to harmonize the norms of all the 
scholarship schemes provided to offer the same benefit in different contexts. The 
Planning Commission has taken note of the advice of the Committee regarding setting 
up of a National Scholarship Authority and other concerned  issues. These issues will 
be placed in the Working Groups and the Steering Committees on Empowerment of 
Scheduled Cast es, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Minorities for 
Twelfth Five Year Plan (2010-17) and an appropriate view will be taken accordingly. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 1.56 ) 
2.3 The Committee observe that the Ministry is generating awareness about the 
scholarship schemes only through its  weekly radio programme "SANWARTI JAYEN 
JEEVAN KI RAHEYEN" produced and broadcast in Hindi and 17 Regional langu ages 
through 30 Vividh Bharti, 71 Primary channels, 15 Primary Channels of North East and 
F.M. Stations of All India Radio.  However, there is still general ignorance among the 
target groups especially in the rural areas that such schemes exist for them.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire besides the above programme, the Ministry should give 
wide publicity about its various scholarship Schemes through National Dailies and 
Vernacular papers, making available details of the scholarship schemes at Panchayat 
level and circulating pamphlets in regional languages. The poor SC/OBC students in 
rural areas should especially be made aware of the various scholarship schemes.  
Awareness campaigns should be organized at the beginning of the academic year in 

22 
 
schools, educa tional institutions so as to generate awareness about the schemes 
amongst the students. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 During the year 2010 -11, The Ministry have released advertisements in Hindi, 
English and regional languages on all India basis inviting applications under the scheme 
of National Overseas Scholarship/Passage Grants for SCs etc., and scheme of free 
coaching for SCs and OBCs students. Besides, Ministry has also released 
advertisement on the revised Post Matric Scholarship for SCs in the month of January, 
2011 in more than 300 news papers in Hindi, English and regional languages notifying 
the revision of rates and parental income ceiling. Information about the revised scheme 
has also been placed on the website of Ministry. Further, in June , 2011 the Ministry has 
published full page advertisement in prominent news   paper publicizing 3 important 
schemes for S.C. students viz. (i) Post -matric Scholarship scheme (ii) “Top Class 
Education” scheme and (iii) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship scheme. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 1.57) 
2.5 The Committee are unhappy to note that Ministry monitor the performance of its 
scholarship schemes through the quarterly/annual progress Reports furnished by the 
State Governments/UT Administrations. The Committee also observe that nodal officers 
appointed for the States/UTs to undertake field visits for on -the-spot study for 
implementation of various schemes could not undertake visits on a significant scale due 

23 
 
to pre-occupation in the Winter and Budget Session of Parliament and in proce ssing the 
proposals of States/UTs and other implemen ting agencies. The Committee have  also 
been informed that the Ministry implements the schemes through the State 
Governments/UT Administrations and the primary responsibility for monitoring the 
schemes at village, block and districts levels vests with the State Governments. The 
Committee feel that there should be a monitoring mechanism at the Central level and 
also spot visits are essential to ascertain the shortcomings of the schemes. The 
Committee, theref ore, recommend that a Monitoring Committee may be set up in the 
Ministry to ensure regular and strict monitoring of the implementation of the schemes 
and top most priority must be accorded to the periodic spot field visits by the officials 
concerned so as to assess the ground realities. The Committee would like the 
Department to consider their recommendations/suggestions with all the seriousness 
and provide specific response on all the issues raised above.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Ministry implements its scholarship schemes through State Governments/UT 
Administrations, and monitors the progress of implementation of schemes/programmes 
by them. Apart from monitoring the performance of schemes through the 
quarterly/annual progress reports furnished by the State Governments/UT 
Administrations, the following steps are also taken:   
 
 The Ministry takes the following steps for proper implementation of, inter -alia, its 
scholarship schemes: 

24 
 
i. The Ministry has constituted two Committees for  regular monitoring of 
following Scholarship Schemes pertaining  to SC & OBCs, respectively: 
Scholarship Schemes for Scheduled Castes 
a) Post-matric scholarship for SCs 
b) Pre-matric scholarship for children of SCs engaged in „unclean‟ 
occupation 
c) National Overseas Scholarship for SCs, etc. 
d) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SCs 
Scholarship Schemes for OBCs 
a) Post matric scholarship for BCs 
b) Pre matric scholarship for BCs 
Orders constituting Monitoring Committees as above are enclosed at 
Annexure VI & VII respectively. 
ii. For the effective monitoring of all the schemes, Ministry has designated 
Bureau Heads and Divisional Heads as Nodal Officers for various 
regions/States.  
iii. Release of grants to State Governments during a year are  made only on 
receipt of audited Utilization Certificates in respect of previous grants 
sanctioned which have become due. 
 Ministry also organizes Annual Conference of State Welfare Secretaries/Ministers 
wherein, inter alia, all the schemes of the Ministry , including scholarship schemes, are 
reviewed. States/UTs have also been advised to strengthen their monitoring mechanism.  

25 
 
 During the field visits of Officers of this Ministry to States/UTs discussions are 
held in order to identify constraints and to tak e corrective measures. Eleven visits have 
been carried out by the Nodal Officers in the current financial year to various States/UTs 
allotted to them, so far.  The Nodal Officers are also expected to undertake spot visits 
and interact, inter-alia, with beneficiaries of scholarship wherever during their tours.  
 The Ministry also sponsors evaluation studies from time to time through 
independent evaluation agencies to check whether their benefits reach the target 
groups. 
 Constitution of Monitoring Committee at the State & District levels for major  
Schemes of the Ministry is under active consideration.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
  

26 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16,  Para No. 1. 139) 
2.7 The Committee observe that the objective of the pre -matric scholarship scheme 
for children of those engaged in unclean occupation is to promote education to children 
of scavengers, tanners, flayers etc. and to wean them away from their traditional 
occupation. The Commit tee, however, note  that the number of beneficiaries under the 
scheme which was 7.35 lakh in 2007 -08 came down to 6.22 lakh in 2008 -09 and in 
2009-10 the number of beneficiaries up to 31.12.09 has been only 4.65 lakh. Keeping in 
view the importance of schem e which is aimed to assist the children of the families in 
the lowest strata of society in their pursuit of improving the educational status, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to get an evaluation done by a central agency on the 
impact of the scheme and al so   find out reasons for declining number of beneficiaries 
under the scheme. There is further an urgent need to bring more awareness in the 
families of unclean occupations about the scheme so more and more children from this 
disadvantaged section are able  to pursue the pre -matric education with a cushion of 
financial support of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to impress upon the States to give utmost importance to the effective 
implementation of the scheme and give intense publicity among the families engaged in 
unclean occupations not only through print and electronic media but officials of 
concerned State organizations should approach such families and motivate them to 
send their children to schools and take benefit of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Scheme of “Pre-matric scholarship for children of those engaged in „unclean‟ 
occupations” is in operation since 1977-78.  The number of beneficiaries covered under 

27 
 
the scheme during last three years and anticipated  during the current year is given 
below:- 
            
 
 
The provisions of the scheme have been liberalized with effect from 1 -4-2008 to 
ensure that more and more students from this target group get enrolled and avail its 
benefit. Information about the scheme is publicized through the weekly radio 
programme of t he Ministry named “Sanwarti Jaayein Jeevan Ki Raahein”. It is also 
being publicized through the Ministry‟s website.  
 Secretary (SJ&E) has demi -officially written to Chief Secretaries  on 05.10.2010 
requesting them, inter-alia, to:- 
i) ensure regular payment of scholarship money to students on monthly 
basis; 
ii) ensure disbursement of scholarship directly into the bank/post -office 
accounts of the students; 
iii) set-up grievance redressal mechanism for scholarship related complaints. 
 
 Further, as recom mended by the Committee, all State Governments/UTs were 
again requested vide D.O. letter dated 1 -2-2011  to publicize the scheme extensively 
and take proactive action to approach such families and motivate them to send their 
children to school. 
Sl. No. Financial Year Number of beneficiaries  covered 
(in lakh) 
1 2007-08 7.35 
2 2008-09 6.22 
3 2009-10 7.06 
4 2010-11 7.00 (provisional) 

28 
 
 The above Scheme has now been further modified  w.e.f. 1.7.2011 vide this 
Ministry‟s letter dated 8.6.2011 (Annexure VIII) doing away with the requirement of 
seeking certificates every year regarding the Child‟s parent being engaged in manual 
scavenging. With this, Children of rehabilitated man, scavengers will also now be able 
to avail of the Scholarship. Further,   Secretary, SJ&E, has vide his d.o. letter dated 
17.8. 2011, addressed to the Chief Secretaries of 15 Major States requested them to,  
inter alia, take the followings steps urgently for optimum utilization of the Scheme in the 
State: - 
(i) Give wide publicity to the Scheme through print and audio-visual media. 
(ii) Specifically bring it to the notice of heads of all Schools having classes upto 
Class X, and ask them  to ensure that no eligible student studying in their 
schools remains without this Scholarship. 
(iii) Direct officers of Education Department, teachers and others concerned to 
pro-actively conduct special enrolment drive for children of the above 
category, especially in bastis of the concerned communities, so that no child 
remains out of school, and all can complete education at least upto the 
secondary level, availing of the above Scholarship. 
(iv) Have the above scholarship Scheme implemented synergistically with SS A, 
RMSA, KGBV, etc. to maximize enrolment, retention and achievement levels 
of children from families  engaged  in “unclean occupations”. 
(v) Give suitable directions to Distt. Collectors and Urban local bodies also in this 
behalf. Of the above 15, attention o f Chief Secretaries of 3 States (UP, 
Karnataka and Jharkhand) have also been drawn to the fact that their States 

29 
 
have not been availing of Central assistance under the Scheme in the XI 
Plan, and they have been requested to take corrective steps in this regard. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17,  Para No. 1. 140) 
2.9  The Committee are unhappy to note that under the post -matric scholarship 
scheme during 2007-08 whereas an amount of Rs. 87508.23 lakh had been released to 
the States/UTs only a reduced amount of Rs. 64549.49 lakh could be released to 
States/UTs during the year 2008 -09. The Committee are also given to understand tha t 
many States did not receive any funds under the scheme during 2008 -09 due to non -
submission of proposals, not furnishing audited accounts/Utilization Certificates and 
huge unspent balances already lying with them. The Committee are not happy with the 
above situation and recommend the Ministry to persuade the above States to utilize the 
unspent amount lying with them strictly within the financial year so that fresh funds 
could be released to them on a regular basis. The Committee also desire the Ministry t o 
take up the matter regarding sending of clarification on the Audit para as well as action 
on misutilized funds with Uttar Pradesh and Assam so that funds are released to these 
States without any further delay.  
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The matter is being taken up regularly with all the State Governments/UTs 
Administrations, including those  who have unspent balance of Central assistance 
available with them or those not getting regular audit of expenditure under the 
Scholarship scheme do ne, to implement the Scheme in a transparent and effective 
manner, so that the beneficiaries are not put to any hardship.  

30 
 
 The issue of Audit objections in the implementation of “Post -Matric Scholarship 
scheme for SC students” was followed up with State G overnment of Uttar Pradesh. 
Consequently, it is one of the first States which started disbursement of scholarship 
amount through accounts in banks/post -offices. Uttar Pradesh has fully computerized 
the implementation of this scheme and has started „on -line‟ processing of scholarships. 
As a result, Central assistance of Rs.19967.13 lakh was released to the State during 
2009-10. The due Central assistance of Rs.37256.00 lakh has been released to it 
during 2010 -11. After the revision of the Scheme in December,  2010, ad -hoc central 
assistance of Rs.12548 lakh was released to Uttar Pradesh to meet increased financial 
requirements. During 2011 -12, an ad-hoc central assistance of Rs.21420.00 lakh has 
already been released. 
 In a similar manner, after receipt of requisite documents from Assam, the Ministry 
was able to release Rs.1014.99 lakh to it during 2009 -10, including arrears for 2008-09. 
During 2010 -11, central assistance of Rs.504.9 lakh has been released to Assam to 
meet increased financial requirements. During 2011-12, an ad-hoc central assistance of 
Rs.250.00 lakh has already been released.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18,  Para No. 1. 141) 
2.11 The Committee observe that as per the existing provision under scholarship 
scheme, Book Banks are to be set up in all the Medical, Engineering, Agriculture, Law 
and Veterinary Degree Colleges and Institutes imparting Chartered Accountancy, MBA 

31 
 
and alike Management courses and Polytechnics where Scheduled Caste students are 
in receipt of post matric scholarship. The Committee are constrained to note that as per 
the existing provision books are issued on the basis of sharing criterion of one set for 
two stude nts. On the Book Bank facility and feasibility for providing separate sets of 
books to each student the Ministry have stated that primary responsibility for 
implementing the scheme including the Book Bank component lies with the State 
Governments/UTs, whic h incur expenditure from their committed liability with Central 
Government providing the additional fund requirements over and above their committed 
liability. Considering the fact that text books are very important for the students who are 
pursuing professional courses such as Medical, Engineering, Agriculture etc. there is an 
urgent need making these available to all the needy students. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should direct the State Governments to make available 
separate set of books for every student so that their studies are not affected.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 As per the “Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC students”, one set of books 
is already being provided to students in the following courses: 
i) Post Graduate courses in Medical, Engineering, Agriculture and Veterinary 
courses and such other technical / alike courses as are approved by the 
Universities / institutes of higher learning. 
ii) Law courses, LLB (3years and 5 years) LLM (2 years) 
iii) Chartered Accountancy (intermediate and final) 
iv) MBA (2 years) and similar courses 
v) Bio-sciences 

32 
 
 However, the scheme currently envisages provision of one set of books for two 
students in the following courses: 
i) Degree courses in Medical/Engineering 
ii) Degree courses in Veterinary 
iii) Degree courses in Agriculture 
iv) Polytechnics 
 
Recommendation of the Committee would be kept in view in regard to courses 
mentioned in para 2 above while revising the Scheme during XII Plan period. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19,  Para No. 1.142 ) 
2.13 The Committee observe that the Planning Commission has agreed to conduct an 
All India Evaluation Study of the scheme of post -matric scholarships for SC students 
through programme evaluation organization in March, 2010.  However, the study has 
not yet been conducted. T he Committee, therefore, desire  that Ministry should pursue 
the matter with the Planning Commission so that evaluation study of the post -matric 
scholarship scheme is conducted as early as possible.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Development Evaluation Advisory Committee (DAEC) of Planning 
Commission in a meeting headed by Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, on 19 -
11-2009, clubbed the evaluation of the Scheme of Post matric scholarship schemes for 
SC, ST and OBC students, and assigned its evaluation and impact assessment to the 
Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO) of the Planning Commission. 

33 
 
 In order to monitor and  supervise the study, PEO constituted a Consultancy 
Evaluation cum Monitoring Committee (CEMC) headed by Dr. Santosh Mehrotra, 
Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi. The officers from 
concerned Ministries are also its members. The stu dy is being outsourced soon to 
empanelled research institutes by Planning Commission. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 20,  Para No. 1. 143) 
2.15 The Committee observe  that the scheme of Top Class Education launched in 
2007-08, provides for 1250 scholarships every year.  However, the scholarships 
awarded during the last three years i.e. 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009 -10 has been 195, 
378 & 541 respectively.  The main reason attributed for not availing utilization of 
scholarship slots could be attributed to the scheme of being relatively recent origin 
(2007-08) and consequently inadequate awareness about it. Though the Ministry have 
contended that the scheme is circulated to a ll the selected institutions at the beginning 
of the year with a request to forward proposals to this Ministry, the Committee feel that 
wide publicity about this scheme has not been given by the States/UTs as a result most 
SC students are not aware of this  scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to impress upon States/UTs to give wide publicity of the scheme among SC 
students so that they apply in large numbers and full quota of scholarship slots could be 
availed.  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Wide publicity to the Scheme of Top Class Education was given through 
advertisements in more than 300 Newspapers in Hindi, English and  Regional 
Languages on 17.6. 2011 . There will be more such advertisement in future.   Details of 

34 
 
the Scheme are also uploaded on the web site of the Ministry, which is „disabled 
friendly‟. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21,  Para No. 1.144) 
2.17 The Committee also observe that under the Top Class Scholarship Scheme  in 
most cases (Engineering, Management, Medicine, Law, Fashion Technology/Design, 
Hotel Management and Catering, etc.) the admission is done on the basis of All India 
Common Entrance Tests and  in some cases, like CPL training, Tata Institute of Social 
Science, National School of Drama, Film & Television Institute of India, Indian Institute 
of Mass Communication, etc. the admission is done by the institutes on the basis of 
entrance test/assessment. However, there is no provision under the scheme for giving 
special training to students to get admissions in notified institutions. During evidence the 
Secretary also admitted that there is a strong need for supporting coaching facilities for 
SC students. The Committee feel that in the absence of any proper coaching /training to 
SC students, they are not able to successfully compete with general category students 
for admission in premier institutes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that some  
coaching/training be imparted to them to prepare them for entrance examination. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 A Central Sector Scheme of Upgradation of Merit for the SCs Students is being 
implemented since 2002-03.  Under this scheme 100% central assistance is provided to 
states/UTs for arranging coaching for SC/ST students studying in class 9 th to 12th. While 
remedial coaching aims at removing deficiencies in school subjects, special coaching is 
provided with a view to prepare students for competitive exam inations for entry into 
professional courses like Engineering and Medical. 

35 
 
  The main objective of the scheme is to upgrade the merits of SC/ST students by 
providing with facilities for all round development through education in Residential 
School.   
a. Making up any academic deficiencies. 
b. Facilitating their entry into professional courses by upgrading their merit so 
that they can compete  
c. Admission to higher education courses 
d. Generating self confidence.   
The existing on -going “Central Sector Scheme of Free Coaching for SC & OBC 
Students” provides for coaching to SC and OBC students for the following 
examinations: 
i. Group A and B examinations conducted by UPSC, State Public Service 
Commissions, Railway, SSC etc. 
ii. Officer Grade Examination of Bank/Insurance companies and  
iii. Finishing Job Courses/job oriented courses. 
 The scheme is under revision and it is , inter-alia, proposed to include coaching 
for the following entrance examinations within its scope: 
i. Engineering entrance examinations conducted by IITs (IIT -JEE), CBSE 
(AIEEE),  and State Governments/ UTs. 
ii. Medical entrance examinations conducted by CBSE (AIPMT) and State 
Governments/UTs.  
iii. Entrance examinations for Management, (eg. CAT)  

36 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22,  Para 1.145) 
2.19 The Committee are unhappy to note that under the National Overseas 
Scholarship Scheme launched in 1954 -55 only 732 students were offered awards upto  
1994-95 out of which 524 students availed the benefit of the scheme.  The Committee 
also find that for the period 1995 -96 to 1997 -98 no selection was made as the 
Committee for Non Plan Expenditure had approved the continuation of the scheme only 
from 1998-99 to 2000-2001 and also  no selection was made during  the years 2000 -01 
to 2003-04.  The Committee also note with dismay that under the scheme targets were 
not always achieved.  The Committee have been informed that no formal training is 
imparted to the  selected students for admission into foreign Universities.  However, an 
orientation Workshop is being held by the Ministry for selected students by inviting 
representatives from Ministry of External Affairs and selected Embassies of other 
Countries in Ind ia to sensitize the candidates about admission process etc. in foreign 
Universities. The Commit tee feel  that holding an orientation workshop is not enough 
and there is a need to give proper counseling/guidance to selected students to enable 
them to take ad mission in foreign universities. The Committee , therefore, desire the 
Ministry to tie up with specialized agencies having expertise on the matter and therefore 
in a position to deliver the goods. 
  The Committee also observes that the scheme is available o nly for a small 
number of technical courses.  All Science, Humanities, Commerce and Management 
courses have not been included.  The Committee was informed that the number of 
students from SC category who get admission in overseas Universities in technical 
courses is small and, therefore, there is not always full utilization of awards.  The 

37 
 
Committee recommends that the list of subjects for which the students may go abroad 
be widened and corresponding increase in number of scholarships.  
Reply of the Government 
2.20 The number of subjects covered under the National Overseas Scholarship 
Scheme has already been increased for the selection year 2010 -11. The subjects for 
which this scholarship can be availed were earlier limited to only advanced Engineerin g 
subjects.  This list has been expanded from 2010 -11 so as to cover the following 
disciplines:- 
a. Medicine, 
b. Pure Sciences, 
c. Engineering,  
d. Agricultural Sciences and 
e. Management. 
A Committee has been set up to review the National Overseas Scholarship 
scheme. Th e XII Plan Working Group set up by the Planning Commission is also 
discussing the subject at length and will make recommendations.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 

38 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-  Nil -  

39 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED 
UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 1.44) 
4.1 The Committee are unhappy to note that there is a substantial delay in the 
revision of post matric  scholarship schemes for SCs/OBCs which was last revised 
during 2003.  On the status of the revision of the scholarship schemes, the Committee 
have been informed that the revision is under consideration and is proposed to be 
effected by the end of the year .  Keeping in view the considerable price hike, the 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to increase the rates as per the present 
consumer price Index.  Also with considerable increase in salaries of Government 
employees consequent to 6 th Pay Commission Report and with no increase in income 
ceiling many deserving SC students have been left out of the ambit of scholarship 
scheme. Since these scholarship schemes empower and sustain the interest of 
SC/OBC students towards formal education, the revision should be all -encompassing 
taking into account every parameter of the scheme viz. income criteria, rates of 
scholarship,  norms for award of scholarship, the time and the mode of payment, etc. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to ex pedite the process of 
revising the schemes so that SC/OBC students are able to get enhanced rates in the 
current academic year itself.  The Committee further desire that the scholarship rates be 
linked with the consumer price index and reviewed at the begi nning of each academic 
year so that in the event of increase in price index, the scholarship rates are suitably 
increased.  
Reply of the Government 

40 
 
4.2 The status of revision of Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SCs and OBCs is 
given below:  
(i) Post Matric Scholarship Scheme to Students belonging to Scheduled 
Castes: The scheme has been revised with effect from 1 st July, 2010, vide 
this Ministry‟s Order dated 31.12.2010 (copy of the Order is at  Annexure-
I).  The Scheme has been revised so as to:-  
 raise the parental income ceiling for eligibility from Rs.1.00 lakh to Rs.2.00 
lakh,  
 rationalize the grouping of Courses, and  
 upward revision of maintenance and other allowances by approximately 
60%. 
(ii) Post Matric Scholarship to OBC students BE allocation under Post Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for OBC students in 2009 -10 was Rs.135.00  crore, 
which was enhanced to Rs .350.00 crore and Rs. 535.00 crore in 2010 -11 
and 2011 -12 respectively.  In the light of the enhanced a llocation, the 
scheme has been revised w.e.f. 1.7.2011 (Annexure II)  to raise the 
income ceiling and maintenance and other allowances.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 1.47) 

41 
 
4.3 The Committee note that according to selected Educational statistics 2006 -07, 
published by the Ministry of Human Resource Devel opment, the dropout rate for SC  
students at pre -matric stage is as high as 70% and when compared to all categories 
students it is higher by a significant 10%. The Committee further note that pre -matric 
scholarship scheme for SC students which can be instrumental into reducing the 
dropout rate is limited only to students of parents engaged in unclean occupations. The 
Ministry had sent a proposal for Planning Commission ‟s approval for introducing pre -
matric scholarship for all SC students and though the Planning Commission has 
conveyed its  approval in principle, the Ministry has not been able to get the required 
allocation for the scheme. The Committee wish to emphasize those scholarships for 
poor SC students at pre -matric stage will greatly motivate and facilitate them to attend 
schools in large numbers and also reduce the dropout rates. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to make concerted efforts to get requisite allocation for 
introduction of the pre -matric scholarship scheme for all SC students during the next 
financial year so that the scheme is fully implemented at the earliest or in the beginning 
of 12th plan. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 With a view to bring down the dropout rate of SC children, in general,  a new 
Centrally-sponsored “Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Caste Students” 
studying in Classes IX & X has been announced by the Finance Minister in his budget 
speech,  2011-12.  This would benefit an estimated 43 lakh SC students.  An allocation  
 

42 
 
of Rs.200 crore has been provided  for this purpose in this Ministry‟s budget for the year 
2011-12 which will need to be augmented.  Further necessary action in this regard is 
being taken.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.48) 
4.5 The Committee further observe  that some State Governments are implementing 
scholarship schemes for SC students at pre -matric level from their own budgetary 
resources which has helped in bringing down the dropout rates. While appreciating 
efforts of these State Go vernments, the Committee desire  the Government to give 
suitable incentive to all States to implement Pre -matric schol arship schemes at their 
own levels till the implementation of such scheme at Central level.  
Reply of the Government 
4.6 It may not be possible to provide any incentive/financial assistance to States for 
implementing their own Pre -matric scholarship scheme s. However, launch of a new 
Centrally-sponsored “Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Caste Students” 
studying in Classes IX & X is already under consideration of the Government.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23,  Para No. 1. 146) 
4.7 The Committee find that under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC students 
every year 1333 fellowships are awarded for Scheduled Caste students.  The 

43 
 
Committee are constrained to note that the number of applications received under the 
scheme i.e. 4372 during 2006 -07, 5909 during 2007 -08 and 6895 during 2008 -09 has 
been increasing while the number of awards per year has remained the same.  The 
Committee have been informed that a proposal to increase the number of fresh 
fellowships per year is under consideration.  Keeping  in view the population of 
Scheduled Caste students and the number of applications rejected every year, these 
fellowships are not sufficient,  the Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
number of fellowships may be increased immediately so that more and more number of 
students could get fellowships.   
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The number of fresh fellowships to be awarded under the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship Scheme for SC students has been increased from 1333 to 2000 each year 
with effect from 1-4-2010.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25,  Para No. 1. 148) 
4.9 The Committee observe that under the schemes of pre -matric and post -matric 
scholarships for OBC students introduced during the year 1998 -99, the actual 
expenditure has been constantly on the higher side exceeding the Budget 
Estimates/Revised Estimates. In the case of pre -matric scholarships, the actual 
expenditure has been high over Budget Estimates during 2006 -07 and 2008 -09 and in 
respect of post -matric scholarships, the actual expenditure has always been high over 

44 
 
Budget Estimates during 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and 2008 -09. the Committee have been 
given to understand that the higher expenditure has been due to high demand from the 
State Governments. The Committee also observe that under the pre -matric scholarship 
for OBC students very meager amounts i.e. Rs. 25/ - from Class I to V, Rs.40/ - from 
Class VI to VIII and Rs. 50/ - from Class IX to X and under post matric scholarship for 
OBC students Rs. 190/- for Group A,B,C, Rs. 120 for Group D and Rs. 90/ - for Group E 
for Day scholars are being awarded to the students which are grossly inadequate to 
meet the educational needs of these stude nts. The Committee feel that for the large 
section of OBC students who are in dire need of financial support the existing rate of 
scholarships under both the heads of pre -matric and post -matric is just not sufficient 
and there is correspondingly  a need to increase the allocation of funds under both the 
scholarship schemes for OBCs. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to examine 
the feasibility of increasing funds under both the schemes by seeking an enhanced 
allocation in the budgetary estimates dur ing the next financial year so that the above 
schemes do not suffer due to paucity of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 The PMS-OBC Scheme has been revised with effect from 01.7.2011 to raise the 
income ceiling and maintenance and other allowances. (Copy of Order is at Annexure 
II)  The allocation under PMS for OBCs has increased by about 53% from Rs.350 crore 
in 2010-2011 to Rs.535 crore in 2011 -2012.  This increase is still far below the actual 
requirement of States for meeting the full demand of OBC students.  This issue is also 
being deliberated upon by the Working Group for the XII Five Year Plan set up by the 
Planning Commission and its recommendations would be placed before the Planning 
Commission. 

45 
 
      The Ministry has regularly been taking up the matter of enhancement of plan 
budget of schemes for welfare of OBCs including Pre -Matric Scholarship for OBCs.  
Due to bu dgetary constraints, it has not been possible to revise the Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for OBCs, so far. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.43) 
5.1 The Committee note  that the budgetary allocations for scholarship schemes for 
SCs and for OBCs students which was only Rs. 935 crores and Rs. 165 crores 
respectively during 2009 -2010 was significantly enhanced to Rs. 1971 crores and Rs. 
400 crores in the budget 2010-2011.  The Committee has been given to understand that 
the Ministry would utilize increased allocation on the long pending issue of revision of 
scholarship rates under the post matric scholarship scheme for SCs a nd OBCs.  The 
Committee welcome  the increase of all ocation of funds to the Ministry and hope this 
increase would stand them in good stead when the matter of revision of scholarship 
rates and income ceiling is taken up in the right earnest.  However, looking at the critical 
importance of the scholarship sch emes in improving the access of SCs/OBCs students 
to education, the Committee desire that the other scholarship schemes which have 
combined allocations of only Rs. 681 crore during 2010 -2011 should also be reviewed 
and revised to improve their rates and co verage so that more and more students from 
these disadvantaged sections are able to benefit from these schemes. The Committe e, 
therefore, recommend  the Ministry to pursue with well formulated proposals with the 
Government for increased allocations for other scholarship schemes as well so that they 
can also be suitably revised with increased coverage to bring in more SCs and OBCs 
students within the ambit of various scholarship schemes. 
Reply of the Government 

47 
 
5.2 The Ministry has been pursuing with the Plan ning Commission from the 
beginning of the XI Five Year Plan i.e. from 2007 for higher allocation for its various 
schemes including scholarship schemes. Due to the persistent efforts of the Ministry, 
the plan outlay of the Ministry increased by 80% from Rs 2500 crore in 2009 -10 to Rs 
4500 crore in 2010 -11 and further to Rs 5375 crore in 2011 -12. As a result, allocation 
under various scholarship schemes has increased, as indicated below: 
BE for Scholarship Schemes of the Ministry 
(Rs. in Crore) 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1102 
(3%) 
2375 
(115.5%) 
3043 
(28.2%) 
Figures in the Bracket indicates the percentage 
increase over the previous year 
 
The status/position with regard to the revision of Scholarship schemes for SCs 
and OBCs, other than Post Matric Scholarship Schemes, is given below:  
(i) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SCs 
This scheme was launched in 2005 -06 and financial assistance was being 
provided each year for 1333 Research Fellowships to Scheduled Caste students 
pursuing M. Phil., Ph.D. and equivalent courses.  The following important changes 
have been made in the scheme from 2010-11:- 
1) Number of fellowships 
 
The number of new fellowships to be awarded each year has been increased 
from 1333 to 2000 to benefit more Scheduled Caste students. 

48 
 
2) Rates of fellowship 
The rates of fellowship for JRF and SRF will be at par with the UGC fellowships. 
Rates of fellowship under the scheme have been upwardly revised with effect 
from 01 -04-2010 to annul the inflationary effect and make the fellowship more 
beneficial.  
The revised rates of fellowship under the scheme are as follows:-   
Sl. 
No. 
Stream  Monthly Rate of fellowship (amount in Rupees) 
J.R.F. S.R.F. 
Pre-revised Revised Pre-
revised 
Revised 
1 Science, 
Humanities and 
Social Sciences 
12,000 16,000 14,000 18,000 
2 Engineering and 
Technology 
14,000 18,000 15,000 20,000 
 
(ii)         Top Class Education Scheme for SCs 
There are 182 institutes of excellence spread all over the country in the 
list of identified institutes.  Five new institution namely, i) IIT - Mandi, IIT - 
Indore, IIM- Raipur, IIM -Rohtak, and IIM- Ranchi have been added in the list 
during 2010-11.  Notified institutes include all IIMs, IITs, NITs (earlier known 
as RECs), Commercial Pilot License training institutes and reputed 
Medical/Law and other i nstitutes of excellence. The notified institutes are 
allotted 12 awards/scholarships each, whereas the Commercial Pilot License 
training institutes are allotted 2 awards/seats each.  Courses of study covered 
are Engineering, Medicine/Dentistry, Law, Manage ment, Hotel Management, 
Fashion Technology and other streams. 
(iii)          National Overseas Scholarship for SCs 

49 
 
   The important changes introduced in various components of the scheme 
with effect from the year 2007-08 include the following:  
 The income ceilin g from all sources of the employed candidate or his/her 
parents/guardians has been raised from Rs. 18000/ - per month to Rs. 
25,000/- per month.    
 The number of awards has been enhanced from 20 to 30 from the 
selection year 2007-08 onwards.  
 30% of the awa rds for each year have been earmarked for women 
candidates from the selection year 2007 -2008. If unutilized by women 
candidates, the awards would be available for male candidates belonging 
to Scheduled Castes, De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes, 
Landless Agricultural Labourers and Traditional Artisans.  
 The rates of various components of scholarship have been enhanced with 
effect from 9.7.2007.   
The specified fields of study under the scheme have been revised for the 
selection year 2010-11 in order to broaden the scope and benefit more students, 
and following disciplines have been covered under the scheme: 
a. Medicine,   
b.  Pure Sciences, 
c.   Engineering,  
d. Agricultural Sciences; and 
e.  Management. 
A Committee has been constituted on 20.6.2010 to recommend further 
changes in the scheme and is expected to submit its report shortly.  

50 
 
(iv) Pre-matric scholarship for children of those engaged in unclean occupation” 
The Scheme has been partially modified with effect from 1 -7-2011. The 
„Object‟ and „Conditions of eligibility‟ have been modified in such a manner to do 
away with the condition which restricts the Scholarship to the Children of only 
existing manual scavengers. These changes have been communicated to  all the 
State Governments/UTs vide Ministry‟s letter F. No. 11014/28/2007-SCD-V dated 
8-6-2011 with the request to publicize the above changes widely. More students 
are likely to be benefitted after these changes. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerme nt O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4,  Para No. 1.46) 
5.3 The Committee observe  that the Ministry has been implementing a Scholarship 
Scheme for Students with Disabilities from a fund of the Ministry called the „National 
Fund for People with Disabilities ‟. The Committee also observe  that up to five hundred 
Scholarships 250 each for male and female students are given annually through 
institutions in which students are pursuing studies/courses and amount i.e. Rs. 4 8.07 
lakh during 2007-08, Rs. 66.30 lakh during 2008 -09 and Rs. 35.04 lakh during 2009 -10 
was released for the purpose.  The Committee feel that keeping in view the large 
number of people suffering from different types of disabilities, these awards and fun ds 
are not sufficient.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that with effect from 
next financial year,   awards and funds under this category of scholarship may be 
increased suitably.   
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The issue of revision of number o f these scholarships and their rates is under   
consideration of the Ministry.  

51 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 1.49) 
5.5 The Committee note  that the Ministry has advised State Governments to make 
payments of scholarships through Post Office/Bank. The Committee are, however, 
unhappy to note that so far only in six States namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh scholarship is fully paid through Post Office/Bank 
Account while in the rest of States it has not been implemented at all or partially 
implemented and the payment is made through the Principals and Head Masters who 
further distribute scholarships to the st udents which results in delays. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should sensitize the States about the same and vigorously 
pursue the opening of bank accounts of all the beneficiaries within a definite time frame.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6  All the States/UTs have been consistently advised to streamline the 
disbursement mechanism and ensure that scholarships are given to the beneficiaries 
directly through their individual accounts in Banks/ Post Offices.  Presently, 10 State 
Governments viz. Utta r Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Punjab, Tripura, Orissa, 
Haryana, Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Gujarat have confirmed disbursement of scholarship 
through accounts in banks/post offices under the scheme of “Post Matric scholarship for 
SC students”. Other Six State Governments viz. Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim and Karnataka have also issued instructions for 
implementing this system. Under the Post Matric scholarship scheme for OBC students 

52 
 
States of Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Ut tarakhand, Tripura, Goa and Manipur have 
informed that they have introduced system of payment of scholarships through 
Banks/ECS. Other States have issued instructions to open accounts in Bank/Post 
Office. 
 The Ministry is pursuing the matter with defaultin g States/UTs on regular basis to 
ensure that a uniform system is adopted throughout the country at the earliest. Secretary 
(SJ&E) has written to State Governments/UTs on 5-10-2010 (Annexure-IV) and again on 
17-1-2011 (Annexure-V) in this regard. This matter was also emphasized during the 
Regional Conferences of the Principal Secretaries of the Social Welfare Departments of 
the States in October and November, 2010 as well as in the Social Welfare Ministers‟ 
Conference in New Delhi in June 2011.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 1.50) 
5.7 During interaction with non -officials witnesses, the Committee found that there is 
a considerable delay in sanction and disbursement of scholarships. On this issue, the 
Secretary impressed upon the Committee during evidence that the delay in payment of 
scholarship is not due to delay in release of Central assistance. On the contrary, the 
delay is caused by the State Governments which do not spend the money falling under 
their committed liability on time. The Committee are of the strong view that delay  in 
payment of scholarships virtually defeats the very purpose for which the same has been 
introduced. Therefore, the Committee recommend  the Ministry to take up the matter of 

53 
 
timely payment of scholarships with State Governments at Chief Secretary level. The 
Committee also recommend that scholarships should be paid Quarterly positively 
beginning with first installment immediately after the admission. The Committee may be 
apprised of the concrete measures taken by the Department in this direction and 
response of the States. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 Secretary (SJ&E) has taken up the matter at Chief Secretary level vide his demi -
official letters dated 5-10-2010 and 17-1-2011 inter-alia impressing upon them to ensure 
regular disbursement of scholarships to the students (Annexure-IV & V).  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 1.51) 
5.9 The Committee have been further informed that some State Governments are 
making payments towards maintenance allowance under the scholarship schemes for 
only 10 months instead of 12 months with a view to reduce their burden of committed 
liability. Taking a serious view on that, the Committee recommend  the Ministry to take 
up the matter with State Governments at the Chief Secretary level and ensure that full 
scholarship amount is paid to students for 12 months. 
Reply of the Government 
5.10 The State Governments/UTs at Chief Secretary level have been requested to 
ensure disbursement of maintenance allowance to the students for 12 months under the 
Scheme of “Post -Matric Scholarship for SC students”, vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s demi -
official letter dated 17.1.2011 (Annexure-V). 

54 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 1.52) 
5.11 The Committee find that the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh & Uttar 
Pradesh have implemented computer based online processing, sanction and 
disbursement of Post-matric scholarship to SC & OBC students through bank. However, 
the majority of States are yet to implement computer based onl ine processing, sanction 
and disbursement. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry has asked NIC 
to develop suitable e-governance module for implementation of the scholarship scheme 
at all 4 critical levels – Central Government, State Government , district administration 
and educational institutions. The Committee while endorsing the use of IT in 
disbursement of scholarships are of the view that it will besides making the entire 
process faster will also make the entire system transparent. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
strongly recommend  the Ministry to accord top priority to development of suitable e -
governance module so that e-payment system of scholarship soon becomes a reality. 
Reply of the Government 
5.12 To promote the e -payment system, the matter  was taken up with the State 
Governments in the Conference of Principal Secretaries of the Social Welfare 
Departments of the States, held during October -November, 2010.  The State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh demonstrated their e -
payment systems during this Conference. All other States have shown their willingness 
to implement the system in their respective States. The matter shall be pursued for 
expediting action on part of the remaining States. Secretary (SJ&E) has also taken up  

55 
 
the matter at Chief Secretary level vide his demi -official letter dated 17 -1-2011 
(Annexure-V) inter-alia requesting them to implement e -payment of scholarships in their 
respective State at the earliest. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No . 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 1.53) 
5.13 The Committee are  unhappy to note that most Private Institutions are charging 
full tuition fee from SC/OBC students at the time of admission which is refunded to them 
only when the same is received by these institutions from State Governments. It results 
in a lot of hardsh ip to poor SC/OBC students who have to arrange for hefty fee amount 
at a short period. Taking a serious view on that, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
direct State Governments to issue instructions to private institutions not to demand 
tuition fee from  SC/OBC students who fulfill the eligibility criteria for scholarship 
schemes, but charge it from State Governments as being done by Government 
institutions. 
Reply of the Government 
5.14 This Ministry has issued a suitable advisory to all the State Governm ents/UTs to 
issue necessary instructions to private institutions not to demand tuition fee from SC 
and OBC students who fulfill the eligibility criteria for scholarship schemes, but charge it 
from State Governments as was being done by Government instituti ons.  They have 
been requested to ensure compliance of these instructions vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s 

56 
 
demi-official letter dated 17 -1-2011 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of the States/ 
Administrators of UTs.  (Annexure-V).  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 1.54) 
5.15 The Committee note that students belonging to reserved categories face a lot of 
difficulties to obtain the caste certificate in their respective States and it becomes all the 
more difficult when it comes to migrant families. The Committee feel that the sys tem put 
in place to issue the certificate is too bureaucratic and cumbersome. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the caste certificate issuing procedure be revamped and simplified 
so that the concerned students do not face any difficulty in obtaining th e same. The 
Committee would like proactive involvement of the Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
5.16 Secretary (SJ&E) has taken up the matter regarding simplification of procedure 
for issue of caste certificate to SC/OBC students with the State Governments/UTs at 
Chief Secretary/Administrator level vide his demi -official letter dated 17 -1-2011 
(Annexure-V).  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13,  Para No. 1. 55) 
5.17 The Committee are unhappy to note that despite a large number of grievances of 
SC/OBC students relating to payment of scholarships neither the Ministry have set up 

57 
 
any Grievance Cell/Helpline nor have they issued any directions to this effect to the 
States. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to create a grievance Cell 
and also direct States/UTs to set up the same at State level so that there could be 
expeditious redressal of grievances of SC/OBC students. 
Reply of the Government 
5.18 Whenever individual complaints regarding delay in disbursement of scholarship 
etc. are received by the Ministry, the matter is taken up with the concerned State 
Government/UT.  The Ministry has already taken up the matter with all the State 
Governments/UTs at Chief Secretary/Administrator level vide Secretary (SJ&E)‟s d.o. 
letter dated 5 -10-2010 (Annexure-IV)  and 17.01.2011 (Annexure-V) to set up 
Grievance Redressal Cells. T he States have been requested to designate Grievance 
Redressal  Officers (GROs) at the State and District levels to redress students‟ 
scholarship-related grievances, publicize their details widely and give suitable 
instructions to them to implement a compr ehensive scholarship grievance redressal  
system.  The State Governments of Kerala, Haryana, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Tripura have confirmed suitable action in this 
regard. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowermen t O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24,  Para No. 1. 147) 
5.19 The Committee note that the number of applications received is more than 5 
times than the fellowships awarded under the scheme and students are selected on 

58 
 
merit basis.  The Committee observe that no relaxation is given to SC students hailing 
from rural areas.  However, during evidence Secretary assured that they would request 
the UGC to give further relaxation to Scheduled Caste Students coming from rural 
areas.  As the standard of teaching and facilities available in the rural areas are much 
below than that of urban areas, the Committee feel that SC students hailing from these 
areas need to be given some special consideration. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend the Government to consider giving suitable relaxation in percentage of 
marks to SC students hailing from rural areas so that they are able to get benefit of the 
scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
5.20 University Grants Commission (UGC), which is the implemen ting agency of the 
Scheme, has been requested to examine the recommendation and convey its views  for 
further necessary action, based on relevant data, vide Joint Secretary‟s d.o. letter dated 
F.No.16015/01/2010–SCD-V dated 15 -2-2011 (Annexure- IX) Further action will be 
taken on receipt of UGC‟s response.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -10/2010/(PS)/PREM dated 
20.10.2011). 
 
NEW DELHI        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
05 March, 2012       Chairman 
15 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
         Social Justice and Empowerment. 

59 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
File No.11017/01/2008-SCD-V 
Government of India 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
*** 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi, 
Dated :  31st   December ,2010 
 
To 
      Secretaries in-Charge of SC Welfare, All States/UTs 
 
    Subject:  Revision in the Centrally sponsored scheme of Post -Matric 
Scholarship for students belonging to Scheduled Castes. 
Sir, 
The Government of India has been implementing the Scheme of Post -Matric 
Scholarship to students belonging to Scheduled Castes since 1944.  It aims to provide 
financial assistance to students belonging to Scheduled Castes for pursuing post -
matriculation courses through recognized institutions. Under the Scheme, Central 
assistance is provided on 100% basis to all States/UTs over and above their respective 
“committed liability” except in the case of the 8 North Eastern States  (Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim), which are 
exempted from committed liability, and were therefore provided 100% assistance without 
deducting any committed liability. 
2. Components of the Scheme include:  
(i) maintenance allowance; 
(ii) reimbursement of non -refundable compulsory fee charged by educational 
institutions; 
(iii) Book Bank facility, and  
(iv) certain other allowances.   
The Scheme was last revised w.e.f. 01.04.2003, and the revised Scheme was 
communicated to State Governments vide this Min istry‟s letter No.11017/7/2002 -SCD-V 
dated 28th January 2004. 
3. The Scheme has now been revised w.e.f. 01.07.2010.  The revision includes 
changes in (i) income ceiling; (ii) grouping of courses; and (iii) rates of maintenance and 
other allowances.   
 
4. The changes effective from 01.07.2010 are summarized in the table below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Item/ Component Present Provision / Rates 
(w.e.f. 01.04.2003) (with 
relevant Section / para of 
Revised Provision / Rates 
(w.e.f. 01.07.2010) 

60 
 
the existing Scheme) 
1. Annual ceiling on 
family income  
 
Rs.1 lakh p.a. 
(Para IV) 
Rs.2 lakh p.a. 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grouping of 
Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group I  
Degree and Post Graduate 
level courses (including 
M.Phil, Ph.D  and Post 
Doctoral research) in 
Medicine (Allopathic, Indian 
and other recognized 
systems of medicines), 
Engineering, Technology, 
Agriculture, Veterinary and 
Allied Sciences, 
Management, Business 
Finance, Business 
Administration and 
Computer 
Applications/Science.   
Commercial Pilot License 
(including helicopter pilot 
and Multi Engine rating) 
 Course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group I 
(i) Degree and Post 
Graduate level courses 
including M.Phil., Ph.D. and 
Post Doctoral research in 
Medicine (Allopathic, Indian 
and other recognized  
systems of medicines), 
Engineering, Technology, 
Planning, Architecture, 
Design, Fashion 
Technology, Agriculture, 
Veterinary & Allied 
Sciences, Management, 
Business Finance / 
Administration, Computer 
Science/ Applications. 
 
(ii) Commercial Pilot License 
(including helicopter pilot 
and multiengine rating) 
course. 
(iii) Post Graduate Diploma 
courses in various branches 
of management & medicine. 
(iv) 
C.A./I.C.W.A./C.S./I.C.F.A. 
etc. 
(v) M. Phil., Ph.D. and Post 
Doctoral Programmes (D. 
Litt., D.Sc. etc.) – 
a) In existing Group II 
courses 
b)  In existing Group III 
courses 
(vi) L.L.M. 

61 
 
 
 
  Group II 
Other professional and 
technical graduate and Post 
Graduate (including M.Phil, 
Ph.D. and Post Doctoral 
research) level courses not 
 covered in Group I.   
C.A./ICWA/C.S. etc. courses.    
All Post Graduate, Graduate 
level 
 Diploma courses, all 
Certificate Level Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group II 
(i)   Graduate/ Post 
Graduate courses  leading 
to Degree, Diploma, 
Certificate in areas like 
Pharmacy (B Pharma), 
Nursing(B Nursing), LLB, 
BFS, other para -medical 
branches like rehabilitation, 
diagnostics etc., Mass 
Communication, Hotel 
Management & Catering, 
Travel/Tourism/Hospitality 
Management, Interior 
Decoration, Nutrition & 
Dietetics, Commercial Art, 
Financial S ervices (e.g. 
Banking, Insurance, 
Taxation etc.) for which 
entrance qualification is 
minimum Sr. Secondary 
(10+2). 
 (ii)  Post Graduate courses 
not covered under Group I 
e.g. MA/M Sc/M.Com/M 
Ed./M. Pharma etc. 
Group III 
All other courses leading to  a 
graduate or above degree (not 
covered in group I & II). 
 
Group III 
All other courses leading to 
a graduate  degree not 
covered under Group I & II 
e.g. BA/B Sc/B Com etc. 
Group IV 
All post matriculation level 
courses before taking up 
graduation like classes XI and 
XII in 10+2 system and 
intermediate examination etc., 
not covered in Group 'II' or „III‟. 
Group IV 
All post -matriculation level 
non-degree courses for 
which entrance qualification 
is High School (Class X), 
e.g.senior secondary 
certificate (class XI and XII); 

62 
 
 
 (Amts. in Rupees) 
ITI courses, other vocational 
courses (if minimum required 
qualification to pursu e the 
course is at least    
matriculation). 
both general and vocational 
stream, ITI courses, 3 year 
diploma courses in 
Polytechnics, etc. 
3 Monthly 
Maintenance 
Allowance   
(Para V) 
 
 
 
Day 
Schol
ars 
 
Hostel
ler 
Group 
I 
 
 
330 740 
Group 
II 
 
 
330 510 
 Group 
III 
 
 
185 355 
 Group 
IV 
140 235 
 
   
 
 
 
Day 
Schol
ars 
 
Hostel
ler 
Group 
I 
 
 
550 1200 
Group 
II 
 
 
530 820 
 Group 
III 
 
 
300 570 
 Group 
IV 
230 380 
   
 
4 Other 
Allowances   
(Para V)   
4.1 Study Tour 
Charges (One 
Time) 
1000 1600 
4.2 Thesis 
Typing/Printing 
Charges(One 
Time) 
1000 1600 
4.3 Book Grant for 
Correspondence 
Courses (One 
750 1200 

63 
 
 
 
 (iv)  Monthly 
Helper Allowance  
admissible  to any 
employee of the 
hostel willing to 
extend help to a 
severely 
orthopaedically 
handicapped 
100 160 
Time) 
4.4 Allowance for 
Students with 
Disability 
(i)Monthly Reader 
Allowance for 
Blind students 
     
 
 
150 (Group I&II) 
125 (Group III) 
100(Group IV) 
 
 
240(Group I&II) 
200(Group III) 
160 (Group IV) 
(ii) Monthly 
Transport 
Allowance for 
Disabled Students 
(as defined under 
the Persons with 
Disabilities Act 
1995), if such 
students do not 
reside in the 
hostel which is 
within the 
premises of the 
Educational 
Institution.  
100 160 
(iii)  Monthly 
Escort Allowance 
for Severely  
Handicapped Day 
Scholars/Students 
with low extremity 
disability  
100 160 

64 
 
student residing in 
the hostel of an 
Educational 
Institution who 
may need the 
assistance of a 
helper.  
 (v)  Monthly 
Coaching 
Allowance to 
Mentally Retarded 
and Mentally ill 
Students  
150 240 
 
5. Under Centrally-sponsored Schemes, recurring expenditure of the last year of a 
Five Year Plan gets transferred to States as their committed liability, from the first year 
of the next Five Year Plan. In the instant case, however, as the revision is taking p lace 
late during the XI Five Year Plan, Government of India have decided, as a special case, 
that additional committed liability arising on account of the revision of the 
Scheme w.e.f. 01.07.2010 shall be passed on to the States / UTs at the end of the 
XII Five Year Plan (w.e.f. 01.04.2017) and not at the end of the XI Plan. However, 
committed liability as per old scholarship rates, at the end of the XI Plan, will get 
transferred to States / UTs from 1.4.2012 as per past practice.   
 
6. Other provisions of the Scheme remain unchanged. 
 
7. State Governments are requested to please send a revised proposal for Central 
assistance in 2010 -11, in the light of the above revision of the Scheme, so as to reach 
the undersigned (by name), preferably by 31st January, 2011, but, in any case, not 
later than 15th February, 2011.   In case the proposal for Central assistance under the 
Scheme for the current year has not yet been sent, it may now please be sent, in the 
light of the above revision, by the above dates, to enabl e the Ministry release Central 
assistance at the earliest. 
 
Yours faithfully 
 
(Sanjeev  Kumar) 
Joint Secretary(SCD) 
Telephone Number :+91-11-23383853 
 
 

65 
 
..6.. 
 
Copy for information to:- 
 
1. PS to Minister (SJ&E) 
2. PS to Minister of State (SJ&E) 
3. PS to Secretary (SJ&E)/PS to Addl. Secretary(SJ&E) 
4. Secretary, NCSC/NCSK 
5. JS(SCD, Media & Parliament)/JS(SD)/JS(DD)/JS(BC & Admn)/JS&FA/ 
DDG/Economic Adviser. 
6. All Ministries/Departments of Govt. of India 
7. All DS/Directors, M/o SJ&E 
8. All Sections of SCD Division 
9. B&C Section, M/o SJ&E 
10. PIO, M/o SJ&E, PIB, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi. 
11. Shri V.B. Arora, Deputy Director(Media), Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi. 
  

66 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 File No.11017/01/2008-BC-I  
Government of India  
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment  
***  
 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi,  
Dated : 11
th 
August, 2011  
 
To  
The Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in-Charge of OBC Welfare,  
All States/UTs  
 
Subject: Revision of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Post -Matric 
Scholarship for students belonging to OBCs (PMS-OBC).  
Sir,  
 
The Government of India has been implementing the Scheme of Post -Matric 
Scholarship to students belonging to OBCs since 1998. It aims to provide financial 
assistance to students belonging to OB Cs for pursuing post -matriculation courses through 
recognized institutions. Under the Scheme, Central Assistance is provided on 100% basis 
to all States/UTs over and above their respective “committed liability” except in the case of 
North Eastern States, which are exempted from committed liability.  
 
2.  Components of the Scheme include:  
(i)  maintenance allowance;  
(ii)  reimbursement of non -refundable compulsory fee charged by educational 
institutions; and  
(iii)  certain other allowances.  
 
3.  The Scheme has now been revised w.e.f. 01.07.2011. The revision consists of 
the following:-  
I. Changes in (i) income ceiling; (ii) grouping of courses; and (iii) rates of 
maintenance and other allowances, as per details given in para 4 below, and  
II. The Scheme was, to begin with, meant to be open -ended, but has, in practice, 
been implemented subject to allocation available for it. This “Funds -Limited” 
nature is now being formalized, as per details given in para 5 below.  
 
 
 
 
 
4. The changes effective from 01.07.2011 are summarized below: 
 

67 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Item / 
Component  
Present Provision / Rates (with 
relevant Section / para of the 
existing Scheme)  
Revised Provision / 
Rates (w.e.f. 01.07.2011)  
1.  Ceiling on family 
income  
(Para III)  
Rs.44,500/- p.a.  
Rs.1 lakh p.a.  
2.  Grouping of 
Courses  
(Para IV)  
Group A  
Medical /Engineering including 
Degree level Courses in Indian 
Medicine, B.A.M&S and 
Comparable courses in 
Ayurveda, Unani/ Tibbia and 
Homeopathic System of 
Medicines.  
B.Sc (Agriculture/B.V.Sc/B.F.Sc  
(Fisheries)  
Higher technical and all 
professional studies like Degree 
and Post -matric courses in 
Agricultural and Veterinary 
Science.  
Group B  
Diploma level courses in Indian 
Medicine and Comparable 
courses in Ayurvedic, 
Unani/Tibbia and Homeopathic 
system of Medicine.  
Diploma & comparable courses 
in Engineering, Technology, 
Architecture, medicine, diploma 
level Courses in printing 
technology and courses for 
Overseer, draftsman, surveyor, 
Commercial Pilot License, 
Diploma and higher courses in 
Hotel Ma nagement catering 
technology and applied Nutrition.  
Degree and post -graduate 
course in nursing and pharmacy.  
Wireless and television 
operators/ sound recording and 
sound engineering motion 
picture, photography, film 
direction/acting. 
screenplay/writing/Degree/post 
graduate Diploma courses in 
business management, 
Group A  
(i) Degree and Post 
Graduate level courses 
including M.Phil., Ph.D. 
and Post Doctoral 
research in Medicine 
(Allopathic, Indian and 
other recognized  systems 
of medicines), 
Engineering, Technology, 
Planning, Architecture, 
Design, Fashion 
Technology, Agriculture, 
Veterinary & Allied 
Sciences, Management, 
Business Finance/ 
Administration, Computer 
Science/Applications.  
(ii) Commercial Pilot 
License (inc luding 
helicopter pilot and 
multiengine rating) course.  
(iii) Post Graduate 
Diploma courses in 
various branches of 
management & medicine.  
(iv)C.A./I.C.W.A./C.S./I.C.
F.A. etc.  
(v) M. Phil., Ph.D. and 
Post Doctoral 
Programmes (D. Litt., 
D.Sc. etc.).  
(vi) L.L.M.  
Group B  
Graduate/Post/Graduate 
courses leading to 
Degree, Diploma, 
Certificate in areas like 
Pharmacy (B. Pharma), 
Nursing (B Nursing), LLB, 
BFS, other para -medial 
branches like rehabilitation 

68 
 
Chartered and Cost /Works 
Accountancy.  
diagnostics etc., Mass 
Communication, Hotel 
Management & Catering, 
Travel/Tourism/ Hospitality 
Management, interior 
Decoration, Nutrition & 
Dietetics, Commercial Art, 
Financial Services (e.g. 
Banking, Insurance, 
Taxation etc.) for which 
entrance qualification is 
minimum Sr. Secondary 
(10+2).  
  Post Graduate courses in 
Science subjects.  
Group C  
Certificate courses in 
Engineering/Technology/Architec
ture and Medicine, Diploma and 
Certificate courses in Agriculture, 
Pharmacy, veterinary Science, 
Fisheries, Dairy development, 
Hygiene and Public Hea lth , 
sanitary Inspector‟s Course, 
courses for Rural services, 
Cooperation and Community 
development, Sub-Officer‟ course 
at the national Fire Service 
College, Nagpur, Library 
Science.  
Degree /Post Graduate Diploma 
and Post Graduate Courses in 
Teachers‟ t raining, Library 
Science and Physical Education , 
Music Fine Arts and Law, Craft 
Instructor‟s Training Course, 
Certificate Course in Hotel 
Management/Catering 
Technology and Applied 
Nutrition, Passenger transport 
Management, Associate degree I 
Pharmacy , P ost graduate 
courses in Arts and Commerce 
(ii) Post Graduate courses 
not covered under Group A 
e.g. MA/M.Sc./M.Com/ 
M.Ed./M.Pharma etc.  
Group C  
All other courses leading to a 
graduate degree not covered 
under Group A & B e.g. 
BA/B.Sc./ B.Com etc.  
Group D  
All post -matriculation level 
non-degree courses f or 
which entrance qualification 
is High School (Class X), 
e.g. senior secondary 
certificate (class XI and XII); 
both general and vocational 
stream, ITI courses, 3 year 
diploma courses in 
Polytechnics, etc.  

69 
 
subjects.  
Group D  
General Courses upto Graduate 
level (2
nd 
year and onward)  
Group E  
Classes X1th and X11th in 10+2 
System  
Intermediate courses and first 
year of General courses upto 
graduate level.  
3  Maintenance 
Allowance  
(Rs. per 
month)  
 
(Para IV) 
 Day 
Scholar
s 
Hosteller 
Group 
A 
190/-  
 
425/-  
 
Group 
B 
190/- 290/- 
Group 
C 
190/-  
 
290/- 
Group 
D 
120/-  
 
230/- 
Group 
E 
90/- 150/- 
 
 
 Day 
Schol
ars 
Hosteller 
Group 
A 
350/-  
 
750/-  
 
Group 
B 
335/-  
 
510/-  
 
Group 
C 
210/-  
 
400/- 
Group 
D 
160/-  
 
260/- 
 
 
4  Other 
Allowances  
(Para IV)  
(Rs.)  
(Rs.)  
4.
1  
Study Tour 
charges  
500/- p.a.  
(subject to actual expenditure)  
900/- p.a.  
(subject to actual 
expenditure)  
4.
2  
Thesis Typing 
& Printing 
charges  
600/- (Maximum)  1000/- (Maximum)  
4.
3  
Book 
Allowance for 
correspondenc
e course  
500/- p.a.  900/- p.a.  
4.
4  
Reader 
charges for 
blind students  
(Rs. per month)  
 
Group A, B, C  100/- 
Group D  75/-  
 
Group E 50/- 
 
 
Group A, B 175/-  
 
Group C  130/- 
Group D 90/- 
 

70 
 
4.
5  
Scholarship for 
CPL Course  
Maintenance allowance at the 
rates applicable to Group B 
courses, in addition to all 
compulsory fees including fee for 
flight charges. The number of 
awards for CPL will be 20 per 
annum on first -cum-first-serve 
basis.  
Rs.5,000/- per flying hour in 
single/multiengine aircraft for 
200 hours, as per DGCA 
approved rates. In addition, 
maintenance allowance at 
the rates applicable to Group 
„A‟ courses will be provided 
(This will be subject to the 
candidate undergoing the 
CPL training i n DGCA 
approved flying institutions 
and his confirmation to meet 
the balance of the cost on 
his own). The number of 
awards for CPL will be 20 
per annum on first -cum-first 
serve basis.  
 
5. “Funds-Limited” nature of the revised Scheme & Procedure for Capping  
Even under the existing PMS-OBC Scheme, due to budgetary constraint, in practice, 
it has not been possible for the Central Government to provide assistance for giving 
scholarship to all eligible students. Therefore, a notional alloc ation (NA) under the 
Scheme was being conveyed at the beginning of the financial year since 2008 -09 to 
States/UTs having OBC population, in proportion to their total population as per census 
and they were being requested to send proposals within the NA. As  mentioned in para 
3(II) above, this is now being formalized under the revised Scheme, as per broad 
procedure outlined below:-  
(i)  At the beginning of the financial year, notional allocation(NA) of funds of 
States/UTs will be made by this Ministry, from the overall annual outlay of the 
Scheme, on the basis of population of each State/UT, excluding States/UTs 
having no notified list of OBCs (viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Lakshadweep).  
 
(ii)  States/UTs will sub-allocate their NA, district-wise and group-wise, for all non-
professional courses. However, such sub -allocation would not be necessary 
for professional courses, as institutions of professional education tend to be 
concentrated in major cities/centres. The State Government is expected to lay 
down criteria for selection for award of scholarship under both types of 
courses – professional and non-professional, to the extent of available funds, 
based on merit-cum-means.  
 
(iii)  States will earmark at least 25% of the total outl ay under the Scheme for 
Group D courses which include, Class -XI and XII and all other post -
matriculation level non -degree courses, diploma courses in polytechnics etc. 
Such earmarking would encourage more OBC students to join entry -level 

71 
 
courses of tertiar y education which would enable them subsequently to take 
up courses leading to higher qualifications.  
 
(iv)  States/UTs will incur expenditure under the Scheme at least to the extent of 
“Central assistance or NA plus their committed liability”, and should normally 
limit the number of scholarships accordingly. However, they would be free to 
allocate funds from the State -Plan, over and above the level of their 
committed liability plus the Central Assistance received, for  funding additional 
scholarships under the Scheme. Any such additional expenditure will have to 
be borne by the State Government/UT Administration itself, over and above 
their committed liability, and will generally not be eligible for reimbursement 
from t he Centre. However, additional expenditure incurred by a State/UT 
beyond the level of Central Assistance may be considered for reimbursement 
by the Central Government, to the extent of availability of savings (mainly 
from States which are not able to fully avail of their notional allocation, for any 
reason), towards the end of a financial year.  
 
(v)  Central assistance given to a State/UT would have to be first utilized to cover 
renewal cases (i.e students already awarded scholarships during the previous 
years against Central Assistance), and only the balance amount left may be 
utilized to cover new cases.  
 
The above lays down the broad principles and procedure for implementing the 
“Capping” feature. Each State Government may please work out its State -specific 
detailed modalities for implementing the “Capping” feature of the revised PMS -OBC 
Scheme, keeping in view the above broad principles/ procedure and its own 
circumstances, and send to this Ministry a copy of its guidelines issued in this behalf to 
the implementing agencies - as far as possible, with the first request for Central 
Assistance under the revised Scheme, and failing that, as soon thereafter as possible.  
 
6.  Under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, recurring expenditure of the last year of a 
Five Year Plan gets transferred to States as their committed liability, from the first year 
of the next Five Year Plan. In the instant case, however, as the revision is taking place 
in the last year of the XI Five Year Plan, Government of India have decided, as  a 
special case, that additional committed liability arising on account of the revision 
of the Scheme w.e.f. 01.07.2011 shall be passed on to the States / UTs at the end 
of the XII Five Year Plan (i.e. w.e.f. 01.04.2017) and not at the end of the XI Plan. 
However, committed liability as per old scholarship rates, at the end of the XI Plan, will 
get transferred to States / UTs with effect from 1.4.2012, as per past practice. 
  
7.  Other provisions of the Scheme remain unchanged.  
 
8.  State Governments/UTs, which have already sent proposals for 2011 -12, are 
requested to revise their proposal for Central Assistance in 2011 -12, in the light of the 
provisions contained in para 4 of this letter, and send the revised proposal to this 
Ministry, so as to reach the u ndersigned (by name), as early as possible but in any 
case, by 15th September, 2011. In case the proposal for Central Assistance under the 

72 
 
Scheme for the 2011-12 has not yet been sent, it may now please be sent, in the light of 
the above revision, by the a bove date, to enable the Ministry to release Central 
Assistance at the earliest.  
 
Yours faithfully,  
Sd/-  
(P.P. Mitra)  
Joint Secretary 
  

73 
 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
File No. M-11012/2/2011-SJ&SW 
Government of India 
Planning Commission 
(Social Justice and Social Welfare Division) 
 
Room No. 318-A, Yojana Bhavan, 
New Delhi-110 001 
Dated February 17th, 2011 
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
 
Subject : Recommendation of the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment – Scholarship schemes for 
Scheduled Castes/Other Backward Classes, Para 1.45 
 
 The Undersigned is directed to refer to your d.o. letter No. 16015/1/2010 -SCD. V 
dated January 3, 2011 on the above mentioned subject and enclose here with the reply 
in respect of para 1.45 of the Report to be f urnished to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Social Justice. 
 
2. This issues with approval of the Member-Secretary, Planning Commission. 
 
Encl: A/A 
            Sd/- 
 (Dr. M.L. Mathur) 
Deputy Adviser (BC) 
Tel: 23096781 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Kind attn.: Smt. Sangita Gairola, Special Secretary) 
Shastri Bhavan, 'A' Wing, 
New Delhi – 110 001 
  

74 
 
Encl: 
 
Planning Commission 
( Social Justice and Social Welfare Division ) 
  
Reg: Recommendation of the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
Scholarship schemes for Scheduled Castes/Other Backward Classes 
 Para 1.45  The Committee observe that there are different rates of scholarships 
as well as income ceiling limits for SCs/OBCs/STs and minorities. The Committee have 
been informed that since these scholarship schemes are being run by three different 
Ministries, there is no coordinated view while effecting revisions under different 
schemes. The Committee are of the view that since all these schemes re late to 
disadvantaged sections of the society and therefore, it is desirable to have some 
uniformity in the various scholarship schemes. In this connection, the Secretary during 
evidence opined that there should be an umbrella authority to be named “Nation al 
Scholarship Authority” which can take a coordinated view of the income ceiling limit, 
rates, etc. in the various scholarship schemes. The Committee while concurring with the 
above, desire the Government to consider setting up such an Authority under the  
Planning Commission/Ministry of HRD to go into the entire gamut of various scholarship 
schemes and take a well considered and coordinated view for determining scholarship 
rates, coverage etc. of all scholarship schemes pertaining to SCs/OBCs/STs and 
Minorities. 
Reply  
 The Planning Commission in its Mid -Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan (2007 -12) document has pronounced that "Scholarships offered by different 
Ministries to weaker sections of the society, follow different norms and criteria 
concerning the stipend amount and parental income.  This creates anomalies and 
mismatch, as a minority can also be SC, ST or OBC and vice-versa.  There is a need 
to harmonise the norms of all scholarship schemes provided to offer the same benefits 
in different contexts.  There is a need to create absorption capacity of funds by 
expanding the coverage, generating awareness about the schemes especially in remote 
rural and inacce ssible areas, providing trained and adequate staff, infrastructure, and 
planning capacity at state. district and block levels" (Para 8.111, Chapter 8 on social 
Justice).  The Planning Commission takes note of the advide of the Committee 
regarding setting u p of a 'National Scholarship Authority' and other concerning issues.  
These issues will be placed in the Working Groups and the Steering Committees on 
Empowerment of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and 
Minorities for Twelfth Five  Year Plan (2012 -17) and an appropriate view will be taken 
accordingly. 
****** 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
 
D.O. No. 11017/10/2006-SCD.V     October 5. 2010 
 
 This Ministry gives plan assistance to State Government for implementing its 
flagship programme viz. the Centrally-sponsored Scheme of Post-matric Scholarship for 
SC students.  Under this Scheme, Central assistance is provided, over and above 
States' committed liability, on 100% basis, for giving scholarship to all eligible SC 
students (without any numerical ceiling). 
 In 2009-10, of the total expenditure incurred on the Scheme by States and the 
Central Government, about 56% was States' committed liability and the balance 44% 
was provided as Central assistance. 
2. For a scholarship scheme to achieve its objective, it is imperative that 
scholarships are disbursed to students in a timely and regular manner.  Unfortunately, it 
has come to our notice that this often does not happen - sometimes on the pleas that 
central assistance for the purpose has not been received. 
 Since over half the total expenditure on the above Scholarship Scheme is 
anyway the States' commi tted liability, it should not b e difficult of State Governments to 
disburse scholarship to eligible students for at least the first half of the f inancial year.  
Further, since receipt of complete proposals from States under the Scheme tends to get 
delayed, we release an ad hoc instalment of Central assistance in the first quarter of the 
financial year.  For example, this year, as against our allocation of Rs. 1700 crore under 
the Scheme, we released ad hoc assistance of about Rs. 500 crore to States in June 
itself.  Together with the States' committed liability, this takes care of over two thirds of 
the State's total requirement of funds  under the Scheme for the whole financial 
year.  
3. We also endeavour to release the balance amount of Central assistance due to a 
State as soon after receipt of complete proposal (including audited utilization certificates 
due) from it, as possible. 
4. You would agree with me that, in the light of the above, there is no justification 
whatever for non-payment of scholarship to eligible SC students, on time, every month.  
I would accordingly be grateful if you could please give directions to ensure that 
disbursement of scholarship to eligible students under the above Scheme is never held 
up, and students get their Scholarship regularly every month so that the Scholarship 
-2- 
 
 Scheme achieves its objective of improving enrolment and retention of SC students, at 
the post-matric stage of education. 
5. I had requested you, vide my d.o. letter No. 11017/10/2006 -SCD.V dated 
20.8.2009, to please also make sure that all students are disbursed scholarship through 
their individual bank or post office accounts.  Kindly let us know the extent to which this 

76 
 
has been implemented in your State, and take steps for cent percent implementation at 
the earliest. 
6. It is also necessary that State Governments designate Grievance Redressal 
Officers (GROs) at the State and District levels to redress students' scholarship -related 
grievances.  I would request that GROs at the two levels, if not already designated, may 
now please be designated urgently, their details publicized widely, and they be given 
suitable instructions to implemen t a comprehensive scholarship grievance redressal 
system. 
7. The above considerations also apply, mutatis, mutandis, to our Scheme of Pre -
matric Scholarship for Children of families engaged in "Unclean" Occupations.  
8. I would be grateful for urgent neces sary action on, and response to the points 
mentioned in paras 4-7 above. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
Sd/- 
       (K.M. Acharya)  
To  
 Chief Secretaries of  
1. 24 States 
(All, excluding Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Meghalaya) 
 2. NCT of Delhi, Chandigarh and Puducherry. 
  

77 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
K.M. Acharya 
 
 D.O. No. 16015/01/2010 –SCD-V 
January 17, 2011 
 
 In the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on the subject "Scholarship schemes for Scheduled Castes/Other 
Backward Classes", presented to the Parliament in October, 2010, the Committee has 
made, inter alia, the following recommendations:- 
(i) opening of individual accounts of students in post -offices /banks, within a 
definite time-frame, for disbursement of scholarships (already advised vide my 
d.o. No. 11017/10/2006-SCD.V dated 20.08.2009 and 05.10.2010); 
(ii) timely payment of scholarship (in at least quarterly installments, beginning with 
the first installment being paid immediately after admission) (already advised 
vide my d.o. letter No. 11017/10/2006-SCD.V dated 05.10.2010); 
(iii) to ensure that full scholarship amount for 12 months is paid to all students; 
(iv) to implement e-payment of scholarships at the earliest; 
(v) to issue instructions to private institutions not to demand tuition fee from 
SC/OBC students who fulfill the eligibility criteria for scholarship  schemes, but 
charge it from State Governments (already advised vide d.o. letter No. 
14012/2/2010-SCD-VI dated 06.10.2010 of Sh. Sanjeev Kumar, Joint 
Secretary, addressed to Principal Secretaries of all States/UTs); 
(vi) simplification of procedure for iss ue of caste certificate to SC/OBC students; 
and 
(vii) to set up Grievance Redressal Cells at the earliest to ensure expeditious 
redressal of grievances of SC/OBC students (already advised vide my d.o. 
letter No. 11017/10/2006-SCD.V dated 05.10.2010). 
  

78 
 
-2- 
 
2. The Standing Committee has desired us to take up the above issues with State 
Governments/UTs, being the implementing agencies for scholarship schemes, on 
priority, and ensure prompt action on its recommendations. 
 We have to submit action taken report on the above recommendations to the 
Standing Committee in a time-bound manner. 
3. In the light of the above, I should be grateful if you could please have immediate 
action taken on the Parliamentary Committee's above r ecommendations, and a point -
wise report on action taken/being taken, sent to us latest by 15.12.2011,  along with 
copies of relevant instructions issued by the State Government. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
Sd/- 
(K.M. Acharya) 
To, 
 Chief Secretaries of  
1. 24 States 
(All, excluding Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Meghalaya) 
 2. NCT of Delhi, Chandigarh and Puducherry. 
 
  

79 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
No. 1-9/2005/(PS) PREM 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
Plan Unit 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi 
Dated: 12th September, 2005 
 
ORDER 
 
Subject : Setting up of Monitoring Committee for Scholarship Schemes for Scheduled 
Castes implemented by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
****** 
 
 In pursuance of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Social Jus tice and Empowerment contained in its XI Report on "Scholarship 
Schemes for SCs/OBCs" that a Monitoring Committee may be set up in the Ministry to 
ensure regular and strict monitoring of the implementation of the Scholarship Schemes, 
it has been decided to  constitute a Monitoring Committee for the following Scholarship 
Schemes of Scheduled Castes:- 
(i) Post-matric Scholarship scheme for Scheduled Castes 
(ii) Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme for Children of those engaged in 
'unclean' occupations 
(iii) National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Castes 
(iv) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for Scheduled Castes 
2. The Composition of the Committee will be as under:- 
(1). Joint Secretary (SCD), M/SJ&E    Chairman 
(2). Economic Adviser (PREM), M/SJ&E    Member 
(3). Two representatives of the Ministry of Human  Members 
 Resource Development – one each from the  
 Department of School Education & Literacy and 
 Department of Higher Education 
(4). Nodal Officer from M/SJ&E for the concerned State Member 
(5). Representative of Integrated Finance Division, M/SJ&E Member 
(6). Representative of University Grants Commission  Member 
 (for Rajeev Gandhi National Fellowship for SCs) 
(7). Representative of Ministry of External Affairs   Member 
 (for National Overseas Scholarship) 
(8). Director/Deputy Secretary In charge of Post-Matric  Member Secretary 
 
3. Director/Deputy Secretary in charge of Schemes other than Post Matric Scholarship 
Scheme for SCs, will be permanent invitees. 

80 
 
 
4. The Terms of Reference of the Committee are as follows: 
 
(i) To monitor progress of release of funds to States/UTs as per the notional 
allocation and its utilization and to take necessary corrective measures. 
 
(ii) To monitor progress of payment of scholarship amount to the beneficiaries 
through Banks/Post Offices by State Governments, and institutionalization of a 
system of electronic payment and monitoring of scholarships in States/UTs. 
 
(iii) To collate and examine the progress reports received from the State 
Governments and to obtain information regardin g financial and physical 
progress, wherever it has not been so received. 
 
(v) To ensure 100% utilization of slots and allocation of funds for the schemes of 
Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SCs and of the National Overseas 
Scholarship by taking mid-term corrective measures. 
 
(vi) Submission of a periodic report about the progress and status of the 
implementation of schemes to Secretary/Minister(SJ&E). 
 
5. The Committee will meet at least once every quarter or more frequently, as required. 
 
            Sd/- 
          (R. Krishnamurthy) 
          Deputy Secretary to the Government of India  
 
1. Secretary, Department of School Education & ] with the request to nominate a  
 Literacy, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.  ] representative of their Department/ 
2. Secretary, Department of Higher Education, ] Organisation on the Committee. 
 Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi   ] 
3. Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, South ] 
 Block, New Delhi.     ] 
4. Secretary, University Grants Commission, New ] 
 Delhi.       ] 
5. JS(SCD)/EA/JS&FA     ] 
6. All Directors/Deputy Secretaries in SCD Bureau 
7. All Nodal Officers 
 
Copy for information to: PS to Minister(SJ&E)/PS to MOS (SJ&E)/Sr. PPS to Secretary(SJ&E)/ 
Sr. PPS to SS(SJ&E)  
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
No. 1-9/2005/(PS) PREM 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
Plan Unit 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi 
Dated: 12th September, 2011 
ORDER 
 
 
 Subject : Setting up of Monitoring Committee for Scholarship Schemes for 
Scheduled Castes implemented by Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
****** 
 
 In pursuance of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment contained in its XI Report on "Scholarship 
Schemes for SCs/OBCs" that a Monitoring Committee may be set up in the Ministry to 
ensure regular and strict monitoring of the implementation of the Scholarship Schemes, 
it has been decided to constitute a Monitoring Committee for the following Scholarship 
Schemes of Other Backward Classes:- 
(vii) Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for Other Backward Classes 
(viii) Pre Matric Scholarship Scheme for Other Backward Classes 
2. The Composition of the Committee will be as under:- 
(1). Joint Secretary (BC), M/SJ&E     Chairman 
(2). Economic Adviser (PREM), M/SJ&E    Member 
(3). Two representatives of the Ministry of Human  Members 
 Resource Development – one each from the  
 Department of School Education & Literacy and 
 Department of Higher Education 
(4). Representative of Ministry of Minority Affairs   Member 
(5). Representative of Integrated Finance Division, M/SJ&E Member 
(6). Nodal Officer from M/SJ&E for the concerned State  Member 
(7). Deputy Secretary dealing with Scholarship Schemes Member Secretary 
 In BC Division, M/SJ&E 
 
 
3. The Terms of Reference of the Committee are as follows: 
 
(i) To monitor progress of release of funds  to States/UTs as per the notional 
allocation and its utilization and to take necessary corrective measures. 
 

82 
 
(ii) To monitor progress of payment of scholarship amount to the beneficiaries 
through Banks/Post Offices by State Governments, and institutionali zation of a 
system of electronic payment and monitoring of scholarships in States/UTs. 
 
(iii) To collate and examine the progress reports received from the State 
Governments and to obtain information regarding financial and physical 
progress, wherever it has not been so received. 
(iv) Monitor redressal of grievances by the Ministry/State Governments. 
 
(v) Submission of a periodic report about the progress and status of the 
implementation of schemes to Secretary/Minister SJ&E. 
 
4. The Committee will meet at least once every quarter or more frequently, as required. 
 
            Sd/- 
          (R. Krishnamurthy) 
           Deputy Secretary to the Government of India  
 
1. Secretary, Department of School Education & ] with the request to nominate a  
 Literacy, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.  ] representative of their Department/ 
2. Secretary, Department of Higher Education, ] Organisation on the Committee. 
 Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi   ] 
3. Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs, CGO ] 
 Complex, New Delhi.    ] 
4. JS(BC)/EA/JS&FA     ] 
5. Deputy Secretaries dealing with Scholarship Schemes in BC Division 
7. All Nodal Officers 
 
Copy for information to: PS to Minister, SJ&E/PS to MOS, SJ&E/Sr. PPS to Secretary, SJ&E/ 
Sr. PPS to SS,  SJ&E  
 
 
  

83 
 
ANNEXURE- IX 
Sanjeev Kumar, 
Telefax 23383853 
         GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Joint Secretary        MINISTRY OF SOCIAL 
                          JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
                  SHASTRI BHAWAN 
NEW DELHI-110001 
D.O. No. 16015/01/2010-SCD-V                   
 
          Dated 15th February, 2011 
 
Dear  
 
 I am enclosing herewith a copy of the recommendation given in Para 1.147 of the 
Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on the 
subject "Scholarship Schemes for Scheduled Castes/Other Backward Cla sses", which 
was presented to Parliament on 30.11.2010. 
 
2. The Committee has inter -alia observed that no relaxation is given to Scheduled 
Caste students hailing from rural areas in the selection of candidates under the scheme 
of "National Overseas Scholar ship for SC etc. candidates".  It has, therefore, 
recommend considering giving suitable relaxation in percentage of marks to SC 
students hailing from rural areas so that they are able to get benefit of the scheme. 
 
3. I would request you to please have the  above recommendation of the Standing 
Committee examined on priority basis and send your response by 18.02.2011 positively 
to enable us to send a consolidated action taken report to the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
within the stipulated time frame.  I would also request you to provide available data, if 
any, about the students selected from rural areas since the inception of scheme in 
2005-06. 
          Yours sincerely, 
           Sd/- 
          (Sanjeev Kumar) 
Encl: As above 
 
Dr. Dev Swarup, 
Joint Secretary, 
University Grants Commission, 
Bahadurshah Zafar Marg, 
New Delhi – 110002. 

84 
 
ANNEXURE - X  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 5TH MARCH, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs . in Committee Room 'D' , PHA, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
7. Shri Mohan Jena 
8. Shri G. V. Harsha Kumar 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
11. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
    MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
14. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
15. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Deepak Mahna - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Choulda - Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for consideration and 

85 
 
adoption of the draft Reports of the Committee i.e. Nineteenth Report on Action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject "Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry 
of Social Justice and  Empowerment  and three Action Taken Reports (Twentieth, 
Twenty-First and Twenty-Second) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministries of 
Minority Affairs, Tribal Affairs and Social Justice and Empowerment respectively. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration all the draft Reports and adopted 
the same with some additions in the 19 th Report on Action taken by the Government on 
the observations/recom mendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
"Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment.  The Committee aut horized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports 
and present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  
 
  
  

86 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   ELEVENTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
 Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 25  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.45, 1.56,  1.57 1.139, 
1.140, 1.141, 1.142, 1.143, 1.144 and 
1.145). 
 
10 40 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies – Nil. 
0 0 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph Nos. 
1.44, 1.47, 1.48, 1.146 and 1.148) 
5 20 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.43, 1.46, 1.49, 1.50, 
1.51, 1.52, 1.53, 1.54, 1.55, and 1.147). 
10 40 
 
 
 