 1 
 
43 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2013 - 2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the   observations/recommendations 
contained in  the  Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)   on  Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry  of  Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935(Saka) 
 
 
 

 2 
 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT   
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the   observations/recommendations 
contained in  the  Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)   on  Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry  of  Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.2.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.2.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935(Saka) 

 3 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
6 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
7 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
18 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government. 
 
39 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted. 
  
46 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
47 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
ANNEXURE - I Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 20.1.2014.
             
        
49 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
51 
                                         
 
    
   
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL        
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-2014) 
    
 
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
                      *10. Shri Madhu Kora  
                    ##11. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
              13. Smt. Mausam Noor 
14. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
15. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Kabir Suman 
21. Vacant  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
   **22. Shri K.R. Arjunan 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
           #26. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
27.       Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
28.        Prof. Mrinal Miri 
29. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
31. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
32. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Shri Madhu Kora nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 18.9.2013. 
**  Shri K.R. Arjunan nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  7.9.2013. 
#   Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member of  Committee w.e.f. 7.9.2013. 
## Ceased to be Member consequent upon his resignation from Lok Sabha     w.e.f.                 
19th December, 2013. 
 

 5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri Devender  Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment       
(2013-14) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Forty-third Report on the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empow erment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of  Tribal Affairs.  
 
2. The Thirty -fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 2 nd May, 2013. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
2.8.2013.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 20.1.2014. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Go vernment on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      HEMANAND BISWAL 
                  Chairman, 
20 January, 2014                                          Standing Committee on 
30 Pausa, 1935 (Saka)    Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
 
 
 
 

 7 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Ju stice and Empowerment (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants-2013-14 relating to Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Thirty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and was laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 2nd May, 201 3. It contained 24 recommendations.  Repl ies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the  
Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 2.30, 2.31, 2.33, 2.35, 2.54, 2.55, 2.56, 2.57, 2.66, 
2.73, 2.85, 2.86, 2.92, 2.93, 2.104, 2.128, 2.130, 2.141 and 2.142. 
 
(Total 19 – Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 2.34, 2.129 and 2.140 
(Total 3 - Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted : 
 
Paragraph No. 2.32  
(Total 1 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature :  
Paragraph Nos. 2.115   
(Total 1 – Chapter V) 

 8 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may 
be furnished to them at the earliest and in any cases not later than three 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Budgetary Allocation to the Ministry 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.30) 
 
1.5 The Committee we re dismayed to note that the Budgetary allocations of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for 2012 -13 were drastically reduced from Rs. 
4090.00 crore to Rs. 3100.00 crore in the Revised Estimate by the Ministry of 
Finance. To their disbelief the reduction was made despite the Ministry having 
met the prescribed expenditure norms.  It was all the more distressing that the 
cut had   not been restored despite the Minister for Tribal Affairs h aving taken up 
the matter with Minister of Finance and the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 29.11.2012 
and 18.12.2012. This is unfortunate, t o say the least. The Committee we re 
deeply concerned  to note that this reduction had  adversely affected the two 
Special ar ea Programmes viz. Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan 
(SCA to TSP) and Grants under Article 275 (1) of the Constitution. Expressing 
their strong disapproval over the reduction on the budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Finance 
enhanced the budget allocation of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs adequately, which 

 9 
is working for the development of disadvantaged tribals who are lagging far 
behind in all socio -economic and educational parameters as als o against the 
average development indices of the country. Mindful of the overriding 
developmental needs of the tribals and the mandatory provision of Article 275 (1) 
of the Constitution, the Committee wish to caution the Ministry of Finance not to 
tinker w ith the charged provision meant for promoting the welfare of STs or 
raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas. The Committee  had, 
therefore, urged  the Government earnestly to reinstate the cuts approved lest an 
impression is created that the Government is not responsive enough and alive to 
the welfare of the tribals. 
1.6 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under :- 
"The matter of restoration of Budget allocation at B.E. level has been 
suitably taken up  with Ministry of Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister 
of Tribal Affairs.  Committee’s observations have also been brought to the 
notice of Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs for compliance & 
future guidelines. 
The matter for submission of  utilization certificates in respect of grants 
released earlier has been vigorously taken up with the respective State 
Governments during the year 2013 -14. The matter is vigorously pursued 
through meetings, Telephone calls, letters and visits of Senior Off icers of 
the Ministry". 
 

 10 
1.7 The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of their 
recommendation, the Ministry has  earnestly taken up the issue of Budget 
cuts with the Ministry of Finance .  As Ministr y of Finance is yet to respond  
favorably,  the Committee desire that there should not  be any let up in their 
efforts to ensure  that there are no cuts in budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry at Revised Estimates  stage so that Special Area Programmes viz.  
Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan (SC A to TSP) and Grants 
under Article 275 (1) of the Constitution  are not adversely affected due to 
paucity of funds.   

 11 
B. Expansion of Scope of new Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.32) 
 
1.8 The Committee observed that from 1961 to 2001, the Literacy rate for STs 
has increased from 8.53% to 47.10%, yet the gap between the literacy rate of 
STs compared to all population groups is about 18%. Similarly,  dropout rates of 
STs i.e. Boys and Girls from classes I -X are also high amo ng all categories, 
which is about 15%. Responding to the anxiety of the Committee, the Ministry 
had informed that a new scheme for pre -matric scholarship for classes 9th and 
10th had been launched during the year 2012-13. The Committee hoped that that 
launching of Pre -matric scholarship would help motivate ST students to attend 
schools in large number and increase their literacy rate and reduce the dropout 
rates. The Committee  hoped that such a laudable scheme like Pre -matric 
Scholarship scheme  did not suff er for want of funds. Since the dropout is 
significant from Class I to Class VIII, the Committee  had recommended that the 
Government consider to extend the scheme to include the ST boys & girls for 
Class I to VIII under the Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme. 
 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under :- 
"At present, there is no such proposal for extending the Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for ST boys & girls for students studying in Classes l 
to Vlll". 
 
 

 12 
1.10 Taking n ote of the  huge gap in literacy rate and dropout rates in 
Class I to X for tribal students,   the Committee had recommended to the 
Ministry to take  all possible proactive measures including grant of 
scholarships to all the needy students from Class I to X and not restricting 
them to only IX and X class students as is being done presently.  The 
Committee are constrained to note the curt reply of the Ministry that there 
was no such proposal  under the consideration of the Government.  T he 
Committee, therefore,  reiterate that the Scholarship be extended  to the 
tribal students from Class I to VI II as well and desire the Ministry to place 
before the Planning Commission  a well formulate d proposal in this reg ard 
for their consideration and approval. 
 

 13 
C. Utilization of funds earmarked for the various Ministries under Tribal-
Sub Plan 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.55) 
 
1.11 The Committee note d that the Task Force constituted by Planning 
Commission in 2010 -11 which had been   headed by Dr. Narendra  Jadhav, 
Member, Planning Commission had recommended differential earmarking of 
funds for Central Ministries categorizing in various groups on the basis of 
minimum percentages. Accordingly, since 2011 -12 Central Ministries are 
allocating funds under TSP component out of the total Gross Budgetary Support 
(GBS). As regards power of monitoring of TSP funds utilization of Central 
Ministries, the Ministry had informed that the TSP funds utilization and its 
monitoring is mainly the subject matter of the Planning Commission.  Keeping in 
view the mandate of the Ministry of overall policy planning and coordination of 
programmes for the development of Scheduled Tribes and the accountability of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to the Parliament on matters relating to tribal welfare 
and development, the Committee had recommended  that the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs should coordinate with the line Central Ministries, and monitor the TSP 
funds utilization by them so that TSP bec ame a more effective instrument of 
bridging the critical gaps.  Taking cognizance of the fact that it is the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs which has the actual database with regard to developmental indices 
of tribals, tribal institutions and their way life and culture, the Committee are  
unanimously of the view that the line Ministries interact closely with the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs for a more coherent, composite and efficient strategy of 
development of tribals. The Committee are of the considered view that the 

 14 
utilization of TSP funds of the line Ministries on conso lation and clearance of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs will bring greater synergy and accelerate the all round 
development of the tribals. 
1.12 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under :- 
"This Ministry in its recent initiatives has suggested revision of guidelines 
in a new approach to planning of Tribal Sub -Plan after detailed 
examination and consideration of various valuable 
recommendations/suggestions of the Parliamentary Committee on 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, National Commission for Scheduled 
Tribes and National Advisory Committee.  The recommendations have 
been sent to Planning Commission for consideration by the Inter -
Ministerial Committee constituted by the former in January, 2013 to 
achieve ways and me ans for ‘inclusive growth’ by revising the existing 
guidelines on Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP). Regular interaction with the Central 
line Ministries/Departments is being made closely for efficient strategy for 
development of Scheduled Tribes and greater synergy w ith the 
schemes/programmes of the Central Ministries / Departments for the 
purpose". 
 

 15 
1.13 The Committee note that the  Ministry of Tribal Affairs have sent their 
proposals/recommendations to the Planning Commission for revision of 
guidelines on the Tribal Sub-Plan with a aim to devising ways and means 
for ‘inclusive growth’ .  The Committee desire that the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs pursue the matter with the Planning Commission in right earnest for 
early revision of guidelines on the Tribal Sub Plan. 

 16 
D. Non-utilization of   funds under the Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship 
Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.73) 
 
1.14 The Committee note d that the objective of the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship scheme is to provide fellowship in the form of fina ncial assistance to 
students belonging to the Scheduled Tribes to pursue higher studies such as 
M.Phil and Ph.D. The Committee, however, note d that the BE for the year 2012 -
13 for such a laudable scheme had  been reduced from Rs. 90.00 crore to Rs. 
45.00 crore at RE stage. On the issue of reduction of funds, Ministry had stated 
that during the year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs.45 crore had been released to the 
implementing agency i.e. University Grants Commission (UGC) towards 1st 
installment of the grant -in-aid for the year 2012 -13 on ad -hoc basis to expedite 
the implementation of the scheme. However, UGC  had reported in the month of 
December, 2012 that there was no need for further release of grant -in-aid as an 
amount of Rs.61.72 crore had been  available being unspent balance from the 
earlier releases. The Committee were anguished to note that the funds, which 
otherwise could be used for needy tribal students lay unspent with the UGC. As 
Assured by the Ministry, the Committee  had, hoped that the Ministry would t ake 
up the matter with the Chairman, UGC so that more tribal students benefit from 
the scheme. 
1.15 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under :- 
"As observed by the Committee, this Ministry has written a letter to 
Chairman, UGC vide letter No.17014/06/2012 -Education dated 4 thJuly, 
2013.   Reply is still awaited". 

 17 
1.16 The Committee note that the Ministry has taken up the matter of non-
utilization of funds under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme with 
the Chairman,  UGC vide the Ministry's letter on 4 th July, 2013 .  As more 
than five months have  since elapsed and the reply is still awaited, the 
Committee would like the Ministry to pursue the matter again with the 
Chairman, UGC and also with the Ministry of Human Reso urce 
Development.  They would also like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard in due course.  

 18 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.30) 
2.1 The Committee are dismayed to note that the Budgetary allocations of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for 2012 -13 were drastically reduced from Rs. 4090.00 
crore to Rs. 3100.00 crore in the Revised Estimate by the Ministry of Finance. To 
their disbelief the reduction was mad e despite the Ministry having met the 
prescribed expenditure norms. It is all the more distressing that the cut was not 
restored despite the Minister for Tribal Affairs having taken up the matter with 
Minister of Finance and the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 2 9.11.2012 and 
18.12.2012. This is unfortunate, to say the least. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that this reduction has adversely affected the two Special area 
Programmes viz. Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan (SCA to TSP) 
and Grant s under Article 275 (1) of the Constitution. Expressing their strong 
disapproval over the reduction on the budgetary allocation of the Ministry, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Finance enhance the budget 
allocation of the Ministry of Tribal Af fairs adequately, which is working for the 
development of disadvantaged tribals who are lagging far behind in all socio -
economic and educational parameters as also against the average development 
indices of the country. Mindful of the overriding developmen tal needs of the 
tribals and the mandatory provision of Article 275 (1) of the Constitution, the 
Committee wish to caution the Ministry of Finance not to tinker with the charged 
provision meant for promoting the welfare of STs or raising the level of 

 19 
administration of the Scheduled Areas. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government earnestly to reinstate the cuts approved lest an impression is 
created that the Government is not responsive enough and alive to the welfare of 
the tribals. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The matter of restoration of Budget allocation at B.E. level has been 
suitably taken up with Ministry of Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Tribal 
Affairs.  Committee’s observations have also been brought to the notice of 
Ministry of Fin ance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs for compliance & future 
guidelines. 
The matter for submission of utilization certificates in respect of grants 
released earlier has been vigorously taken up with the respective State 
Governments during the year 2013 -14. The matter is vigorously pursued through 
meetings, Telephone calls, letters and visits of Senior Officers of the Ministry. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.31) 
2.3 The Committee note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs had requested for 
allocation of funds amounting to Rs 8,901.91 crore during 2013 -14 for different 
schemes. However, the Planning Commission allocated only Rs.4,279.00crore, 

 20 
which is less than half of the projected requirement. On being asked by the 
Committee, the Ministry submitted that due to reduction in allocation, major 
schemes i.e. centrally sponsored, Central sector schemes and Special A reas 
Programmes would be affected. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Budgetary allocation of the Ministry be augmented substantially at RE 
stage for effective implementation of welfare schemes for scheduled Tribes. 
Taking note of the as surance of the Ministry that they would make all out efforts 
to get the budgetary allocation enhanced by Planning Commission at RE stage, 
the Committee desire that their considered views may be brought to the notice of 
the Ministry of Finance and the Plann ing Commission. The Committee would 
also review the utilization of funds after the three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
Reply of  the Government 
2.4 Concerns of the Committee are appreciated. the matter of restoration of 
Budget allocation at B. E. level has been suitably taken up with Ministry of 
Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs. 
The augmentation of budget will be proposed at RE stage. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.33) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the Ministry has outsourced evaluation study of 
NGO projects in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka and 
Madhya Pradesh to an independent agency namely M/s Development Research 

 21 
Services (DRS) Limited during the current year and the draft report has been 
submitted by the agency which is under examination in the Ministry. The 
Committee were informed that the evaluation study highlighted, among other 
issues, the strengths and weaknesses of  the schemes implemented by 
VOs/NGOs. On the status of  implementation of the Report, the Ministry have 
informed that the report was yet to be circulated among the States for their 
comments and that final view would be taken by the Ministry only after takin g into 
consideration the views of the States. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Ministry to take an early call on the above Report based on the views of the 
Statesand keep the Committee apprised. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.6 As on date the Evaluation a gency has submitted a quick evaluation report 
and the final evaluation report is expected in  near future.  The observation of the 
Committee is noted for compliance and on receipt of the final report, it shall also 
be circulated among the State Governments for their views. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.35) 
 
2.7 The Committee find that the Ministry proposes to launch a new scheme 
"Marketing of Minor Forest Produce (MFP) through Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) and Development of Value Chain for MFP” during 2013 -14. The 
Committee have been informed that the Scheme is expected to give a huge 

 22 
social dividend for MFP gatherers, majority of whom are tribals, by enhancing 
their income level and ensuring fair returns to their efforts at collecting MFP. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take speedy action so that the scheme could be 
launched during the current year and the benefit of the scheme accrue to the 
needy Tribals without further loss of time. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.8 Sentiments and views of the Committee have been noted for appropriate 
action. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.54) 
2.9 The Committee note  that the ultimate objective of extending SCA to TSP 
is to boost the demand based income-generation programmes and thus raise the 
economic and social status of tribals. However, the Committee are dismayed to 
note that the budgetary allocation of Rs.1200.00  crore for SCA to TSP during 
2012-13 was scaled down to Rs.852.54 crore in the revised estimates by the 
Ministry of Financeas it imposed an overall cut of Rs. 990.00 crore in the budget 
of the Ministry. The Committee note that due to slashing of the budget , no grant 
could be released by the Ministry to seven States namely Bihar, Goa, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttrakhand and Uttar Pradesh and 
nineStates namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Tr ipura and West Bengal could receive only 
partial allocation. Deploring the callousness with which the grant for the tribals 

 23 
was slashed, the Committee exhort the Ministry of Finance to desist from such 
cuts so that the developmental programmes for the welf are of the tribals are not 
adversely affected or slowed down for want of funds. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.10 The matter of restoration of Budget allocation at B.E. level has been 
suitably taken up with Ministry of Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister  of Tribal 
Affairs. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.55) 
2.11 The Committee note that the Task Force constituted by Planning 
Commission in 2010 -11 which was headed by Dr. Narend ra Jadhav, Member, 
Planning Commission had recommended differential earmarking of funds for 
Central Ministries categorizing in various groups on the basis of minimum 
percentages. Accordingly, since 2011 -12 Central Ministries are allocating funds 
under TSP component out of the total Gross Budgetary Support (GBS). As 
regards power of monitoring of TSP funds utilization of Central Ministries, the 
Ministry have informed that the TSP funds utilization and its monitoring is mainly 
the subject matter of the Planni ng Commission. Keeping in view the mandate of 
the Ministry of overall policy planning and coordination of programmes for the 
development of Scheduled Tribes and the accountability of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs to the Parliament on matters relating to t ribal welfare and development, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should coordinate 
with the line Central Ministries, and monitor the TSP funds utilization by them so 

 24 
that TSP becomes a more effective instrument of bridging the cri tical gaps. 
Taking cognizance of the fact that it is the Ministry of Tribal Affairs which has the 
actual database with regard to developmental indices of tribals, tribal institutions 
and their way life and culture, the Committee are unanimously of the view  that 
the line Ministries interact closely with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for a more 
coherent, composite and efficient strategy of development of tribals. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the utilization of TSP funds of the line 
Ministries on consolation and clearance of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs will bring 
greater synergy and accelerate the all round development of the tribals. 
Reply of  the Government 
2.12 This Ministry in its recent initiatives has suggested revision of guidelines in 
a new approach to planning of Tribal Sub -Plan after detailed examination and 
consideration of various valuable recommendations/suggestions of the 
Parliamentary Committee on Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, National 
Commission for Scheduled Tribes and  National Advisory Committee.  The 
recommendations have been sent to Planning Commission for consideration by 
the Inter -Ministerial Committee constituted by the former in January, 2013 to 
achieve ways and means for ‘inclusive growth’ by revising the existi ng guidelines 
on Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP). Regular interaction with the Central line 
Ministries/Departments is being made closely for efficient strategy for 
development of Scheduled Tribes and greater synergy with the 
schemes/programmes of the Central Ministries / Departments for the purpose. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 

 25 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.56) 
 
2.13 The Committee also re commend that the Ministry should utilize more 
funds under the scheme for training and develop leadership quality among the 
tribal people enabling them to take up various higher and responsible positions in 
various fields like bureaucracy, defence and sport s. They should also find more 
innovative ways for spending the money for fillingup the gaps in human 
development indicators and infrastructural sections like roads, electricity, 
housing, etc. in the tribal areas. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.14 This Ministr y of Tribal Affairs has already been engaged for releasing 
funds under Special Area Programme SCA to TSP for skill development training 
and income generation activities.  Under Special Area Programme of Grants 
under Article 275(1) of the Constitution of In dia, funds are also released to the 
State Governments for innovative project / schemes for filling up of the gaps in 
various human development indices and infrastructural development for bringing 
the quality of life of tribal people at par with the rest of  population.  Under Article 
275(1) of the Constitution of India, funds are also released for Ekalvya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRSs) which have the objective of providing quality 
middle and high level education to Scheduled Tribe (ST) students in remote 

 26 
areas, not only to enable them to avail of reservation in high and professional 
educational courses and jobs in government, public and private sectors but also 
to have access to the best opportunities in education at par with the non -ST 
population and are envisaged on the lines of JawaharNavodayaVidayalas with 
State centered management. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.57) 
2.15 The Committee also recommend that no money under TS P should be 
allowed to lapse or diverted. TSP should be made a right based law on the 
pattern of Andhra Pradesh. The matter should be persued with Ministries 
concerned. The Committee further recommend that a quarterly status of funds 
utilized by all the Mi nistries for tribal welfare and development be placed in 
Parliament by the nodal Ministry of Tribal Affairs for concurrent Parliamentary 
scrutiny.  
Reply of  the Government 
2.16 Funds earmarked under TSP are non -divertible and non-lapsable as per 
the exist ing guidelines.  States/UTs and Central Ministries / Departments are 
regularly reminded of the provision for compliance.  The Committee’s 
recommendations are noted for further appropriate action. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
 
 
 

 27 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.66) 
 
2.17 The Committee observe that under the scheme of Grants under First 
Proviso to Article 275(1) of the Constitution, the Revised Estimate during 2012 -
13 was drastically reduced to Rs. 820.00 cro re against Budget Estimates 2012 -
13 of Rs. 1317.00 crore and the actual expenditure upto 31.12.2012 was Rs. 
756.90 crore. Thus only a meager amount of Rs. 63.10 crore was available for 
the last quarter (January -March 2013). The Committee consider the cut i n the 
revised estimates by the Ministry of Finance as grossly unfair and unjustified as it 
left only a meager Rs. 63.10 crore to be spent in the last quarter from January 
2013 to March, 2013. The Committee also feel that in view of the fact that the 
human development indices of the tribal population are far lower than the 
developmental indices of the rest of the social groups and since infrastructure in 
the tribal areas is not at par, funds under such an important scheme which seeks 
to bridge the critical g aps should not have been slashed. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should vigorously pursue with the Ministry 
of Finance/Planning Commission not to cut funds under the scheme of Grants 
under First Proviso to Article 275(1) for maintain ing the sanctity of the 
Constitutional provision and accelerating the development of the tribals.  
Reply of  the Government 
2.18 The matter of restoration of Budget allocation at B.E. level has been 
suitably taken up with Ministry of Finance at the level o f Hon’ble Minister of Tribal 
Affairs. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 

 28 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.73) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the objective of the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship scheme is to prov ide fellowship in the form of financial assistance to 
students belonging to the Scheduled Tribes to pursue higher studies such as 
M.Phil and Ph.D. The Committee, however, note that the BE for the year 2012-13 
for such a laudable scheme has been reduced fro m Rs. 90.00 crore to Rs. 45.00 
crore at RE stage. On the issue of reduction of funds, Ministry stated that during 
the year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs.45 crore was released to the implementing 
agency i.e. University Grants Commission (UGC) towards 1st installm ent of the 
grant-in-aid for the year 2012 -13 on ad-hoc basis to expedite the implementation 
of the scheme. However, UGC reported in the month of December, 2012 that 
there is no need for further release of grant -in-aid as an amount of Rs.61.72 
crore was ava ilable being unspent balance from the earlier releases. The 
Committee are anguished to note that the funds, which otherwise could be used 
for needy tribal students lay unspent with the UGC. As Assured by the Ministry, 
the Committee, hope that the Ministry would take up the matter with the 
Chairman, UGC so that more tribal students benefit from the scheme. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.20 As observed by the Committee, this Ministry has written a letter to 
Chairman, UGC vide letter No.17014/06/2012 -Education da ted 4 thJuly, 2013.   
Reply is still awaited. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 

 29 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.85) 
2.21 The Committee note that the expenditure under the scheme of Post Matric 
Scholarship, Book Bank and Upgradation of Merit of ST students has been quite 
satisfactory during the last three years. In view of popularity of the scheme, the 
Committee desire that more funds s hould be allocated under the scheme so that 
more ST students get benefit of the scheme.  
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.22 The budget allocation under the scheme of Post Matric Scholarship, Book 
Bank and Upgradation of Merit of ST Students for 2013 -14 is Rs.7 50.00 crore, 
which is sufficient budget.   
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.86) 
 
2.23 The Committee note with concern that as against a target set under 
Component of Upgradation of Merit of ST students during the years 2010 -11 and 
2011-12 of 1053 students each year, the achievements were mere 329 and 958 
students respectively. During the year 2012 -13, against the same target (1053), 
achievement is only 73. The Ministry laid the responsibility for under -
achievements at the door steps of the State Governments which are stated to 

 30 
have not been able to utilize their  respective quota of awards. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should pursue with State Governments for 
submitting adequate number of complete proposals so that target set under the 
scheme are achieved. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.24 The Ministry has written to the various State/UT Administrations to submit 
their proposals for the current year at the earliest. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.92) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that the objective of the National Overseas 
Scholarship Scheme is to provide financial assistance to selected ST stude nts 
pursuing higher studies (Master, Doctoral and Post -Doctoral level) in certain 
specified fields of Engineering, Technology and Science only in accredited 
foreign Universities. However, the Committee are dismayed and shocked to note 
that out of 39 selected candidates in previous selection years i.e. from 2004-05 to 
2010-11, only 17 selected candidates actually got admission in foreign accredited 
Universities during the years 2007 -08 to 2012 -13. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to take up the ma tter earnestly with the Ministry of External 
Affairs for disseminating information about the Scheme among foreign 
Institutions through the respective High Commissions/Embassies and also to 
facilitate that the selected candidates are invited to attend orien tation workshops 
in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs.  

 31 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.26 Based on the evaluation study report of National Institute of Rural 
Development(NIRD), Hyderabad, this Ministry is in the process of revising the 
scheme for  continuation during 12 th Plan period.  Some suggestions of NIRD 
namely wide publicity among universities thought advertisement, payment of TA 
to the students, coaching facility for TOEFL and GRE/GMAT, revision of 
scholarship amount etc. are being incorporated in the revised scheme guidelines. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.93) 
 
2.27 The Committee find that the evaluation study on National Overseas 
Scholarship Scheme on the fo llowing terms of references namely Non 
achievement of target, Problems in getting admission in foreign accredited 
universities, Reason for joining late in foreign universities and measures to make 
the scheme effective/accessible has been entrusted to the N ational Institute of 
Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
emphasize upon NIRD to expedite the submission of the evaluation Report so 
that necessary remedial measures could be taken by the Government in the 
matter. 
Reply of  the Government 
2.28 Based on the draft report of National Institute of Rural Development 
(NIRD), Hyderabad, this Ministry has circulated Standing finance 

 32 
Committee(SFC) Memo for inter-ministerial consultation on the proposed revision 
of the scheme vide this Ministry letter No.11016/1/2011-Edu dated 07.06.2013.   
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.104) 
2.29 The Committee are deeply concerned to observe that there has been 
under utilization of funds during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 under the scheme of 
Strengthening Education among Scheduled Tribe Girls in Low Literacy Districts. 
The Committee also observe that the Budget Estimate during 2012 -13 was Rs. 
40 crore which was reduced to Rs. 14.61 at Revised Estimate stage and actual 
expenditure as on 22.3.2013 was Rs. 7.42 crore. Moreover, the target set under 
the scheme during 2012 -13 was 25,000 ST girls for 67 projects while the 
achievement was education of only 2183 ST girls. The Ministry stated that receipt 
of lesser number of complete proposals was the main reason for low expenditure 
and non-achievement of target. The representatives of the Ministry conceded the 
sense of underachievement of the Ministry but gave a solemn assurance to the 
Committee that they were committed to bringing a revised, revamped education 
umbrella scheme for accelerating the literacy among ST girls. The Committee 
hardly need to emphasize that education of girl child and that too among the ST 
can not be held hostage just for the delay in receipt of proposals from the States. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that despite the Right to Education (REA) 
Act and adequate availability of funds for STs the achievement is only a 
miniscule of the original target.  The Commit tee therefore recommend that the 
matter be taken up with the State Governments vigorously as the stakes are very 
high in terms of achieving a lofty goal of educating the tribal girl child. 

 33 
Reply of  the Government 
2.30 The objective is to release 100% of f unds budgeted for the schemes by 
the end of the financial year.  However, prior to the actual release of funds, the 
Ministry exercises prescribed checks for compliance with terms and conditions of 
the scheme and General Financial Rules (GFRs), by State Org anisaions/Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) while applying for Grants -in-aid.  These 
include inter alia conditions of submission of copy of pass book indicating the 
transactions, funds utilization certificate, recommendations from State Level 
Committees and District Level Inspection report.  All the conditions have to be 
complied with before any sanction for grants-in-aid is issued. 
The recommendations of the State Governments are also normally 
received late, despite the scheme guidelines prescribing th at these should be 
sent to Ministry of Tribal Affairs by 30 th April.  The Scheme guidelines also 
prescribe that “No recommendation may be made after the month of April in 
order to streamline the funding pattern”.  Yet this is generally not adhered to by 
the State Governments. 
The Ministry is totally committed to education of the tribal girls child and all 
the State Governments have been addressed to submit the proposals for 2013 -
14 in time.  Also this Ministry had a meeting with the State Secretaries on 16 th-
17th May, 2013, wherein the State Governments were requested to expedite the 
proposals. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
 

 34 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 2.128) 
 
2.31 The Committee observe that TRIFED is functioning both as a service 
provider and market developer for tribal products and also imparts training 
to ST Artisans and Minor Forest Produce (MFP) gatherers. The Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs extends Grants -in-Aid to TRIFED under the Scheme "Market 
Development of Tribal Product". However, the actual expenditure has been 
constantly on the higher side exceeding the Grant Provided. The 
Committee were apprised that the excess expenditure was met from 
TRIFED's own resources. The Committee feel that time has come t hat the 
TRIFED makes new and innovative endeavors to develop and enhance 
the entrepreneurial skills of the tribals and encourages them to take up 
new enterprises. Keeping in view the laudable objective of the TRIFED that 
is, the socio -economic development of the tribal people, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to examine the feasibility of increasing grant to TRIFED, 
commensurate with its achievements, the overall objectives and the 
enormity of the task of market development for the tribals. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.32 Efforts are made to enhance grants to TRIFED within available resources 
 With a view to undertaking new and innovative endeavors to develop and 
enhance the entrepreneurial skills of the tribals and encourage them to take up 
new enterprises, TRIFED has initiated the following actions:- 

 35 
 
I. Training on Minor Forest Produce: - This training programme being 
organized by TRIFED was undertaken to incorporate marketing linkages 
and enterprise building as integral parts of the training. Awareness about 
marketing linkages is also proposed to be provided as part of the training 
programme also and plans to impart training to 3520 beneficiaries. 
II. Training to the Tribal Artisans: -The training plan for the tribal artisans 
has been modified to make it more effect ive and meaningful through hand 
holding in the post training period for entrepreneurship development. 
TRIFED has also planned to establish Adivasi  Bahu Uddeshiya Vikas 
Kendra in some States for linking training and skill up gradation with value 
addition, m anufacturing, storage, marketing and other income -generating 
and promotional activities for the benefit of tribals. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 2.130) 
 
2.33 Mindful of the fact that the human resource of an organization is 
responsible for, to a great extent, for it successful functioning, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the staff strength of TRIFED, the 
opportunities available for their career progression, the res ult of cadre 
review if any done in the recent past and the grievances redressal 
mechanism for them within the organization. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry submit a detailed note in this behalf to 

 36 
Committee also suggesting measures fo r revamping the TRIFED for 
effective cohesion, synergy and better delivery of services in terms of the  
assigned mandate. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.34 TRIFED had staff strength of 277 regular employees and 28 persons 
engaged on contractual basis.  In addi tion TRIFED had 47 persons engaged 
under the hiring policy for retail marketing operations as approved by the Board 
of Directors of TRIFED. 
During 2012 -13, TRIFED promoted 57 personnal and provided financial 
upgradation to 91 employees in accordance with t he Recruitment & Promotion 
Rules of TRIFED which are framed under the policy of DOPT. TRIFED has also 
sponsored 08 officials for Post Graduate Diploma in Tribal Development through 
National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad through their Distance 
Learning Programme. 
As regards grievance redressel, a mechanism in this regard is already in 
place since 2009 in accordance with the directions of D/o Administrative Reforms 
& Public Grievances. 
Recently, in order to improve the situation, cadre review exer cise has been 
taken up by TRIFED with the following objective:- 
(a) To rationalize the whole manpower requirement; 
(b) To redeploy the manpower with suitable training and orientation; 

 37 
(c) To compulsorily retire the personnel who are found unproductive and unfit 
for the job and are liability for the Federation; 
To draw job charts and job description pin -pointing responsibilities and 
performance indicators against which the performance of each employee be 
assessed. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 2.141) 
 
2.35 The Committee also feel that as per the provision of the Constitution, 
a Council of Governors in respect of the States (including blocks/districts) 
which come under the ambit of the fifth or sixth Schedule, should have 
been formed for monitoring the TSP scheme, PESA Act and Forest Rights 
Act. This would have given the right to the Union and the Council of 
Governors to monitor the provisions of these Acts. The Committee 
recommend that the Mi nistry take appropriate steps to put in place an 
appropriate mechanism in this direction. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.36 The concerns for proactive intervention vis -à-vis powers under the 
provisions of Article 244 read with provision of Schedule V to the constitution for 
ensuring good governance, securing the rights of Scheduled Tribes and forest 
dwellers have been taken up at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs with 

 38 
Governors. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
appropriate action.   
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 2.142) 
 
2.37 The Committee note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry 
for implementation of Scheduled Tribes and ot her Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. However, dedicated Forest Rights 
Division in the Ministry to address the issues related thereto more effectively in a 
focused manner was yet to be created in the Ministry. The Commit tee were 
informed that there is a separate unit called FRA Unit in the Ministry specifically 
for this purpose. The Committee, therefore, desire that a separate dedicated 
Forest Rights Division be created in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to address the 
issues more effectively in a focused manner relating to implementation of 
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
2.38 The Ministry has since set up FRA Division on 1.5.2013 to  monitor the 
progress and address among others the issues relating to implementation of 
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 

 39 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH  THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.34) 
 
3.1 The Committee are pleased to note that a Coordination Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs is meeting regularly to 
monitor the planning and progress of the schemes/programmes being 
implemented by the line Ministries for the overall development of Scheduled 
Tribes. However, the Committee feel that unless the PESA Act is implemented in 
all the States, the benefits of tribal welfare schemes can not be extended to the 
target groups. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that there is an urgent 
need to implement the PESA Act in all the States on the lines of the schemes of 
the Panchayati Raj Ministry.  
Reply of  the Government 
 
3.2 Implementation of PESA is in the mandate of Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
Ministry’s schemes primarily provide State Grants or have universal coverage to 
the scholarship .  However, Gram Sahba/Panchayat’s would be involved in 
dissemination of the information with reference to scholarship schemes. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
 
 
 

 40 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 2.129) 
 
3.3 The Committee note with concern the increasing number of court 
cases and arbitration proceedings involving the TRIFED. The Committee 
were informed that the total payment made to lawyers defending these 45 
cases was Rs.26.57 lakhs (approx.) as on 8.4.2013. Th e Ministry have 
stated that a legal Division in TRIFED is already in existence which is 
equipped with two legal officers in the rank of Deputy Manager. The cases 
in different Courts are defended through a legal adviser, three senior 
counsels and five junior counsels having expertise in different Branch/Field 
of Law who are empanelled in TRIFED. The Committee desire that the 
legal Cell of the TRIFED be strengthened so as to save money which is 
paid to the lawyers as also to solicit legal advice on the 
contracts/agreements being entered into by the TRIFED with their 
business clients. 
Reply of  the Government 
3.4 The present system of empanelling lawyers having expertise in different 
fields is more economical for TRIFED to make payments to the lawyers for 
defending the cases in the Courts and get advice on legal matters on the rates 
prescribed by the Ministry of Law and Justice, Govt. of India.  In case TRIFED 
appoints officers of the level of one Senior Manager and one DGM in order to 
strengthen Legal Cell in a ddition to the existing two Legal Officers, the additional 
financial burden would be Rs.21.00 lakh approximately. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 

 41 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 2.140) 
 
3.5 The Committee are un happy to note the slow progress with regard to 
distribution of title deeds under Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 as against 32,45,191 claims 
only 12,80,710 titles have been distributed so far and 16,226 are ready for 
distribution. The total number of claims rejected is 15,12,695. The Committee 
take a serious view of the large scale rejection of claims apparently to the 
detriment of the tribals. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that till date 
it has not been possible to decide authoritatively how much land is forest land. 
The Committee feel that so long as the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the Ministry 
of Forest and Environment do not have a common view point with respect to the 
rights of the tribals on forest land, the problem will persist. In the light of this 
observation the Committee recommend that the Ministry should review the 
rejected cases, so that no genuine claimant is debarred of his rightful claim while 
expressing judicious disposal of pending claims. 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
3.6 As regards the concern expressed by the Committee about large scale 
rejection of claims, it may be stated that t he claims filed under the Forest Rights 
Act, 2006 for vesting of rights are adjudica ted at three levels, namely, the Gram 
Sabha, the Sub -Divisional Level Committee and the District Level Committee.  
The claims filed under this Act are finally approved by District Level Committee.  
Accordingly, out of the total number of 32,44,191 claims f iled till 28.2.2013, a 
total number of 27,93,405 claims (86.60%) were disposed of, and out of the 

 42 
27,93,405 claims disposed of, 12,80,700 claims were approved and the same 
number of titles were distributed.  16,226 titles were made ready for distribution 
and the remaining 15,12,695 claims were rejected. 
As regards review of the rejected claims it may be stated that the Forest 
Rights Act and the Rules framed there  under do not envisage the review of the 
cases where claims have been rejected.  However, in ord er to minimize the 
incidence of rejection of claims filed under the Act, the Ministry has issued 
comprehensive guidelines to the State/ UT Governments on 12.7.20012 and also 
notified the Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Amendment Rules, 2012 on 6.9.2012, which inter -alia prescribe 
the following process of recognition of rights: 
(1) On receipt of intimation from the Forest Rights Committee, the 
officials of the Forest and Revenue departments shall remain p resent 
during the verification of the claims and the verification of evidences on 
the site and shall sign the proceedings with their designation, date and 
comments, if any.  
(2) If any objections are made by the Forest or Revenue departments 
at a later dat e to a claim approved by the Gram Sabha, for the reason 
that their representatives were absent during field verification, the claim 
shall be remanded to the Gram Sabha for re -verification by the 
committee where objection has been raised and if the represen tatives 
again fail to attend the verification process the Gram Sabha’s decision 
on the field verification shall be final.  
(3)  In the event of modification or rejection of a claim by the Gram 
Sabha or a recommendation for modification or rejection of a cl aim 
forwarded by the Sub -Divisional Level Committee to the District Level 
Committee, such decision or recommendation on the claim shall be 

 43 
communicated in person to the claimant to enable him to prefer a 
petition to the Sub -Divisional Level Committee or Di strict Level 
Committee as the case may be, within a period  of sixty days which shall 
be extendable to a period of thirty days at the discretion of the above 
said committees.  
(4)    If any other state agency desires to object to a decision of the Gram 
Sabha or the Sub -Divisional Level Committee, it shall file an appeal 
before the Sub -Divisional Level Committee or the District Level 
Committee, as the case may be, which shall be decided by the 
Committee (in the absence of the representative of the concerned 
agency, if any) after hearing the claimant.   
(5)  No petition of the aggrieved person shall be disposed of, unless he 
has been given a reasonable opportunity to present anything in support 
of his claim.  
(6)  The Sub -Divisional Level Committee or the Dist rict Level 
Committee shall remand the claim to the Gram Sabha for re -
consideration instead of modifying or rejecting the same, in case the 
resolution or the recommendation of the Gram Sabha is found to be 
incomplete or prima-facie requires additional examination.  
(7)  In cases where the resolution passed by the Gram Sabha, 
recommending a claim, with supporting documents and evidence, is 
upheld by the Sub -Divisional Level Committee with or without 
modifications, but the same is not approved by the District Level 
Committee, the District Level Committee shall record detailed reasons 
for not accepting the recommendations of the Gram Sabha or the Sub -
Divisional Level Committee as the case may be, in writing, and a copy of 
the order of the District Level Committe e along with the reasons shall be 
made available to the claimant or the Gram Sabha or the Community as 
the case may be.  

 44 
(8)  The land rights for self -cultivation recognised under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be, within the specified li mit, including 
the forest lands used for allied activities ancillary to cultivation, such as, 
for keeping cattle, for winnowing and other post -harvest activities, 
rotational fallows, tree crops and storage of produce.  
(9)  On completion of the process of settlement of rights and issue of 
titles as specified in Annexure II, III and IV of these rules, the Revenue 
and the Forest departments shall prepare a final map of the forest land 
so vested and the concerned authorities shall incorporate the forest 
rights so vested in the revenue and forest records, as the case may be, 
within the specified period of record updation under the relevant State 
laws or within a period of three months, whichever is earlier.  
(10)  All decisions of the Sub -Divisional Level Commit tee and District 
Level Committee that involve modification or rejection of a Gram Sabha 
resolution or recommendation of the Sub Divisional Level Committee 
shall give detailed reasons for such modification or rejection, as the case 
may be: 
  Provided that no recommendation or rejection of claims shall be 
merely on  any technical or procedural grounds: 
  Provided further that no committee (except the Gram Sabha or the 
Forest Rights Committee) at the Block or Panchayat or forest beat or 
range level, or any ind ividual officer of any rank shall be empowered to 
receive claims or reject, modify, or decide any claim on forest rights.  
(11)  The Sub -Divisional Level Committee or the District Level Committee 
shall consider the evidence specified in rule 13 while decid ing the claims 
and shall not insist upon any particular form of documentary evidence for 
consideration of a claim.  
 Explanation: 1. Fine receipts, encroacher lists, primary offence reports, 
forest settlement reports, and similar documentation by whatever name 

 45 
called, arisen during prior official exercise, or the lack thereof, shall not be 
the sole basis for rejection of any claim. 
2.   The satellite imagery and other uses of technology may 
supplement other form of evidence and shall not be treated as a 
replacement. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
 
 

 46 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVENRMETN HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON IN CHAPTER-I  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.32) 
4.1 The Committee observe that from 1961 to 2001, the Literacy rate for STs 
has increased from 8.53% to 47.10%, yet the gap between the literacy rate of 
STs compared to all population groups is about 18%. Similarly,  dropout rates of 
STs i.e. Boys and Girls from classes I -X are also high among all categories, 
which is about 15%. Responding to the anxiety of the Committee, the Ministry 
informed that a new scheme for pre -matric scholarship for classes 9th and 10th 
has been launched d uring the year 2012 -13. The Committee hope that that 
launching of Pre -matric scholarship will help motivate ST students to attend 
schools in large number and increase their literacy rate and reduce the dropout 
rates. The Committee  hope that such a laudable  scheme like Pre -matric 
Scholarship scheme  does not suffer for want of funds. Since the dropout is 
significant from Class I to Class VIII, the Committee recommend that the 
Government consider to extend the scheme to include the ST boys & girls for 
Class I to VIII under the Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme. 
Reply of  the Government 
4.2 At present, there is no such proposal for extending the Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for ST boys & girls for students studying in Classes l to Vlll. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 47 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVENRMETN ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.115) 
 
5.1 The Committee feel that the existing system and the research institutes 
under the Ministry are grossly inadequate in carrying out meaningful research 
work in as much as the issues of tribals and their problem have not been 
understood in proper perspective. The Committee are of the considered view that 
Universities are more suitable for such a type of research approach and work. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that while giving guidance to genuine 
NGOs about research, the Univ ersities should also be involved so that the 
outreach of research programme becomes comprehensive enough to cover the 
rich arts, culture, traditions and languages and dialects of the tribals with focus 
on their welfare and development. Further, the procedu re for submitting 
proposals may also be simplified to make available grant-in-aid to genuine NGOs 
and the Committee apprised.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 48 
Reply of  the Government 
 
5.2 The Ministry appreciates the concern of the Standing Committee on 
carrying out meaningful r esearch work in proper perspective.  Revision of 
scheme guidelines would attempt to incorporate issues raised by the committee. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs' OM No. 16015/05/2013-PC&V dated 02.08.2013] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:     HEMANAND BISWAL  
20 January, 2014       Chairman, 
30 Pausa, 1935 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 

 49 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 20 th 
JANUARY, 2014 
 
The Committee met fr om 1130 hrs. to 1 400 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri M. Anandan   
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra  
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
10. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
11. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
    
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
14. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
15. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
16. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 

 50 
******   ******   ******   ******         
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Forty-third Report 
on Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants, 2013-14 of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs without  any modification/amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
5. ******   ******   ******   ******         
 
 
6. ******   ******   ******   ******         
 
7. ******   ******   ******   ******         
 
8. ******   ******   ******   ******         
 
9. ******   ******   ******   ******         
 
10.     ******   ******   ******   ******         
  
******  ******  ****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 51 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         Total             Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
  
24  
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have 
been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.30, 2.31, 2.33, 2.35, 2.54, 
2.55, 2.56, 2.57, 2.66, 2.73, 2.85,  2.86, 2.92, 
2.93, 2.104, 2.128, 2.130, 2.141 and 2.142) 
 
19 79.17 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.34, 2.129 and 2.140)   
 
3 12.50 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations, in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted (Paragraph No. 2.32) 
 
1 4.17 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature (Paragraph No. 2.115)  
 
1 4.16 
 
   
            
 
   
 