1 
 
 
 
32 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
THE PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS MANUAL SCAVENGERS 
AND THEIR REHABILITATION BILL 2012 
 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT  
 
 
 
 
              
   
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934(Saka)  


 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2012-13) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
THE PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS MANUAL SCAVENGERS 
AND THEIR REHABILITATION BILL 2012 
 
            
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.3.2013 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.3.2013 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934(Saka) 
 
 


 
 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE(s) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………………  (vi) 
REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………………………  1 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I. The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Bill, 2012 
 
38 
II. The Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines 
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 
 
66 
III. Census 2011 Data on Latrine Facility. 
 
78 
IV. State/UT-wise Number of Insanitary Latrines. 
 
79 
V. 
 
Survey of Manual Scavengers and their dependents Guidelines. 80 
VI. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on Thursday, 1st November, 2012 
 
107 
VII. Minutes  of  the  Fourth  sitting  of  the Standing  Committee on  Social   
Justice   and  Empowerment  held  on  Thursday, 6th  December, 2012 
 
110 
VIII. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment held on Friday, 11th January, 2013 
 
113 
IX. Minutes of the Seventh sitting  of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on Monday, 21st January, 2013 
 
120 
X. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment held on Wednesday, 27th February, 2013 
 
123 
   
   
   
   
   
   

 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2012-2013) 
       
 
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
  
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
12. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
13. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18. Shri Kabir Suman 
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
 *24. Shri Rishang Keishing 
25. Shri Mangala Kisan 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 

 
 
31. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*  Resigned from the Committee w.e.f. 22.2.2013  

 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kusal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Committee Officer 
 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on  Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to  submit   the  Report  on  
their  behalf, do  present  this  Thirty-second Report of the Committee  on  “The 
Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 3.9.2012  and was referred to the 
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 9.9.2012 under Rule 331E (b) of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and 
report. 
 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained 
in the aforesaid Bill from Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, who also 
briefed them at their sitting held on 1.11.2012. 
 
4. Written suggestions and memoranda were sought from the  some of the  
NGOs working in the field of rehabilitation of manual scavenging namely, Safai 
Karamchari Andolan, Sulabha International Social Service Organization and 
Rashtriya Garima Abhiyan. The Sulabha International Social Service Organization  
gave no suggestions stating that they found the Bill to be in order.  Safai Karamchari 
Andolan forwarded certain suggestions and also deposed before the Committee.  
Suggestions were also received from Shri P.S. Krishnan, IAS (Retired).  Written 
information was  also received obtain from the Ministries of Urban Development, 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Drinking Water and Sanitation and Railways. 
 
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 6.12.2012 heard the views of an NGO 
(Safai Karamcharis Andolan) on the Bill. 
  
6. The Committee took oral evidence s of the Ministries of Urban Development, 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Drinking Water and Sanitation and Railways 
on 11.1.2013 and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on 21.1.2013.  The  
representatives of the Ministries of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) , Urban 
Development, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Drinking Water and Sanitation 
and Railways were also present at the meeting held on 21.1.2013. 
 
7. The Committee   undertook on -the-spot study visit to  Bengaluru, Chennai    
and Hyderabad and interacted  with NGOs, Railway  Safai  Karamcharis,   Chief 
Secretaries of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh and Railway authorities 
in connection with implementational aspects of the Bi ll.  The observations of the 
Committee are based on the appraisal of the suggestions received, views expressed 
by NGOs, evidences of the Ministries of Social Justice and Empowerment , Urban 
Development, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Drinking Water and Sanitation 
and Railways as also the deliberations of the study visit. 

 
 
 
 
8. The Committee considered and adopted  the Draft Report on “The Prohibition 
of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” at their 
sitting held on 27.2.2013. 
 
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministries of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, Urban Development, Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, Drinking Water and Sanitation and Railways, representatives of Ministry 
of L aw and Justice (Legislative Department) , State Governments of Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh and NGOs for their cooperation in placing before 
them their considered views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for 
furnishing written not es and information that the Committee had desired in 
connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 New Delhi;   HEMANAND BISWAL, 
27 February, 2013     Chairman, 
8 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
  

 
 
REPORT 
BACKGROUND 
1.1            The obnoxious practice of manual scavenging or engaging fellow 
human beings into cleaning the untreated human excreta is a blot on our 
society. Deeply concerned about liberating the manual scavengers from the 
inhuman task of carrying night soil, the Parliament enacted The Employment 
of manual scavengers and construction of Dry Latrine (Prohibition) Act, 1993. 
The law prohibits construction and or maintenance of dry latrines and 
employment of manual scavengers. However, a s b rought out by census 
2011, there are still 26 lakh insanitary latrines in the country where nightsoil is 
either being deposited into open drains or removed manually . This 
abominable practice of manual scavenging which persists in various parts of 
the country violates the constitutional right of human dignity.   
 
1.2            To eradicate this dehumanizing  practice and to gainfully rehabilitate 
human scavenger s, the Government introduced "The Prohibition of 
Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012"  
(Hereinafter, the Bill) in Lok Sabha on 3.9.2012 (Annexure-I). The Bill was 
referred to the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on 
9.9.2012 for examination and making a report thereon.  
 
1.3            The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, states that 
elimination of dry latrines and manual scavenging and the reha bilitation of 
manual scavengers in alternate occupations has been an area of high priority 

 
 
for the Government. Despite the concerted efforts made in the past to 
eliminate the dehumanizing practice of manual scavenging, the practice still 
persists in variou s parts of the country. Existing laws have not proved 
adequate in eliminating the twin evils of insanitary latrines and manual 
scavenging from the country. These evils are inconsistent with the right to live 
with dignity which is an essence of the Fundamen tal Rights guaranteed in 
Part III of the Constitution. Further, there is a related problem of serious 
health hazard and safety of the workers employed in the manual cleaning of 
sewers and septic tanks. It is also felt that the existing laws are not stringe nt 
enough to eliminate these evil practices. In view of the above, there is a need 
to make comprehensive and stringent provisions for the prohibition of 
insanitary latrines and employment of persons as manual scavengers, 
rehabilitation of manual scavengers  and their families and to discontinue the 
hazardous manual cleaning of sewers and septic tanks by the use of 
technology and for matters connected therewith.  With a view to eliminate 
manual scavenging and insanitary latrines and to provide for the rehabilitation 
of manual scavengers, a multi -pronged strategy has been worked out in the 
provisions of the Bill, which consists of legislative as well as programmatic 
interventions. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
  
1.4  There have been concerted e fforts in the past to eliminate the 
dehumanizing practice of Manual Scavenging. Even though sanitation is a 
State subject as per entry 6 of the Constitution, h owever, taking into 

 
 
consideration the seriousness of the problem and the resolutions passed by 
the legislatures of six States (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Goa, 
West Bengal & Tripura), the Parliament has enacted  The Employment of 
Manual Scavengers & Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 
1993,  under Article 252 ("Power of Parliame nt to legislate for two or more 
States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State") of the 
Constitution. The Act came into force w.e.f. 26.1.1997  in all the Union 
Territories and the above six States. Subsequently, 19 other States also 
adopted it. The remaining three States viz. Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Rajasthan have their own Acts.  A copy of the 1993 Act is 
enclosed as Annexure-II. 
1.5  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is implementing the 
scheme of Rehabilita tion of Manual Scavengers (SRMS).  Though all the 
concerned State  Governments had confirmed in June, 2010 that all eligible 
and willing manual scavengers had been rehabilitated in alternative 
occupations under SRMS, the National Advisory Council (NAC)  in a  
resolution dated 23.10.2010, inter alia, observed that;  
"(i) The National Advisory (NAC) is deeply distressed to observe 
that the shameful practice of manual scavenging persists in India, 
despite being outlawed. This practice involves entrapping women, m en 
and even children only because of the accident of their birth, into a 
humiliating vocation of gathering human excreta from individual or 
community dry toilets with bare hands, brooms or metal scrapers. It is 
intolerable that this endures, and is the wor st surviving symbol of 
untouchability. The persistence of dry latrines in various parts of the 
country violates human dignity, the law and articles 14, 17, 21 and 23 
of the Constitution. (ii) In 1993, Parliament passed the Employment of 
Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 

 
 
1993, which declared the employment of scavengers or the 
construction of dry (non-flush) latrines to be an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for up  to one year and a fine of two thousand rupees.  
But cen tral, state and local governments have been very weak in 
implementing this law, and almost no one has been punished under 
this law in 17 years. Local bodies themselves routinely run dry toilets 
and employ people of specific castes to clean these manually. (iii) One 
basic problem so far is that the effort has been viewed by governments 
more as an issue of sanitation, than an issue of human dignity as 
guaranteed to all citizens in the Preamble of the Constitution".  
 
1.6  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Pov erty Alleviation is the nodal 
Ministry for implementing The Employment of Manual Scavengers and 
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993. However, to focus on 
human dignity of the manual scavengers, the Cabinet Secretariat, vide its 
O.M. dated 17.8.11, conveyed its decision that the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment would handle the work relating to the new Bill. 
House listing and Housing Census 2011 
1.7  House listing and Housing Census 2011' data released by the 
Registrar General of I ndia in March, 2012, shows that there are still some 26 
lakh insanitary latrines in the country . They have given the following  broad, 
category-wise break-up:-  
Table 1.7: Insanitary Latrines as per Census 2011 
Category Approx. No. 
a. Latrines from which Nightsoil is disposed into 
open drain; 
13 lakh 
 
       b. Service latrines in which nightsoil is: - 
     i)   removed by humans, 
 
8 lakh 

 
 
                           and 
      ii)    serviced by animals. 
 
5 lakh 
 
 An abstract of the total households in the cou ntry, those with and without latrines, 
and with different types of latrines, is enclosed at Annexure-III.  The State/Union Territory 
wise figures of various types of insanitary latrines are given in Annexure-IV.   
 
1.8     Elaborating on the Census Data, t he Ministry of Urban Development stated  
that;   
  "As per 2011 Census, 81.40% urban households are having latrine 
facility and the remaining 18.60% households are sharing both public latrines 
(6.00%) and defecating in open (12.60%).  Out of 81.40% househol ds having 
latrine facility, 38.20% households are having septic tanks, 32.70% 
households are connected with pipe sewerage system, 8.80% households are 
having pit latrines (single & double, etc.) and 1.70% of households are having 
insanitary latrines (conne cted to open drains, night soil removed by human, 
dry and bahao etc.)". 
 
1.9  When the issue of the number of insanitary latrines was discussed with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice, the Secretary submitted;  
"Let me clarify, Sir. The Registrar General has given a report in 
which he inter-alias, talks about only insanitary latrines. He has not 
canvassed the number of manual scavengers. In the Census data form 
in which they collect the data, there are various columns. One of the 
columns pertains to the kind of latrine that is available inside the house. 
So, based on the replies received throughout the country; the Registrar 
General of India has arrived at the conclusion that there are three kinds 
of latrines which can be termed as insanitary latrines". 
 
1.10  Further the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice informed that State 
Governments have disputed the data and have filed affidavits in the Supreme 
Court.  He deposed before the Committee; 

 
 
"They have filed affidavits. I do not think the y have carried out 
any survey. I am presuming that they have not carried out any survey 
because if they had carried out a survey, then they would have shared 
the data and the result with everybody. We have not received any 
reports from the State Governments saying that they have carried out a 
survey in the State and based on the results of the survey their 
conclusion is that there is no insanitary latrine in the States and there 
are no manual scavengers. They have certainly filed affidavits to that 
effect in the Supreme Court but they have not shared any such report 
with us". 
 
1.11  Explaining on the need for a stronger legislation in view of the census 
data 2011, the Ministry stated that;  
"It would be seen from the Census, 2011 data that the problem 
of ins anitary latrines and therefore manual scavenging still persists  in 
the country .  Therefore, a need was felt for a stronger Central 
legislation to eliminate these twin evils i.e. insanitary latrines and 
manual scavenging as well as for the proper rehabilita tion of the 
remaining manual scavengers. Further the 1993 Act’s ambit was only 
dry latrines and manual scavengers engaged therein, whereas, in 
reality, all the above three categories of insanitary latrines i.e. those 
from which night soil is disposed into open drain or removed by human 
and serviced by animals  may entail manual scavenging." 
  

 
 
 
A. GENERAL 
2.1  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has enumerated the 
shortcomings in the 1993 Act which have been addressed in the new Bill as 
mentioned below:- 
Table 2.1: Comparison between the Act of 1993 and the Bill.  
Sl 
No. 
Provision 1993 Act The Bill 
1. Prohibition  of 
Dry/Insanitary 
Latrines 
prohibits "dry latrines" 
 
prohibits "insanitary latrines". 
2. Definition  of 
Dry/Insanitary 
Latrines 
“dry latrine" as any 
latrine, other than a 
water-seal latrine 
"insanitary latrine", in a more 
specific manner, as one which 
requires human excreta to be 
cleaned or otherwise handled 
manually, before complete 
decomposition, either in situ or 
in an open drain or p it into 
which the excreta is discharged 
or flushed. 
3. Definition of 
Manual Scavenger 
a person employed for 
"manually carrying 
human excreta" 
a person employed for 
"manually cleaning, carrying, 
disposing of, or otherwise 
handling in any manner, 
human excreta in an insanitary 
latrine or in an open drain or pit 
into which human excreta from 
insanitary latrines is disposed 
of, or on a railway track, …. 
before the excreta fully 
decomposes…" 
4. Prohibition of 
hazardous manual 
cleaning of sewer 
& septic tanks in 
the 1993 Act. 
No Provision Clause 7 prohibits this. 
5. Penal Provisions 1st contravention- upto 
1 year of imprisonment 
For violation of provisions of  
prohibition of insanitary 

 
 
Sl 
No. 
Provision 1993 Act The Bill 
and fine upto Rs. 
2000/-. 
latrines and manual 
scavenging 
1st contravention- upto 1 year 
of imprisonment and fine upto 
Rs. 50000/-, or both. 
Double in case of 2nd and 
subsequent offences. 
For violation of provisions of  
prohibition of hazardous 
cleaning of septic tanks and 
sewers 
1st contravention- upto 2 years 
of imprisonment and fine upto 
Rs. two lakh. 
In 2nd and subsequent offences 
- 5 years and fine upto Rs. Five 
lakh, or both. 
6. Offences to be 
Cognizable and 
Non-bailable 
Cognizable Cognizable and non-bailable. 
7. Jurisdiction of 
Courts 
Metropolitan Magistrate 
or Judicial Magistrate of 
the 1st Class 
Executive Magistrate may be 
conferred powers to the or 
Judicial Magistrate of the 1 st 
Class 
8. Identification of 
Manual 
Scavengers and 
their 
Rehabilitation 
 
No provision for survey 
and identification 
Detailed provisions for 
identification. 
9. Implementation  
mechanism 
DM or SDM is to be 
appointed as executive 
authority for 
implementation of the 
Act. 
Appropriate Govt. shall confer 
powers on local authority and 
District Magistrates to carry out 
provisions of this Act. 
10. Vigilance 
Mechanism 
Central and State 
Govts. may constitute 
committees of various 
kinds. 
Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committees shall be 
constituted at the Sub -division, 
District, State and Central 
Levels. National Commission 
for Safai Karamcharis ( NCSK) 
to monitor im plementation of 
the Act. 

 
 
Sl 
No. 
Provision 1993 Act The Bill 
11. Responsibility of 
Local Authorities 
to provide 
Sanitary 
Community 
Latrines 
No such obligation. Mandatory. 
12. Cognizance of 
offence 
Upon a complaint made 
by a person generally 
or  specially 
authorized in this 
behalf by the Ex ecutive 
Authority (Section 17(3) 
Upon a complaint is made by a 
person.  (Clause 10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2    Asked whether the new legislation will supersede the existing 
Employment of Manual Scavengers and Constructions of dry latrines 
(Prohibition) Act 1993, The M inistry replied that the present Bill has an 
overriding clause, which reads as follows:- 
“Clause 3 - The provision s of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construct ion of Dry Latrines 
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 or in any other law, or in any instrument having 
effect  by virtue of any other law.” 
The Ministry further clarified that b y virtue of the above provi sion in the 
Bill, the existing Employment of Manual Scavengers  and Construction of Dry 
Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 would become practically infructuous. 
2.3  Further, when it was enquired whether the Ministry wanted two laws 
instead of one consolidated and comprehensive one, the Ministry submitted;  

 
 
"The Ministr y of Law and Justice was consulted regarding 
repeal of the 1993 Act. It was advised by them that the repeal of the 
1993 Act would have to follow the same procedure, as was followed for 
its enactment i.e . resolution by two or more State Govts. for its repea l 
and thereafter adoption of the repeal Act by each State. This would 
have only delayed the new legislation". 
 
Stake-holders in the implementation of the proposed Legislation 
2.4   The Ministries of Urban Development, Housing and Poverty Alleviation 
and Dr inking Water and Sanitation of the Central Government are 
implementing sanitation related schemes, the details of which are given as 
under :-  
(i) Ministry of Urban Development is responsible for broad policies and 
programmes and assists State Governments / UTs in providing technical 
assistance in sanitation. 
(ii) Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has been vested with the 
responsibility to monitor the implementation of the Employment of Manual 
Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Pro hibition) Act, 1993.  The 
Ministry is responsible for implementation of the Integrated Low Cost 
Sanitation Scheme in the urban area. 
(iii) Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation is implementing the Nirmal Bharat 
Abhiyan Scheme for rural areas. 
(iv) The Ministry of Railways is to be involved in the implementational aspect of 
the Bill to prevent manual scavenging on railway lines and railway lands. 
2.5  When asked about the mechanism of coordination of these Ministries, 
it was informed that a  Central Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Cabinet Secretary has been constituted  which coordinates with various 

 
 
Ministries in regard to the issues regarding manual scavenging.  The 
Committee reviews the progress of eradication of manual scavenging and 
rehabilitation of manual scavengers, periodically. The Members of the 
Committee are the Secretaries of the Ministries concerned with the subject.  
  
 
 
Scheme on Assistance for Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers and Septic Tanks 
2.6  The Bill prohibits the engaging or  employing of persons for hazardous 
cleaning of sewers and septic tanks.  The Ministry of Urban Development 
have informed that Hon'ble supreme Court of India has directed the need for 
proper equipment, adequate protection and safety gears to sewer workers 
who enter into the manhole for cleaning blocks. The Central Monitoring 
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary at its meeting 
held on 31.8.2012 while reviewing the implementation of the "Employment of 
Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993", 
recommended that a "Scheme on Assistance for Mechanical Cleaning of 
Sewers and Septic Tanks" may be formulated by the Ministry of Urban 
Development, Government of India.  The scheme which is under finalization 
by this Ministry envisages to switch over from manual cleaning to mechanical 
cleaning of sewers & septic tanks with the objective to eliminate the need for 
engaging sanitation workers for the hazardous cleaning of sewers and septic 
tanks manually. 

 
 
2.7  Elaborating on the scheme in response to a query during evidence, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development stated :- 
"the proposed scheme envisages provision of 100 per cent 
financial support to the municipalities for procurement and  mechanical 
devices for cle aning of sewers and septic tanks for five year period 
ending 2017 of the 12 th Five Year Plan and the Operation and 
Maintenance cost for one year for cleaning of the sewers and septic 
tanks with the objective of providing mechanical devices for  cleaning 
of sewers and septic tanks for elimination of manual cleaning of 
sewers and septic tanks; and switching over to mechanical means and 
also providing training of the existing sanitation workers." 
 
2.8  In regard to monitoring mechanism, the Secretary deposed :- 
"We have also proposed that for prioritising the towns, the State 
Government would constitute State level sanctioning and monitoring 
committee and the scheme would be implemented by the Ministry of 
Urban Development with a separate Mission Directorate wi th the post 
of Mission Director at the level of Joint Secretary and supporting staff 
of Directors etc., and a project management unit. The Mission Director 
is to be the nodal officer for handling the scheme. 
We have also proposed an inter -Ministerial group . The overall 
progress of eradication of manual scavenging shall be monitored by 
the inter -Ministerial group headed by the hon. Minister for Urban 
Development. Other members will include the hon. Ministers from 
related Ministries such as HUPA Ministry, Fin ance, Environment and 
Forests, Social Justice and Empowerment, and the Planning 
Commission. The IMG shall meet at least once in a year for overall 
monitoring of the progress and the status of eradication of manual 
scavenging. That is the proposal in our scheme".  
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for Urban Areas 
2.9   The Ministry of Housing & Poverty Alleviation has been implementing 
the scheme of ILCS (Revised) in the urban areas of the country since 2008 in 
order to facilitate the State Government in  the task of conversion of all 
reported Dry Latrines into sanitary twin pit pour flush toilets for the 
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) households.  Through conversion of dry 
latrines this Scheme envisages eradication of Manual Scavenging.  Both 

 
 
Manual Sc avengers and EWS households who are generally vulnerable 
sections of the society are benefited under the scheme. 
2.10  As informed by the Ministry of HUPA the revised ILCS was 
implemented during the 11th Plan (2008 -12) with a target to convert 6 lakh 
dry latrines estimated by States, with an outlay of Rs. 545.16 crores. These 
figures were changed by the State Governments after the reported house to 
house survey conducted by the States in all municipal areas. Funds were 
eventually sought to eliminate 2,51,96 3 dry latrines (Rs. 214.572). Sanctions 
were accorded for conversion of all reported dry latrines and States have 
reported that they have been successfully completed. There was a provision 
to approve 25% of this for New Construction of toilets to EWS benef iciaries 
having no latrines.  
2.11  Main features of the revised scheme are:-  
(i) Unit cost of twin pit pour flush latrines increased from Rs. 10,000/- to 
Rs. 15,000/- (for Hilly areas from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 18,750/-). 
(ii) In case the States decide to adopt envir onment friendly and 
maintenance free technologies like bio -toilets/eco-san toilets or any 
other such innovative technologies, additional funding of 15%, over 
and above the normal cost is provided.  
(iii) The above costs are financed by Central subsidy -75%, State  
subsidy - 15% and the remaining 10% - beneficiary share. 

 
 
The Scheme also has provision for construction of new sanitary 
toilets where none exists for which 25% of the budget is utilized. The 
following are the achievements during the last three years, unde r the 
Scheme:-  
Table 2.11: Achievements of Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme 
Year No. of units 
sanctioned 
Central Subsidy 
Released to States 
(Rs. in crore) 
Central Subsidy 
Utilized by States 
(Rs. in crore) 
2009-10 42,662 62.50 51.40 
2010-11 30,418 99.43 56.56 
2011-12 69,296 53.23 5.95 
Total 142,376 215.16 113.91 
 
2.12  Responding to a query regarding the continuation of the ILCS, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted as 
follows  :-  
"The Cabinet allowed us to c ontinue with the ILCS programme 
till March, 2014. And we have also revi sed the support system that we 
wanted to give. The original support of Rs.10,000 per toilet was revised 
to Rs.15,000.  In difficult cases it became Rs.18,000. And we also kept 
some provision.  
So, effectively, even without getting any information from the 
State Governments about the existence of the dry latrines and about 
the existence of the manual scavenging, the Cabinet has already 
approved for us an extension of the scheme for two mo re years and 
then we have also released the guidelines.  So, we have got whatever 
money is required and that is Rs.350 crore odd. That has been 
sanctioned and this has been informed to the State Governments".  
 
2.13  Elaborating on the fundamental differen ces of the two legislations and 
definition of dry latrine and of manual scavenging, the Secretary apprised the 
Committee as follows :- 

 
 
"Here the definition of dry latrines has been expanded. So it is 
not only dry latrine which is cleaned, now it is also co nverted to an 
insanitary latrine in which it is said in a more specific manner where 
excreta is cleaned or otherwise handled manually before complete 
decomposition either in situ or in an open drain or pit into which the 
excreta is discharged or flushed.  
So, the definition has been widened. Manually carrying of 
human excreta has also been changed. Now, we say that manually 
cleaning, carrying, disposing of, or otherwise handling in any manner 
human excreta in an insanitary latrine or in an open drain or pit  into 
which human excreta from insanitary latrines is disposed of, or on a 
railway track before the excreta fully decomposes.  The fundamentals 
are these two major differences". 
 
The Secretary further desired that there was a need to further 
strengthen the administrative machinery in the municipalities of the towns and 
panchayats in implementation of the Bill, he deposed before the Committee; 
"I cannot delink manual scavenging with toilets, community 
toilets, sewerage systems, drainage systems, etc. It is s anitation work. 
But these two bills make it mandatory for municipalities to provide all 
protection gears and provide mechanisation of things. So, we have 
been separately writing to the Ministry of Urban Development to please 
come up with a new scheme. It i s because once it is passed, the 
Ministry of Urban Development, the State Governments and the 
municipalities will have to come up with new schemes. So, to answer 
to your question whether we come up with new scheme or not, may be 
we would not be required to  come up but the Ministry of Urban 
Development and the State Governments will have to come up with 
new schemes to implement this Act". 
 
Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan for Rural Areas 
2.14  The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation is implementing the 
Nirmal Bha rat Abhiyan scheme to accelerate the progress of sanitation in 
rural areas.   The objective of NBA is to achieve sustainable behavior change 
with provision of sanitary facilities in entire communities in a phased, 
saturation mode with 'Nirmal Grams' as out comes.  The new strategy is to 
transform rural India into 'Nirmal Bharat' by adopting community saturation 

 
 
approach. NBA goal is to achieve 100% access to sanitation for all rural 
households by 2022. 
2.15  The scheme of Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan has the following components :- 
 Provision of incentive amount to B elow Poverty L ine (BPL) and 
identified Above Poverty Line (APL)  for construction of Individual 
household latrines, including for conversion of bucket latrine, 
include the following:-  
Unit cost of Individual Household Latrine – upto Rs. 10,000 (upto Rs. 10,500 
for hilly and difficult areas), with the following break-up:- 
o Central incentive -Rs. 3200 ( Rs. 3700 in Hilly and difficult 
areas) 
o State share -Rs. 1400 
o Upto Rs. 4500 from convergence from MGMNREGA ( 20 
mandays unskilled labour + 6 mandays skilled labour) 
o Beneficiary share- Rs. 900 
 Provision of Toilets in Schools and Anganwadis. 
 Construction of Community Sanitary Complexes. 
  Assistance to Production Centers of sanitary materials and Rural 
Sanitary Marts 
 Solid and Liquid Waste Management 
 The achievements made by the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
during the last three years, under the Scheme are as under:- 
 
Table 2.15:- Achievements made by Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation  
in NBA.  
Year Total Central 
Assistance 
Released to 
States (Rs. in 
Central Assistance 
Utilized by States for 
construction of 
Individual Household 
No. of  Individual 
Household 
Latrines 
constructed ( In 

 
 
crore) Latrines 
(Rs. in crore) 
lakh) 
 
2009-10 1038.85 906.50 124.08 
2010-11 1175.07 814.91 122.43 
2011-12 1440.59 847.31 87.99 
Total 3654.51 2568.72 334.50 
 
 
2.16  When asked about the workability of the NREGA in the amount 
allocated, the Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation submitted 
before the Committee during evidence :- 
"The States have reported that convergence with NREGA is not 
in practice workable easily because of the coordination problems on 
the ground. Therefore, the Ministers of the State Governments who 
were present on the 21 st of December 2012 suggested that we should 
delink our programme from NREGA and add that money in our 
scheme so that it is coordinated at one place". 
 
2.17  When asked about the fund requirement of the scheme, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation infor med the Committee that the 
requirement was about Rs. 5200 crore for the next year from the Planning 
Commission. 
2.18  Further, the Ministry has informed that since 1999, over 8.97 crore 
toilets have been provided for rural households under the TSC/NBA.  A 
significant achievement has also been made in the construction of 12.58 lakh 
school toilet units and 4.24 lakh Anganwadi toilets.  The cumulative 
achievements against project objectives as reported by the States through the 

 
 
on-line Monitoring system mainta ined by the Ministry as of November, 2012 
under NBA/TSC are as under :- 
Table 2.18:- Achievements of Project Objectives in Construction of Latrines 
Component Sanctioned Achievement % 
 
Individual 
household latrines 
 
12,57,26,727 8,97,42,398 71.38 
School Toilet Units 
 
13,75,234 12,58,181 91.49 
Anganwadi Toilets 
 
5,34,931 4,24,434 79.34 
Community 
Complexes 
33,684 25,174 74.74 
2.19  Regarding provision of toilets in schools etc., the Secretary informed 
that there was a Supreme Court order on this and they were pressing for it by 
writing to State Governments to achieve this target because the Supreme 
Court will ask for States' affidavits. 
2.20  The Ministry further informed the Committee that the State wise 
number of villages having night soil removed by hum ans as per information 
received from Registrar General of India (RGI) have been forwarded to all 
States for making detailed, time bound Action Plans and set up robust 
monitoring mechanisms for conversion of all dry latrines into sanitary latrines. 
Manual Scavenging on railway coaches, tracks and railway land 
 
2.21  The Ministry of Railways have informed that they have about 7114 
Mail/Express/Ordinary trains (as per Year Book 2010 -11) (including Meter 
Gauge (MG) and Narrow Gauge (NG)) being run daily on IR's  network.  
These are having direct discharge or Controlled Discharge Toilet System type 
of toilets where human excreta is directly discharged on the track. 

 
 
2.22  When asked further, they have informed that:-  
"For dealing with general cleanliness at stations, more and more 
mechanical cleaning gadgets are being introduced and better types of 
cleaning agents are being used to achieve improved standard of 
cleanliness at railway stations. Contracts are given for supply of 
machines like scrubbers, high pressure jet cleaners, mops, etc. 
Railways are also providing washable aprons (Ballast less track) on 
platform lines at railway stations with jet cleaning arrangements. Zonal 
Railways have been directed to provide long stick brooms and jet pipes 
to the workers invo lved in cleaning at stations and also provide them 
with protective gear and aprons.  It is planned to proliferate IR -DRDO 
bio-toilets in passenger coaches on large scale and provision of 
vacuum toilets in coaches of certain selected trains. A project for t rial 
of aircraft type vacuum toilets in Shatabdi Express is also under 
process". 
 
2.23  On the issue of Bio-toilets, the Ministry have informed that it is planning 
to induct IR -DRDO (Indian Railways -Defence Research & Development 
Organization) bio-toilets progressively in Indian Railways' passenger coaches. 
If there is no technical/safety/operational set back during the development 
and induction process with such a design of bio -toilets, IR is targeting to 
eliminate production of new coaches fitted with dir ect discharge system by 
2016-17 and elimination of direct discharge system from all coaches by 2021 -
22.  
The Ministry have furnished the following data regarding the funds 
spent on environment friendly toilets during last five years:- 
Table 2.23 : Expenditure by Railways on Environment friendly toilets  
2007-08 Rs. 2,96,26,400/- 
2008-09 NIL 
 
 2009-10 NIL 
 
2010-11 Rs. 49,32,321/- 
2011-12 Rs. 2,53,13,480/- 
 

 
 
 
2.24  Regarding the bio -toilets, the Ministry have informed that it is IR's 
endeavor to provide e nvironment friendly bio -toilets in all coaches at the 
earliest. Indian Railways is a pioneer in the adoption of this indigenous bio -
technology jointly developed with DRDO (Defence Research & Development 
Organization) which is being used for the first time in the railway coaches. 
There is no precedence of use of this indigenously developed technology in 
any other railway system in the world.  So far these toilets have been fitted in 
new coaches because securing arrangement of bio -tank needs to be carried 
out in a conducive environment. Highly skilled workmanship and special 
welding technique is required for the welding of brackets and mounting of bio -
tanks as these tanks are to be fitted below the coach and any fitment failure 
during run can adversely affect safety of the train.  
 
2.25  The Ministry have also specified certain problems being faced in the 
Indian Railways in implementation of bio-toilets in coaches such as:- 
(1) Clogging of the toilets: The bio -toilets are found clogged due to 
passengers throwing po lythenes /plastics/napkins/bottles etc, into the 
toilet. 
(2) Fitment problem of mounting brackets: Some cases of welding failures 
in the mounting brackets have been observed in few of the coaches 
fitted with bio-toilets that are running in service. 
(3) In new coac hes the mounting arrangement is done when the under 
frame of the coach is in upside down position. This cannot be done in 

 
 
case of an existing coach, as coach cannot be over turned. Thus, retro 
fitment of the bio -toilets in the existing in -service coaches c an only be 
done when the headstock of the coach is being changed, as there are 
welding/fitment constraints in the old coaches, etc. apart from other 
technical problems. 
 
 
2.26  When the representatives of the Ministry of Railways was asked about 
the steps taken to ensure that railway employees do not get down on the 
tracks to clean the human excreta, he stated before the Committee :- 
"Our efforts  is to avoid manual hand ling of excreta falling on 
platform.  For this, surface should be such as the excreta may  pass 
into the drain.  As you have told that the employees have to get down 
the platform, this situation must be avoided.  There are 390 such 
platforms where trains mostly stop  in morning rather than in evening 
time and surface being not as stated above, t he safai karamcharis 
have to work hard and have to get down the platform to clean the 
excreta.  For this a plan has been formulated to construct the platforms 
with concrete.  An amount of one to one and half of crores is likely to 
be incurred on this.  For  this sanctioning power has been delegated to 
the Manager and if sanction is required from the Board that, also, has 
been done.  There are some problems in implementation of this since 
the trains also run in the same period and stoppages are required to be 
given to them". 
 
Study Tour of the Standing Committee on Social Justice on implementation al 
aspects of the Bill. 
 
2.27  As the implementation of the proposed legislation at the ground level 
has to be done by State Governments and local authorities, the Co mmittee 
during the study tour to Bengaluru, Chennai and Hyderabad (5 th to 9 th 
February, 2013) interacted with Principal Secretaries of the Social Welfare 
Departments and Other State Government officials on how the new Bill would 

 
 
be enforced to eradicate ma nual scavenging and rehabilitate the manual 
scavengers. The representatives of the State Governments were 
wholeheartedly in favour of the Bill though they put emphasis on 
strengthening of local bodies for undertaking the task.  The Committee, 
further inter acted with some NGOs and Railways Safai Karamcharis. They 
submitted that most of the safai karamcharis were hired on contract basis. 
Moreover, there was inadequacy in the health & safety measures of the Safai 
Karamcharis.  
2.28  It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that as per the 
definition of the manual scavenger, the practice of handling human excreta 
was not considered an offence if the excreta was fully decomposed. However, 
the representatives of the safai karamcharis expressed serious ap prehension 
that the sanitary staff may be asked to handle or remove the human excreta 
not really decomposed and therefore pleaded for providing safeguards in this 
behalf.  
2.29  In oral submission before the Committee during the Study tour, the 
representatives of one of the NGO pointed out that while Government are no 
more engaging the manual scavengers/sanitation worker directly, they are 
outsourcing these jobs by awarding Contract to private firms.  They brought to 
the notice of the Committee that a promi nent private firm, which  have a Pan 
India presence, was getting the sanitation contract regularly and employing 
the very same persons who have been retrenched/rehabilitated by the 
Government, at a much lower salary, thereby depriving them of the statutory  

 
 
salary and other benefits.  The representatives of the NGO urged the 
Committee to look into the matter and make suitable recommendations so 
that these contracts are awarded to the local NGOs, working in this field, 
which in turn could negotiate better rem uneration and benefits for the 
sanitation workers. 
 
 
 
General Observations/Recommendations 
3.1  The Committee note that in order to eradicate the dehumanizing 
practice of manual scavenging, the Government enacted " The 
Employment of Manual Scavengers & Cons truction of Dry Latrines 
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 " under Article 252 of the Constitution of India. 
The Act declares the employment of manual scavengers and 
construction of dry latrines to be a punishable offence.  Although some 
State Governments are reporte d to have filed affidavits in the Supreme 
Court claiming there were no insanitary latrines or manual scavengers 
in their State, the Census 2011 has reported 26 lakhs insanitary latrines 
in the country.  Concerned over the persisting obnoxious practice of 
manual scavenging and the inefficacy of the 1993 Act to eradicate 
manual scavenging lock, stock and barrel, the Government introduced 
the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Bill, 2012 in Lok Sabha on 3.9.2012.  The Bill seeks to 
eliminate manual scavenging and insanitary latrines and to provide for 

 
 
the rehabilitation of manual scavengers through a multi -pronged 
strategy consisting of legislative and programmatic interventions.  The 
Committee welcome the laudable objects o f the new Bill.  The 
Committee are optimistic that the new Act and the rules to be framed 
there-under would be implemented with utmost sincerity and with a 
sense of purpose so that the new legislation attains its intended 
objectives within the given time frame.  
3.2  During their Study Tour to Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra 
Pradesh in February (5th to 9th) 2013, the Committee noted with 
satisfaction that representatives of State Governments and 
municipalities whole heartedly welcomed the proposed legislat ion.  The 
representatives of the Government of Andhra Pradesh however, did 
indicate that the stipulated time of 9 months for demolition of the 
existing insanitary latrines and converting them into sanitary ones, was 
rather short, given the enormity of the task and the time involved in 
denovo identification of manual scavengers and the insanitary latrines. 
Mindful of the federal structure, the Committee note that the successful 
implementation of the new Act would largely depend on how the 
Corporations, Munic ipalities and Other Local Bodies like the Gram 
Panchayats are motivated and geared up for meeting the challenges to 
be thrown up by the new Act. Undoubtedly, the entire Governmental 
apparatus need to be revamped by strengthening the executing 
agencies by p roviding them with adequate human resources, latest 

 
 
equipment and gadgets and above all adequate funds well on time.  
Besides the statutory provisions of the new Act, the implementing 
agencies and officers would require utmost understanding of the socio –
economic conditions of the hapless manual scavengers. They consider 
it incumbent upon the Government to liberate and rehabilitate the 
manual scavengers in terms of section 13 of the Bill without 
outsourcing these jobs to the private NGOs / firms with a view to 
ensuring that they do not relapse in the same pernicious practice.  The 
Committee would also like to caution the Government to ensure that the 
proposed law does not become a double edged sword for penalizing the 
unsuspecting poor people. The Committee r ecommend that, subject to 
their willingness, and the relevant provisions of the Constitution of 
India, efforts should be made to suitably employ the manual scavengers 
in the municipalities, corporations and other local bodies.            
3.3  The Committee note that Clause 29 of the Bill provides for setting 
up of a Central Monitoring Committee, comprising the Secretaries of 
various stakeholder Ministries to look into the implementational aspects 
of the Bill. As a corollary to this, Committee feel that ther e should also 
be coordination at Ministerial Level for making the entire exercise more 
effective and fruitful. The Committee therefore, recommend that an Inter 
Ministerial Group (IMG) also be formed to oversee the implementation of 
the new Act and the rule s to be framed thereunder.  This would remove 
the bottlenecks, overlapping of functional jurisdiction of various 

 
 
Ministries and provide greater vigor and unified direction in addressing 
the need for effective inter-ministerial coordination.  
3.4  The Committee note with concern that under the new legislation, 
a great responsibility devolves on the Ministry of Railways so far as 
Manual Scavenging is concerned.  There are reportedly about 7114 
mail/express/ordinary trains which have direct discharge or control led 
discharge system type of toilets. The Committee have been informed 
that the Railways have started constructing concrete washable aprons 
under the railway tracks at important stations so that the safai 
karamcharis can clean the track with high pressure water jet cleaning 
system, instead of doing it manually. The Committee recommend the 
construction of more such concrete aprons on all railway stations in a 
time bound manner.  
3.5  The Committee also find that allocation of funds for environment 
friendly toilets during the last five years was either nil or very low with 
an allocation of only Rs. 2,53,13,480 in 2011 -12. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Railways should seek more allocation of 
funds for conversion of all toilets into bio-toilets in the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan itself for completely eliminating all direct discharge toilets to 
escape penalty under the Act. 
3.6  As part of the multi -pronged strategy of the Government, the 
Ministry of Urban Development have been entrusted with the 
responsibility for formulating a scheme on 'Assistance for Mechanical 

 
 
Cleaning of Sewers and Septic Tanks'.  The proposed scheme 
envisages a provision of 100 percent financial support to the 
municipalities for procurement of mechanical devices for cleaning of 
sewers and septic tanks for five years period ending 2017. The Ministry 
have also proposed that the State Governments should constitute State 
Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee. Keeping in view the 
Supreme Court's direction for providing equipments, a dequate 
protection and safety gears to those who enter the manhole for cleaning 
blocks, the Committee recommend that the scheme on 'Assistance for 
Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers and Septic Tanks' should be finalized 
and executed within the timeframe as stip ulated in the new Bill.  The 
Committee also desire that funds sought under the scheme should be 
allocated by the Planning Commission in the financial year 2013 -14 
itself so as to aid the municipalities in the implementation of the Act.  
The State Governmen ts should also be sensitized about this since 
manual cleaning of septic tanks and sewers is banned in the Bill. 
3.7  The Committee note that the Government are running schemes 
like Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan in Rural Areas and the Integrated Low Cost 
Sanitation Scheme for occupiers of insanitary latrines in Urban Areas 
for people belonging to BPL and other categories of EWS. The 
Committee would like these schemes to be extended to all 'occupiers' 
irrespective of their economic status. The Committee feel that thi s 
would go a long way in implementing the provisions of the proposed 

 
 
legislation. Since the existence of insanitary latrines would give rise to 
manual scavenging, the Committee are of the considered view that there 
has to be a proactive participation of bo th the Government and the 
Owners / Occupiers of such latrines for bringing in a swift end to this 
scourge.  Taking note of the piecemeal approach adopted by the Act of 
1993 and its failure to address the problem, the Committee strongly feel 
that it is incu mbent upon the Central Government to finance and fund 
the entire project of demolition of insanitary latrines and constructions 
of sanitary latrines in close cooperation with the State Governments.  
Money should not be a constraint for eradicating such a p ernicious 
practice which is a blot on human dignity and a matter of shame for the 
entire nation.  
 
B.  CLAUSE-WISE AND ISSUE-WISE ANALYSIS OF THE BILL 
Preamble of the Bill 
4.1  "AND WHEREAS the dehumanizing practice of manual scavenging, 
arising from the c ontinuing existence of insanitary latrines and a highly 
iniquitous caste system, still persists in various parts of the country, and the 
existing laws have not proved adequate in eliminating the twin evils of 
insanitary latrines and manual scavenging"; 
4.2  After hearing the submissions of the NGOs, the Committee feel 
that the wordings of the Preamble of the Bill are not strong enough to 
decry the centuries old practice of manual scavenging, which is an 

 
 
anathema to any civilized society. The Committee  would therefore like 
the Government to consider the desireability or otherwise of 
incorporating, the words 'which is a National shame ' after the words 
'highly iniquitous caste system' in the Preamble of the Bill. 
Chapter I 
Preliminary 
4.3  The definition of Manual Scavengers in the Bill States:- 
"Manual Scavengers" means a person engaged or employed, at the 
commencement of this Act or at any time thereafter, by an individual or a local 
authority or an agency or a contractor, for manually cleaning, carrying, 
disposing of, or otherwise handling in any manner, human excreta in an 
insanitary latrine or in an open drain or pit into which the human excreta from 
the insanitary latrines is disposed of, or on a railways track or in such other 
spaces or premises, as the Ce ntral or a State Government may notify, before 
the excreta fully decomposes, and the expression "manual scavenging" shall 
be construed accordingly. 
 
4.4   The Committee find merit in the apprehension of safai 
karamcharis that they may be asked to handle hu man excreta which is 
not decomposed in the absence of any stipulated time period provided 
for decomposing or certification of decomposition by independent 
authority or expert. The Committee, therefore, desire that this aspect 
should be appropriately dealt with while framing the rules in this regard. 
CHAPTER-III 
Prohibition of Insanitary Latrines and Employment  
and Engagement as Manual Scavenger 
 
4.5 Clause 5(2) (b) Proviso of the Bill states :- 
 
(i) Provided further that the State Government may give assistance 
for conversion of insanitary latrines into sanitary latrines to 
occupiers from such categories of persons and on such scale, 
as it may, by notification, specify : 
(ii) Provided also that non-receipt of State assistance shall not be a 
valid ground to maintain or use an insanitary latrine, beyond the 
said period of nine months. 

 
 
 
4.6  Keeping in view the recommendation in Para 3.7 of the Report, 
the second Proviso may be deleted. 
 
4.7 Clause 6 of the Bill states :- 
(l) Any contract, agreement or other instrument entered into or executed 
before the commencement of this Act, engaging or employing a person 
for the purpose of manual scavenging shall, on the date of 
commencement of this Act, be terminated and such contract, 
agreement or other instrument shall be void a nd inoperative and no 
compensation shall be payable therefor. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (l), no person 
employed or engaged as a manual scavenger on a full -time basis shall 
be retrenched by his employer, but shall be retained, su bject to his 
willingness, in employment on at least the same emoluments, and shall 
be assigned work other than manual scavenging. 
 
4.8  The Committee desire that their recommendation in Para 3.2 
should be taken into consideration while implementing this Clause. 
 
4.9 Clause 8 of the Bill states :- 
Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 or section 6 shall for 
the first contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand  rupees or 
with both, and for any subsequent contravention with imprisonment which 

 
 
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or 
with both. 
 
4.10  Asked to show justification for stringent penalty as specified in clause 8 
and 9 of the Bill,  the Ministry submitted in a written reply :- 
"Appropriate penalty have been proposed to act as an effective 
deterrent for the violation of the provisions of the Act, and to ensure 
that the abominable prac tice of manual scavenging is eliminated 
forthwith". 
 
4.11  The Committee feel that although deterrent punishment for 
implementation of the Act is a necessity, this should be done after 
giving due consideration to the financial status of the occupier / owner 
of the insanitary latrine.  The Co mmittee are of the considered opinion 
that acceptance and implementation of the recommendation in Para 3.7 
of the Report would take care of this aspect.  The Committee further 
recommend that full and proper publicity be given to the provisions of 
the Act bo th in print and electronic media especially with regard to 
provisions dealing with financial and other assistance to be given to the 
affected families and the penal provisions against the occupiers of 
insanitary latrines.  
4.12 Clause 10 of the Bill states :- 
No court shall take cognizance of a ny offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a complaint thereof is made by a person in this behalf within 
three months from the date of the occurrence of the alleged commission of 
the offence. 

 
 
 
4.13  During the S tudy Visit of the Committee it was pointed out by 
some representative of the State Government that the time period of 
three months from the date of the occurrence of the offence is too long 
and it should be reduced to 30 days. The Committee would like the 
Government to give a thoughtful consideration to this suggestion.   
CHAPTER-IV 
Identification of Manual Scavengers in Urban and Rural,  
Areas and their Rehabilitation 
 
4.14 Clause 11 of the Bill states :- 
(l) If any Municipality has reason to believe that some persons are 
engaged or employed in manual scavenging within its jurisdiction, the 
Chief Executive Officer of such Municipality shall cause a survey to be 
undertaken to identify such persons. 
(2) The content and methodology of the survey referred to in  sub-section 
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed, and it shall be completed 
within a period of two months from its commencement in the case of 
Municipal Corporations, and within a period of one month in the case 
of other Municipalities. 
(3) The Chief Ex ecutive Officer of the Municipality, in whose jurisdiction 
the survey is undertaken, shall be responsible for accurate and timely 
completion of the survey. 
  

 
 
4.15   Pilot Survey:  Explaining about the pilot survey, the Ministry have 
stated that t he objectiv e of the pilot phase of the survey was to start the 
survey in limited area so that the bugs in the survey methodology, forms etc. 
or problems of the main survey, if any, could be identified and corrected, 
before taking up full fledged survey in all the 354 6 statu tory towns of the 
country. The States/UT concerned have not reported any problem in 
conducting the pilot survey, except for a few suggestion with respect to the 
survey form . Further, in the light of pilot survey it was  felt appropriate to 
review the  methodology and efficacy of the existing survey guidelines 
recommended earlier by the Committee, for its finalization, with or without 
modifications. Accordingly, a meeting of the Committee was held on 
23.1.2013 where it was inter alia decided to revise t he survey guidelines and 
the form being used in the survey. The work of revision of the guidelines have 
been started.  
 
  
4.16  The Committee feel that since survey is a very important part of 
the whole process of implementation of the new legislation, it should be 
properly planned and conducted. The format should specifically 
mention the number of years the manual scavenger has been working in 
the profession with a cutoff date specified for eligibility in the guidelines 
of the survey so as to give benefit to the genuine persons. It has come 
to the notice of the Committee that some NGOs have been trying to 
register bogus manual scavengers. The Government should look at the 

 
 
preventive measures in this regard and make the procedure for 
identification and rehabilitation of manual scavengers as transparent as 
possible. The Committee feel that there should be some penal provision 
in the Bill for furnishing of false information to prevent bogus claims.    
4.17  Clause 13 (l) of the Bill gives various provisions for rehabilitation of the 
manual scavengers. 
4.18  In response to a query on the linking of 'Aadhar Card' to the scheme of 
rehabilitation, the Ministry have responded that 'Aadhar Card' will be 
considered for extending benefits of rehabilitation schemes to ma nual 
scavengers. 
4.19  The Committee note that a photo identity card containing inter-
alia details of all members of the family dependent on him would be 
issued to the manual scavenger.  The Committee desire that 'Aadhar 
Card' should be linked to the rehab ilitation schemes. A suitable 
provision in this behalf needs to be made under the Rules to be framed 
under the Act. 
CHAPTER-V 
Implementing Authorities 
4.20 Clause 11 of the Bill states :- 
The District Magistrate and the authority authorized under section 1 8 
or any other subordinate officers specified by them under that section shall 
ensure that, after the expiry or such period as specified for the purpose of this 
Act, - 

 
 
(a) No person is engaged or employed as manual scavenger with their   
           jurisdiction; 
(b) No one constructs, maintains, uses or makes available for use, an 
insanitary latrine; 
(c) Manual scavengers identified under this Act are rehabilitated in 
accordance with section 13, or as the case may be, section 16; and 
(d) persons contravening the provisions of section 5, section 6 or section 7 
are investigated and prosecuted under the provisions of this Act; 
(e) all provisions of this Act applicable within his jurisdiction are duly 
complied with. 
4.21  To a query that in case the DM or the author ity concerned fails to 
discharge the duty within the given time, how the accountability of the DM or 
the designated authority would be ensured, the Ministry have stated that 
clauses 24 to 32 of the Bill will ensure accountability of concerned authorities.  
Further, negligence on the part of the officials in discharging their duties 
under the Bill, would make them liable for disciplinary action under the 
existing conduct rules. 
 
 
4.22  The Committee recommend that duties and responsibilities of the 
officials, concerned should be fixed and some penalty be imposed on 
them for delay in implementing the Act  especially with regard to delay 
in granting various benefits under Clause 13 of the Act on the lines of 

 
 
the RTI Act, 2005, besides taking suitable administra tive measures 
against them.  
 
CHAPTER-VII 
Vigilance Committees, Clause 24 to 32 
 
4.23  Clause 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29 gives the details of the constitution of 
various Vigilance Committee, the State Monitoring Committees, the Central 
Monitoring Committees. 
 
4.24  When it was enquired whether the constitution of so many monitoring 
agencies at different levels would not impinge upon one another's domain of 
functioning thereby causing delay in implementation of the various provisions 
of the Bill, the Ministry have stated;  
 
"While the Committee at the Sub -division and District level 
would be mainly concerned with actual implementation of the Act, the 
Committees at the State and National Level would be monitoring the 
implementation of the Act on a regular and p eriodic basis. The State 
and National Commissions supervision is more of a nature of 
watchdog.  Thus the multiplicity of the committees appears to be 
necessary". 
 
 
 
 
4.25  The Committee note that Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 
have been constituted at  the sub -division, District , State and National 
level to oversee the implementation of the Act. The Committee 
recommend that there should be suitable representation of women in  
these Committees to the extent feasible.  The Committee desire that the 

 
 
Government should consider more frequent meetings of these 
Committees and submit six monthly progress report to Parliament until 
the obnoxious practice is completely eradicated from across the 
country.  
  Subject to the foregoing observation and recommendations, t he 
Committee recommend that necessary further action be taken by the 
Government in the matter to enact the Bill. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:     HEMANAND BISWAL  
27 February, 2013      Chairman, 
8 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)   Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE – I


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
ANNEXURE  - II 
 

 
 
 


 
  


 
 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 
 


 
 
ANNEXURE –III 
Census of India 2011 
Houses, Household Amenities and Assets 
Figures at a Glance 
          Item 
No. 
  House list Item Absolute number   Percentage 
  Total Rural Urban   Total Rural Urban 
1   2 3 4 5   6 7 8 
                    
Q : 
Households by type of latrine 
facility 
              
Q.1 : Total number of households 246,692,667 167,826,730 78,865,937   100.0 100.0 100.0 
Q.2 : Latrine facility within the premises 115,737,458 51,575,339 64,162,119   46.9 30.7 81.4 
Q.3 : Water Closet  89,852,052 32,616,824 57,235,228   36.4 19.4 72.6 
Q.4 :    - Piped sewer system 29,471,391 3,696,144 25,775,247   11.9 2.2 32.7 
Q.5 :    - Septic tank 54,758,885 24,671,448 30,087,437   22.2 14.7 38.2 
Q.6 :    - Other system 5,621,776 4,249,232 1,372,544   2.3 2.5 1.7 
Q.7 : Pit Latrine 23,279,128 17,681,985 5,597,143   9.4 10.5 7.1 
Q.8 : 
   - With slab/ ventilated 
improved pit 
18,813,022 13,746,699 5,066,323   7.6 8.2 6.4 
Q.9 :    - Without slab/  open pit 4,466,106 3,935,286 530,820   1.8 2.3 0.7 
Q.10 : Other Latrine 2,606,278 1,276,530 1,329,748   1.1 0.8 1.7 
Q.11 : 
     -Night soil disposed into 
open drain 
1,314,652 372,009 942,643   0.5 0.2 1.2 
Q.12 : 
    - Night soil removed by 
human 
794,390 586,067 208,323   0.3 0.3 0.3 
Q.13 : 
    - Night soil serviced by 
animals 
497,236 318,454 178,782   0.2 0.2 0.2 
Q.14 : 
No Latrine within the 
premises 
130,955,209 116,251,391 14,703,818   53.1 69.3 18.6 
Q.15 :  - Public latrine 7,997,699 3,253,892 4,743,807   3.2 1.9 6.0 
Q.16 :  - Open 122,957,510 112,997,499 9,960,011   49.8 67.3 12.6 

 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
State/UT – wise number of Insanitary Latrines 
S.
No
. 
State/UT Total  
number of 
households 
 
No. of Households by type of Insanitary latrines 
   Total 
 
   Night soil 
disposed 
into open 
drain 
Service
d 
Manuall
y 
Sub Total 
(4+5) 
Service
d by 
animal 
Total 
(6+7) 
% of 
col. 8 
to col. 
3 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
 ALL INDIA 246,692,667 1314652 794390 2109042 497236 260627
8 
1.06 
1. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
93,376 151 11 162 57 219 0.33 
2. Andhra Pradesh 21,024,534 165673 10357 176030 52767 228797 1.09 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 261,614 1865 1059 2924 9579 12503 4.78 
4. Assam 6,367,295 54381 22139 76520 35394 111914 1.76 
5. Bihar 18,940,629 39246 13587 52833 35009 87842 0.46 
6. Chandigarh 235,061 164 - 164 32 196 0.08 
7. Chhattisgarh 5,622,850 4881 736 5617 3484 9101 0.16 
8. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
73,063 55 168 223 28 251 0.34 
9. Daman & Diu 60,381 29 16 45 14 59 0.10 
10. Goa 322,813 667 - 667 3151 3818 1.18 
11. Gujarat 12,181,718 25234 2566 27800 4890 32690 0.27 
12. Haryana 4,717,954 32432 1343 33775 4752 38527 0.82 
13. Himachal Pradesh 1,476,581 3069 310 3379 561 3940 0.27 
14. Jammu & Kashmir 2,015,088 64479 178443 242922 13109 256031 12.71 
15. Jharkhand 6,181,607 9317 1836 11153 5986 17139 0.28 
16. Karnataka 13,179,911 61802 7740 69542 28995 98537 0.75 
17. Kerala 7,716,370 12052 3011 15063 1713 16776 0.22 
18. Lakshadweep 10,703 - - - - - - 
19. Madhya Pradesh 14,967,597 41363 5664 47027 13948 60975 0.41 
20. Maharashtra 23,830,580 154331 9622 163953 45429 209382 0.88 
21. Manipur 507,152 27713 10062 37775 2964 40739 8.03 
22. Meghalaya 538,299 1792 1962 3754 4126 7880 1.46 
23. Mizoram 221,077 583 121 704 562 1266 0.57 
24. Nagaland 399,965 1208 786 1994 2481 4475 1.12 
25. NCT of Delhi 3,340,538 68424 583 69007 633 69640 2.08 
26. Odisha 9,661,085 30567 26496 57063 24222 81285 0.84 
27. Puducherry 301,276 638 133 771 88 859 0.29 
28. Punjab 5,409,699 28274 3465 31739 9460 41199 0.76 
29. Rajasthan 12,581,303 94061 2572 96633 8781 105414 0.84 
30. Sikkim 128,131 93 - 93 126 219 0.17 
31. Tamil Nadu 18,493,003 149455 27659 177114 26020 203134 1.10 
32. Tripura 842,781 3760 830 4590 3733 8323 0.99 
33. Uttar Pradesh 32,924,266 151717 326082 477799 80291 558090 1.70 
34. Uttarakhand 1,997,068 6730 4701 11431 2562 13993 0.70 
35. West Bengal 20,067,299 78446 130330 208776 72289 281065 1.40 
 
Source : Census, 2011 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
SURVEY OF  
MANUAL SCAVENGERS AND THEIR DEPENDENTS 
GUIDELINES 
1. Background 
1.1   National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers 
and their Dependents (NSLRS) :  NSLRS was started in March, 1992 to 
rehabilitate manual s cavengers and their dependents in alternative 
occupations.  As per information furnished by State Governments , there 
were about 7.70 lakh manual scavengers and their dependents to be 
rehabilitated under the scheme. Out of this about 4.2 3 lakh manual 
scavengers and their dependents were assisted for rehabilitation during 
1992 to 2005. 
1.2 Self- Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual 
Scavengers (SRMS) : The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
introduced SRMS in January, 2007 to rehabilitate the re maining 3.42 lakh 
Manual Scavengers and their dependents in alternative occupations by 
March, 2009. Subsequently, the deadline was extended up to 31.3.2010. 18 
States/UTs reported existence of Manual Scavengers to be covered at the 
beginning of this scheme . All these States/UTs confirmed disbursement of 
loans to all eligible and willing 78,941 beneficiaries for alternative 
occupations by 30.6.2010.  
1.3 Recommendations of the National Advisory Council (NAC) : The 
NAC, in its resolution dated 23.10.2010 on th e issue of manual scavenging, 
urged the Central Government to ensure that the practice of manual 
scavenging is fully abolished latest by the end of the 11 th Plan period in 
coordination with all the Central Government Departments, including 
Railways, and concerned States/ Local Governments. The resolution states, 
inter alia, that this would require (a) new survey in every State and UT, with 
wide public involvement, of remaining dry latrines and manual scavengers;  
(b) demolition of dry latrines;  (c) psycho-social and livelihood rehabilitation 
in modern marketable skills of all manual scavengers and their families, 
and formulation of a Centrally Sponsored Scheme by the Ministry of Social 
Justice & Empowerment to support the rehabilitation initiative;  (d) special 
programme for education, including higher education and computer 
education of all children of manual scavengers; and (e) to amend the law to 
ensure sharper definition of manual scavenging, and accountability of 
public officials who employ, or fail to prevent, manual scavenging. 
1.4. In pursuance of the resolution of the NAC, two meetings were held in 
November, 2010, among the Secretaries of Ministries of Housing and 
Poverty Alleviation, Social Justice & Empowerment, Urban Development, 
and Railways. These meetings were followed by a meeting under the 
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. 

 
 
1.5.  After the above meetings, a consultation meeting was held on 24 -25 
January, 2011, jointly by Ministries of Social Justice & Empowerment, 
Housing and Poverty Alleviat ion, Urban Development, Representatives of 
State Governments and Civil Society Organizations.  
1.6.  Pursuant to the recommendations of the above meetings, a  Task 
Force was constituted on 10.2.2011 by the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment to recomme nd detailed modalities for undertaking a fresh 
survey of manual scavengers and their dependents who are yet to be 
rehabilitated. The Task Force s ubmitted its Report on 6.5.2011.  The Task 
Force, inter alia, recommended for appointment of a National level Technical 
Agency (NTA) for countrywide survey of manual scavengers and their 
dependents.   However, the same could not be finalized due to unavailability 
of an appropriate agency. 
2.  Setting up of a Committee  for recommending 
modalities for conducting survey 
2.1. The Ministry of Social Justice and Emp owerment, vide its Order  
No.19014/12/2011-SCD-IV dated 04.04.2012 constituted a Committee for 
recommending modalities for conducting a survey of manual scavengers 
and their dependents, in the light of data available from Census, 2011, and 
the Socio- economic and Caste Census (Rural), currently underway, under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment as its Co -chair.  Committee submitted its report on 
19.6.2012.  Based on the recommendations of the Committee, which have 
been accepted by this Ministry, survey guidelines have been finalized. 
3.  OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF SURVEY 
3.1.    Objectives of the Survey 
 i.  To identify the persons who are still engaged in manual scavenging, 
(and  their dependents – both adult and minor) which, would include: 
a. those covered under SRMS but  who have not yet actually given 
up manual scavenging, and 
b. those not covered under SRMS  
ii. To ensure that all genuine manual scavengers are identified , and at 
the same time,  possibility of inclusion of non -genuine scavengers  is 
minimized, if not eliminated. 
iii. To ascertain the social, economic, educational, health and skill status 
of the identified manual scavengers, and their willingness for taking 
up alternative self employment ventures. 

 
 
iv. To ascertain details of the insanitary latrines, open drains, etc., to 
clean which the manual scavengers identified , as  above, are 
engaged/employed.   
3.2.   Distinction between Manual Scavengers and Safai Karamcharis:  
(i) Safai Karamcharis normally include persons engaged as 
‘Sweepers’ or ‘sanitation/cleaning workers’ in municipalities, 
government and private offices.  They may be direct employees of these 
bodies (mu nicipalities, government/private sector organizations) or 
may be contract employees who happen to be working for these 
organizations.  However, Safai karamcharis, per se, are not manual 
scavengers. 
(ii)  Manual Scavengers  are usually self employed or contr act 
employees.  “Self employed” means a person who scavenges a group of 
household dry latrines or drains etc. in a particular ward, for payment 
in cash and/or in kind, by the house -owners.  Contract employees 
would normally be those who are hired through c ontractors, by a 
municipal body, any other organization or a group of house -owners, 
to scavenge indiv idual or community dry latrines and  open drains 
where night soil is disposed.   
3.3. Definition of Manual Scavenger and insanitary latrine:  
“manual scavenger” means a person engaged or employed by 
an individual or a local authority or a public or private agency, for 
manually cleaning, carrying, disposing of, or otherwise handling 
in any manner, human excreta in an insanitary latrine or in an 
open drain or p it into which human excreta from insanitary 
latrines is disposed of, or on a railway track, before the excreta 
fully decomposes, and the expression “manual scavenging” shall 
be interpreted accordingly; 
     
 Explanation.-  (a) “engaged or employed” means b eing engaged or employed on a 
regular or contract basis; 
(b) a person engaged  or employed to clean excreta with the help of 
such devices  and using such protective gear, as the Central 
Government may notify in this behalf, shall not be deemed to be a 
‘manual scavenger’; 
 “insanitary latrine”  means a latrine which requires human 
excreta to be cleaned or otherwise handled manually, either in 
situ, or in an open drain or pit into which the excreta is 
discharged or flushed out, before the excreta fully decomposes: 
Provided that a water flush latrine in a railway passenger coach, 
when cleaned by an employee with the help of appropriate 

 
 
devices(like high pressure water jet etc. ) and using proper 
protective gear will not be deemed to be an insanitary latrine. 
3.4. Geographical Scope of the Survey 
(i) The proposed Survey would be conducted straight away in the statutory 
towns without waiting for the outcome of Socio Economic & Caste 
Census (SECC),Rural, 2011,. The scope of the survey would be limited to 
(4041-495 = 354 6 statutory cities/towns where the Census 2011 has 
pointed out the existence of insanitary latrines. State/UT wise details are 
at Annexure-V(a)   . Categorisation of Statutory Cities/Towns 
according to No. of Insanitary Latrines is as follows:- 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Number of  Households having  
 insanitary latrines 
Number of Cities/Towns 
1 0                              495 
2 1-999                             3351 
3 1000-9999                              184 
4 >  =   10000                                11 
 Total                          4041 
  
 
(ii) SECC, 2011(Rural) would yield the State -wise no. of manual 
scavengers in rural areas  but would not yield all the information 
about them which the survey on Manual Scavengers aims to collect . 
Outcome of SECC (rural) may be awaited so that the no. and 
identity of rural manual scavengers becomes known.  Thereafter, 
an exercise would be undertaken to collect only that information 
about these identified rural manual scavengers, which is 
necessary as per the Form appended at Anne xure-II with this 
Scheme, but which is not being collected as part of SECC (rural) 
[e.g. information on health status, preferred alternative 
employment, etc].   
 
4.  METHODOLOGY AND THE PROCESS FOR THE 
SURVEY  
4.1.   Awareness Campaign  
(i) A Media Plan would   be prepared by the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment for giving wide publicity about the survey for 
identification of Manual Scavengers, its dates, etc, through Print, and 

 
 
audio-visual Media, outdoor publicity , etc . After finalisation of the 
Media Plan, Doordarshan, All India Radio and Directorate of 
Advertising and Visual Publicity will undertake publicity work. 
(ii) Awareness campaign would also be carried out at the State level and 
in the 3546 cities/towns and their wards having insanitary latrines.  
The information about wards/pockets having insanitary latrines 
would be collected from the office of Registrar General of India (RGI) 
and Census Commissioner, New Delhi. The RGI would also be 
requested to instruct State Govt. & Regional Directors of Census  
Operations to provide ward/EB wise data to District Collectors. [In 
case, required data is not made available by the Office of RGI, 
concerned Town Level Survey Committee/Office of Municipality would 
elicit support of community leaders/activists, NGOs work ing for 
welfare of Safai Karamcharis in identification of wards/pockets having 
concentration of insanitary latrines.] 
(iii)The awareness campaign would basically invite manual scavengers to 
declare themselves and have their details verified during a period and 
at places, which will be specified.   A Toll-free helpline would  also be 
established in each town and district to assist manual scavengers 
being counted in the survey. 
4.2.    Self-Declaration by Manual Scavengers: 
 Pursuant to the above awareness campaign , manual scavengers 
would be expected to file declarations/claims of being manual scavengers at 
designated place(s) during the specified period.  Designated places should as 
far as possible be nearer to wards/bastis/ areas where manual scavengers 
reside.  C hief Executive Officer of Municipalities will designate officers for 
recording information of manual scavengers in the P ersonal Computer/ 
Hand Held Device available at the designated places.  The Local Authority 
[Municipality/Cantonment Board] would notify designated places, dates and 
time for recording information from manual scavengers by Enumerator(s)/ 
Data Entry Operator(s).  It w ould also be ensured that at least one 
enumerator/data entry operator will be available at designated places. A 
copy of the F orm (Annexure-V(b)) filled in would  be instantly given to the 
respondent for his/her information and record.   
 In addition to self -declaration by manual scavengers at designated 
places as above, the Local Authority may also, in appropriate cases, direct 
house-to-house visit in bastis of manual scavengers by enumerators, to 
record their declarations. 
4.3.   Cent Percent Verification by Enumerators: 
    After filling up the information of self-declaring manual scavengers 

 
 
at designated places, verification of each such declaration would be done by 
Enumerator who would normally be an employee of the Municipality or the 
State Govt. Enumerator would visit households of Manual Scavengers and 
verify the information, which was recorded in P ersonal Computer/ Hand 
Held device at the time of self declaration . In case the enumerator finds any 
information in the self -declaration to be incorrect, he will record the correct 
information, after verification, on the spot.  The information recorded by the 
enumerator will not be disclosed to the declarant. 
 
 
4.4.   Sample check by Supervisors: 
Sample checks of the work done by the enumerators would be carried 
out by Supervisors designated by the local authority for the purpose, on the 
basis of random selection, to the extent shown below : -  
(i) 100% check will be carried out in  3351 cities/towns, having less than 
1000 households with insanitary latrines,  
(ii) 50%  of the declarations verified by each enumerator will be checked 
in 184 cities/towns having 1000 to 9999 households with insanitary 
latrines and  
(iii)33% of the declaration verified  by each enumerator will be checked in 
11 Cities/Towns having 10,000 or more households of the above type 
 In categories (ii) & (iii), if sample check of the work of any enumerator 
reveals an error of >1 0%, a 100% check of his work will be carried out by 
the Supervisor.   
4.5. Preparation of the Draft List of Manual Scavengers and its 
Publication 
  A draft list of identified manual scavengers for each city/town , as 
verified by the Supervisors, would be pu blished by  the concerned local 
authority in local newspapers and displayed in its own office and at the 
offices of the local Tehsildar and the Sub -Divisional Officer (also, the 
Collectorate in the case of district headquarters, towns).   A copy of the draft 
list would also be made available to members of the Local Authority and of 
the Town-level Survey Committee. While publishing the Draft List, the Local 
Authority w ould call upon members of the public to file claims and 
objections vis-à-vis, the list, withi n a period of two weeks, in prescribed 
proforma. 

 
 
4.6. Filing of Claims and Objections to the Draft List. 
         Claims and objections  would be received within the above period of 
two weeks. A c laimant or objector may also support  his/her claim  with 
documentary evidence.  Forms for filing claims & objections would be made 
available to the applicants free of charge on demand at the designated 
place(s), as also through the website of Distt./Local Authority.   The District 
Collector would notify officers not b elow the rank of Tehsildar/Block 
Development Officer for enquiring into claims and objections  received and 
giving their findings .  Summary hearing s would be conducted by such 
officers.  They may also order fresh verification by a suitable functionary, if 
necessary.  After summary hearing and such further verification (if ordered), 
the officer would pass an appropriate order, accepting or rejecting the 
claim/objection, as the case may be.  A copy of the order  would be given to 
the persons concerned. 
 
4.7 Publication of Final List of Manual Scavengers 
   After settlement of claims & objections by the Competent authority,     
the local authority would carry out necessary corrections in the draft list 
and transmit it to the Town -Level Survey Committee for its co nsideration.  
Once the Town Level Survey Committee is satisfied with the survey work 
carried out and the final list prepared on its basis, it would transmit it to 
the District Level Survey Committee for its approval to publish.  After the 
approval of the list by the District Level Survey Committee, it would be duly 
published at the offices of the municipality, tehsil, sub -divisional and 
district offices concerned, and local news papers, etc.  The final list w ould 
also be uploaded on the website of the Distt. and the State Government.  
 
4.8 Compilation of Final Lists of Manual Scavengers at District, State 
and National levels. 
 The Town Level Survey Committee would submit finally published list 
of identified manual scavengers to the District Level Survey Committee.  The 
District Level Survey Committee would cause compilation of lists of manual 
scavengers received from each Town and prepare a list of manual 
scavengers for the district which the Distt. Collector will forward to the State 
nodal Deptt. for the Surv ey.  The State nodal Department would have the 
lists of manual scavengers received from various districts, compiled and 
prepare a consolidated State list of Manual Scavengers for the consideration 
and approval of the State Survey Committee.  After this app roval, the State 
nodal Deptt. would send the State List to the Ministry of SJ&E, which would 
compile t he National level list of manual scavengers and publish it after 
approval of the National-level Survey Committee. 

 
 
4.9 Preparation of Analytical Reports at  the Town, District, State and 
National Level  
After finalization of Lists of Manual Scavenger at town, Distt, State & 
National levels, the Local Body, Collector, State Government/UT 
Administration and the Ministry of SJ&E would also prepare and publish in  
due course, suitable reports analyzing the respective Lists from various 
angles e.g. gender, geographical distribution, socio -economic, educational & 
skill status, aspirations of manual scavengers in regard to alternative 
vocation etc.  They may undertake  this task themselves or may engage 
specialized agency for the purpose.   
5.    Pilot survey and Pre -testing of form for identification 
of Manual Scavengers 
 A pilot survey and pre -testing of the recommended methodology 
for conducting survey of manual scav engers would be carried out , 
before launching full scale survey , in one District from each region - 
North, North-East, West, South and East.  Based on the outcome of the 
pilot survey, Survey Form, Instructions Manual, and process for conducting 
the survey would  be suitably modified and finalised. 
6. Time frame for completing the Survey 
The Survey would take about eight months as per Schedule given below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity Period Sl. 
No 
Activity Period Sl.
N
o 
Activity Period 
1 Approval of 
Recommendation
s of the 
Committee reg. 
Survey modalities 
Zero - - - - - - 
2 Pilot Survey in 
five districts of 
five States 
i) Issues of 
Advisory to 
States                                     
1 week 
ii) Orientation of 
State 
Functionaries            
1 week 
iii) Actual Survey 
& 
 Compilation of 
its Results-                                    
6 weeks 
2 
 months 
1 Design & 
Finalisation of  
Mass 
Awareness 
Campaign at 
the national 
level 
i) Preparation 
of media   
material by 
Ministry (7 
Week) 
ii) 
Communicatio
n to States (1 
week) 
2 
months 
1 Creation 
of a Cell 
for the 
Survey  
in the 
Ministry 
of SJ&E 
2 months 

 
 
3 i)  Finalisation & 
Printing of 
Survey Forms & 
Instruction 
Manual (2 weeks) 
ii)  Orientation of 
State 
functionaries (2 
weeks) 
1 month 2 Design & 
Finalisation of 
Mass 
Awareness 
Campaign at 
the State level 
  
1 month 2 Creation 
of a Cell 
for the 
Survey 
in the 
State 
Govt. 
1 month 
   3 i)  Printing of 
Survey forms in 
State language 
(2 weeks) 
ii) Orientation 
of Distt. & 
City 
functionaries 
(2 weeks) 
 
1 month 3 Awareness 
campaign 
at State & 
local levels 
1 month 
   4 Actual Survey 
& Publication 
of final 
City/Town-
wise Lists 
 i) Self 
declaration – 1 
week 
ii) Verification 
by 
enumerators – 
1 week 
iii) Sample 
check – 1 
week 
iv) Publication 
of draft list -1 
week 
 
v) Claims & 
objections – 2 
week 
vi) Disposal of 
claims & 
objections               
vii) 
Publication of 
2 
months 
   

 
 
final city/town 
list – 2 weeks 
(for vi&vii) 
   5 Compilation of 
Distt. Lists 
2 weeks    
   6 Compilation of 
State Lists 
2 weeks    
   7 Compilation of 
National Lists 
4 weeks    
     8 
months 
   
7.  INSTITUTIONAL SET UP FOR CONDUCTING THE 
SURVEY 
7.1. Executive responsibility for the Survey at various levels would be as 
follows:- 
S.No. Level Responsibility 
1. National Central Govt. (Ministry of SJ&E be the nodal Ministry, 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation 
and RGI to be technical partners) 
2. State State Govt. [Each State Govt. to designate a suitable 
nodal Deptt., and other collaborating Deptt. 
(Organisation) 
3. Distt. Distt. Collector (with assistance of D istt. level officers 
of concerned Deptt.) 
4. City/Town Commissioners/CEO of Municipal  Corporation 
/Municipality/Cantonment Board, as the case may be  
 
 
7.2. Each executive agency will discharge the following functions at its 
respective levels : - 
i) Awareness Campaign 
ii) Appointment/Designation of officers/manpower for various tasks 
iii) Orientation of above functionaries 
iv) Preparation/Printing of forms 
v) Data Collection & its validation and compilation 
vi) Timely completion of Survey & Publication of  final List of Manual 

 
 
Scavenger. 
 
7.3. Formation of Survey Committees: 
In order to : -  
 Oversee the above work of the executive agencies, 
 Achieve coordination of all concerned deptts/agencies in the 
survey, 
 Ensure involvement of civil society/stakeholders in the survey 
work, and  
 Validation of survey data,  
 formation  of  Survey  Committees  would  be  as  per 
Annexure-V(c).  
8. Orientation of Key Functionaries 
 One-day orientation programmes for Key functionaries would be 
conducted at various levels as fol lows to acquaint them with the survey 
methodology :- 
Level of Key functionaries Level of which Orientation will be 
conducted 
State National 
Distt. State 
Town Distt. 
 
 
 
9.   Assessment of number of Enumerators, Data Entry 
Operators and Supervisors & their Appointment  
  Each Local body will assess the numerical requirement of 
enumerators & supervisors, and will appoint  its own employees and/or 
employees of the State Govt, made available for the Survey as Enumerators 
for conducting the survey.  A suitable no. of Data Entry Operators may be 
appointed as per need.   
10.  Training of Enumerators,  Data Entry Operators   and 
Supervisors 
 Each Local Body will organize, under the guidance of the Collector a 
one-day orientation/training programme for Enumerators, D ata Entry 
Operators and Supervisors about survey methodology, filling up of form for 
manual scavengers, verification procedure, etc.   

 
 
11. Creation of Cell at National & State levels 
11.1.   A Cell in the Ministry of SJ&E would be created  under its DDG 
(Statistics), with the following manpower :- 
                                                                                                            
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Post No. of 
Posts 
1. Professional Survey 
Statistician as Adviser * 
1 
2. Director 1 
3. Joint Director 1 
4. Statisticians 2 
5. Data Entry Operators 4 
 Total 9 
 
The above Cell would  coordinate the following functions: 
 Providing technical inputs, preparation of detailed guidelines for the 
survey, modules for training at various levels, and publicity material, 
 organizing training programmes for State level Officers, 
 overseeing and ensuring the smooth conduct of survey at the State 
and district levels, and 
 compilation, validation, scrutiny and collation of reports received from 
the States, and preparation of the National level Lists & Reports on 
the survey. 
11.2.  State Government/UT Administration would likewise create a Cell at 
their level to perform the functions, mutatis mutandis, mentioned in para 11.1 
above.  Central assistance would  be provided to States on a suitable Scale, 
looking to the size of the State/UT, to meet expenditure on the State -level Cell.  
Average expenditure norms for States/UTs may be taken to be Rs.10 lakh per 
annum. 
 
12. Outsourcing of Data Processing 
 Data Proce ssing work at the national level would be outsourced to a 
reputed agency by the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment.  At the 
State, district & local levels, the State Governments would facilitate utilization 
of available IT infrastructure for data ent ry, data processing, and analysis and 
compilation of reports.  States may utilize IT infrastructure of NIC, District 
Informatics Centre or any other IT infrastructure of State Government. 
13. Estimated Financial Implications 

 
 
 It is difficult to accurately estimate the financial implications of the 
proposed Survey, in the absence of data on the magnitude of the work 
involved.  However, a preliminary cost estimate  of carrying out survey in the 
3546 statutory towns, is  about Rs 18.50 crore. Corresponding financial norms  
of the survey are as per details given below:.  
  (Amount in Rs Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity Estimated 
Expenditure 
1. National & State Level Media Campaign 3.00 
2. Distt. & Town level Awareness Campaign  @ Rs. 1 lakh per 
district x 600 districts 
6.00 
 
3. (i) Translation of Instruction Manual and Survey Forms into 
local language by States/UTs.  
(ii) Finalization & Printing of 5000 Instructions Manual & 3.50 
lakhs Form in Local language / Hiring of Hand Held Device  
for self declaration.  
Rs. 50 per Instruction Manual and Form x 3.55  lakh  
(including 10% wastage) 
 
 
1.80 
4. Orientation of State and District level officers 0.40 
5. Orientation of Enumerators, Data Entry Operators and 
Supervisors  
1.00 
 
6. Pre-Testing of Forms and Pilot Survey in 5 districts 0.50 
7. Honorarium to Enumerators and Data Entry Operators 
 Rs. 1000 x 2400 Enumerators & 2400 Data Entry Operators 
Honorarium to Supervisors 
@Rs.2000 x  1600 supervisors 
 
0.48 
 
0.32 
8.  Creation of Cells at States/UTs @ Rs.10 lakh per State/UT x  
30 
3.00 
9. Creation of a Cell in the Ministry  
i) Recurring   0.5 
  +  
ii) Non-recurring  0.5 
1.0 
10. Outsourcing of data processing 1.0 
 Total 18.5 
 
As soon as a State Government agrees to undertake the Survey, it will 
work out a proposal for seeking central assistance for it using the norms given 
above.  It will also designate a State -level Corporation or other autonomous 
body to which central funds for the purpose should be released. The Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment will  examine the proposal  and release  
upto 75% of the entitlement of Central assistance to the designated body 
through the NSKFDC.  The State -level body will, in turn, release this 
assistance to Municipalities & District Panchayats etc., based on approval of 
State Level Survey Committee.  Utilisation certificates for the Central grant will 
be forwarded by local bodies to the District level, by Districts to the State-level 
body, and by it to the NSKFDC. Balance 25% of the funds will be released 

 
 
after receipt of periodical utilization statements to the extent of at least 50% of 
the funds released as first installment. 
 
 
 

 
 
Annexure-V(a)    
State/UT wise No. of households having insanitary latrines in (4041) 
statutory Cities/Towns- Census , 2011 
S. 
No
. 
State/UT No. of 
statutory 
towns  
No. of Households in Statutory towns 
with Insanitary latrines 
% Total 
Night soil 
disposed into 
open drain 
Night soil 
removed by 
human 
Total 
1 Uttar Pradesh 648 92,819 100,634 193,453 18.2 
2 Tamil Nadu 721 128,097 13,794 141,891 13.4 
3 Andhra Pradesh 125 131,621 4,127 135,748 12.8 
4 Maharashtra 256 129,138 4,996 134,134 12.6 
5 Rajasthan 185 82,931 1,420 84,351 8.0 
6 Jammu & Kashmir 86 53,935 14,405 68,340 6.4 
7 Karnataka 220 50,714 5,581 56,295 5.3 
8 NCT of Delhi  3 52,550 583 53,133 5.0 
9 Madhya Pradesh 364 29,882 2,614 32,496 3.1 
10 Haryana 129 25,569 607 26,176 2.5 
11 West Bengal 80 14,097 6,465 20,562 1.9 
12 Odisha 107 12,357 6,511 18,868 1.8 
13 Gujarat 195 16,038 1,119 17,157 1.6 
14 Punjab 143 15,863 775 16,638 1.6 
15 Bihar 139 10,064 3,738 13,802 1.3 
16 Manipur 28 9,580 2,764 12,344 1.2 
17 Assam 88 5,183 5,025 10,208 1.0 
18 Uttarakhand 74 4,569 930 5,499 0.5 
19 Jharkhand 40 4,594 498 5,092 0.5 
20 Kerala 59 3,554 843 4,397 0.4 
21 Chattisgarh 168 3,354 148 3,502 0.3 
22 Himachal Pradesh 56 2,039 - 2,039 0.2 
23 Tirpura 16 1,613 108 1,721 0.2 
24 Puducherry 6 547 108 655 0.1 
25 Mizoram 23 506 14 520 0.0 
26 Nagaland 19 399 108 507 0.0 
27 Meghalaya 10 163 281 444 0.0 
28 Arunachal Pradesh 26 230 100 330 0.0 
29 Goa 14 220 - 220 0.0 
30. Sikkim 8 15 - 15 0.0 
31. Chandigarh 1 11 - 11 0.0 
32 Daman & Diu 2 9 - 9 0.0 
33 A&N Islands 1 9 - 9 0.0 
34 D & N Haveli 1 1 - 9 0.0 
35 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 
 TOTAL 4041 882,271 178,296 1,060,567 100.0 

 
 
Annexure-V(b) 
Survey Form   
Identification of Manual Scavenger 
                          (Office Use) 
 
        
 Name of the State: 
 District:         
 Municipality:________ ⁬ Town ______⁬ Ward : _______⁬ 
   
 
 
Picture post card size photogram 
6'x4' 
  
 
   
 
1. Name of the Manual Scavenger : 
 
2. Name of  Father / Mother / Spouse: ____________________ 
 
* Delete whichever is inapplicable 
3. Age: 
 
4. Sex : Male  Female  
 
5. Marital Status : (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
 
Married Unmarried Separated Divorced  Widow Widower 
      
 
6. Educational Status : (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
(i) a  )   Literate    b)   Not literate 
(ii) If literate level of education:- 
a) Studied:  Class 1-5:               Class 6-10:                 Class  11-12 :             Class above 12:     
 
7. Occupation :    
ii) Carrying/disposing/cleaning  of human excreta manually from insanitary 
latrine  
ii)           Cleaning untreated human excreta from  (a)  open drain   
                                                                                          (b)  Railway Track 
   
                                                                                          (c)  Pit Latrine       
8. Status of Employment:-     
 
Photo of manual 
scavenger  
 
 
Family Photo of 
manual   
scavenger  

 
 
 
i) Employed in:  
(a) Central Government             (b) State  Government 
( c)   Municipal Corporation                 
          (d)   Private:-  
           (i) Individual Household     (ii)  Community/ Group of Households 
           (iii)  Contractor         (iv)   Institution       (v) Others (specify)    
         (e) Employed on 
 
i) Permanent basis ii) Temporary basis        iii) Contract basis 
  
9. Monthly Income 
(a) From Manual Scavenging 
 
i)  In cash:-                        Rs. _____________ 
ii)    In kind                             Rs.______________  
(b)  Other  sources             Rs.------------------------  
Total Income:                       Rs. ---------------------- 
10. How long you are into this Occupation: ______________ 
 
11. How many generations of your family have been in this Occupation : _______________ 
 
12. When you are not able to go for work because of illness or any other reaso n who does the work instead 
of you : 
 
a. Name ____________________ ____  b. Relationship: ______________ 
(Fill a separate form for this person) 
 
c. Address:   ____________________________________________________  
 
 
13.  Details of Family Members: 
Sl. 
No 
Name Sex 
(M/F) 
Age Relationship 
 to MS  
Marital status 
M/UM/W/ 
WR/D/S 
Education Occupation Salary 
(monthly) 
Skills  
if any 
Class 
passed 
Drop  
Out 
(Yes/ 
No) 
Attending 
School  
(Yes/No) 
            

 
 
 
M- Male, F – Female,            M- Married, UM- Unmarried W- Widow,   WR-Widower, D- Divorce,  S-
Separated  
  
            
            
            
            
            
            

 
 
14. Social Background:  
a)  Whether SC/ST/OBCs/Others __________  
b) Caste/ Sub Caste __________ 
15.  Discrimination  (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
 i)  Do You feel  that you are doing this work  
  (a) Because of your caste         Yes     N                 No  
  (b) Poor economic condition    Yes                                       No 
(c) Because you are a woman Yes                         No  
 ii) Do You feel that others are looking down on you because you are doing manual scavenging:  
              Yes                                        No 
iii)  Do You feel that in school your children are treated badly because you are manual scavenger: 
                Yes                             No  
16. Religion: (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
 Hindu   Muslim   Sikh  Buddhist  
Christian   Parsi   Other (Specify)   
 
17. Economic Condition: (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
a) Housing  
   i)  
 
  
                ii)   Condition of house: - 
 
 
 
b) Land Owned: (Put a √ mark in the  ppropriate box) 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Other Property: (No. of 
domestic animals): 
i)  Cow            ii)  Buffalo      iii)  Goat      
iv)  Sheep       v)  Pigs           vi)  Others 
d) Ration Card (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box): 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of the Card Yes No 
(1) B.P.L Card   
(2) Antodaya Card   
(3) Health card    
 
18. Incidence of Indebtedness  
 Borrowed from  Amount  Rate of interest per month  
Money lender    
Bank    
Employer    
Mortgaged gold or other articles    
Living in rented house Owned House 
  
Pucca Semi Pucca Katcha 
   
Irrigated Land (Acres)   
Un-irrigated Land (Acres)  
Other land (Acres)  
(Land put to non-agriculture use) 
 

 
 
Others   
  

 
 
19.  Have you received any benefit from the government rehabilitation scheme? 
 (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
 a)  
 
 
 b) Name of the scheme (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box): 
 Name of the Schemes Rupees 
(1) National Scheme for liberation and 
rehabilitation of scavengers (NSLRS) 
 
(2) Self Employment Scheme for 
rehabilitation for manual scavengers 
(SRMS) 
 
(3) Any other   
(Please specify the name of Scheme(s)) 
 
 
 
 c) If yes, whether project funded through above scheme  is running: 
 
 
 
 
 d) Whether he/she is defaulter: 
 
 
 
 
20. Have you received the benefit of any Govt. Educational Scheme for your children?  
       (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box) 
 
 a) 
 
 b) Name of the scheme (Put a √ mark in the appropriate box): 
 
Yes No 
  
Yes No If yes, monthly income 
(Rs.) 
   
Yes No If yes, since when (date of 
defaulting) 
   
Yes No 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Schemes 
Which child    
  Ist  2nd  3rd  4th  
(1) Pre Matric 
scheme of 
scholarship for 
Children of those 
engaged in 
unclean 
occupation 
    
(2) Did They get 
admission in the 
special residential 
school 
Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No 
(3) Post matric 
scholarship for 
scheduled caste  
Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No 
(4) Any other 
scholarships 
Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No 

 
 
 
21.  (a)   Are you engaged in any occupation other than scavenging? :   Yes   No 
 (b)  If yes, specify:___________ 
22. Any other skills you possess:   
 
     i) Construction     
                  ii) Carpentry 
                 iii) Driving  
                 iv) Cooking  
                 v) Tailoring  
                vi)  Any other (specify) 
 
23. Alternative Occupation Proposed: 
       (Please specify)  
 
24. Health problems, if any: 
 
  ⁬Respiratory        ⁬ Stomach        ⁬ Skin         ⁬ TB ⁬ Eye ⁬ 
 
 Others(specify) 
 
Name and Address of Manual Scavenger:  --------------------------------------------------------------------- 
                 ---------------------------------------------------------------------        
    Signature / Thumb Impression of Manual Scavenger: 
   Date:  ---------------------------- 
  Name of Data Entry Operator: ------------------------------------------- 
  Signature:  --------------------------------------------- Date: ---------------------------------------- 
 Name of Enumerator: ------------------------------------------------------ 
  Signature:  --------------------------------------------- Date: ---------------------------------------- 
Name of   Supervisor: ------------------------------------------------------ 
  Signature:  --------------------------------------------- Date: ---------------------------------------- 
Verified by Ward Councilor/Equivalent 
(name & Signature of the Councilor)

 
 
Survey Form Details of Insanitary Latrine 
1. Details of Individual Insanitary Latrine (IDL):  
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the owner of 
Insanitary Latrine  
Location  of the Monthly Salary/ wages of the 
Manual Scavenger (Rs.) 
    dry 
latrine   
latrine from 
which excreta is 
being flushed 
into open drain 
In cash In food grains 
etc. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
 
 
Total Number of the Individual Insanitary Latrines :  
 
(Note: Please give detailed description of the individual Insanitary Latrine Cleaned by the Manual Scavengers. 
In case you need to write extra information kindly photocopy this page and attach with the survey form)  
 
 
 
 
 
2. Detail of Community Open Drains: 
 
S.No Location of Open Drains in 
which excreta from the 
insanitary latrines is being 
flushed 
Salary/wages of the manual scavengers 
 
In cash (Rs.) In kind (Rs.) 

 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
(Note: If the number of involved manual scavengers in CDL is more than one then please fill up the each form 
for each scavenger) 
 
 
****  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-V(c) 
 
Survey Committees :  Composition and Functions 
 
Sl. 
No 
 Town level Survey Committee District level 
Survey 
Committee 
State level 
Survey 
Committee  
National level 
Survey 
Committee 
  Towns having Municipal 
Corporations where the 
Municipal Commissioner 
is of a higher rank than 
the Distt. Magistrate 
Other District 
Headquarter 
Town 
Other Towns    

 
 
1. Composition 
 (i) Chairman Municipal Commissioner Distt. Magistrate Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate 
District 
Magistrate 
An Additional 
Chief Secretary 
or Principal 
Secretary  
nominated by 
the State 
Government  
Secretary, 
Ministry of 
Social Justice 
& 
Empowerment 
 (ii) Member Secretary Chief Executive Officer of 
the Local body. 
Chief Executive 
Officer of the 
Local body  
Chief 
Executive 
Officer of the 
Local body. 
District Level 
Officer dealing 
with 
Scheduled 
Castes Affairs. 
 Principal 
Secretary/ 
Secretary 
dealing with 
Scheduled 
Castes,if the 
Committee is 
chaired by 
Addl. Chief 
Secretary.  If 
Principal 
Secretary, SC 
Welfare, 
himself is the 
Chairman then 
Director, SC 
Welfare. 
 Joint 
Secretary 
(SCD), 
Ministry of 
Social Justice 
& 
Empowerment. 
 (iii) Members - - - (i)District 
Statistical 
Officer 
(i) Director,  
Economic & 
Statistics  
(i) 
Representative 
of  Ministry of 
Statistics & 
Programme 
Implementatio
n 
- - - - - (ii) 
Representative 
of  Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Poverty 
Alleviation. 
(i) Representative of 
Municipal Corporation. 
(i)Representative 
of Municipal body. 
(i) 
Representative 
of Municipal 
body. 
(ii) District 
level officer of 
Urban 
Development 
Department/L
ocal Self Govt. 
Deptt. 
(ii) Secretary, 
Urban Dev. 
Deptt./ 
Department of 
Local Self 
Government. 
(iii) 
Representative 
of Ministry of 
Urban 
Development. 
- - - - (iii) Regional 
Director 
Census 
Operation 
 (iv) Registrar 
General of 
India & 
Census 
Commissioner. 
(ii) One Representative of 
Railways * 
(ii) One 
Representative of 
Railways * 
(ii) One 
Representative 
of Railways * 
(iii) One 
representative 
of Railways* 
(iv) One 
representative 
of Railways* 
(v) One 
representative 
of Railways* 
(vi) One 
representative 
of Cantonment 
Board 
 (iii) Upto two  
representatives of  NGOs 
working for Welfare of 
Manual Scavengers and 
Safai Karamcharis 
 (iii) Upto two  
representatives of 
NGOs working for 
Welfare of Manual 
Scavengers and 
Safai Karamcharis 
 (iii) Upto two 
representative 
of  NGOs 
working for 
Welfare of 
Manual 
Scavengers 
and Safai 
Karamcharis 
(iv) Upto two 
representatives 
of  NGOs 
working for 
Welfare of 
Manual 
Scavengers 
and Safai 
Karamcharis  
(v) Upto two  
representatives 
of  NGOs 
working for 
Welfare of 
Manual 
Scavengers and 
Safai 
Karamcharis 
(vii) Upto two  
representatives 
of NGOs 
working for 
Welfare of 
Manual 
Scavengers 
and Safai 
Karamcharis 
  (iv) Upto two  Community 
Representative of whom 
one should be a woman 
(iv) Upto two  
Community 
Representative of 
whom one should 
be a woman 
(iv) Upto two   
Community 
Representative 
of whom one 
should be a 
woman 
(v) Upto two 
Community 
Representative 
of whom one 
should be a 
woman 
vi) Upto two 
Community 
Representative 
of whom one 
should be a 
woman 
(viii) Upto two  
Community 
Representative 
of whom one 
should be a 
woman 
Functions 

 
 
2.  (i)To ensure proper and 
timely conduct of survey. 
(i)To ensure 
proper and timely 
conduct of survey  
(i)To ensure 
proper and 
timely conduct 
of survey 
(i) To conduct 
and oversee 
the survey 
process at 
District level. 
(i) To 
coordinate and 
monitor work of 
survey of 
manual 
scavengers at 
State level. 
(i) To 
coordinate 
and monitor 
work of 
survey of 
manual 
scavengers at 
National level. 
          -   .     - (ii) States/ UTs 
will translate 
the media 
material into 
local language 
so received 
from Mi nistry 
of Social 
Justice & 
Empowerment. 
(ii)The Ministry 
will prepare 
Media material    
and distribute 
to 
States/UTs.   
         -   (ii) Districts 
will distribute 
media material 
to Towns. 
(iii) States/UTs 
will distribute 
media material 
to districts. 
 - 
(ii) To arrange local level 
publicity through local 
news-papers, posters etc. 
about survey of manual 
scavengers. 
(ii) To arrange 
local level 
publicity through 
local news-papers, 
posters etc. about 
survey of manual 
scavengers 
(ii) To arrange 
local level 
publicity 
through local 
news-papers, 
posters etc. 
about survey of 
manual 
scavengers 
(iii) To arrange 
publicity 
through local 
newspapers, 
etc. about 
survey of 
manual 
scavengers. 
          - (iii) The 
Ministry will 
also launch 
media 
campaign 
through print 
and electronic 
media at 
National level.   
(iii) To distribute 
translated Survey Form 
and Instructions Manual 
to Enumerators and 
Supervisors. 
(iii) To distribute 
translated Survey 
Form and 
Instructions 
Manual to 
Enumerators and 
Supervisors 
(iiii) To 
distribute 
translated 
Survey Form 
and 
Instructions 
Manual to 
Enumerators 
and 
Supervisors 
(iv) To 
distribute  
translated 
survey material 
to Town Level 
Survey 
Committee. 
(iv) To 
distribute 
translated 
survey material 
in local 
language to 
District Level 
Survey 
Committee. 
 (iv)To send 
survey 
material – 
Survey Form 
and 
Instruction 
Manual to 
States/UTs. 
(iv) Preparation of draft 
list of manual scavengers  
(iv) Preparation of 
draft list of 
manual 
scavengers 
(iv) Preparation 
of draft list of 
manual 
scavengers 
             -           -            - 
(v) Inviting claims and 
objections on the draft 
list 
(v) Inviting claims 
and objections on 
the draft list 
(v) Inviting 
claims and 
objections on 
the draft list 
   
(vi) Disposal of claims 
and objections 
(vi) Disposal of 
claims and 
objections 
(vi) Disposal of 
claims and 
objections 
   

 
 
 -  -  (v) Approval of 
final list of 
manual 
scavengers for 
all 
Towns/Cities 
in the District.    
          -            - 
  (vii) Publication of final 
list 
(vii) Publication of 
final list 
(vii) 
Publication of 
final list 
(vi) Publication 
of final list 
  
      (v) Compilation 
of State level 
lists. 
(v) Publication 
of national 
level report of 
the Suvery. 
 
* Applicable to Towns having Railway only. 
  
 

 
ANNEXURE - VI  
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING O F THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 1 st 
NOVEMBER, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'D',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
10. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Rishang Keishing 
12. Shri Mangala Kisan 
13. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
14. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
15. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
16. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
  1. Shri C.S.  Joon  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kusal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT/ORGANIZATION 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation & Organization 
1. Shri Anil Goswami Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
2. Shri Anoop Srivastava Additional Secretary, Ministry of Soc ial 
Justice and Empowerment 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Joint Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
4. Shri Lalit Kohli Managing Director, National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSKFDC 
 
  
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairm an welcomed the Members and 
representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting 
of the Committee.  He then requested the Secretary to brief the Committee on 
the contents of the “The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavenger s and 
their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” as well as its objectives and reasons and also drew 
his attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha. 
   
3. The representative of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowe rment 
explained the various provisions of the Bill as well as the background and need 
for the proposed legislation with the help of a power point presentation. 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised various queries, which inter-alia pertained 
to:- 
(i) Procedure for identification and rehabilitation of Manual 
Scavengers. 
(ii) Financial requirement for implementation of the Bill. 
(iii) Lack of sanitation and the need for construction of sanitary latrines 
by Ministry of Urban/Rural Development/other agencies. 
(iv) Provision of stringent punishment for contravention of certain 
clauses of the Bill. 

 
(v) Inclusion of persons who remove dead bodies within the ambit of 
the Bill. 
(vi) Implementation of the proposed Bill by railway authorities so as to 
maintain cleanliness of railway tracks and railway land. 
(vii) Representation of MPs/MLAs in the Monitoring Committees. 
(viii) Survey conducted and steps taken by the Government to redress 
the difficulties faced by manual scavengers. 
(ix) Improvement of infrastructure like cle anliness and availability of 
water to maintain sanitation in community toilets.  
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Hon'ble Chairman directed them to furnish 
replies to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting. 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the 
Ministry for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and 
expressing their views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
ANNEXURE – VII 
MINUTES  OF  THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF  THE STANDING  COMMITTEE 
ON  SOCIAL   JUSTI CE   AND  EMPOWERMENT  HELD  ON  THURSDAY, 
6TH  DECEMBER, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room 'D',  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
1. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
2. Shri Devidhan Besra 
3. Smt. Rama Devi 
4. Shri Mohan Jena 
5. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
6. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
8. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
11. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
  1. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
2. Shri Kusal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
  
Sl. No. 
 
Name Organization 
 
1. Shri Bezwada Wilson Safai Karmachari Andolan (NGO) 
 
2. Smt. Deepthi Sukumar -do- 
 
3. Dr. Y Moses -do- 
 
4. Smt. Bhasha Singh -do- 
 
5. Dr. Renu -do- 

 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and representatives of Safai Karmachari Andolan, an NGO working for 
rehabilitation of manual scavengers, to the sitting of the Committe e.  He then 
requested the non -official witnesses to brief the Committee on their views on 
“The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation 
Bill, 2012” and also drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.   
3. The representatives of Safai Karmachari Andolan then put forth before the 
Committee their views/suggestions on various provisions of the Bill.  They 
suggested the following changes/amendments in the proposed legislation :- 
 
 (i) The preamble of the Bill should adequately reflect the outrage and 
shame of society on the practice of manual scavenging. 
(ii) The need to make the Bill more gender sensitive. 
(iii) Need to develop a sanitation perspective to abolish the pract ice of 
manual scavenging. 
(iv) Use of suction machines and vacuum cleaners for hazardous 
cleaning of drains and sewerage holes and lines. 
(v) Need to reform the structure of the toilets on trains (Indian 
Railways). 
(vi) New survey and rehabilitation of man ual scavengers and issues 
regarding release of Grants-in-aid and loans to manual scavengers. 
(vii) Requirement for establishment of a sanitation technology institute 
in the country. 
(viii) The structure and working of the monitoring and vigilance 
Committees in implementation of the Act. 
 
4. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the non -official witnesses for giving 
valuable suggestions and information to the Committee on the Bill under 

 
examination and also for expressing their views in a free and frank manner on 
various issues.                         
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
ANNEXURE – VIII 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOW ERMENT HELD ON FRIDAY, 11 th JANUARY, 
2013 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'E',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
1.  Shri M. Anandan 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Smt. Rama Devi 
4. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
7. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
9. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
11. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
13. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
14. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Dr. Sudhir Krishna Secretary 
 
2. Shri Ashok Singhvi Joint Secretary 
 
3. Dr. M. Dhinadhayalan Deputy Advisor, Central Public Health & 
Environmental Engineering 
Organization (CPHEEO) 
 
 
  
 
  
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed the Members and representatives 
of the Ministry of Urban Development to the sitting of the Committee.  He then 
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development to brief the Committee on 
the various aspects of “The Prohibition of Employment as Manu al Scavengers 
and  their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” and the role of Ministry of Urban Development 
in implementation of the proposed legislation.  The Chairman drew his attention 
to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
   
3. The Members raised queries on various issues which inter-alia included :- 
(i) The definition of 'manual scavenger' and ambit of the Bill to be 
broadened to include septic tanks and sewers. 
(ii) Devising of scheme for mechanical cleaning of sewers  and septic 
tanks. 
(iii) Allocation of funds for making available modern equipments for 
cleaning of sewers and septic tanks, etc.  
(iii) Implementation of Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal 
Mission (JnNURM) for eradication of manual scavenging. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies 
to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting within a week. 

 
5. The Chairman thanked the Secre tary and other officials of the Ministry for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
The representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development  then withdrew. 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING  
AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Misra Secretary,  
 
2. Shri Susheel Kumar,  Joint Secretary (Housing) 
 
3. Shri V.P. Baligar CMD, HUDCO 
 
 
6. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation and requested them to brief the Committee on the 
implementational aspects of the “The Prohibition of Empl oyment as Manual 
Scavengers and  their Rehabilitation Bil l, 2012” vis-à-vis "The Employment of 
Manual Scavengers and construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 as 
well as the schemes such as Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) scheme 
executed by the Ministry. 
7. The Members raised queries and sought clarifications on various issues 
which inter-alia included :- 
 
(i) Implementational aspects of the 1993 legislation on Dry Latrines. 
(ii) Continuation of Integrated Low Cost Sanitation scheme for 
construction of sanitary latrines upto 2014 and finances ava ilable 
under the scheme. 
 (iii) Widening the definition of  'manual scavenger'. 
(iv) Provisions of a new law reportedly to be enacted by Ministry of 
Labour on the conditions of work of sanitation workers. 
 
8. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the  queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies 
to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting. 

 
9. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner.                         
The representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation  then withdrew. 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE  MINISTRY OF DRINKING  
WATER AND SANITATION 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain Secretary 
 
2. Shri Saraswati Prasad  Joint Secretary 
 
3. Smt. Pratima Gupta Director (Sanitation) 
 
 
 
10. The Chairman, then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Drinkin g 
Water and Sanitation and requested them to brief the Committee  on the 
implementational aspect of  “The Prohibition of Employment as Manual 
Scavengers and  their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” as also the scheme of Nirmal 
Bharat Abhiyan i.e. the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC). 
11. The Members raised certain issues and sought clarifications which inter-
alia  included :- 
 (i) The number of insanitary toilet in rural areas. 
(ii) Delinking of NREGA from the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan scheme. 
(iii) Construction of comm unity toilets in rural areas and their upkeep 
and sanitation. 
(iv) Full financial grant for construction of sanitary toilets in rural areas 
to BPL and landless labourers. 
12. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies 
to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting. 

 
13. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry for 
giving valuable information to the Committ ee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner on various issues.  
                   The representatives of the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
then withdrew. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri A.K. Vohra Member Staff, Railway  Board   
 
2. Shri Keshav Chandra Member Mechanical, Railway  Board   
 
3. Shri K.K. Srivastava Member Traffic, Railway  Board   
 
4. Dr. V.K. Ramteke Director General (RHS) 
 
5. Shri R. Vijaya Kumar Additional Member (Mechanical 
Engineering) 
 
6. Shri S.K. Sharma Additional Member (Production Units) 
 
7. Shri H.V. Sharma OSD (PRI) 
 
8. Smt. Saroj Rajware Adviser (Finance) 
 
 
14. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Railways 
and requested them to brief the Committee on the implementational aspects of 
the “The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and  their 
Rehabilitation Bill, 2012” as also the efforts being made to fit bio -toilets on all 
trains. 
15. The Members raised queries on various issues which inter-alia included:- 
(i) The toilet system existing on trains and their manual cleaning. 
(ii) Use of water jet system to avoid manual handling of human 
excreta. 
 (iii) Efforts being made to install bio-toilets on trains. 
(iv) Need to increase the allocation of funds to introduce bio -toilets on 
all trains.  

 
16. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies 
to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting. 
17. The Chairman thanked the officials of the Ministry for giving valuable 
information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their views in a free 
and frank manner on various issues.                         
18. A verbatim of the proceedings was kept on record. 
 
The representatives of the Ministry of Railways then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
ANNEXURE –IX 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWER MENT HELD ON 
MONDAY, 21st JANUARY, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1625 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 62,  Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
1. Shri M. Anandan 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
7. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
8. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
11. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
12. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
13. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
14. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kusal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
 
       REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT/ORGANIZATION 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation and Organization 
 
1. Shri Anil Goswami Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
2. Shri Anoop Srivastava Additional Secretary, Ministry of Social 
 
 
 
 

 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Joint Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
4. Shri Lalit Kohli Managing Director, National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSKFDC) 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OTHER MINISTRIES 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation and Organization 
 
1. Smt. Sharda Jain Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department). 
 
2. Dr. Ashok Singhvi Joint Secretary, Ministry of Urban 
Development 
 
3. Shri Susheel Kumar,  Joint Secretary (Housing), Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
 
4. Shri Saraswati Prasad  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation 
 
5. Shri S.K. Seth Additional Member Staff, Railway  Board   
 
6. Shri Nitin Chaudhary Executive Director, Mechanical Engineering 
(Dev.), Railway Board 
 
7. Shri D.R. Gupta Executive Director (Land & amenities), 
Railway  Board 
   
 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and representatives 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting of the 
Committee.   The Committee then took evidence of repr esentatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on "The Prohibition of Manual 
Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Bill, 2012".   The Chairman drew the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha.   

 
3. The Members then raised queries on the various aspects of the Bill which 
inter-alia included :- 
(i) Improvements in the new legislation over the previous act "The 
Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry 
Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993  and reasons for the non -
implementation of old Act. 
(v) Model Rules to be drafted in consultation with the States in regard 
to the under proposed legislation / Bill. 
 
(vi) The financial provisions for implementation of the new legislation 
and the rehabilitation programme chalked out for the same. 
(iv) Co-ordination among various Ministries involved and the gearing up 
of the machinery of State/local bodies for the mammoth task of 
implementation of the proposed legislation.  
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish written 
replies to those points which could not be replied to orally. 
5. The Chairman thanked the Secretary  and other officials of the Ministry for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
6. The verbatim proceedings were kept on record. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
ANNEXURE - X 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHT SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 27 TH 
FEBRUARY, 2013. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1525 hrs. in Commit tee 
Room No. 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
6. Shri Mohan Jena 
7. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
8. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 10.   Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
11. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
13. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
14. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for 
consideration and adoption of the draft (Thirty -second) Report of the Committee 
on “The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Bill 2012.     

 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Thirty -second 
Report. Some Members re -emphasized the need for taking into c onsideration 
possible harassment that might be caused by the implementing agencies on the 
issue of prosecution and imposing penalty on the poor who, being mostly 
illiterate/ignorant of the provisions of the Act may not understand the adverse 
implications of the new Act.  
4. The Committee also felt strongly that wide publicity, both in print and 
electronic media, should be given to the provisions of the Act, especially those 
which would affect the lives of poor people, be the manual scavengers or the 
owners/occupiers of the insanitary latrines, so that they are fully educated about 
their rights and liabilities under the Act.  The Chairman observed that the 
concerns and suggestions of the Members have been suitably incorporated in 
the Report.  
 5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report 
and present the same to Parliament. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 