1 
 
39 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES FOR WELFARE 
OF SENIOR CITIZENS 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT  
              
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935(Saka)  


2 
 
39 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES FOR WELFARE OF 
SENIOR CITIZENS 
         Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on  4.1.2014  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  7.2.2014 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on  7.2.2014 
 
                
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935(Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE(s) 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) 
 
4 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14) 
 
6 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
8 
REPORT  
PART - A  
I INTRODUCTORY 11 
II POPULATION OF SENIOR CITIZENS IN THE COUNTRY 13 
III NATIONAL POLICY ON OLDER PERSONS 17 
IV CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME OF INTEGRATED PROGRAMME FOR OLDER 
PERSONS (IPOP), MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
22 
V SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES/FACILITIES OF OTHER MINISTRIES FOR THE 
WELFARE OF SENIOR CITIZENS/SCHEME OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE 
 
34 
VI PENSION SCHEME OF MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 40 
VII FACILITIES PROVIDED BY THE MINISTRIES OF RAILWAYS, CIVIL 
AVIATION, ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS AND FINANCE  
 
44 
VIII MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 
2007 
 
46 
IX PROGRAMMES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS IN OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE 
WORLD 
 
52 
PART – B 
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 57 
PART - C 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I DISTRIBUTION OF OLD AGE HOMES/DAY CARE CENTRES ACROSS THE 
COUNTRY 
75 
II DETAILS OF THE NUMBER OF BENEFICIARIES COVERED DURING 2012-13 
AS REPORTED BY THE STATES/UTS (NSAP) 
 
144 
III DETAILS OF CENTRAL FUNDS ALLOCATED UNDER NSAP DURING THE 
LAST FIVE YEARS  
 
146 
IV MINUTES OF THE  NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2012-13) HELD ON 5TH JULY, 
2013 
 
148 
V MINUTES  OF  THE  TWENTY-FIRST  SITTING  OF  THE STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON  SOCIAL   JUSTICE   AND  EMPOWERMENT     (2012-13) 
HELD  ON  26TH  AUGUST, 2013 
 
151 
VI MINUTES OF THE  SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-14) HELD ON 25TH 
SEPTEMBER, 2013 
 
154 
VII MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-14) HELD ON 17TH 
DECEMBER, 2013 
 
157 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL        
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2012-2013) 
    
   SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
                      #12. Smt. Mausam Noor 
13. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
14. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
15. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
16. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
17. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
19. Shri Kabir Suman 
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
                      *24. Shri Rishang Keishing 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
26.      Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.       Prof. Mrinal Miri 
##28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
________________________________________________________________ 
*   Resigned from the Committee w.e.f. 22.2.2013 
# Nominated w.e.f. 01.5.2013 
##  Shri Jesudasu Seelam ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 17.6.2013 consequent upon his 
appointment as Minister.  

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL        
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-2014) 
    
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
                      *10. Shri Madhu Kora  
11. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
              13. Smt. Mausam Noor 
14. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
15. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Kabir Suman 
21. Vacant  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
   **22. Shri K.R. Arjunan 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
           #26. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
27.       Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
28.        Prof. Mrinal Miri 
29. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
31. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
32. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Shri Madhu Kora nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 18.9.2013. 
**  Shri K.R. Arjunan nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  7.9.2013. 
#   Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member of  Committee w.e.f. 7.9.2013. 

7 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2013 -14) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Thirty -ninth Report on the subject 
"Implementation of schemes for welfare of Senior Citizens" of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerm ent (Department of  Social Justice and 
Empowerment). 
 
2. The Committee took briefing and evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment) on 5 th July, 2013 and 25 th September, 2013 respectively.  
The Committee, at their sitting held on 26 th August, 2013 heard the views of an 
NGO (HelpAge India) on the subject. 
 
3. Written Memoranda were received from some of the NGOs working in 
the field of welfare of senior citizens namely, Rashtriya Seva Samithi,Tirupati, 
Chittoor Distt., Andhra Pradesh, Janta Kalyan Samiti, Rewari, Haryana, Gram 
Swarajya Sansthan, Hissar, Haryana, Indira Ladies Club, Nahan, Distt. Sirmour, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karuna Bhavan Social Centre, Ernakulam District , Kera la, 
HelpAge India, New Delhi, Integrated Rural Development and Economic 
Organisation, Thoubal, Manipur and Calcutta Metropolitan Instt. of 
Gerontology, Kolkata.  HelpAge India forwarded certain suggestions and also 
deposed before the Committee.  Written in formation was also obtained from 
the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Rural Development and Railways, 
etc. 
4.  The Committee undertook an on -the-spot study visit and interacted with 
the Chief Secretaries of Maharashtra and Goa in connection with 
implementation of various schemes for the welfare of senior citizens. The 
observations of the Committee are based on the appraisal of the Memoranda 
received, views expressed by NGOs, evidence of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of S ocial Justice and Empowerment) and 

9 
 
written information obtained from the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, 
Rural Development, Railways, etc. as also on the observations made during 
the study visit.  
 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draf t Report on the subject 
"Implementation of schemes for welfare of Senior Citizens " at their sitting held 
on 17.12.2013. 
 
6. The elderly people are precious assets of a Nation being the repository 
of accumulated knowledge of life.  Baked by experience, they  provide 
moorings to the society.  With the increased life expectancy, empirical studies 
show that the youthful demographic bulge, considered a demographic 
dividend, would transform into a gerontological bulge as the population of 60+ 
and 80+ people will i ncrease by 326% and 700% respectively by the year 2050.  
Besides, the fast changing social matrix is increasingly impacting adversely 
the care, dignity and independence of the elders.  This calls for drastic 
pragmatic and policy interventions and, of cours e, commensurately enhanced 
allocations.  The Committee have made, after due deliberation, 
recommendation of far reaching impact which, if implemented substantially, 
would go a long way to safeguard the care, dignity and independence of our 
elders which rig htfully belongs to them.  The Committee have also laid 
emphasis on imparting of moral education to the young impressionable minds 
given India's great cultural heritage laying emphasis on the wisdom of the 
elders and the rich benefits that accrue from the s ervice rendered to the 
elders.   
 
7.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the 
Ministries of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), State Governments of Maharashtra and Goa and NGOs for 
their cooperation in placing before them their considered views and 
perceptions on the various aspects of the subject and for furnishing written 
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  The servic e rendered by the Committee 

10 
 
Secretariat deserves, fullest appreciation for preparing the draft Report ably 
and swiftly. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report.   
   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       HEMANAND BISWAL 
                  Chairman, 
17 December, 2013                                          Standing Committee on 
26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)    Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
REPORT 
PART - A 
I. Introductory 
1.1 The elderly people are a precious asset of a nation who are deemed to be the 
repository of  rich experience and wisdom.  They give moorings to society and act as 
lodestar when the wisdom and accumulated knowledge of the elders is counted.  
With the improvement in child survival and adoption of s mall family norms and 
increased life expectancy, a significant feature of demographic change in world 
population including India is the progressive increase in the number of elderly 
persons.  This ageing of world population represents an unparalleled chall enge to 
the Governments to ensure that the needs of aged and their human resource 
potential are adequately addressed through appropriate programmatic and policy 
interventions. 
1.2 The situation of older persons was highlighted for the first time at the Wor ld 
Assembly on Ag eing in 1982 in Vienna wherein International Plan of Action on 
Ageing was adopted. It served as a International blue print  for development of 
policies and programmes on ageing.  Later, the United Nations Principles for Older 
persons were adopted by General Assembly Resolution 46 -91 of 16 th December, 
1991.  The following are the five principles which Governments are encouraged to 
incorporate into National programmes wherever possible :- 
(i) Independence: Older persons should have access to food, water, 
shelter, clothing, health care, work and other income -generating 
opportunities, education, training, and a life in safe environment.   
(ii) Participation: Older persons should remain integrated into community 
life and participate actively in t he formulation of policies affecting their 
well-being.   

12 
 
(iii) Care: Older persons should have access to social and legal services 
and to health care so that they can maintain an optimum level of 
physical, mental and emotional well -being. This should include full 
respect for dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy.   
(iv) Self-fulfilment: Older persons should have access to educational, 
cultural, spiritual and recreational resources and be able to develop 
their full potential.   
(v) Dignity: Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security, be 
free of exploitation, physical or mental, and be treated fairly regardless 
of age, gender and racial or ethnic background.   
1.3 The second World A ssembly on Ageing was held in Madrid in 2002 where 
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing  (MIPAA),  2002 was adopted and 
endorsed by the General Assembly.  The Plan has inspired the development of 
National and regional plans and provided an international frame work for dialogue on 
ageing.   
1.4 The well being of older persons was enshrined in Indian Constitution much 
before it was raised in the international forum.   Article 41 of the Indian Constitution 
enjoining that " The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and 
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education 
and to public a ssistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and 
disablement, and in other cases of underserved want".    
  

13 
 
II. Population of senior citizens in the country 
 
2.1 As per 2001 Census, total population of Senior Citizens (60+) was 7.7 crore, 
of which population of males and females was 3.8 crore and 3.9 crore respectively. 
Table 2.1 depicts t he share of people aged 60 years and above in the total 
population as per Census 2001. 
 
Table 2.1  :  Population of Senior Citizens (2001) 
(Fig. in crore) 
 Persons Males Females 
All India 102.9 53.2 49.7 
Senior Citizens (60+) 7.7 3.8 3.9 
As % of total 7.5 7.1 7.8 
Source: Census, 2001 
 
2.2 As per the data given by the Ministry  (table 2.2), the projected population 
aged 60+ and their percentage share in the total projected population of the country, 
for the year 2006 to 2026 (as on 1 st March) as per the May 2006 Report of the 
Technical Group on Population Projections constituted  by the National Commission 
on Population published by the Office of the Registrar General of India. 
Table 2.2  :  Projected Population of Senior Citizens 
 
Year Projected Senior Citizens 
Population (Crore) 
As % of total population 
Persons Male Female Persons Male Female 
2006 8.36 4.07 4.28 7.5 7.1 8.0 
2011 9.85 4.81 5.03 8.3 7.8 8.8 
2016 11.81 5.81 5.99 9.3 8.8 9.8 
2021 14.32 7.06 7.26 10.7 10.2 11.3 
2026 17.32 8.46 8.86 12.4 11.7 13.1 
 
2.3 Old Age Dependency Ratio is defined as the number of persons in the Old 
Age group 60+ per 100 persons in the age group 15-59.  Old Age Dependency Ratio 
has been steadily  rising during the past three decade s.  Table 2.3 contains the 

14 
 
details of Old Age Dependency Ratio by Sex and Residence in India in 1981, 1991 
and 2001. 
Table 2.3  :  Old Age Dependency Ratio 
Area Male Female Persons 
1981 1991 2001 1981 1991 2001 1981 1991 2001 
Rural 13.1 13.3 13.6 12.9 13.0 14.6 13.0 13.2 14.1 
Urban 8.5 9.2 9.9 10.1 10.2 11.7 9.2 9.7 10.7 
Combined 11.8 12.2 12.4 12.2 12.2 13.8 12.0 12.2 13.1 
  
Note : 1. All India excludes Assam for 1981 and Jammu & Kashmir for 1991. 
2. 2001 figure exclude the population of Pao Mata, Mao Maram and Purul 
division of Manipur State. 
Source : Report and Tables on Age, Census of India, 2001, Registrar General of 
India, New Delhi. 
1981 & 1991 : Population from Social and Cultural Tables, 1981 and 1991 
respectively, Registrar General of India, Government of India, 
New Delhi. 
 
2.4 As per the United Nations Projection on old age population in India,  the 
demographic profile depicts that in the years 2000 -2050, the overall population in 
India will grow by 55% whereas population of people in their 60 years and above will 
increase by 326% and those in the age group of 80+ by 700% - the fastest growing 
group.  Table 2.4 contains the data as projected by the UN. 
Table 2.4  :  Old Age Projected by UN 
Years Total 
Population 
(millions)  
60+ (millions)  80+ (millions)  
2000 1008 76 6 
2050 1572 324 48 

15 
 
Source: World population Ageing: 1950 -2050; Department of Economic and 
Social affairs, Population Division, United Nations. New York.2002 
 
2.5 Elaborating on the life expectancy in India , the Ministry informed that a s per 
the Census of India’s Projected Value of expectation of life at birth (2006 -10), the life 
expectancy for males and females was 65.8 years and 68.1 years respectively.  
According to United Nations Population Division’s World Population Prospects and 
United Nations Statistical Division’s Population and Vital Statistical Report, the life 
expectancy at birth in India in 2007 was 64.07 years.   As per the Census of India’s 
Projected Value of expectation of life at birth (2011 -15), the life expectancy for males 
and females is 67.3 years and 69.6 years respectively.   
2.6 On the specific need to have an expert Committee or a working group to look 
into the needs of the specialized group of the population of 80+, whose population 
would increase drastically in the next 20 years, the Ministry submitted :- 
 
"Ministry has not constituted an Expert Committee of working group to look 
into the specialised group of the population of 80+ so far. However, Ministry 
has set up an Expert Committee to formulate a few new Schemes under the 
XIIth Five Year Plan for the welfare of senior citizens at large. These schemes 
are (i) Scheme for awareness generation for the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act 2007; (ii) Scheme for setting up Helpline for 
Senior Citizens at the National and District level; (iii) Scheme for Setting up a 
National Commission for S enior Citizens; (iv) Scheme for setting up a 
National Trust for the Aged".  
 
2.7 The Committee also sought the views of the Ministry as to how the age group 
of 60-70 years of the populat ion can be made more productive.  T he Ministry stated 
in a written reply :- 
"The National Policy of Senior Citizen recognises ‘Productive ageing’ as key 
to ensuring well -being of the senior citizens. In this regard, the policy 
promotes measures to create avenues for continuity in employment and/or 
post retirement opportunities; set ting up of a Directorate of Employment to 
enable seniors find re -employment opportunities; the age of retirement be 
reviewed by the Government due to increasing longevity and to re -employ 
people over the age of 60 years and encourage them to work till the age of 75.  

16 
 
Further, Special programmes will be designed and disseminated through the 
media in order to educate society to appreciate and respect the contribution of 
senior citizens, especially older women, in running the household. Similarly, 
senior Citizens will be motivated to contribute their experience and knowledge 
to integrate tradition with contemporary needs  and transmit more effectively 
socio-cultural heritage to the grandchildren". 
 
Perspective Planning 
 
2.8 The Ministry informed the Committee that the following programmes/schemes 
are proposed in the 12th Plan documents for senior citizens :- 
 
(i) Awareness generation for the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007. 
 
(ii) Setting up a Helpline for Senior Citizens at the National  and District 
levels. 
 
(iii) Setting up a National Commission for Senior Citizens. 
 
(iv) Creating National Trust for the Aged. 
 
(v) Scheme for implementation of various provisions of the New National 
Policy on Senior Citizens. 
 
(vi) Setting up of Bureau for Socio -Economic Emp owerment of Senior 
Citizens at District level. 
 
(vii) Issue of Smart Identity Cards for senior citizens. 
 
(viii) Health Insurance for senior citizens. 
 
 
2.9 When asked about the status of the above schemes, the Ministry informed 
that the Schemes mentioned at Sl. No.  (vi), (vii) and (viii) pertain  to the Ministries of 
Labour, Home Affairs, Finance (Department of Financial Services) respectively. 
These Ministries have been requested to take action in this regard.  It was further 
submitted that so far as the Ministry of  Social Justice & Empowerment is concerned, 
as mentioned earlier, an Expert Committee has been set up to prepare blue prints of 
the Schemes mentioned at Sl. No. (i) to (v) mentioned above.  A meeting of the 
Expert Group was held on 7.8.2013. 

17 
 
III. National Policy on Older Persons 
 
3.1 The National Policy on Older Persons (NPOP), 1999 was announced in 
January 1999 to reaffirm the commitment of the Government to ensure the well -
being of the older persons. The Policy envisages State support to ensure financial 
and food security, health care, shelter and other needs of older persons to improve 
the quality of their lives. Some of the principal areas of intervention identified in the 
Policy pertain to pension, taxation policies, long term savings, strengthening hea lth 
care system, health insurance, training of health care personnel, promotion of 
voluntary organizations through grants, providing shelter, awareness generation 
regarding inter-generational bonding, protection of life and property, etc. 
 
3.2 Keeping in view the changes in the demographic pattern, social -economic, 
technological and other relevant fields, a Committee was set up on 28.1.2010 under 
the Chairpersonship of Dr. (Smt) V. Mohini Giri to draft inter-alia a new National 
Policy on Senior Citizens. The Committee submitted its report on 30 th March 2011. 
The new draft Policy has been placed on the Ministry’s Website for comments from 
the general public and circulated to State Governments for their response. 
 
3.3 When asked how the new policy is likely to give a better perspective for senior 
citizens than the existing policy of 1999, the Ministry stated that the proposed new 
policy though built on the policy of 1999 is a  considerable improvement which takes 
into account the present demographic pattern, socio-economic needs, social value 
system, advancement in science and technology and other relevant fields. 
Compared to the extant policy, the proposed new policy is more comprehensive. The 
new policy sets out upfront the areas needing very special attention i.e, (a) the oldest 
old i.e. senior citizens in the age g roup of 80 years and above; (b) e lderly women;    

18 
 
(c) r ural poor; and (d) t he unorganised sector. These sections were either not 
covered or not adequately covered in the policy  of 1999.  The proposed new policy 
also emphasizes upon t he use of science and technology for the well - being and 
safety of senior citizens; enhancing the capacity of family to take care of senior 
citizens while the institutional care to be the last resort; i nter-generational bonding to 
be a core principle ; productive ageing; financial security in old age; Heal th care and 
nutrition;  Effective i mplementation of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007; review of laws to make them more strin gent and effective 
in case of elder abuse; setting up of a National Commission for Senior Citizens at the 
centre and similar Commissions at the state level  for looking into their grievances  
earmarking of c orporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds ; the Panchayati Raj 
institutions will be encouraged to implement the policy at grassroots level, etc.  
 
3.4 A non -official witnesses from a n NGO, Help Age India, New Delhi stated 
before the Committee on National Policy on Older Persons of the Government of 
India :- 
"In 1999, the Government passed a National Policy on Senior Citizens. That 
was the year when the UN considered it as the International Year of the Older 
Persons and passed the Madrid Plan of Declaration. The Indian Government 
then decided to pass a Natio nal Policy on Older Persons. This document is 
there in the papers and this was by the Ministry of Social Justice. 
This policy, for ten years, did not get implement ed. Various times, we have 
gone to the Ministry and said that this is not being implemented. Then, the 
former Minister Shri Mukul Wasnik said that if it is not working then let us have 
a review committee, to review the policy. This policy was then reviewed under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. (Mrs.) Mohini Giri and Help Age India was the 
Secretariat which worked on the policy ".   
3.5 The Ministry was asked to specify by when the new draft policy on senior 
citizens would be finalised.  The Ministry in a written reply have stated :- 
"The draft Cabinet Note  on the Policy has been prepared  and circulated for 
inter-Ministerial consultations. After receipt of the comments from the 

19 
 
concerned central Ministries/Departments, t he draft Cabinet Note would be 
finalized incorporating the views of the concerned Ministries/Departments and 
will be forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat for  placing before the Cabinet for  
approval. Accordingly, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment is 
making all possible efforts to finalize the policy by the end of this financial 
year". 
 
3.6 When it was enquired what woul d be the implementation mechanism of the 
new policy, the Ministry responded in a written reply :- 
"As part of the  implementation mechanism under the new policy, the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment proposes to  expand the Department of 
Disability Affairs as the “Department of Disability Affairs and Senior Citizens” 
and designated as nodal agency for implementing programmes and services 
for senior citizens and the NPSC, 2013. Further, the National Council for 
Senior Citizens will pursue matters rela ting to implementation of the National 
Policy and monitor its progress. Ministry of Health & family Welfare, Ministry 
of Rural Development & many other ministries are represented in this Council. 
States and Union Territories will be expected to set up sepa rate Directorates 
of Senior Citizens for implementing the proposed Policy, the state -run 
programmes and services for senior citizens.  The coordination work in the 
States will be done by the nodal department i.e. the department handling the 
senior citizens’ affairs".  
 
3.7 Responding to the query of the Committee on the new policy for senior 
citizens, the Secretary deposed before the Committee :- 
"The first issue that you raised related to the new policy.  The policy is under 
consideration and as I said, we  had finalised it but after the last meeting we 
had incorporated certain other suggestions.  I also had a consultation with 
most of the activists, the leading NGOs.  Therefore, we have tried to make it 
updated so that we can address the challenges that the  problem of aging 
poses.  Briefly, the main focus of the draft policy now is, family as the primary 
care taker of senior citizens and setting up of homes for abandoned senior 
citizens.  We are trying to see that the welfare of rural elderly is given 
prominence.  We are also paying special attention to address concerns of the 
oldest of old, that is of 80+.  Expansion in the coverage under old age pension 
scheme for senior citizens both below the poverty line and those just above 
the poverty line, use of adva nced technology for the welfare of senior citizens 
and innovative health care techniques for senior citizens, disaster risk 
reduction and management plan for senior citizens. 
The new policy will also address some of the issues which is as I said 
recognises that the proportion of senior citizens above 80+ is rapidly 
increasing and they should be given special address.  As you are aware, even 

20 
 
among the senior citizens almost 10 per cent are 80+.  This number would be 
growing and by 2050 the number is supposed  to constitute almost, which is 
12.4, close to 20 per cent of the population.  In that also the number of 80+ 
would also increase.  That is one of the focus areas of the new policy". 
 
National Council for Senior Citizens 
3.8 The National Policy on Older Persons 1999 envisages setting up of an 
autonomous National Council for Older Persons (NCOP) headed by the Minister of 
Social Justice and Empowerment to promote and coordinate the concerns of older 
persons.  In pursuance thereof, a National Council for Older Persons was constituted 
on 10.5.1999 for a period of 5 years.  It was reconstituted in 2005 for another period 
of 5 years.  The tenure of last NCOP was last extended up to 31.12.2011.  The draft 
new policy proposes setting u p of State Council for senior citizens on the lines of 
National Council for senior citizens. 
 
3.9 The Ministry also informed that i n order to have a definite structure, it was 
decided to reconstitute the Council on the lines of National Consultative Committee 
on De -addiction and Rehabilitation (NCCDR) . The name of the Council has also 
been changed to National Council of Senior Citizens (NCSrC). The Prime Minister  
approved the proposal for constitution of NCSrC.   Accordingly, a resolution for 
reconstituting the National Council for Older Persons as National Council of Senior 
Citizens (NCSrC) was published in the Gazette of India dated 22-2-2012. 
 
3.10 As per the notification, the NCSrC will advise Central and State Governments 
on the entire gamut of issues related to welfare of senior citizens and enhancement 
of their quality of life, with special reference to (i) Policies, programmes and 
legislative me asures, (ii) Promotion of physical and financial security, health and 

21 
 
independent and productive living and (iii) Awareness generation and community 
mobilization.  Also, the NCSrC will meet at least twice a year.  

22 
 
IV. Central Sector Scheme of Integrated Pr ogramme for Older Persons 
(IPOP), Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
4.1 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is implementing the Central 
Sector Scheme of Integrated Programme for Older Persons (IPOP) since 1992 with 
the objective of improving the quality of life of senior citizens by providing basic 
amenities like shelter, food, medical care and entertainment opportunities , etc. 
through Government/ Non -Governmental Organizations/Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/local bodies, etc.  
4.2 The Scheme was last revised with effect from 01.04.2008. Besides increase in 
the amount of financial assistance for existing projects, several innovative projects 
have been added and made  eligible for assistance under the Scheme. Some of 
these are :- 
 
 Maintenance of Respite Care Homes and Continuous Care Homes;  
 Running of Day Care Centres for Alzheimer's Disease/ Dementia 
Patients,  
 Physiotherapy Clinics for older persons;  
 Help-lines and Counseling Centres for older persons;  
 Sensitizing programmes for children particularly in Schools and Colleges;  
 Regional Resource and Training Centres;  
 Training of Caregivers to the older persons;  
 Awareness Generation Programmes for Older Persons and Care Givers;  
 Formation of Senior Citizens Associations, etc.  
 
4.3 The eligibility criteria for beneficiaries of some important activities/ projects 
supported under the Scheme are :-  
 
 Old Age Homes  - for destitute older persons 
 Mobile Medicare Units - for older persons living in slums, rural and 
inaccessible areas where proper health facilities are not available 
 Respite Care Homes and  
Continuous Care Homes - for older persons seriously ill requiring 
continuous nursing care and respite. 
 
 

23 
 
4.4 The following (table 4.4) shows physical and financial achievements were 
made by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment under the sche me during 
the last four years. 
Table 4.4  :  Physical and Financial achievements made under IPOP 
Year BE 
(Rs. 
Crore) 
RE 
(Rs. 
Crore) 
Amount 
Released 
(Rs. 
Crore) 
Achievements 
No. of 
NGOs 
assiste
d 
No. of 
Project
s 
assiste
d 
 
No. of 
Beneficiarie
s 
2009-
10 
22.00 22.00 19.72 362 559 33100 
2010-
11 
40.00 22.00 20.67 359 595 38785 
2011-
12 
40.00 25.00 19.99 348 615 34630 
2012-
13 
40.00 18.00 18.21 296 496 30775 
 
4.5 The Committee note that the NGO scheme for the old age received pretty 
allocation which were further reduced at BE stage.  However, the Ministry could not 
utilize even the allocated funds. 
4.6 The Ministry was asked to specify the reasons for the poor financial 
performance of the scheme.  The Ministry earmarked as under :- 
"The Ministry has put in place a system of Notional Allocation to States/UTs 
under the Scheme.  At the beginning of every financial year while conveying  
the Notional Allocation, the State Govts/UTs are requ ested to identify and 
recommend adequate number of feasible new project proposals as well as to 
recommend the ongoing/continuing projects in the first quarter of Financial 
Year so that grants to the NGOs are released well in time within the Financial 
Year. However, recommendations from most of the States/UTs are received 
in the third and fourth quarter of the financial year thereby delaying the 
process of release of grants. Further, deficiencies in document s are observed 
in many proposals. With a view to enhance the skills of NGOs in the 
documentation/preparation of the proposals, NISD conducts Workshops, 
Seminars & Training programmes in collaboration with Regional Resource 

24 
 
Training Centres (RRTCs) /Government office s from the Social Welfare  
Department for capacity building of the NGOs and attempts to provide hand-
holding when needed. The process of release of grant is  also delayed as a 
result of late response from States/UTs on the clarification s/documents 
sought by the Ministry. As a result  of delayed receipt of State Governments’ 
recommendation, the target set by the Ministry of Finance to meet the plan 
expenditure up to 67 per cent till 31 December of the financial year could not 
be achieved during 2012 -13. Accordingly, budget under the Sc heme for the 
financial year 2012 -13 was  substantially reduced at the revised estimate 
stage".   
 
4.7 In response to a query on the poor performance of the scheme, the Ministry 
submitted that they have taken the following steps for improvement in the 
implementation of the scheme: 
 The State Governments/ UT Administrations are requested regularly at 
the beginning of every financial year to identify more feasible project 
proposals and recommend them to the Ministry on adequate scale in 
the first quarter o f the financial year so that grant is released well in 
time.  
 
 A system of notional allocation of funds to States/UTs within the Budget 
Allocation for the Scheme of IPOP has been developed taking into 
account the population of senior citizens and demand/re quirement of 
funds for optimum utilisation of funds under the Scheme.  
 
 The State Governments/ UT Administrations are also urged to send 
adequate number of project proposals during the annual Welfare 
Ministers/Secretaries Conference held at New Delhi.  
 
 
4.8 Asked to explain how the Ministry ensure that the Government funds reach 
the desirous people, the Ministry submitted : 
● Each NGO is required to be inspected by the State Government every 
year, and grant is considered after recommendation of the State level 
grant-in-aid committee along with the inspection report and other 
relevant documents are received through the State Government.  
Further in order to ensure more effective implementation of the 
scheme, services of the officers of this Ministry or any other agency 
prescribed by the Ministry can also be utilized for inspection for the 
projects. 
 

25 
 
● Action has been taken for designing and developing as database 
relating to NGOs/VOs receiving grants which will act as a treasure 
house of information and help  in immediate ret rieval, monitoring, 
processing of data inputs required by the Ministry.  This will also 
provide greater transparency and facilitate decisional inputs and 
remove a lot of shell drudgery. 
 
● Officers of the Ministry at the Deputy Secretary/D irector and Joint 
Secretary level have been designated as Nodal Officers for the States 
to carry out inspection of grantee organizations of the Ministry. 
 
● Utilization Certificates and audited accounts duly certified by a 
Chartered Accountant are obtained  from the grantee NGOs in order to 
ensure proper utilization of funds and funds for subsequent year is 
related after receipt of utilization certificate of previous year's grant. 
  
4.9 Taking note of the uneven distribution of old age homes across , the 
Committee asked  why no funds were released to Kerala which has the largest 
population of senior citizens and why there were very few projects in the N orth East 
region of the country, the Ministry replied:- 
"At present 3 projects, namely 2 old age homes (OAH) and 1 Mobile Medicare 
Unit (MMU) are being assisted under the Scheme of IPOP in the State of 
Kerala. Grants-in-aid to these projects could not be released during 2012 -13 
due to late receipt of the recommendations and deficiency in certain 
documents.  These proposals have been processed for release of grant 
during 2013 -14. Adequate and complete proposals of NGOs are not being 
recommended by the State Governments of NE region. However, at present, 
2 projects in Meghalaya and 1 proposal in Tripura are being assisted under 
the Scheme". 
  
4.10 On the concern of the Committee over uneven distribution of old age homes 
(Annexure–I),   the Secretary testified:- 
"Old age homes are definitely an issue.  The total old age homes that we have 
in the country are 296 and they are again concentrated in a few States.  As 
you have rightly said, Andhra Pradesh has a very high number, close to 76, 
Tamil Nadu has 45, Karnatak a has 39.  In the South they are in large 
numbers but in north and other parts the old age homes are few and far 
between.  In fact we had taken a proposal to the Planning Commission where 
we have said that we should be given funds to ensure that there are old age 
homes in each and every district.  But the view taken was that we should try 
to see that the care is in situ at home because traditionally in India the family 
has been taking care and that is also one of the reasons why it should not be 

26 
 
encouraged.  Since, under the Act it is the responsibility of the State 
Governments to ensure that there are old age homes in each and every 
district". 
4.11 With regard to  the inadequacy of old age homes in the country and the need 
for augmentation of the scheme by t he State Government and Central Government,  
the Secretary deposed :- 
"They are trying to work but the main problem is that currently we are not 
funding construction of Old Age Homes.  We are supporting the running of 
Old Age Homes.  So that is a major cause of concern.  Therefore, we have 
asked the State Governments if they  could ensure and many State 
Governments have done it, that Old Age Homes are there and then the 
running can be supported under IPOP.  Therefore, in many States the Day 
Care Centres are more popular.  We have approached the Planning 
Commission in this rega rd.   They have said that we should try to focus on in 
situ care".  
 
4.12 Stressing upon the need for prescribed standards for the buildings, manpower 
and facilities for older persons, the Committee enquired how the facilities could be 
improved, the Ministry stated :- 
"Inspections of the old age homes are carried out by the State Governments 
officials every year to check the proper functioning of the old age homes. The 
Ministry has prepared standard format for submission of inspection report. 
Information re garding adequate facilities for older persons such as space, 
food, hygiene, health care etc, is obtained in the inspection report to ensure 
that proper standard and facilities in the old age homes are maintained.  The 
Scheme of IPOP also prescribes  norms for staff for running and maintenance 
of various projects under the Scheme . Specific norms with reference to 
Manpower have  been mentioned in the guidelines of the scheme IPOP for 
engaging the staff for running the projects.  We propose to revise  the scheme 
to ensure that the standard  of the buildings are brought at  par with the 
standards of Helpage India model". 
 
4.13 Regarding the strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions/local bodies for the 
welfare of senior citizens at local level, the Ministry submitted that under the scheme, 
the following agencies are eligible for financial assistance: 
  

27 
 
(i)  Panchayati Raj Institutions/Local bodies  
 
(ii)  Non-Governmental Voluntary Organizations  
 
(iii) Institutions or Organizations set up by Government as autonomous/ 
subordinate bodies  
 
(iv) Government Recognized Educational institutions, Charitable Hospitals/ 
Nursing Homes, and recognized youth organizations such as Nehru 
Yuvak Kendra Sanghathan (NYKS).  
 
(v) In exceptional case, financial assistance under the Scheme shall also 
be provided to State Governments/Union Territory administrations.  
 
4.14 Asked about the  assistance given to Panchayati Raj Institutions and local 
bodies, the Ministry replied :- 
 
"So far, no State, Panchayati R aj Institutions and local body  has 
approached/send their proposals under the Scheme seeking financial 
assistance/grants-in-aid under the Scheme". 
 
4.15 Regarding the day care centres  (Annexure-I), the Ministry informed that 
under the Scheme of Integrated Programme for Older Persons (IPOP) grants -in-aid 
is given, among others, for running and maintenance of Day Care Centres. Grants -
in-aid under this project is given to implementing agencies for prov iding facilities of 
daycare, healthcare, recreation, peer interaction, entertainment, and companionship, 
spiritual and religious programmes for 50 senior citizens. During 2012 -13, grants-in-
aid was given to the Voluntary Organisations for running 175 Day C are Centres 
under the Scheme. 
4.16 Further, elaborating on the mobile medicare units, the Ministry have inf ormed 
that under the scheme of I POP, grants-in-aid is provided to implementing agencies 
for running and maintenance of Mobile Medicare Units (MMUs).  Table 4.16 contains 
the number of MMUs assisted under the Scheme during last three years. 
 
 

28 
 
Table 4.16  :  MMUs assisted 
Year  No. of MMUs 
assisted. 
2010-11 21 
2011-12 38 
2012-13 29 
 
4.17 A representatives of Help Age India made the following submissions before 
the Committee about the scheme of Integrated Programme for Older Persons and 
difficulties faced in getting sanction of funds : 
"As far as the Integrated Programme for Older Persons is concerned, we are 
very closely associated with the Na tional Committee which is the Screening 
Committee  for assisting the Government of India to screen various proposals 
that come up for this grant -in-aid scheme and for the ten schemes that they 
have.   
 
Rupees forty crore allocated by the Planning Commissio n for this particular 
Scheme.  But if you look at the implementation, there are a lot of issues like 
implementation issues, transparency issues, monitoring and evaluation issues 
which need to be looked at very seriously. 
 
It is because most of the times due diligence is not used at the State level. We 
normally get proposals at the State level which are not worthy of being 
implemented by public money. So, there are big issues in that and it needs 
revamping. Also, it needs to periodically review itself and lo ok at the kind of 
allocation that is being made for this kind of a scheme so that money given for 
these schemes is realistic and only genuine people come up and take up 
these schemes and there should be technical guidelines which are as of now 
not present. So, it is very difficult. For example, a proposal comes for an old 
age home and they are running it in a rented premises which is hardly suitable 
for human existence and there is no way that the Committee can raise an 
objection on that point. But if the s ame Committee recommends this kind of a 
project, then quality of life of senior citizens will be affected by that. So, there 
are very big issues that require to be taken urgent note of in this respect".  
4.18 The Memoranda received from the various NGOs wo rking in the  field of 
welfare of older persons are suggestive of the fact that the procedure for availing 
grant-in-aid is very long and arduous and needs to be streamlined.  When the point 
was raised by the Committee during evidence, the Secretary testified :- 
".....the solution is, as the hon. Chairman has said, to simplify the procedure.  
Many NGOs are saying that the process is very complex.  Any proposal that 

29 
 
comes, first it has to be vetted by the State Government and the district 
authorities.  Then, i t comes to us and here again the proposals are 
scrutinised.  So, what we are trying to do is that at least in the central Ministry, 
a proposal is under consideration where we can give this part of examining 
the proposals to another agency of the Ministry l ike the corporations that we 
have so that it can be faster.  So, that is what we are thinking.  But the main 
issue still remains, what the hon. Chairman was saying, whether there are 
good NGOs which can take up this work.  Another reason for that is the 
amount that is given is not sufficient as per many NGOs for meeting the 
expenses.  Obviously, in any programme, the norms that are fixed – whether 
it is for the doctors or nurses or staff, the philosophy has been that the 
Government would be supplementing the efforts of NGOs".    
 
4.19 The scheme of IPOP is being run through the NGOs.  On a query why more 
NGOs are not coming forward to implement the scheme, the Secretary testified 
before the Committee :- 
"There are very few NGOs which are able to raise resources on their own and 
then they can take the supplement help from the government.  Therefore, the 
NGOs are not coming forward.  If they are coming forward, the State 
Governments inspect them and they find that the facilities are inadequate, 
they do no t have sufficient space and they do not have trained manpower.  
So, they are not forward them.  That is why the number of NGOs which are 
coming forward under the scheme is less". 
4.20 A representative of an NGO , Help Age India , while deposing before the 
Committee highlighted the problems faced by NGOs in getting grant in aid for the 
various schemes :- 
"I would like to add something on the process of implementation of the IPOP 
Scheme which is giving grants to NGOs. We have written in our written 
deposition that there is complete lack of transparency in the process. I have 
also served on the Screening Committee. It is very difficult for the NGOs in 
the States to come all the way to Delhi and try to follow up the case. My 
suggestion is first of all they have to  implement, like what the Planning 
Commission has done on the NGO portal, an on -line system of filing 
applications. Secondly, you may have to probably decentralise this grants 
scheme to the States. Keeping it in the Centre is not an ideal method of giving 
grants to these NGOs in the States. Only the interested NGOs and those who 
have connections are able to come and process it. So, very often when I sit 
on the Screening Committee, there are a lot of NGOs who are genuinely good 
NGOs, but their papers do not come to the Screening Committee. This is a 
big problem. The other thing is that the first grant is usually given by the 
Government of India to the NGO, but the second instalment never comes. 

30 
 
They say there is some problem here, there is some problem in the  utilisation 
certificate, etc. As a result, most NGOs do not receive the second instalment. 
So, if we look at the spending on the grants scheme, you will find whatever is 
allocated is never spent. So, one of our suggestions is, use our IT and NIC 
backbone to make it an on-line system of application.  Then, let the screening 
take place in the State Government and let the State Governments disburse 
the funds. This may be a much better system than putting everything in Delhi".  
4.21 When asked to specify how the process can be made more accessible, the 
Ministry informed that online submission and processing of the proposals for grants 
under the Scheme to the NGOs is being developed in collaboration with National 
Informatics Centre (NI C) for making the system more transparent and speedy 
release of grants to the NGOs. 
4.22 Regarding the need for transparency and streamlining the procedure and 
follow-up of the money sanctioned and the work done by the various NGOs, the 
Secretary informed the Committee :- 
"We are trying to have all this on the web, namely, all the NGOs lists, 
beneficiaries, etc., so that they can be tracked. In all the schemes we are 
trying to develop that portal. Once it is there, then I think that most of the 
issues would be resolved. Thereafter, if anybody wants, they can look into it 
or check it and let us know, and we can take follow -up action. So, we are 
trying to do it". 
4.23 When it was enquired about revision of the cost norms of the Central Sector 
Scheme of Integra ted Programme for Older Persons (IPOP), the Ministry informed 
that the the Scheme was last revised with effect from 01.04.2008. Besides increase 
in amount of financial assistance for existing projects, several innovative projects 
have been added as being e ligible for assistance under the Scheme.  Keeping in 
view the rising cost of living index, the cost norms of the scheme are being revised. 
4.24 Elaborating on the Regional Resource and Training Centre (RRTC), the 
Ministry informed that the RRTC is one of the innovative projects introduced in the 

31 
 
revised Scheme of Integrated Programme for Older Persons (IPOP).  The revised 
Scheme of IPOP came into effect with effect from 01.04.2008.   
 
 The broad activities expected to be carried out by these RRTCs include :- 
 
(i) Training of functionaries of other grantee organizations under IPOP 
and monitoring of their work. 
 
(ii) Advocacy and awareness generation. 
 
(iii) Liaisoning with concerned State Governments in the field of old age 
care, with specific reference to implementation of MWPSC Act, 2007, 
NPOP, 1999 and other programmes and interventions for senior 
citizens. 
 
(iv) Maintaining data -base of institutions working in the f ield of old age 
care. 
 
4.25 During 2012 -13, one NGO has been recommended by the Screening 
Committee designating it as RRTC for Eastern Region States. 
 
4.26 The Ministry also statedly wrote to the State Governments requesting them to 
explore the possibilities of designating one of the suitable State Training Institutes to 
function as RRTC in the State/UT under the Scheme. 
4.27 Upto December, 2013 , 4 Regional Resource and Training Centres (RRTCs) 
have been supported under the Scheme of IPOP.  Table 4.27 contains the list of the 
RRTCs along with the States they have been assigned to cover. 
Table 4.27  :  RRTC supported under IPOP 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the RRTC States assigned to them 
1. Anugraha, New Delhi Delhi, Haryana and 
Uttarakhand 
2. Nightingales Medical Trust, 
Bangalore, Karnataka 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh 
3. Integrated Rural Development and 
Educational Organization (IRDEO) 
Thoubal, Manipur 
Manipur, Assam, Tripura and 
Mizoram 

32 
 
4. Calcutta Metropolitan Instt. of 
Gerontology, Kolkata 
 
- 
 
4.28 As furnished by t he Ministry, the  major findings and recommendations of the 
evaluation studies conducted by independent agencies for the scheme of IPOP 
during the XI Plan period contained in table 4.28. 
Table 4.28  :  Gist of recommendations for revamping IPOP 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Institutions 
Month and 
Year 
States covered Major Findings Recommendations 
1. Midstream 
Marketing 
Research Pvt. Ltd., 
New Delhi 
2.5.2008 Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Haryana 
● Criteria for 
selection of 
inmates 
were based 
on social 
isolation and 
poor 
economic 
status. 
 
● On an 
average, 25 
inmates 
were 
enrolled in 
OAHs and 
50 persons 
are enrolled 
in DCCs. 
 
●  Most of the 
Centres 
were 
functioning 
in rented 
building and 
rooms are 
not 
spacious. 
 
● Inmates have 
expressed 
satisfaction 
over the 
services 
provided. 
 
●  In most 
cases, 
inmates 
● Govt. should fund 
more OAHs. 
 
● Grant for 
construction of 
OAHs be 
provided. 
 
● There  should be 
separate rooms for 
male and female. 
● Need for timely 
release of grant. 
 
●  2 outdoor tours be   
arranged in a year. 
 
● MMUs should 
coordinate with 
District Health Care 
System to organize 
camps.  They 
should also have 
specialized doctors. 
 
● There should be 
separate budget for 
nutrition, medicines 
and material for 
vocational training. 
 
●  5 -10% increased of 
project cost to 
absorb cost inflation 
on building, 
foodstuff, health 
care facilities etc. 
2. International 
Longevity Centre, 
Pune 
10.1.2008 Maharashtra, 
Gujarat, Goa 
3. Anugraha, New 
Delhi 
6.8.2008 Odisha, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Punjab, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, 
Chhattisgarh 
4. Roda Mistry 
College of Social 
Work & Research 
Centre, Hyderabad 
March 2009 Andhra 
Pradesh, 
Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra 

33 
 
were staying 
in 
dormitories. 
 
● Beneficiaries 
have 
received 
consultancy 
and 
medicines. 
 
 
  

34 
 
V. Schemes/Programmes/Facilities of other Ministries for the welfare of 
senior citizens  
 
I. Scheme of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  – National Programme 
for Health Care of elderly  
5.1 The Committee were informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
that a t present health care infrastructure for elderly is almost non -existent in our 
country and consequently, elderly are sharing health care facilities along with 
general public which is causing extreme hardship.  Un der such circumstances, it 
becomes the responsibility of the state to make suitable health care arrangement for 
the ailing elderly.  It is high time to gear up for the health care requirements of the 
elderly to meet the future challenge of rapidly increasing ageing society. 
 
5.2 The normal physiological aging process results in decrease in body stamina 
as well as decline in body immunity.  This makes elderly physically weak and more 
prone to diseases and disabilities.  Around 8% elderly are bed ridden as pe r NSSO 
(2004) study.  By virtue of decline in physical ability and increasing susceptibility to 
diseases, elderly need dedicated health care facilities.  Apart from this, with 
degradation in social and family values, the elderly are left alone to manage th eir 
own health problems. 
5.3 The basic aim of the National Programme for the Health Care of the Elderly 
(NPHCE) programme is to provide separate and specialized comprehensive health 
care to the senior citizens at various level of st ate health care delivery  system 
including outreach services. Preventive and promotive care, management of illness, 
health manpower development for geriatric services, medical rehabilitation and 
therapeutic intervention and IEC are some of the strategies envisaged in the 
NPHCE. 

35 
 
5.4 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment informed the Committee that 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have issued orders for providing  (i) 
separate queues for older persons in government hospitals and (ii) geriatric clinic in 
several gover nment hospitals. The Ministry also taken a new initiative called the 
National Programme for the Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE) in the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan.  
 
5.5 Further, under the National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly 
(NPHCE) launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare during 2010 -11 in 
100 selected districts of 21 States, separate and specialized comprehensive health 
care is provided to the senior citizens at various level of state health care delivery 
system, including the P rimary Health Centres. Preventive and promotive care, 
management of illness, health manpower development for geriatric services, medical 
rehabilitation and therapeutic intervention and IEC are some of the strategies 
envisaged in the NPHCE. 
5.6 Giving detai ls of the programme, the Ministry informed that the programme 
was approved with an outlay of Rs. 288 crore for the remaining period of the 11 th 
Plan.  The expenditure was shared by the Central and the State Governments on 
80:20 basis.  Out of the total out lay of the project, the Central share was around Rs. 
240.00 crore.  Out of this, total amount of Rs. 112.86 crore was released to the 
States/8 Regional Geriatric Centres during the period and an amount of Rs. 68.55 
crore was released during the year 2012-13. 
 
5.7 The Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee  of the 
following developments in the programme :- 

36 
 
(i) Eight Regional Geriatric Centres and 100 districts have been covered 
under the programme so far. 
 
(ii) Implementation of the programme is in progress in identified RCGs and 
100 districts of 21 States with varied progress.   
 
 
5.8 Elaborating on the district and sub district level activities, the Ministry 
submitted:- 
 
(i) 100 districts covered so far in 21 States. 
(ii) Geriatric daily clinic established in 65 district hospitals (DH) and 
Geriatric wards established in 53 DH. 
(iii) Physiotherapy units started in 33 district hospitals. 
(iv) Partial staff enrolled in 17 DH while 35 have procured appliances, 
drugs and equipment. 
(v) 120834 cases provided OPD services and 16346 cases admitted in the 
Geriatric wards. 
(vi) 18745 cases provided rehabilitation/physiotherapy services in district 
hospitals. 
(vii) Physiotherapy unit established in 37 CHCS and 3573 cases provided 
services. 
(viii) Weekly clinics sta rted in 380 PHCs, 24959 cases provided OPD 
services and 1103 home based care. 
 
5.9 Geriatric OPDs have been opened in all 8 Regional Geriatric Centres viz: (1) 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; (2) Madras Medical College, 
Chennai; (3) Gra nts Medical College & JJ Hospital, Mumbai; (4) Sher -I Kashmir 
Institute of Medical Sciences (SKIMS), J&K; (5) Government Medical College, 
Thiruvananthapuram; (6) Guwahati Medical College, Assam; (7) Dr. S.N. Medical 
College, Jodhpur, Rajasthan; and (8) Ban aras Hindu University, U.P.  Indoor 
services have been established in 6 Regional Geriatric Centres viz: All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; Madras Medical College, Chennai; Grants Medical 
College & JJ Hospital, Mumbai; Sher -I Kashmir Instit ute of Medical Sciences 
(SKIMS), J&K; Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram; Dr. S.N. Medical 
College, Jodhpur, Rajasthan. 

37 
 
5.10 A total amount of Rs. 1710.13 crore has been approved for XII Five Year 
Plan.  Out of this, an amount of Rs. 1147.56 crore is earmarked for activities 
proposed to be undertaken upto district  level.  The fund sharing ratio  between the 
Centre and the State is 75:25 during the 12 th FYP.  An amount of Rs. 562.57 crore 
has been earmarked for tertiary level activities.  In addition to the existing activities, it 
is proposed to establish National Institute of Ageing (NIA) at AIIMS, New Delhi and 
Madras Medical College, Chennai during XI I Five Year Plan.  The main functions of 
the NIA are health care delivery, training of health professionals and research 
activity.  The NIA will have 200 bedded inpatient services, in addition to daily 
outpatient services.  Training of health professionals  include Post Graduate 
programme in Geriatrics, short term and medium term courses in Geriatrics for 
doctors/nurses, distance learning courses in Geriatrics for doctors/nurses and 
paramedical personnel, courses for self help for the elderly. 
5.11 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have inaugurated the following new 
initiatives proposed during 12th Five Year Plan :- 
(i) Cover the new 225 districts under the programme during the 12 th Five 
Year Plan in a phased manner. 
(ii) Develop 12 additional Regiona l Geriatric Centres in selected Medical 
Colleges of the country. 
(iii) Establish National Institute of Aging at AIIMS, New Delhi and Madras 
Medical College, Chennai (the proposal could not be considered during 
11th Plan). 
(iv) Coordination with old age hom es for providing medical and health care 
in the identified districts (100 units per year). 

38 
 
(v) IEC activities at National (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare) and 
State level. 
(vi) Monitoring and evaluation. 
5.12 When it was pointed out that dementia rema ins a major problem for old 
people, the Ministry conceded that dementia has been identified as one of the major 
problems of the old age people.  The NPHCE provide exclusive health care to the 
elderly population in the country who suffer from various illnes ses including 
dementia. General facilities for elderly diagnosis and management of Dementia exist 
in Government hospitals.  Specialized treatment for Dementia is available in 
Institutions such as All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; Post Gra duate 
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and National Institute of 
Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore.  Further, the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare is implementing National Mental Health Programme for management 
of ment al disorders which include treatment for behavioural and psychological 
symptoms of dementia in 123 districts. 
5.13 When it was enquired whether a specific health insurance scheme funded 
through Central funds can be started for the senior citizens, the Mini stry replied that 
no such proposal was under consideration by the Government. 
5.14 With respect to the insurance scheme, the Ministry informed that IRDA  vide 
letter dated 25.5.2009 issued instructions on health insurance for senior citizens to 
CEOs of all General Health Insurance Companies which inter-alia includes: 
 
 Allowing entry into health insurance scheme till 65 years of age. 
 Transparency in the premium charged. 
 Reasons to be recorded for denial of any proposals , etc. on all health 
insurance products catering to the needs of senior citizens. Likewise the 
insurance companies cannot deny renewability without specific reasons.  
 

39 
 
5.15 The representative of Help Age India, New Delhi made the following 
deposition with respect of the problems of the older people, particularly people above 
80+ years :- 
"As you grow older, your needs increase more because your healthcare 
needs increase.  As you grow older and go above 80 years, your requirement 
for healthcare is tremendously high than when you are 60 years.  At 60 years, 
you can still walk and survive but at 80 years, you are on a bad wicket.  So, 
we have asked in the new policy that the oldest of the old – the people above 
80 years – should be given special recognition and some means are provided 
for that kind of programme". 
 
5.16 The witness also emphasised the need for universalization of RSBY as many 
older people were not getting efficient health care.  The representative further 
testified :- 
"Only two years ago, the Government launched a programme called National 
Programme for the Healthcare of Elderly under the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare which said that there would be geriatric healthcare units in 100 
poorest districts of the country.  Even today, only abo ut 35 districts have 
implemented some schemes under this particular programme.  We also feel 
that the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) should be universalised 
because many older people are not getting sufficient health insurance.  
Chairman, Sir, you wi ll agree that as you grow older, you require more and 
more healthcare.  But when you go to the Ministry or to the primary healthcare 
centre, you do not get any special treatment.  The old people are made to 
stand in queues.  There are no separate queues and people have to go to 101 
locations even in the premium centre like All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences.  They have to wait for long hours to get the treatment.  So, we think 
that the RSBY should be universalised.  We also feel that healthcare should 
be given not only in100 districts but geriatric healthcare should become a 
reality in all the 622 districts of the country". 
  

40 
 
VI. Pension Scheme of Ministry of Rural Development 
6.1 The Ministry of Rural Development is implementing the Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) under which Central assistance is given 
towards pension @ Rs. 200/- per month to persons above 60 years and @ Rs. 500/ - 
per month to persons above 80 years belonging to a household below poverty li ne, 
which is meant to be supplemented by at least an equal contribution by the States. 
During 2012-13,  227 lakh beneficiaries were covered under the Scheme. 
6.2 Giving details on the various schemes, the Ministry have informed that the 
Ministry of Rural Development is administering the National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP) which is being implemented as a Scheme under Additional 
Central Assistance (ACA). Under the Scheme pension is given to (i) old aged 
persons, (ii) widows and (iii) disabled persons.  The funds for the operation of these 
schemes are released to the States by the Ministry of Finance and to the Union 
Territories by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The ACA to be provided to the 
States/UTs for the NSAP is decided by the  Planning Commission, while the State -
wise allocation of ACA is made by the Ministry of Rural Development and Planning 
Commission. The States/UTs have been given the requisite flexibility to implement 
the schemes under NSAP. The States have been urged to m ake at least a matching 
contribution to the ACA released to them.  
 
6.3 The details of the number of beneficiaries covered during 2012-13 as reported 
by the States/UTs are at Annexure-II.  The details of Central funds allocated under 
NSAP during the last five years are at Annexure - III. 
6.4 In the year 2002 -03, NSAP was transferred to the State-plan.  Funds are 
released as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Ministry of Finance/Home 
Affairs to States/UTs in a combined allocation for all the schemes under NSAP.  

41 
 
States/UTs have been given requisite flexibility in the implementation of the 
schemes.   
 
6.5 The Ministry also apprised the Committee about the monitoring procedure   of 
the scheme as follows :- 
(i) The States/UTs have to designate a Nodal Secretary at the State level 
to report the  progress of implementation by coordinating with different 
departments concerned with the implementation of the schemes. 
(ii) The progress of implementation of the schemes of NSAP is to be 
reported through quarterly reports in a given monitoring format by the 
15th of month of the following quarter. 
(iii) Annual verification and social audit by the States/UTs have been 
introduced unde r NSAP.  All the States are to complete the Annual 
verification by 30 th June and the social audit by 30 th September, each 
year. 
(iv) A checklist for the schemes under NSAP is provided to the National 
Level Monitors (NLMs) during their field visits.  Each N LM is advised to 
visit the district, block and village level offices and meet the 
Government functionaries, public representatives and the beneficiaries 
to get feedback on the implementation of the schemes under NSAP. 
(v) The performance of the schemes of NSAP is reviewed in the quarterly 
Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings. 
(vi) The NSAP is included in the schemes to be reviewed by the Vigilance 
and Monitoring Committee (V&MC) constituted at the District level, 
along with other Rural Development Schemes.  MPs represented in the 

42 
 
V&MC in the District.  States have been asked to hold quarterly 
monitoring meeting at State as well as District level. 
6.6 A representatives of Help Age India, New Delhi, a leading NGO working in the 
field, highlighting the problem of pension at ground level deposed : 
"There is also an issue relating to elderly and pensions in rural areas.  We 
have a pension scheme which is the Indira Gandhi Old Age Pension Scheme.  
The Government gives Rs.200 per month, which again is a very low amount.  
We have been arguing that this pension scheme has fraught with a lot of 
problems and we need to have a universal pension for older people who  are 
not tax-payers.  Rest of them deserve an older pension and that needs to be 
looked into.  There are a lot of problems relating to BPL card issue, relating to 
identification of older people and the definition of destitution is very -very 
flawed.  Who is poor, who is destitute, all these issues become a problem.  
The second area is the problem relating to women and widows.  Current 
population of elderly is about 100 million and there are close to 22 million 
widows.  Old age pension does not reach many of the widows; whether it is 
the widow in Vrindavan, Mathura or in Haridwar.  It does not reach even the 
widows in other locations.  There is a huge problem in implementation of the 
widow pension". 
 
 Asked to state the amount of pension which should be given to senior citizens 
with no other income, the representative  of HelpAge India stated that it should be 
atleast 1000/- per month. 
 
6.7 When it was enquired about the pension provided to Government employees 
according to 6th Pay Commission, the Ministry informed that t he Department has set 
up a Pension Portal to enable senior citizens to get information regarding the status 
of their application, the amount of pension, documents required, if any, etc. The 
Portal also provides for lodging of grievances. As per recommendation of the Sixth 
Pay Commission, additional pension will be provided as per details given in table 6.7 
to older persons. 
 
 

43 
 
Table 6.7  :  Additional pension to different age group 
 
Age Group % pension to be added 
80+ 20 
85+ 30 
90+ 40 
95+ 50 
100+ 100 
 
  

44 
 
VII. Facilities provided by the Ministries of Railways , Civil Aviation, Road 
Transport and Highways and Finance 
7.1 The Ministry of Railways provides the following facilities to senior citizens : 
 Separate ticket counters for senior citizens at various (Passenger 
Reservation System) PRS centres;  
 Provision of lower berth to male passengers of 60 years and above and 
female passengers of 45 years and above. 
 40% and 50% concession in rail fare for male  passengers aged 60 years 
and above and female passengers aged 58 years and above respectively.  
 Wheel chairs at stations for old age passengers. 
 
 
7.2 The National Carrier, Air India, under the Ministry of Civil Aviation  offers 50% 
discount on the Highest Economy class Basic fare to senior citizens who have 
completed 63 years of age on the date of commencement of journey for travel on 
Domestic Network.  
7.3 During evidence, it was pointed out that all schemes for senior ci tizens should 
be for 60+ population.  In response, the Secretary replied :- 
"We have already taken up the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. It is 
not only for this. What we said is that the concession that you are giving, 
which is fifty per cent,  is on the published fare, whereas your fares are much 
lower. So, if you really want to give benefits, you should give it on the fare 
which exists". 
7.4 The Committee were  informed that t he Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways has taken initiatives for providing reservation of two seats for senior 
citizens in front row of the buses of the State Road Transport Undertakings. Some 
State Governments are giving fare concession to senior citizens in the State Road 
Transport Undertaking buses and are introducin g Bus Models, which are convenient 
to the elderly.  
7.5 The Ministry of Finance provides the following facilities for senior citizens: 
 
 Income tax exemption for Senior Citizens of 60 years and above up to Rs. 
2.50 lakh per annum.  

45 
 
 Income tax exemption for Senior Citizens of 80 years and above up to Rs. 
5.0 lakh per annum.  
 Deduction of Rs 20,000 allowed to an individual who pays medical 
insurance premium for his/ her parent or parents, who is a senior citizen 
and deduction of the amount spent or Rs 60,000, whichever is less for 
medical treatment of a dependent senior citizen.  
 
  

46 
 
VIII. Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 
8.1 The Ministry have informed that the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 (MWPSCs) was enacted in December, 2007 to ensure 
need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and their welfare.  The 
salient features of the Act include: 
(i) Maintenance of Parents/senior citizens by children/relatives made 
obligatory and justiciable through Tribunals. 
(ii) Revocation of transfer of property by senior citizens in case of 
negligence by relatives. 
(iii) Penal provision for abandonment of senior citizens. 
(iv) Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens. 
(v) Adequate medical facilities and security for Senior Citizens. 
8.2 The Act has to be brought into force by individual State Governments.  The 
Act is not appl icable to the State of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh as it 
has its own Act for Senior Citizens.  By now, all the States and UTs (except Jammu 
& Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh) have brought the Act into force. 
8.3 The progress of implementation of the Act by States/UTs is summarised in 
table 8.3. 
Table 8.3  :  Status of implementation of MWPSCs Act (As on 31.3.2013) 
Sl. 
No. 
Steps in Implementation of 
the Act 
No. of States/UTs which 
have taken the steps 
No. of  States which 
are yet to take these 
steps 
1. Notification of appointed 
date to bring Act into force 
26 States and 7 UTs Nil 
2. Taken all consequential 
steps under the Act 
15 States and 6 UTs 11 States and 1 UTs 
(i) Rules framed under Act 19 States and 6 UTs 7 States and 1 UTs 
(ii) Appointment  of 
Maintenance Officers 
19 States and 6 UTs 7 States and 1 UTs 
(iii) Constitution of 19 States and 6 UTs 7 States and 1 UTs 

47 
 
Maintenance Tribunals 
(iv) Constitution of 
Appellate Tribunals 
20 States and 6 UTs 6 States and 1 UTs 
 
8.4 The Committee were informed that the States which have yet to take all 
consequential steps for its implementation are being regularly pursued.  As per 
available information, furnished by the Ministry, 15 States and 6 UTs ha d completed 
all the above mentioned consequential steps under the Act. 
8.5 Table 8.5 contains t he details of State -wise and UT -wise progre ss of 
implementation of the Act. 
Table 8.5  :  Progress Report of Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 (December, 2012) 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
 
Name of 
State/UT 
 
 
 
 
Date of 
Notification 
of Act 
Appointed 
date of 
enforcement 
of Act in 
State/UT    
Date of 
Notification 
of Rules 
Date of 
Notification 
of  
Maintenance 
Officer 
Date of 
Notification 
of  
Maintenance 
Tribunal 
Date of 
Notification 
of  
Appellate 
Tribunal 
1 Andhra Pradesh 22.04.2008 28.4.2008 28.12.2011 - 19.8.2008 19.8.2008 
2 Bihar 28.9.2011 19.10.2011 7.9.2012 9.11.2011 9.11.2011 9.11.2011 
3 Chhattisgarh 26.9.2008 26.9.2008 7.5.2010 24.1.2009 24.1.2009 24.1.2009 
4 Goa 23.9.2008 1.10.2008 1.10.2009 24.9.2009 24.9.2009 24.9.2009 
5 Gujarat 7.10.2008 7.10.2008 19.5.2009 19.5.2009 19.5.2009 19.5.2009 
6 Haryana 22.10.2008 22.10.2008 19.6.2009 28.8.2009 23.11.2010 23.11.2010 
7 
Himachal 
Pradesh The State has its own Act 
8 J & K Act not applicable 
9 Jharkhand 12.4.2008 1.4.2008 - 14.2.2009 14.2.2009 14.2.2009 
10 Karnataka 27.3.2008 1.4.2008 19.11.2009 13.9.2010 19.2.2009 19.2.2009 
11 Kerala 24.9.2008 24.9.2008 28.8.2009 17.8.2009 17.8.2009 17.8.2009 
12 Madhya Pradesh 23.8.2008 23.8.2008 2.7.2009 2.7.2009 2.7.2009 2.7.2009 
13 Maharashtra 27.2.2009 1.3.2009 23.6.2010 - - - 
14 Odisha 20.9.2008 1.10.2008 24.9.2009 1.10.2009 1.10.2009 1.10.2009 
15 Punjab 15.7.2008 15.7.2008 17.10.2012 27.8.2008 27.8.2008 27.8.2008 
16 Rajasthan 31.7.2008 1.8.2008 18.6.2010 19.9.2008 19.9.2008 19.9.2008 
17 Tamilnadu 29.9.2008 29.9.2008 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 
18 Uttar Pradesh 25.9.2012 - - - - - 
19 Uttarakhand 11.11.2008 1.11.2008 19.12.2011 - 7.8.2012 7.8.2012 
20 West Bengal 5.12.2008 5.12.2008 12.1.2009 20.1.2009 20.1.2009 20.1.2009 
North-eastern  States 
     
 
21 Meghalaya     22.6.2012 22.6.2012 - 25.9.2012 - - 
22 Sikkim 3.5.2012 1.2.2012 - 27.6.2012 18.12.2011 18.12.2011 
23 Tripura 14.8.2008 15.8.2008 22.8.2008 15.12.2008 15.8.2008 15.8.2008 
24 Assam  4.10.2008 4.10.2008 27.9.2012 2.8.2008 2.8.2008 2.8.2008 

48 
 
25 Manipur 29.10.2008 30.10.2009 2.12.2011 6.7.2012 - - 
26 Mizoram 29.12.2008 1.1.2009 - - - - 
27 Nagaland 22.4.2008 22.4.2008 - - - - 
28 
Arunachal 
Pradesh     8.8.2008 6.8.2008 - - - 
19.6.2012 
Union Territories 
     
 
29 A&N Islands 21.5.2008 21.5.2008 29.2.2012 4.3.2010 4.3.2010 4.3.2010 
30 Chandigarh 21.10.2008 22.10.2008 12.8.2009 17.4.2012 22.12.2008 22.12.2008 
31 D&N Haveli 17.9.2008 17.9.2008 6.5.2010 7.4.2010 7.4.2010 7.4.2010 
32 Daman & Diu 17.9.2008 17.9.2008 4.5.2010 7.4.2010 7.4.2010 7.4.2010 
33 Delhi 8.9.2008 1.9.2008 30.6.2009 1.10.2009 1.10.2009 11.2.2011 
34 Lakshadweep 25.10.2008 22.9.2008 - - - - 
35 Puducherry 31.10.2008 1.11.2008 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 
 
8.6 The Ministry highlighted the following are the main provisions of the Act  as 
follows : 
1. A senior citizen, including parent, who is unable to maintain himself from his own 
earning or out of the property owned by him , is entitled to  make an application for 
maintenance allowance by his/her children/ relative [Section 4(1)]. 
 
2. If a senior citizen or a parent is incapable, he can authorize any other 
person or organization for filing an application for maintenance on his behalf 
[Section 5(1) (b)]. 
 
3. Application filed for monthly allowance shall be disposed of by the Tribunal 
within 90 days [Section 5(4)]. 
 
4. Proceedings of maintenance application shall be taken in any district (a) 
where the senior citizen or parent resides/ last resided  or where the children 
or relative resides [Section 6(1)]. 
 
5. Maintenance allowance  up to Rs. 10,000/ - per month  can be awarded 
[Section 9(2)]. 
 
6. Maintenance allowance shall be  deposited by children/ relative within 30 
days from the date of announcing the order by the Tribunal [Section 13]. 
 
7. Any senior citizen or a parent, aggrieved by an order of a Tribunal can prefer 
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within 60 days from the date of the order 
of the Tribunal [Section 16(1)]. 
 
(i) Bar of legal practitioner before the Tribunals 
 
No party to a proceeding before a Maintenance and Appellate Tribunals 
shall be represented by a legal practitioner [Section 17].  

49 
 
 
(ii) Establishment of Old Age Homes 
 
The Act envisages that State Governments shall: 
 
1. Establish and maintain old age homes  at accessible places, in a 
phased manner, beginning with at least one in each district for a 
minimum of 150 indigent senior citizens [Section 19(1)]. 
 
2. Prescribe a scheme for management of such old age homes including 
standards and various types of service s to be provided by them 
[Section 19 (2)]. 
 
(iii) Medical Care  
 
The Act envisages that State Governments shall provide: 
 
1. Beds for all senior citizens as far as possible in Government 
hospitals or hospitals fully or partially funded by the Government  
[Section 20(i)]. 
  
2. Separate queues for senior citizens [Section 20(ii)]. 
 
3. Facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital  headed by a 
medical officer having experience in geriatric care [Section 20(v)].  
 
 
(iv) Protection of Life and Property 
 
The Act envisages that: 
 
1. State Governments shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan  for 
providing protection of life and property of senior citizens [Section 
22(2)].  
 
2. Revocation of transfer of property  by senior citizens in case of 
negligence by relatives [Section 23(1)]. 
 
3. Penal provision or punishment with 3 months imprisonment or fine up 
to Rs. 5000/ - or with both  in case of abandonment of senior citizens 
[Section 24]. 
 
 
8.7 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment informed the Committee that 
it has been making all efforts by persuading the States/ UTs from time to time to 
effectively implement the Act in letter and spirit so that the senior citizens are 

50 
 
benefited in their respective States/ UTs. As a result of the vigorous follow up by the 
Ministry, States/UTs have initiated necessary action in this regard.  
8.8 The Ministry also informed that Chapter V of the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens act, 2007 provides for protection of life and property of 
senior citizens.  State Go vernments are required to prescribe a comprehensive 
action plan for providing protection of life and property of senior citizens. 
 
8.9 When the Committee enquired how many States had devised comprehensive 
action plan in this regard, the Ministry informed that as per the available records, 6 
states, namely Goa, Tripura, Haryana, Mizoram, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu 
and 4 UTs namely, Chandigarh, Delhi, Puducherry and Daman & Diu have devised a 
comprehensive action plan for providing protection of life and property of senior 
citizens.  The Ministry has advised the State Governments to prepare action plan 
under the Act.  
8.10 On the role of District Administration, the Ministry informed that according to 
Section 7 of the Act, the State Governments constitute one or more Maintenance 
Tribunals for each sub -division for the purpose of adjudicating and deciding upon 
applications received with res pect to claim of maintenance allowances. These 
Maintenance Tribunals are presided over by an officer not below the rank of Sub -
Divisional Officer of a State.  
8.11 Further, according to Section 15 of the Act, the State Governments constitute 
one Appellate Tribunal for each district to hear the appeal against the order of the 
Maintenance Tribunal. These Appellate Tribunals are presided over by an officer not 
below the rank of District Magistrate.  As per Section 21 (ii) of the Act, the State 
Government shall , take all measures to ensure that “the Central Government and 
State Government Officers, including the police officers and the members of the 

51 
 
judicial service, are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the issues 
relating to this Act”.  
  

52 
 
IX. Programmes for Senior Citizens in other countries of the world 
 
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have furnished the following 
information on the  best practices for the welfare of senior citizens/elderly in other 
countries:- 
 
Sweden 
 
9.1 Elderly people represent a growing share of the Swedish population. Many 
are in good health and lead active lives, and most live in their own homes. Sweden 
invests more of its gross domestic product in its elderly than any other country in the 
world. As a  proportion of GDP, Sweden’s allocation to elderly care is almost five 
times the EU average.  Health and social care for the elderly are important parts of 
Swedish welfare policy.  
 
9.2 Most elderly care is funded by municipal taxes and government grants. In 
2010, the total cost of elderly care in Sweden was SEK 95.9 billion, (USD 14.0 
billion, EUR 10.7 billion) but only 3 percent of the cost was financed by patient 
charges. Health care costs paid by the elderly themselves are subsidized and based 
on specified rate schedules. 
 
9.3 More municipalities are choosing to privatize parts of their elderly care, letting 
private care providers run their operations. In 2011, private care provided services 
for 18.6 percent of all elderly people getting home help. All r ecipients can choose 
whether they want their home help or special housing to be provided by public or 
private operators. The municipality always has overall responsibility, however, for 
areas such as funding and allocating home help or a place in a special  housing 
facility. 
 

53 
 
9.4 One of the aims of aged care is to help elderly people and those with 
disabilities live normal, independent lives. This includes living in their own homes as 
long as possible.  Elderly people who continue to live at home can obtain v arious 
kinds of support to make life easier. For example, almost all municipalities in Sweden 
offer ready-cooked meals that can be home-delivered.  When an elderly person is no 
longer able to cope with the demands of everyday life, he or she can apply for 
assistance from municipally funded home -help services. The extent of such care is 
subject to an assessment of need. Elderly people with disabilities can receive 
assistance around the clock, which means that many are able to remain at home 
throughout their lives. The severely ill, too, can be provided with health and social 
care in their own homes. 
 
9.5 The elderly and disabled also qualify for transportation services in taxis or 
specially adapted vehicles. This option is available to those who are unable to  travel 
by regular public transport. In 2010, there were 11 million such journeys completed 
across the country, a national average of 34 per eligible person. 
 
 
9.6 All Swedish citizens are entitled to a pension after they retire. People can 
choose to start receiving their pension between the ages of 61 and 67. 
 
9.7 Several new forms of effective preventive health care for the elderly have 
been introduced in recent years, and are attracting increasing levels of interest which 
include stimulation through music, films, reading, painting and other cultural activities 
also plays a role in well -being. This is increasingly recognized in elderly care homes 
where many people engage in at least one such activity every day. 
 
 

54 
 
Norway 
 
9.8 The National Council for Senior Citizens is a Norwegian government -
appointed body which advises on policies for senior citizens at the national level. It 
gives advice to the country’s public authorities and institutions and also provides 
guidance to the public and to private and public bodies. 
 
9.9 In Norway care provision is to a large extent publicly subsidized and provided 
by public organizations. Therefore, user fees are significantly lower as the service as 
such are more generously subsidized by the states.   The health service is divided 
into a primary and a specialist health service. The state finances and is responsible 
for the specialist health care, which includes, among other services, hospitals. The 
funding of the primary health services  is divided between the state, municipalities 
and patients. The primary health services are organized as private practices but are 
regulated by municipalities and the National Insurance legal framework. Eighty -five 
percent of the total expenditures on heal th services are public, which is considerably 
higher than the EU average. Most of the hospitals and other kinds of institutions, like 
medical care institutions for the elderly, are owned and managed by public 
authorities bound to the legal framework of public services. 
 
9.10 In the last decade, the aspiration of health care policy in Norway has been to 
include all groups in a general service model. This means we do not find special 
services reserved for the elderly due to the ideal of equal treatment of all  patient 
groups. Health policy has, in the last years, focused on efficiency, quality of services 
and a strengthening of patients’ rights. The Patients Right Act, the Psychiatrist Care 
Act and the Specialised Health Care Act, all implemented on 1 Jan. 2001 , highlight 

55 
 
the value of placing patients first. This was also reiterated through the passage of the 
Primary Care Act of 2001, which provided for a family doctor for all citizens.  
 
Finland 
 
 
9.11 Local authorities provide various home services for the elderly, from meals on 
wheels to cleaning. Medical treatment can also be arranged at home. In some 
municipalities, customers can acquire the services wherever they want by using 
service vouchers.Informal care support is targeted towards families in which a  family 
member is caring for an aged spouse or parent, for example. Decisions on granting 
informal care support are made by local authorities.   Dedicated rehabilitation 
services are available for disabled veterans and their spouses. 
 
9.12 Social welfare for older p eople is made up of social and health services, and 
income security.  The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (MSAH) is responsible for 
the running of services for older people. It determines the course of service 
development, draws up legislation and ov ersees the implementation of reforms. The 
ministry also monitors service standards through the National Supervisory Authority 
for Welfare and Health and the Regional State Administrative Agencies.  
Municipalities are responsible for arranging the social and  health services that older 
people require. Information for older people is available through the comprehensive 
information portal on citizens' services.  The qualities of the elderly care in Finland is 
advancing now. There are 452 municipalities in the co untry . Every municipality has 
accountability of care for the elderly, including health , institutional care and home 
care. The Minister of Health and W elfare in Finland makes recommendations about 
care for the elderly. The recommendation proposes old age policy to be formulated 
in every municipality, respecting older people's dignity and autonomy.  

56 
 
9.13 There is 24-hours home care work. Day service (8 -16),evening service(13--
21),night services/night patrol(21-7) . 11.2% of the elderly people 65 years and over, 
26.2% of the elderly people 75 years and over used the home care service in 1998. 
When home care starts, home nurse and home helper visit together  at user's house. 
Listen to their demands, assess the user's needs, make a service plan with users 
and families.  Home nurses belong  to health sector and they visit the users house 
from the health center. Home helper s belong  to social welfare and they visi t the 
users' house from helper station. But home nurse and home helper collaborate in the 
community.  Support services are supplied for the user. Meals on wheels, cleaning 
house, escort for a shoppin g, technical aids such as wheel  chairs, sliding board, 
alarms.  
 
 9.14 SAS, Special group consisting of 2  General Practitioners, 1Nurse, 3 Social 
workers meet once a week. The group discusses where is the best place for the 
user, nursing home, ol d people's house, service house , own house in the 
community.   
 
9.15 The committee were apprised that Sri Lanka has also initiated steps for 
universalization of pension for the aged who are otherwise not claiming Government 
pension. 
  

57 
 
PART - B 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Progressive implementation of UN Principles and Directive Principles of 
State Policy .  The Committee note that the International community was 
sensitized to the needs of the senior citizens in first ever World Assembly on 
Ageing in Vienna in 1982 which was followed by adoption of fi ve principles for 
older persons by the United Nations on 16 th December, 1991 viz. 
independence, participation, care, self -fulfilment and dignity as safeguards for 
the senior citizens.  Notably, these laudable principles were enshrined in 
Article 41 of Cons titution of India as Directive Principles of State Policy much 
before these were adopted by the UN. The Committee, however, recommend 
the Government to strive persistently to invoke these basic principles with 
unflinching determination and resolve for the welfare of the older persons.  
Though India traditionally enjoyed robust joint family system taking full care of 
elderly persons, however, the Committee note with deep concern that with the 
fast changing socio - economic conditions, disintegration of joint family 
system and emergence of nuclear families, the old people are getting 
increasingly neglected adversely affecting their care and dignity.  It is, 
therefore, important that Government and the community play a proactive role 
in taking care of the elderl y.  The Committee ardently hope that with the 
positive programmatic and policy intervention  by the Government for the 
welfare of senior citizens and the progressive implementation of the laudable 
goals set for the old people in the UN resolution and in ou r own Directive 
Principles of State Policy would enable the senior citizens to lead a life of 

58 
 
dignity and self -fulfillment.  The Committee also recommend that the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, in consultation with the Ministries of 
Commerce a nd External Affairs, apprise the Committee about the status of 
ratification of the said UN resolution by India in due course.   
2. Formulation of integrated action plan after due consultation with 
stakeholders.  The Committee note that the population of senior citizens as a 
percentage of total population stood at 7.5% as per the 2001 census. The 
population is likely to increase to 12.4% in 2026 as per the report of the 
Technical Group on Population Projections constituted by the National 
Commission on Population.  Further, as per the United Nations Projections on 
old age population in India, the overall population in India by the year 2050 will 
grow by 55% but more alarmingly, the population of people in their 6 0 years 
and above will increase by 326% and those in the age group of 80+ by 700%  
which is the fastest growing group.  The Committee are, however, dismayed to 
note that the issue of rapid population ageing in the country has not received 
due attention of the Government and the community at large.  The Committee 
feel that to meet squarely the daunting task of providing adequate social 
security, healthcare and other welfare measures to senior citizens, there is an 
imperative need for integrated plan of actio n involving various Departments 
and stakeholders.  Since the community has a big role in ensuring the well 
being of senior citizens, they should be actively involved and their views taken 
on board while formulating such a plan.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to put in place a robust integrated action plan 
expeditiously with due consultation with all the stakeholders and the elders 

59 
 
and earnestly implement the same with in a definite time frame to fulfil the 
Nation's commitment to address the serious problems of senior citizens.   
 
3. Formation of inter -ministerial expert group for 80+ group .  The 
Committee are deeply concerned to note that there are no specific 
programmes/schemes to address the particular needs and challenges of 80+ 
age group which is projected to increase manifolds (700%) in the next 20 -30 
years.  This age group is most vul nerable and runs the risk of  getting 
dementia, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson disease, depression, etc. in their 
older years.     The Committee, therefore, recommend that an expert group of  
representatives of all concerned Departments be constituted to d evise 
specialized health care programme for the 80+ group.  
 
4. Early implementation of schemes for welfare of senior citizens during 
12th Plan.  The Committee were informed that the Ministry have set up an 
expert committee to formulate a few new schemes u nder the XII th Five Year 
Plan for the welfare of the senior citizens which include the scheme for 
awareness generation for Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
citizens Act 2007, setting up a helpline for senior citizens at the National and 
District Levels, setting up a National Commission for senior citizens, and 
setting up a National Trust for the Aged.  The Committee are anguished to note 
that the above schemes incorporated in the 12 th Five Year Plan have not taken 
off so far, though, almost two  precious years of the Plan period have elapsed.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry take urgent necessary action so 
that these schemes are operationalized at the earliest. 
 

60 
 
5. Harnessing of talent of senior citizens and their rehabilitation .  The 
Committee note that as per the census of India's projected value of 
expectation of life at birth (2011 -15), the life expectancy of males and females 
is 67.3 years and 69.6 years respectively.  The Committee also note that the 
National Policy for Senior Citi zens recognizes productive ageing as the key to 
the welfare of senior citizens between the age of 60 -70 years.  The Committee 
feel that with the increase in the life expectancy and relatively better state of 
health of people, the Government need to look at  continuity of employment 
upto 65 years/or greater post retirement opportunities for the senior citizens 
so that the society continue to draw upon their experience and tap their talent.  
The Committee would like the Ministry to seriously consider the vario us 
options which would include reviewing the age of retirement, reemployment 
opportunities for the retired persons subject to their physical fitness and 
mental agility and setting up a Directorate of Employment and Rehabilitation 
for Senior Citizens.   
6. Early formulation and implementation of new National Policy on Older 
Persons.  The Committee note that the National Policy on older persons was 
announced in January 1999.  Though the Policy had several features like State 
support to ensure financial and food security, health care, shelter and other 
needs of older persons to improv e the quality of their lives,  the 
implementation has been rather tardy and there is no coordination mechanism 
to effectively implement the policy.  In view  of the new demographic changes 
and to address the upfront areas viz. citizens of 80+, elderly women, rural poor 
and unorganized sectors, the Government, notably, set up a Committee under 
the chairmanship of Dr. (Smt.) V. Mohini Giri to draft a new National Policy on 

61 
 
senior citizens, which submitted its report on 30th March, 2011.  The Committee 
are deeply distressed that even after two years of submission of the new draft 
National Policy on Senior Citizens, the policy was yet to be finalized and 
implemented.  Taking serious note of the tardy implementation of the 1999 
policy and the inordinate delay in finalization of the new National policy on 
senior citizens, the Committee deplore the apathy and neglect on the part of 
the Government to address the problems of senior citizens. Though, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment assured the  
Committee that efforts were being made to finalise the policy by the end of the 
financial year 2013 -14, yet taking note of the unconscionable delay, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry take urgent action so as to ensure 
that the new National Policy on Senior Citizens is finalized and  implemented 
expeditiously without further loss of time and they be apprised.  
7. Periodic meetings of National Council for Senior Citizens and State level 
councils.  The Committee deprecate to note that the new National  Council for 
Senior Citizens constituted on 22.2.2012, under the Chairmanship of the 
Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment, has been largely dysfunctional 
as no meeting of the Council has been held, though required to meet twice in a 
year.  As the Na tional Council for Senior Citizens is an apex body on the 
policies and programmes for senior citizens, the Committee urge that the 
Council may be fully functionalized at the earliest alongwith constitution of 
State Level Councils for senior citizens in all  the States and the Committee 
apprised.    
8. Upfront areas for 80+ group in  National Policy on Older Persons .  The 
Committee note that the new draft policy sets out upfront areas needing very 

62 
 
special attention i.e. senior citizens in the age group of 80+,  elderly women, 
rural poor and the unorganized sector.  The Committee welcome the focus on 
these sections which are the most vulnerable and are facing increasing 
neglect and deprivation, poverty and abuse.  Undoubtedly, these sections are 
in dire need of s ocial security and special health care facilities.   The 
Committee, therefore, ardently urge the Ministry to formulate suitable schemes 
for the dignified care of these vulnerable sections with adequate funding and 
get them implemented expeditiously. 
9. Formation of Department of  Disability Affairs and Senior C itizens.  The 
Committee are pleased to note that for the effective implementation of the new 
policy, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment propose to expand the 
Department of Disability Affair s and rechristen it as 'Department of Disability 
Affairs and Senior Citizens'.  The Committee while welcoming the laudable 
move, would like the new Department to be adequately strengthened with 
professional human resource and material resources so as to me et the lofty 
objectives of the welfare of our senior citizens, the most neglected section of 
society, as per good International norms and standards. 
10. Utilization of funds allocated for welfare of senior citizens .  The 
Committee note that the Ministry of  Social Justice and Empowerment is 
implementing the Central Sector Scheme of Integrated Programme for Older 
Persons (IPOP) since 1992 with the objective of improving the quality of life of 
senior citizens by providing basic amenities like shelter, food, me dical care, 
basically through Government/Non-Government Organizations, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/local bodies, etc.  Important projects supported under the scheme 
are old age homes, Mobile Medicare Units and respite care homes and 

63 
 
continuous care homes.  The Committee are anguished at the low physical and 
financial performance of the scheme under IPOP for the last three years.  
Surprisingly, against a paltry budget allocation of Rs. 40 cr.,  only Rs. 20.67 cr. 
could be utilized during 2010 -11, the position was equally discouraging during 
the previous years.  The reasons enumerated for the trend include late receipt 
of proposals, incomplete documents, late response from the States/UTs in 
clarification of procedure, etc.  The Committee take serious note of 
underutilization of allocated funds as programmes/projects such as running of 
old age homes, day care centers and Mobile Medicare Units have grievously  
suffered.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry look into the reasons 
for non-utilization of funds,  bottlenecks in the implementation and streamline 
their procedure so that the funds earmarked for the welfare of older persons 
are well spent and the lapse of fund does not become a recurring theme.   
11. Persuasive implementation of IPOP by States .  The C ommittee are 
concerned to note the large disparity in release of grant -in-aid for old age 
homes under IPOP scheme in various States.  The Secretary, while testifying 
before the Committee, stated that there were about 296 old age homes in the 
country and concentrated in a few States.  It was pointed out that some States 
have been quite active while others have not taken the benefit of the scheme.  
The Committee desire that the Ministry should approach and persuade the 
States, lagging behind in taking benefit  of the scheme, to send complete and 
viable proposals so that funds can be released to them for running old age 
homes.   
12. Standardisation of norms and guidelines for old age homes . The 
Committee note that there is a felt need for more old age homes in the country.  

64 
 
The Committee feel that the Union Government need to address this issue so 
that old age homes are available in all districts of the country given the 
growing requirements.  The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
contained in the 36th Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment that liberal central assistance should be 
provided for the construction of old age homes in each district of the country.  
The Committee also desire that the plan  of old age homes needs to be 
standardised so that specific norms and guidelines are chalked out for design 
of the building and the manpower and expertise much needed for running old 
age homes. 
13. Programmes for senior citizens in rural areas .  The Committee note with 
deep concern the rising population of senior citizens residing in rural areas 
and the problems faced by them.  The deposition of the representatives of an 
NGO that the rural elderly are facing deprivation, discrimination and abuse 
only reinforces the worry of the Committee.  The Committee are distressed to 
note that no State, Panchayati Raj institution and local body had, reportedly, 
approached/sent their proposal seeking financial assistance/grant in aid under 
the scheme of Integrated Program me for Older Persons for running any 
scheme for the welfare of senior citizens.  The Committee desire the Ministry 
to sensitize the State Governments and local bodies so that programmes for 
welfare of senior citizens are implemented in rural areas through day care 
centres and other measures with the help of Panchayati Raj institutions and 
local bodies.  If necessary, the Ministry may consider to release funds for 
undertaking welfare programmes to these institutions under IPOP.  Needless 
to say, this would g o a long way in helping the senior citizens residing in rural 

65 
 
areas, thereby giving them access to healthcare, recreation, entertainment and 
peer interaction. 
14. Organization of health camps of MMUs in remote, inaccessible areas . 
The Committee are dismayed to observe that the number of Mobile Medicare 
Units (MMUs) assisted under the scheme have gone down from 38 units in 
year 2011-12 to 29 units in 2012 -13.  The Committee are of the firm view that 
MMUs are an important part of the IPOP scheme and, t herefore, stress that 
more MMUs should be assisted, especially in rural and inaccessible areas 
deprived of medical care as old people, who at times, confined to their homes 
and bedridden, are unable to travel.  MMUs should also regularly organize 
health ca mps in remote and distant areas so that more people can avail the 
benefits. 
15. Need for online portal for scrutiny of applications of NGO s.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that the procedure for release of Grant -in-aid 
under the scheme of IPOP is ver y long and cumbersome as submitted by the 
NGOs in their Memoranda to the Committee.  Statedly, quite often  the 
proposals are held up at the State level and it becomes difficult for the NGOs 
to submit the same to the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment.  
Taking note of the assurance of the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, that efforts are being made to design an online portal for 
receipt of applications and the examination of proposals by an independent 
agency, the Committee recommend that the online portal be opened and made 
operational expeditiously and the examination of proposals be made by an 
independent agency and the Committee apprised.  Also the details of the 
NGOs, the list of beneficiaries, grants given and detail s of the projects 

66 
 
undertaken should be uploaded on the website of the Ministry in order to bring 
greater transparency and accountability in the working of the scheme. 
16. Early revision of cost norms .  The Committee have also been informed 
that the cost norms of the Central Sector Scheme of Integrated Programme for 
Older People (IPOP) were last revised w.e.f. 01.04.2008.  Besides increase in 
amount of financial assistance for existing projects, several innovative 
projects were added as being eligible for as sistance under the scheme.  Since 
more than five years have passed when the scheme was last revised and 
keeping in view the inflation rate and the cost of living index, the Committee 
recommend that the cost norms of the scheme be revised with a sense of 
urgency.  The Ministry should urgently take action in the matter and inform the 
Committee in this regard. 
17. Setting up of RRTCs in each State. The Committee note that the 
Regional Resource and Training Cenres (RRTCs) is an innovative project 
introduced in the revised scheme of Integrated Programme for Older Persons 
(IPOP).  The Committee are unhappy to observe that only 4 RRTCs have been 
supported under the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that at 
least one RRTC should be designated in each stat e so as to maintain a data 
base of institutions working in the field of old age care, the number of old age 
persons who are destitute and need help, organise training programmes in 
gerontology and liaison with State Government Departments dealing with 
welfare of senior citizens whenever required. 
18. Extension of geriatric health care and other facilities in all the districts .  
The Committee note that the National Programme for the Health Care of the 

67 
 
Elderly (NPHCE) is an important programme which aims to p rovide separate 
and specialized healthcare to the senior citizens.  Due to the decline in the 
physical ability and increasing susceptibility to diseases, the elderly need 
dedicated healthcare facilities, especially the age group of 80+.  The 
Committee note that 100 districts in 21 States have so far been covered under 
the NPHCE programme and geriatric daily clinics have been established in 65 
district hospitals and geriatric wards established in 53 district hospitals.  Also 
8 Regional geriatric centres have been opened in regional centres in major 
hospitals throughout the country .  Further, the National Institute of Ageing 
(NIA) at AIIMS, New Delhi and Madras Medical College, Chennai is to be 
established during XII Five Year Plan  for which Rs. 1710.13 cr. have been 
approved during the Plan period.  A ppreciative of the Government resolve to 
improve the coverage of NPHCE, the Committee recommend that (i) geriatric 
healthcare should be extended in all the districts of the country, (ii) given the  
projection of manifold increase in old age population of the country in the next 
20 years, super speciality hospitals be set up exclusively for geriatric care in 
all the State capitals, (iii)  wide publicity be given to the scheme so that the 
senior citizens become aware of the facilities existing in the various Regional 
Hospitals and District Hospitals for them and  avail the same without hassles,   
(iv) d irections may be issued to and it may be ensured that all Government 
Hospitals, district centres and he althcare centres have separate queues and 
seating arrangements for the elderly persons so that they get access to 
healthcare facilities on priority without discomfiture while waiting for their turn 
inter se , (v) the population of 80+ should be given priority over others in 
availing all medical facilities, and (vi) suitable  training be imparted to the care 

68 
 
givers of the old age population so that they handle the cases with greater 
sensitivity and professionalism. 
19. Need for health insurance for the older persons or universalization of 
RSBY. The Committee note that Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) have issued instructions on healthcare for senior citizens to 
Chief Executive Officer of all Gen eral Health Insurance Companies, which 
includes their entry upto 65 years of age.  The Committee desire that the 
Government should work on a health insurance scheme on the lines of the 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) for the senior citizens or the RSB Y 
universalised.   
20. Revision in pension ceiling and criteria for pension .  The Committee 
note that the Ministry of Rural Development is implementing the Indira Gandhi 
National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) under which Central Assistance 
is given towa rds pension @ Rs. 200/ - per month to persons above 60 years 
and Rs. 500/ - per month to persons above 80 years belonging to a household 
below poverty line, which is to be supplemented by the States.  The Committee 
feel that the pension provided under the sc heme is too low and desire that 
senior citizens in the country should at least get an old age pension of          
Rs. 1000/ - pm.  The Committee also desire that the criteria of below poverty 
line for availing old age pension needs to be revised and may be universalized 
for all non income tax payers.   
21. Assistance to persons without  permanent address to facilitate grant of  
pension.   Mindful of the deplorable conditions of the destitute and the widows, 
the  Committee urge that priority be accorded to them in the grant of old age 

69 
 
pension.  The Committee recommend that local Government bodies be 
persuaded to identify the most needy class of old age pensioners with the help 
of NGOs and the community so as to help them get access to pension.  Due 
assistance may also be extended to the people without a permanent 
address/bank account, etc. so that all deserving people get old age pension.  
22. Better monitoring needed of NSAP .  The Committee note that the 
Ministry of Rural Development have laid out a procedure for monitoring of the 
Central Assistance schemes like the National Social Assistance Programme 
(NSAP), which provides pension to the se nior citizens.  The Committee were 
apprised that the scheme is to be reviewed by the Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committee (V&MC) constituted at the District level.  MPs have representation 
in these Committees.  The Committee recommend that the States hold 
monitoring meetings at least every three months to vigorously monitor the 
pension schemes at the District and State levels and give the requisite feed 
back to the Ministry of Rural Development. 
23. Uniform criteria needed for the definition of senior citizens and due 
concession in airfare .  The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry of 
Railways provides facilities for senior citizens, such as separate ticket 
counters for senior citizens at various centres and concessional rail fares for 
senior citizens.  The Committee are, however, surprised that the National 
Carrier, Air India, under the Ministry of Civil Aviation offers 50% discount on 
the Highest Economy class Basic fare to senior citizens who have completed 
63 years of age on the date of co mmencement of journey for travel on 
Domestic Network.  The Committee note that the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act 2007 defines senior citizens as people of 60 

70 
 
years of age.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that all schemes fo r 
senior citizens should be aimed at the target group of 60+ and the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment should issue mandatory instructions in this 
regard.  Moreover, the concession in airfare should be on the minimum fare of 
that day and not on the full fare ticket as per the prevalent practice. 
 
24. Need for revision of income tax exemption ceiling .  The Committee note 
that the Ministry of Finance also provides certain concessions to the senior 
citizens in terms of income tax exemption for the senior citizens which is Rs. 
2.50 lakh per annum to persons above 60 years and Rs. 5.00 lakh to persons 
above 80 years.  The Committee feel that the exemption should be raised 
periodically keeping in view the increasing cost of living, including food, 
housing and the prohibitive cost of healthcare of the senior citizens. 
25. Framework for implementation by the States for Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 .  The Committee note that the 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Seni or Citizens Act, 2007 has been 
enacted to ensure need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and 
their welfare.  The Act has been brought into force by individual State 
Governments.  The Committee find that about 7 State Governments and one 
UT a re still to frame rules under the Act, appoint maintenance officers, 
constitute maintenance Tribunals, etc., which mainly include Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal 
Pradesh and the Union Territory of Laksha dweep.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment pursue with the State 
Governments for putting in place expeditiously the prescribed machinery and 

71 
 
framework for the implementation of the Act with stringent monitoring 
mechanism. 
26. Protection to the life and property of senior citizens .  The Committee 
understand that under the provisions of the Act, the State Governments are 
required to prescribe a comprehensive action plan for providing protection to 
the life and property of  senior citizens.  However, the Committee were 
informed that only 6 states – Goa, Tripura, Haryana, Mizoram, Andhra Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu and 4 UTs namely Chandigarh, Delhi, Puducherry and Daman 
& Diu have devised an action plan for providing security to the life and 
property of senior citizens.  The Committee note that protection of the life and 
property is very important aspect of the Act since crimes against senior 
citizens have become common especially in urban areas.  The Committee 
desire that effective steps should be taken by the States to give protection and 
a sense of security to the senior citizens residing in both urban and rural 
areas. 
27. Study of best welfare practices .  The Committee note from the 
information furnished by the Ministry that ma ny of the European countries, 
especially the Scandinavian countries , which have sizeable population of 
elderly people , provide many facilities for their senior citizens through 
municipalities and Government agencies, which include home help, healthcare 
and cooked meals.  The Committee feel that the Government of India should 
endeavour to adopt best practices from these countries and elsewhere for the 
welfare of senior citizens in our country and a detailed study in t his regard 
should be carried out by the Ageing Division of Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 

72 
 
28. Compendium of welfare measures/relaxations/facilitie s.  Having regard 
to the fact that programmes and schemes for the welfare of the older persons 
are run by different Ministries/Departments and various concessions, 
relaxations, facilities and priorities are accorded to them, the Committee 
recommend that an exhaustive compendium of all such benefits extended by 
the Union Government be brought out and periodically updated as a ready 
reference manual for the older persons and the stakeholder.   
29. Multipronged strategy to include destitute elders and financial 
independence and integration of elders .  Taking cognizance of the diversity 
and enormity of the problems confronting the aged, the Committee 
recommend that the proposed new National Policy on Older Persons must  
adopt a multipronged strategy to address the problems of the elders with 
variegated socio -economic condition s and make provision for their 
independence, social integration, care and dignity.  The policy so evolved 
specifically needs to make provision for the shelter and care of the aged 
destitute as well as the elders who  are desolate, physically infirm  but 
financially independent.  The Government may so integrate their welfare 
programmes that the elders in old age homes/service apartments are able to 
interact and educate the children in orphanages or schools.   Special 
concession may be given to the destitute widow or widower who enter into 
matrimonial alliance after sixty years of age. 
30. Sensitization of young minds through education .  Mindful of the rich 
cultural heritage of India and the s criptural edicts which proclaim  that an 
assembly must have elders and that one who renders service to the elders, the 
longevity, knowledge, fame and power of such a person gets enh anced.  The 

73 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development may design appropriate syllabus in order to 
enlighten the awareness of children about great Indian cultural heritage and 
the esteem in wh ich the elders have been held from time immemorial and the 
far reaching benefits that accrue from the care and service of the elders.   
31. Standing machinery for effective inter -ministerial coordination and 
enactment of a new law.  The Committee note that the various Ministries of the 
Government of India run schemes for the welfare of senior citizens, i.e. the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of  Railways, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Ministry of Finance, etc.  The Committee desire that the Government 
should strengthen the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for better 
liaisoning and coordination between the various Ministries implementing t he 
schemes for the welfare of senior citizens, both at the Central and State level.  
In order to ensure that the elders get proper access to food, shelter and the 
much needed healthcare in the twilight of their life and that they lead a 
dignified existence , which is part of the fundamental right to life, the 
Committee recommend that a permanent standing machinery be created under 
the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) for better conception, coordination and effective 
implementation of various interdependent programmes for the welfare of 
elderly people. Given the enormity of the emerging challenges in the next 20 
years and the vulnerability of this age group, the Committee recommend that a 
comprehensive law for  the social security and protection of the dignity of 
senior citizens of the country be enacted at the earliest.   The Committee are 

74 
 
quite sanguine that if their recommendations are given due consideration and 
implemented earnestly, the vision of 'grow old' and the 'best of  life is yet to 
be', would get fructified.   
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       HEMANAND BISWAL 
                  Chairman, 
17 December, 2013                                          Standing Committee on 
26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)              Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
PART – C 
ANNEXURE – I  
DISTRIBUTION OF OLD AGE HOMES/DARE CARE CENTRES ACROSS THE COUNTRY 
Abbreviations:-      
OAHs-Old Age Homes – 25 beneficiaries per annum 
DCCs-Day Care Centres – 50 beneficiaries per annum 
MMUs-Mobile Medicare Units – 400 beneficiaries per month 
S. No. Name of the NGOs and Address Project  Details of GIA released during 2012-
13 
(Amount in lakh) 
Arrear, if any 2012-13 Total 
Year Amount As on 
31.3.2013 
Andhra Pradesh           
1 Jyothi Welfare Association, RR 
District, Andhra Pradesh  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.34     
2011-
12 
4.02     
Total 8.36 4.16 12.52 
2 Adarsh Mahila Mandali, Prakasham, 
Andhra pradesh  
OAH 2010-
11 
2.09     
2011-
12 
2.03     
Total 4.12 8.19 12.31 
3 Navodaya Seva Sangham, AP OAH 2010-
11 
4.33     
2011-
12 
4.07     
Total 8.40 7.98 16.38 
4 Sandhya Rural Welfare Society,               
Mehboob nagar,  
OAH 2010-
11 
2.17     

76 
 
2011-
12 
      
Total 2.17 0.00 2.17 
5 Annapurna Manav Samkshema 
Samithi, No. 811, Behind Water 
Tank, Sangeeva Reddy Colony, 
Hyderabad 
OAH 2010-
11 
2.31     
2011-
12 
2.35     
Total 4.66 0.00 4.66 
6 Swarajya Laxmi Organisation for 
Women, Sri Vasavi 
Kanyakaparameshwari Temple 
Compound,  Mehboobnagar Distt.  
OAH 2010-
11 
3.55     
  2011-
12 
3.54     
  Total 7.09 8.63 15.72 
7 kothapet Mahila Mandali, Guntur  OAH 2010-
11 
3.80     
  2011-
12 
2.04     
  Total 5.84 2.76 8.60 
8 Narsapet Taluka Scheduled Tribes 
youth  club, guntur  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.09     
  2011-
12 
3.45     
  Total 7.54 5.46 13.00 
9 Sri Triveni  Education Acacademy OAH 2010-
11 
3.69     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 3.69 0.00 3.69 
10 Valmiki Seva Sangham, Prakasham, 
AP 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.26     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.14 4.88 14.02 

77 
 
11 Shree Mahalakshmi Mahila Mandali, 
Prakasham District  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.00     
  2011-
12 
4.17     
  Total 8.17 4.88 13.05 
12 Udaysri mahila samajam, guntur OAH 2010-
11 
4.33     
  2011-
12 
3.90     
  Total  8.23 3.92 12.15 
13 Jagjeevan Balaheenavarga 
Abhivrudhi Sangam, Kadappa 
OAH 2010-
11 
3.74     
  2011-
12 
2.80     
  Total  6.54 0.00 6.54 
14 SAV Gupta Education Society, 
Mehboobnagar,  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.87     
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 9.74 0.00 9.74 
15 Nava Bharath Socio -Economic 
Development Society, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total  7.05 7.32 14.37 
16 Anuraag, Secunderabad MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.37     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 
 
2.37 0.00 2.37 
17 Sree Venkateswara Convent Educational OAH-1 2010- 4.33     

78 
 
Society, Door No. 12 -5-41, Ubbayappa 
Street,  Anantapurt Distt. Phone- 23622. 
11 
  2011-
12 
4.06     
  Total 8.39 5.56 13.95 
18 Sri Rakesh Educational Welfare Society, 
D. No. 4-3-95, Bellary Bypass, Anantapur 
Distt. 
OAH-1 &  DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.44     
  2011-
12 
8.19     
  Total 16.63 0.00 16.63 
19 Arya Dayannd Mahila Mandli, Nellore OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.37     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.25 4.70 13.95 
20 Mother India Community Development 
Association (MICDA), 11 -8, NGOs 
Colony, Puttur- 517583, Chittoor Distt.   
OAH-2, DCC-1 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
13.94     
  2011-
12 
15.51     
  Total 29.45 11.43 40.88 
21 People's Action for Social Service, 10-14, 
Maruthi Nagar, Tirupati -517502, 
Chittoor Distt.  
OAH-2 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
11.36     
  2011-
12 
8.95     
  Total 20.31 0.00 20.31 
22 Sarvodaya Women Welfare Society, 16 -
13, Munireddy Nagar, Tirupati -517502, 
Chittoor Distt. (Phone-08574-42140) 
OAH-1 & DDC-1 2010-
11 
7.20     
  2011-
12 
5.50     
  Total 12.70 4.36 17.06 
23 Chaitnya Edu Rural Dev. Society, Kadapa 
Distt. 
DCC-2 2010-
11 
5.52     

79 
 
  2011-
12 
5.18     
  Total 10.70 4.51 15.21 
24 Help the Women, Door No. 69 -3-17, 
Nagavanam, Kakinada -533003, East 
Godavari Distt. Phone No - 0884-
2378851 
OAH-1 & DDC-1 2010-
11 
7.33     
  2011-
12 
3.62     
  Total 10.95 0.00 10.95 
25 Pushkaramatha Convent Committee, D. 
No. 35 -2-9, Main Road , Rahajmundry, 
East Godavari Distt.  Phone -0883-
417612,  
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.98     
  2011-
12 
2.80     
  Total 5.78 0.00 5.78 
26 Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Orphanages 
Boarding Home, D. No. 103/1, Kanchara 
Lane, Dowlaiswaram -533125, East 
Godavari Distt. Phone-417612 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.33     
  2011-
12 
4.00     
  Total 8.33 0.00 8.33 
27 Sarda Educational Society, 10 -62, 
Venkataramana Colony, Indrapalem, 
Kakinada-533006, East Godavari Distt.  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.25     
  2011-
12 
4.19     
  Total 7.44 0.61 8.05 
28 Soniya Gandhi Harijana Girijana 
Balheena Vargamula Mahila Mandali, 
Thummalacheruvu, Piduguralla Mandal, 
Guntur Distt, 
OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.63     
  2011-
12 
3.97     
  Total 
 
11.60 0.00 11.60 
29 Kandrika Mahila Mandali, Kandrika, 
Phirangipuram-522529, Guntur Distt.  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     

80 
 
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 0.00 9.76 
30 Anuraag Human Services, Flat No. 202, 
II-Floor, Ushodaya Enclave, 27 & 28, 
Ushodaya Colony, Gudimalkapur, 
Hyderabad-500028,  Phone - 040-
3561157, 3560993 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.37     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.25 2.44 11.69 
31 Social Integration for Rural 
Development, 896, Jayaprakash Nagar, 
Opp. State Home, Hyderabad -500073, 
Phone-040-373546 (SIRI) 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.71     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 4.71 0.00 4.71 
32 Mother Theressa Mahila Mandali, D. No. 
76-16-102, Eklavya Nagar, 
Bhavanipuram, Vijayawada -520012, 
Phone- 415848 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
5.00     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 7.81 0.00 7.81 
33 ICC Social Service Association DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.99     
  Total 5.98 2.81 8.79 
34 Nav Bharat Educational Society, KVS 
Colony, Kothapeta, Dhone -518222, 
Kurnool Distt. Phone- 08516-72158 
OAH-1& MMU-1 2010-
11 
4.33     
  2011-
12 
2.97     
  Total 
 
7.30 0.00 7.30 
35 Pratibha Educational Society, H. No. 13 -
93, Neeli Street, Nandyal -518501, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
7.23     

81 
 
  Kurnool Distt. Phone-08514-44662 2011-
12 
5.52     
  Total 12.75 6.43 19.18 
36 Priyadarshini Mahila Mandali, H. No.  
1/351, B.C. Colony, Banaganapalli - 
518124, Kurnool Distt. Phone -27371. 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
37 Rural Upliftment of Health and 
Educational Society, D.No. 9 -51, K.V.S. 
Colony, Dhone-518222, Kurnool Distt. 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 4.88 0.00 4.88 
38 Mahalaxmi Mahila Mandali, Nalagonda  OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.21     
  2011-
12 
2.93     
  Total 6.14 3.16 9.30 
39 Mahila Dakshita Samithi MMU-1  2010-
11 
5.38     
  2011-
12 
5.02     
  Total 10.40 5.03 15.43 
40 Old Age Welfare Centre MMU-1, OAH-1 2010-
11 
7.19     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 
 
11.26 4.07 15.33 
41 Omkar Development Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     

82 
 
  2011-
12 
3.25     
  Total 7.86 0.00 7.86 
42 Asthana-A-Chistia Mahila Mandali, 
Khajapeer Makhan, Chinna Bazar, 
Nellore-1, Phone-0861-330584 
OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.98     
  2011-
12 
8.17     
  Total 16.15 11.54 27.69 
3 Bharathi Mahila Voluntary Service 
Orgn.D. No. 11 -3-33A, 
Swayampakulavari Street, Kavali -
524201, Nellore Distt.  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
2.99     
  Total 7.33 3.99 11.32 
44 Haritha Mahila Mandali SocietyD. No. 
251/1592, Gowtham Nagar, 2nd Lane, 
Podalakur Road, A.K. Nagar Post, 
Nellore- 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
3.25     
  Total 7.86 0.00 7.86 
45 Indiramma Mahila Mandali, Dr. Zakir 
Hussain Nagar, Nellore-524001,  
MMU-1& DCC 2010-
11 
5.84     
  2011-
12 
5.99     
  Total 11.83 8.13 19.96 
46 Nehru Bharathi Educational Institution, 
Jyothi Nagar, Vedayapalem, Nellore -
524004,  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.00     
  Total 
 
8.34 4.06 12.40 
47 People Organisation for Welfare & 
Educational (POWER)  
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.22     

83 
 
  2011-
12 
3.13     
  Total 6.35 0.78 7.13 
48 Rashtriya Seva Samiti, Chittoor OAH-5, DCC-5 2010-
11 
22.91     
  2011-
12 
18.75     
  Total 41.66 26.21 67.87 
49 Lakshmi Mahila Mandali, Chejerla, 
Nellore Distt-524341,(Phone-84642) 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.37     
  2011-
12 
5.81     
  Total 9.18 3.37 12.55 
50 Rayalseema SC,ST/BC socieity, kadappa MMU-1 2010-
11 
5.26     
  2011-
12 
2.64     
  Total 10.07 5.28 15.35 
51 Rural Tribal Dev. Society, Kurnool OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.49 4.75 14.24 
52 Sai Seva Sangh,  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.14     
  2011-
12 
3.89     
  Total 
 
8.03 3.89 11.92 
53 Senior Citizen Forum, OAH-1 2010-
11 
0.00     

84 
 
  2011-
12 
6.16     
  Total 6.16 3.20 9.36 
54 Shri Laxmi Parvati  Mahila Mandli, 
Nellore 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.29     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.65 1.68 8.33 
55 Shri Venketeshwara  Yuva Jan Sangam, 
Visakhapatnam  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.28     
  2011-
12 
4.00     
  Total 8.28 0.00 8.28 
56 St. Anthony Edu. Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.33     
  Total 8.67 5.14 13.81 
57  Venkateswar Social Service Association DCC-1, OAH-1 2010-
11 
6.94     
  2011-
12 
5.81     
  Total 12.75 2.44 15.19 
58 3-Mens Academics, prakasha,  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.67 4.88 14.55 
59 Bapuji Integrated Rural Development OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.81     

85 
 
  2011-
12 
4.74     
  Total 9.55 0.00 9.55 
60 Arunoday mahila Mandali, prakashm  DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.25     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.61 0.00 6.61 
61 Chandra Vamsa Organisation for Rural 
Development, Prakasham  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.26     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.14 0.00 9.14 
62 Country Women’s Association OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.49 0.00 9.49 
63 Health Care & Social Welfare Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
6.09     
  2011-
12 
6.97     
  Total 13.06 6.97 20.03 
64 Hyderabad Zilla Mahila Mandal 
Samakhema 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.84     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 
 
1.84 0.00 1.84 
65 Indira Memorial Weaker section OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.33     

86 
 
  2011-
12 
3.46     
  Total 7.79 0.00 7.79 
66 Indira Priyadarsini Girijana Backward 
class mahila mandali, Guntur  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.87     
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 9.74 0.00 9.74 
67 Indira Priyadarshini Mahila Mandali DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.29     
  2011-
12 
1.78     
  Total 5.07 3.37 8.44 
68 Khadi Silk Gramodyoga Samiti OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.78     
  Total 9.66 7.27 16.93 
69 Lakshmi Mahila Mandali, Prakasam OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.30     
  2011-
12 
4.56     
  Total 2.30 7.32 9.62 
70 Mahila Mandali, Chirala, Prakasam OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.26     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 
 
8.33 4.06 12.39 
71 Naveena Adarsa Mahila Mandali OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.26     

87 
 
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 3.25 9.68 12.93 
72 Netaji Yuva Kendra, Prakasham OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
4.78     
  Total 9.57 7.23 16.80 
73 Padmavathi Mahila Mandali OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 8.41 4.06 12.47 
74 Polymers Educational Society OAH-2 2010-
11 
8.74     
  2011-
12 
4.70     
  Total 13.44 9.76 23.20 
75 Prakasam Nagar Mahila Mandali DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.80     
  Total 5.79 3.51 9.30 
76 Priyadarsini Mahila Mandali, prakasham DCC-1, OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.96     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 
 
6.32 4.88 6.32 
77 Priyadasini Service Organisation OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.01     

88 
 
  2011-
12 
2.02     
  Total 4.03 4.07 8.10 
78 Rupa Education Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.80     
  2011-
12 
4.66     
  Total 9.46 0.00 9.46 
79 Sabari Girijana Mahila Mandali, 
prakasham  
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.29     
  2011-
12 
3.55     
  Total 6.84 3.37 10.21 
80 Samatha Mahila Vedika, prakasham  OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.11     
  2011-
12 
6.58     
  Total 13.69 6.88 20.57 
81 Social Action for Integrated 
Development Sociey, adilabad 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.66     
  2011-
12 
4.50     
  Total 4.66 5.94 10.60 
82 Shri Sarada Mahila Vignana Samiti, 
guntur 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
5.35     
  2011-
12 
5.90     
  Total 
 
11.25 2.39 13.64 
83 Society for Welfare and Awakeining 
Rural Development (SWARE)  
DCC-2 2010-
11 
6.37     

89 
 
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 6.37 13.46 19.83 
84 Shri Bhavani Mahila Mandali, Prakasham  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.25     
  2011-
12 
3.98     
  Total 8.23 4.07 12.30 
85 Sri Krishnadevaraya Yuvajana Sangham OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 0.00 9.76 
86 Sri Sachidananda Venkateswara  OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.72     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total 6.16 0.00 6.16 
87 Sri Sai Educational Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00   
88 Sri Venkateswara Mahila Mandali OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.17     
  2011-
12 
5.17     
  Total 
 
7.34 0.00 7.34 
89 Telugu Bharathi Mahila Mandali OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.69     

90 
 
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.57 6.05 15.62 
90 The Divine India, nellore  OAH-2 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 4.87 0.00 4.87 
91 Upkaar Dr. P. Nirmala H.R.Charitable 
Trust 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
3.59     
  Total 8.38 0.00 8.38 
92 Prakasam Zilla Balaheena Vargala 
Colony Varla Seva Sangam, Ongole, 
Prakasham  
DCC 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
6.90     
  Total 6.90 14.65 21.55 
93 Vasavi Educational Society, prakasam OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.67 0.00 9.67 
94 Vutukuri Venkateswara Subbhama 
Welfare Society 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.29     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 
 
6.65 3.37 10.02 
95 VELUGU, Andhra Pradesh  MFCC 2010-
11 
0.00     

91 
 
  2011-
12 
1.46     
  Total 1.46 0.00 1.46 
Arunachal Pradesh  
96 Arunachal Pradesh Art and Culturual, 
Arunachal Pradesh  
OAH 2010-
11 
1.15     
  2011-
12 
4.08     
  Total  5.23 4.88 10.11 
Assam             
97 WODWICHEE, P.O. Lakshirbond - (1-OAH 
at Cachar Distt) 
OAH-2, DCC-1, MMU-1 2010-
11 
15.78     
  2011-
12 
15.06     
  Total 30.84 14.06 44.90 
98 Dhula Regional Physically Handicapped 
Dev. Association, Distt. Darrang 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.07     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 8.14 3.98 12.12 
99 Mahila Mandali, Distt. Guwahati OAH-1 2010-
11 
8.72     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 8.72 4.36 13.08 
100 Sadau Asom Gramya Puthibharal Sangh, 
Nagon 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.69     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.69 0.00 3.69 

92 
 
101 South Borbond Gram Unnayan Samity, 
Vill. & PO - Borbond, District - 
Hailakandi,-788164 (Phone-03844-
23501) 
DCC-1, OAH-1 2010-
11 
7.32     
  2011-
12 
7.52     
  Total 14.84 4.15 18.99 
102 Bahumukhi Krishi Aru Samaj Kalyan 
Samity, Noor Nagar, P.O. Herapati, Via - 
Haibargaon, Morigaon Distt) 
OAH-2, DCC-1 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
19.52     
  2011-
12 
15.58     
  Total 35.10 14.54 49.64 
103 Fulkumari Bapuji Club, Dhubri DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.37     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total 6.74 0.00 6.74 
104 Global Health Immunisation &  
Population Control Organisation, At -
Rangaloo, P.O. Jumarmur, Via - 
Kathiatoli, Distt. Nagaon,  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
7.28     
  2011-
12 
7.55     
  Total 14.83 4.88 19.71 
105 Gram Vikas Parishad, At -Rangaloo, P.O. 
Jumarmur, Via- Kathiatoli, Distt. Nagaon, 
782427. (Phone-03627-33140) 
DCC-1, MMU-1 2010-
11 
6.03     
  2011-
12 
6.03     
  Total 12.06 6.03 18.09 
106 Khorapattar Sammilita Yuvak Samaj, 
P.O. Sandahkhowa -787054, Distt. 
Lakhimpur, (Phone -03752-58326) 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 5.80 2.81 8.61 
107 Pragati Social Dev. Organisation OAH-1 2010- 4.70     

93 
 
11 
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.58 4.88 14.46 
108 Rogurtook Club & Library, P.O. Asal 
Kandli, Distt. Karimganj,  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
109 Karimganj Saptha Barna Welfare 
Organisation, Karimganj 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.77     
  Total 9.65 4.88 14.53 
110 Al-Amin Foundation MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.52     
  2011-
12 
2.51     
  Total 5.03 0.00 5.03 
111 Dr. Ambedkar Mission DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.17     
  2011-
12 
3.28     
  Total 6.45 7.38 13.83 
112 Jagriti Sammilitha Unnayan Kendra, 
Lakhimpur, Assam  
MMU-1 2010-
11 
5.03     
2011-
12 
0.00     
Total  5.03 0.00 5.03 
Bihar 
113 Rajendra Institute of Education and OAH-1 2010- 0.00     

94 
 
Social Welfare, Sitamarhi,  11 
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 4.87 7.32 12.19 
114 Ekata Gram Seva Sansthan, Vaishali OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.42     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 6.30 9.76 16.06 
115 Sister Nivedita Memorial Trust, Patna DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.31     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 3.67 3.36 7.03 
Chhattisgarh           
116 Chhattisgarh Bal Avam Kalyan Parisad, 
Raipur 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.66     
  2011-
12 
2.43     
  Total 1.83 5.27 7.10 
117 Gayatri Pariwar Trust, Batauli, Surguja OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.14     
  2011-
12 
6.22     
  Total 7.36 2.07 9.43 
118 Nav Abhilasha Shikshan Sansthan, 
Rajnandgaon 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
9.76     
  Total 14.55 4.88 19.43 

95 
 
Delhi           
119 Helpage India, Delhi MMU-6 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
5.63     
    Total 5.63 18.15 23.78 
120 Annugraha RRTC 2010-
11 
4.85     
  2011-
12 
5.96     
  Total 10.81 10.00 20.81 
121 Johns Day Care and Boarding  OAH 2010-
11 
1.15     
  2011-
12 
3.01     
  Total 4.16 3.00 7.16 
122 New  India Educational and Cultural 
Society  
OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 4.16 4.16 
 Haryana           
123 Association for Welfare of Handicapped, 
Faridabad, Haryana 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
0.62     
  Total 3.61 0.00 3.61 
124 Akhil Bhartia Sant Haridas Samaj Sewa 
Sangh,   Distt. Jhajjar   
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.81     

96 
 
  Total 5.80 2.81 8.61 
125 Manav Avam Jan Kalyan Educational 
Society,  Dist. Jhajjar, Haryana    
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
3.64     
  Total 8.25 4.10 12.35 
126 Amar Jyothi Foundation   Jind OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
6.79     
  2011-
12 
7.42     
  Total 14.21 7.42 21.63 
127 Chaubisee Vikas Sangh, Meham, Distt - 
Rohtak   
OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.90     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.26 9.20 15.46 
128 Haryana Nav Yuvak Kala Sangam, Rohtak   DCC-2 2010-
11 
5.91     
  2011-
12 
6.73     
  Total 12.64 0.00 12.64 
129 Adarsh Saraswati Shiksha Samiti, Sant 
Garib Dass,   Sonipat  
DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 3.36 3.37 6.73 
130 Akhil Bhartiya Nav Yuvak Kala Sangam, 
Bhivani 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.48     
  2011-
12 
4.43     
  Total 8.91 4.61 13.52 

97 
 
131 Eco Club, Bhiwani  DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.13     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.49 3.37 9.86 
132 Gramya Swarajya Sansthan, Hissar  DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.35 2.24 8.59 
133 Lok Kalyan Foundation, Panipat 1-DCC 2010-
11 
3.22     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.22 5.05 8.27 
134 Janta Kalyan Samiti, Rewari 1-DCC 2010-
11 
3.18     
  2011-
12 
2.71     
  Total 5.89 0.00 5.89 
135 Samaj Kalyan Shiksha Samiti, Sonepat 1-OAH 2010-
11 
3.86     
  2011-
12 
7.85     
  Total 7.88 3.99 11.87 
136 Bhartiya Gram Sudhar Sabha, Rohtak, 
Haryana 
DCC 2010-
11 
3.26     
  2011-
12 
3.26     
  Total 
 
6.52 3.37 9.89 

98 
 
Himachal Pradesh           
137 Kanchan Duggal Memorial Old 
Age/Handicapped Society, Spiti 
1-OAH 2010-
11 
4.72     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.60 6.10 15.70 
138 Indira Ladies Club, Nahan, Himachal 
Pradesh  
DCC and MMU  2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.33     
  Total 1.33 0.00 1.33 
Karnataka           
139 Adarsha Education Society, Bellary, 
Karnataka  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total  9.22 7.32 16.54 
140 Shri Uma Maheshwari Mandir Trust, 
Ramnagar 
OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
9.49     
  Total  9.49 4.88 14.37 
141 Ashaktha Poshaka Sabha,  
Vishveswarpuram, Bangalore 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
9.62     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 9.62 0.00 9.62 
142 Sri Shathashrunga Vidya Samasthe, 
Shridi Sai Baba Mandir Premises,   
Bangalore 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
6.40     
  2011-
12 
4.80     

99 
 
  Total 11.20 8.00 19.20 
143 Eshwar Education &  Welfare Society,   
Bangalore-560091   
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.04     
  Total 8.38 4.60 12.98 
144 Sarvodaya Service Society,  Near 
Evergreen School;, Vijayapura, 
Devanahalli Taluk, Bangalore Rural Distt.  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
145 Vidyaranya Education & Development 
Society, Mandur, Virgonagar (Via), 
Bangalore East Taluk, Bangalore -
560049. 
OAH-2 2010-
11 
9.74     
    2011-
12 
9.76     
    Total 19.50 4.88 24.38 
146 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Cultural & Welfare 
Society, H. No. 7 -3-31, Bheem Nagar, 
Bidar   
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
8.94     
  Total 13.28 13.55 26.83 
147 Sangram Educational Society, Bidar OAH 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 4.34 0.00 4.34 
148 Nittur Education Society, Nittur, Tq. 
Bhalki, Distt- Bidar, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.06     

100 
 
  Total 8.40 4.06 12.46 
149 Shivleela Women's Welfare Association,   
Bidar 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.10     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 8.17 4.06 12.23 
150 Annapurna Association, Chintamani 
Nagar, Harihar, Davangere Distt 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
3.46     
  Total 8.34 4.88 13.22 
151 Sri Maitri Association, Sugar Factory 
Road, Doddabathi Post - 577566, 
Davangere Tq. & Distt. (Phone-0819-
291645) 
OAH-2 2010-
11 
12.01     
  2011-
12 
10.97     
  Total 12.01 11.65 23.66 
152 Sri Shakti Association, Guttur Colony, 
Harihar  
OAH-2 2010-
11 
11.73     
  2011-
12 
11.84     
  Total 23.57 12.01 35.58 
153 Sneha Education and Development 
Society, Shivananda Nagar, Hubli, 
Dharwad Distt.  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.77     
  2011-
12 
4.77     
  Total 9.54 4.88 14.42 
154 Sri Surabee Mahila Mandal,  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
2.30     
  Total 6.91 6.36 13.27 

101 
 
155 Shri Ramana Maharishi Trust for 
Disabled Persons, Parandahally, Via -
K.G.F.Bangarpet Taluk, Kolar Distt. 
OAH-1& MMU-1 2010-
11 
9.79     
  2011-
12 
6.16     
  Total 15.95 9.59 25.54 
156 Jnana Sindhu Home for Senior Citizens, 
Shankrappa Layout, Hallahalli, Mandya -
571401 (Phone-0823-237444) 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.21     
  2011-
12 
3.25     
  Total 7.46 4.88 12.34 
157 Lalitha Academy, shivakumar 
swamynagar, Distt. Davangere 
OAH-1 & MFCC-1 2010-
11 
6.36     
  2011-
12 
14.32     
  Total 20.68 9.76 30.44 
158 Sri Swamy Sarvadharma Sharanalaya 
Trust, Sultanpet, Nandi Post, 
Chikkaballapur Taluk, Kolar Distt. 
OAH-3 2010-
11 
13.20     
  2011-
12 
10.66     
  Total 23.86 11.65 35.51 
159 Rajyogi Siddartha Education 
Society,Turvanur-577517, Chitradurga 
OAH 2010-
11 
1.00     
  2011-
12 
4.10     
  Total 5.10 3.86 8.96 
160 Shri Kalikamba Association, Shimoga OAH-1    &1-MFCC  2010-
11 
6.09     
  2011-
12 
16.55     
  Total 
 
22.64 11.76 34.40 

102 
 
161 Mata Dahilly Jagjivan Sarvodya Sangha, 
Bangalore 
OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
162 Shree Vishnu Educational Society, 
Chitradurga 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.19     
  2011-
12 
4.34     
  Total 8.53 4.06 12.59 
163 Varshini Gramabhiruddi Mahila Mandli, 
Davengere 
OAH 2010-
11 
1.46     
  2011-
12 
10.45     
  Total  11.91 0.00 11.91 
164 Nightingle  Medical Trust, Bangalore DCC 2010-
11 
3.53     
  2011-
12 
5.49     
  Total 9.02 8.95 17.97 
165 Mehboob Suhani Educational Trust, 
Gulbarga 
OAH 2010-
11 
3.94     
  2011-
12 
5.59     
  Total 9.53 0.00 9.53 
166 Sri Sirdi Sai Baba Shikshan Sansthan, 
Bidar 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.72     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.60 0.00 9.60 

103 
 
167 Sri Mallikarujana Jana Seva Society, 
Gulbarga 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.70     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.31 4.69 14.00 
168 Rural Organization for Educational 
Society, Bangalore 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.84     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.72 0.00 9.72 
169 Ramalingeshwar Gramabhiruddhi Sangh, 
Gulbarga 
MMU 2010-
11 
7.29     
  2011-
12 
5.95     
  Total 13.24 6.81 20.05 
170 R. T. Nagar Educational Trust, Bangalore OAH 2010-
11 
2.13     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 2.13 0.00 2.13 
171 Poornima Mahila Mandali, Bellar OAH 2010-
11 
      
  2011-
12 
7.90     
  Total 7.90 7.03 14.93 
172 Poornima Mahila Vidya Samasthe, 
Manya 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.49 4.88 14.37 

104 
 
173 Sharanara Nadu Educaitonal Society, 
Gulbarga 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
174 Gayathri Grameena Vidya Samsthe, 
Davangere 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.49 4.88 14.37 
175 Hyderabad Karnataka Dalit Women 
Society, Gulbarga  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.77     
  2011-
12 
2.05     
 Total 4.82 8.13 12.95 
KERALA           
176 Karuna Bhawan Social Centre, 
Ernakulam 
Oah-1 2010-
11 
4.07     
  2011-
12 
3.88     
  Total 7.95 0.00 7.95 
177 Welfare Services, Ernakulam   2010-
11 
6.43     
  2011-
12 
3.02     
  Total 9.45 0.00 9.45 
Manipur           
178 Centre for Rural Upliftment Services, 
Wangbal Canal Maya, P.O. -Thoubal, 
B.P.O.-Wangbal, Thoubal -795135, 
Manipur 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.37     
  2011-
12 
3.37     

105 
 
  Total 6.74 8.24 14.98 
179 Community Development society , 
Palace Compound, Imphal-795001 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.56     
  2011-
12 
2.07     
  Total 6.63 4.54 11.17 
180 Human Resources Infrastructure Dev. 
Organisation, Imphal 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.25     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.61 4.00 10.61 
181 Kumbhi Khullakpam Leikai Women’s 
Association, Bishnupur 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.10     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 8.98 4.88 13.86 
182 Social Dev. & Rehabilitation  Council, 
Thoubal 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.90     
  Total 5.89 1.41 7.30 
183 South Eastern Dev Organisation, 
Thoubal 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.22 0.00 9.22 
184 The Manipur SC/ST Welfare Association, 
Imphal East, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
5.87     
  2011-
12 
7.99     
  Total 13.86 0.00 13.86 

106 
 
185 Integrated Rural Development Agency, 
Hangul, P.O. Mayang, Imphal-795132 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.36     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.72 3.37 10.09 
186 Centre for Development Activities( C -
DAC), Wangjing , Near Indo -Myanmar 
Road, Wangjing-795148 
 DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.36     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 6.72 3.37 10.09 
187 Integrated Rural Development and 
Educational Organisation, Wangbal, 
P.O.-Thoubal-795138, Manipur 
OAH-1 & RRTC 2010-
11 
5.95     
  2011-
12 
9.87     
  Total 15.82 4.99 20.81 
188 New Integrated Rural Management 
Agency (NIRMA), Nungphou Bazar, 
Sangaiyumpham, P.O.-Wangjing-795148 
OAH-      2  2010-
11 
7.12     
  2011-
12 
7.12     
  Total 14.24 0.00 14.24 
189 Rural Dev. Society, R.D.S Bhawan, 
Wangjing Bazar, wangjing -795148, 
Manipur 
MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.66     
  2011-
12 
2.66     
  Total 5.32 1.99 7.31 
190 Rural Industries Dev. Assocn., 
Wankhem, P.O. -Thoubal,                            
Manipur-795138    
DCC-2 2010-
11 
6.51     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total 
 
9.88 6.66 16.54 

107 
 
191 Youth Progressive Organization, Thoubal OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 8.95 0.00 8.95 
192 Rural Downtrodden People Upliftment 
Society, Thoubal  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.34     
  Total 8.68 4.88 13.56 
193 Society for Women’s Ed. Action &  
Reflection, Athokpam Khunou, P.O. -
Thoubal, Manipur-795138  
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.80     
  Total 5.79 4.07 9.86 
194 United Rural Dev. Services, H.O. -
Heirokheituppokpi, Thoubal Dist., P.O. -
Wanging-795148, Manipur 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
195 Wangjing Women & Girls Society, P.O. -
Wanjing, Thoubal Dist., Manipur-795148 
DCC-7 2010-
11 
23.56     
  2011-
12 
17.32     
  Total 40.88 30.12 71.00 
196 Volunteers for Rural Health & Action 
(VOHRA), Thoubal 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.34     
  2011-
12 
2.98     
  Total 
 
6.32 2.98 9.30 

108 
 
197 United Hill People’s Development 
Society, Thoubal 
OAH- 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
198 The Social Agriculture and Rural 
Development Agency, Imphal 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.49     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.49 0.00 4.49 
199 Rural Service Agency (RUSA), Imphal 
East, 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total 7.32 0.00 7.32 
200 Integrated Rural Upliftment 
Service(IRUS), Thoubal 
DCC 2010-
11 
2.90     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 5.71 2.80 8.51 
201 Centre for  Upliftment  for Rural Women 
Association, Imphal 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.22 8.24 17.46 
202 Rural Medical Institute, Manipur  MMU 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.33     
  Total 
 
1.33 0.00 1.33 

109 
 
203 Ima Leimaral Women Welfare 
Association, Imphal 
OAH 2010-
11 
3.46     
  2011-
12 
5.40     
  Total 8.86 9.20 18.06 
204 Social Environmental & Rural 
Technology 
DCC 2010-
11 
3.13     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.13 0.00 3.13 
Mizoram            
205 Save Help and Development (SHAD), 
Mizoram 
DCC 2010-
11 
3.79     
  2011-
12 
4.46     
  Total 8.25 0.00 8.25 
Madhya Pradesh           
206 Mahila Utkarsh Sansthan, Indore OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.06     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.06 1.02 4.08 
207 Nivedita Kalyan Samity, Rewa OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.02     
  2011-
12 
4.07     
  Total 8.09 4.15 12.24 
208 Ajanta Lalit Kala Evam Samaj Kalyan 
Samiti, Vidisha, MP 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     

110 
 
  Total 9.76 0.00 9.76 
209 Ujjwal Mahila Mandali, Jabalpur DCC for Dementia 2010-
11 
1.12     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 1.12 15.17 16.29 
 Maharashtra           
210 Jai Prakash Gram Kalyan Sanstha, 
Nanded  
oah 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.48     
  Total 1.48 6.97 8.45 
211 Mahabodhi Education,Bhandara,MS oah 2010-
11 
4.53     
  2011-
12 
2.27     
  Total 6.80 6.95 13.75 
212 Bhartiya Ausadhi anusandhan 
kendra,Bhandara  
MMU               and OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
6.52     
  Total  6.52 14.24 20.76 
213 Bal Vikas Mahila Mandal,C/o Swa -Adhar 
Mahila Vastigrh Sudarshan Colony, India 
Nagar, Latur,  Maharashtra   
DCC-1 2010-
11 
5.93     
  2011-
12 
3.10     
  Total 9.03 3.11 12.14 
214 Arunoday Bahuddeshiya Gramin Vikas 
Sanstha, 
OAH-1, MFCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
11.30     

111 
 
  Total 11.30 0.00 11.30 
215 Jankranti  Shikshan Prasarak Mandal , 
Nanded 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total  3.37 3.37 6.74 
216 Jankranti  Shikshan Prasarak Mandal , 
Nanded 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.26     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 3.26 0.00 3.26 
217 Lok Seva Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, 
Yavatmal, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.59     
  2011-
12 
4.71     
  Total 9.30 4.28 13.58 
218 Late Ramesh Jadhav Shikshan & Krida 
Prasarak Mandal, 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.84     
  Total 9.72 4.88 14.60 
219 Sant Tukdoji Maharaj Adivasi 
Bahuddeshiya Sanstha, 
DCC for Dementia 2010-
11 
7.72     
  2011-
12 
7.72     
  Total 15.44 7.72 23.16 
220  Shri Mahila Bal Kalyan &  Apang Vikas 
Mandal, Dhule   
OAH  2010-
11 
9.38     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 14.26 4.88 19.14 

112 
 
221 Bharatiya Aushadi Anusandhan Sanstha, MMU, DCC-Dementia 2010-
11 
3.95     
  2011-
12 
2.66     
  Total 6.61 0.00 6.61 
222 Jankibai Trust, Kamlabai  Ajmera Vidya 
Nagar, Deopur,Dhule Distt, Maharashtra 
DCC 2010-
11 
2.14     
  2011-
12 
3.65     
  Total 5.79 5.66 11.45 
223 Sainath Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, 
Andhori Tq, Ahmadpur, Distt. Latur  
DCC 2010-
11 
3.36     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total 6.73 3.37 10.10 
224 Late Sanjay Rathod Shikshan Sanstha, 
Gunj Tq. Mahagaon Distt. Yavatmal, 
Maharashtra 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.08     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.08 0.00 4.08 
225 Shri Krishna Mahila Bal Kalyan Avam 
Purnvasam Vikas Mandal, Jalgaon  
OAH  2010-
11 
4.35     
  2011-
12 
9.22     
  Total 13.57 0.00 13.57 
226 Gramin Janseva Shikhsan Sansthan, 
Nanded 
OAH  2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.76 0.00 9.76 

113 
 
227 Shri Chhatrapati Shivaji Education & 
Awakaning Welfare Society, Akola 
OAH  2010-
11 
3.66     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 3.66 10.86 14.52 
228 Late Laxmanrao Chinnawar Shikshan 
Prasarak Mandal, Akoli Tq. Umarkhed, 
Distt. Yawatmal, Mahrashtra 
OAH  2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.78     
  Total 9.66 4.88 14.54 
229 Youth Farmer  & Health Social Welfare, 
Yawatmal 
Sensitization, OAH  2010-
11 
2.79     
  2011-
12 
7.64     
  Total 10.43 7.59 18.02 
230 Ashirwad Shakshanik Samajik Sanskrit 
Sanstha, Vidya Nagar, Ambejogai, Distt. 
Beed 
MFCC 2010-
11 
1.47     
  2011-
12 
5.20     
  Total 6.67 6.97 13.64 
231 Dnayana Shikshan Sansthan Sanstha at 
Latur Distt. Maharashtra. 
DCC with Dementia 2010-
11 
1.29     
  2011-
12 
6.64     
  Total 7.93 7.72 15.65 
232 Jogai Mata Krishi Gramin Vikas 
sevabhavi sanstha,  at Nandurbar distt., 
Maharashtra. 
OAH 2010-
11 
3.85     
  2011-
12 
7.31     
  Total 
 
11.16 19.52 30.68 

114 
 
233 Jogeshwari Gramin Vikas Sevabhavi 
Sanstha, at Khedgaon, Jalgaon distt., 
Maharashtra. 
OAH 2010-
11 
1.42     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 6.30 4.88 11.18 
234 Late Bhikajirao Alies Dada Jagtap 
Pratishthan, Pune, Pune  distt., 
Maharashtra 
MFCC 2010-
11 
1.86     
  2011-
12 
6.80     
  Total 8.66 6.66 15.32 
235 Lokmanya Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, at 
Osmanabad distt., Maharashtra 
MFCC 2010-
11 
1.86     
  2011-
12 
6.97     
  Total 8.83 6.96 15.79 
236 Peoples Education Society, latur  Physiotherapy 2010-
11 
6.41     
  2011-
12 
1.85     
  Total 8.26 3.82 12.08 
237 Shri Satya Sai Sanskrutik Samaji 
Shaikshanik Mandal, Khedgaon, Jalgaon, 
at Beed  distt., Maharashtra , 
Physiotherapy, OAH 2010-
11 
7.72     
  2011-
12 
6.46     
  Total 14.18 7.00 21.18 
 Orissa           
238 Cuttack Zilla Harizana Adivasi Yojana DCC 2010-
11 
3.51     
  2011-
12 
4.77     
  Total 8.28 14.26 22.54 

115 
 
239 Orissa Social Rurual Tehchnology 
Institute,  
DCC 2010-
11 
4.77     
  2011-
12 
4.77     
  Total 9.54 12.63 22.17 
240 Jaya Kishan Youth Club, Puri OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
241 All Orissa Research Institute For 
Development of Women 
Movement(ARIDOWM)Angul 
DCC 2010-
11 
3.36     
  2011-
12 
1.68     
  Total 5.04 1.60 6.64 
242 Anatha Parityakt Balashrama, At/PO -
Ramachandrapur, Tikiraipada, 
Mohatapalla, Distt. Nayagarh, Orissa 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total 7.32 7.32 14.64 
243 Arun Institute of Rural Affairs (AIRA), 
Dhenkanal  
DCC-5, Helpline 2010-
11 
22.41     
  2011-
12 
25.65     
  Total 48.06 28.26 76.32 
244 Asha Nayakam Seva Sangha, jajpur DCC 2010-
11 
9.51     
  2011-
12 
2.38     
  Total 
 
18.23 9.02 27.25 

116 
 
245 Association for Social Reconstructive 
Activities 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.81     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.69 4.85 14.54 
246 Association for Social Work and Social 
Research in Orissa,Khurda 
OAH-1, DCC-5 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
247 Association for Voluntary Action, Puri, 
Orissa 
DCC-2 2010-
11 
27.77     
  2011-
12 
12.75     
  Total 40.52 6.03 46.55 
248 Banadurga, Bhubaneshwar, Boudh  OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total 7.32 0.00 7.32 
249 Bankeswari Jubak Sangha, Puri  OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.99     
  2011-
12 
1.68     
  Total 9.67 9.87 19.54 
250 Banki Anchalika Adivasi Harijan Kalyan 
Parishad, Puri    
DCC--3 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 
 
0.00 0.00 0.00 

117 
 
251 Basudeva Pathaagar, cuttack OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.24     
  2011-
12 
8.24     
  Total 16.48 0.00 16.48 
252 Bhairabi Club, Khurda OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.20     
  2011-
12 
8.21     
  Total 16.41 9.00 25.41 
253 Bishnupriya Balashram, Keonjhar DCC-1   2010-
11 
4.87     
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 9.74 0.00 9.74 
254 Bright Career Academy, Koraput , OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.87     
  2011-
12 
4.60     
  Total 9.47 0.00 9.47 
255 Council for All Round Dev. Of Society, 
Khurda  
DCC-2 2010-
11 
5.73     
  2011-
12 
2.80     
  Total 8.53 5.60 14.13 
256 Gandhian Institute of Technical                  
Advancement, Koraput  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.76 7.32 17.08 

118 
 
257 Gram Mangal Pathagar, Balangir OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.80     
  2011-
12 
4.87     
  Total 9.67 0.79 10.46 
258 Gram Seva Mandal OAH-1 & DCC-5 2010-
11 
5.35     
  2011-
12 
3.76     
  Total 9.11 0.00 9.11 
259 Indian Village Development 
Organisation, Kendrapada  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
260 Jankalyan sewa Sanstha, Kendrapada OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.44     
  2011-
12 
2.43     
  Total 4.87 4.88 9.75 
261 Janvikash, Nayagarh  OAH-1,  2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.88 0.00 4.88 
262 Jayanti Pathagar, Kalahandi  DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.25     
  2011-
12 
3.29     
  Total 
 
6.54 3.29 9.83 

119 
 
263  Juba Jyoti Club, Khurda  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.09     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 8.97 0.00 8.97 
264 Lutheran Mahila Samiti, Kendrapada OAH-1,  DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.71     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total 11.08 0.00 11.08 
265 Maharishi Dayanand Service Mission, 
Dhenkanal  
OAH-1 & DCC-4 2010-
11 
18.25     
  2011-
12 
17.70     
  Total  35.95 18.36 54.31 
266 Nandighosha, Cuttack  DCC-1 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
3.26     
  2011-
12 
7.36     
  Total 10.62 11.86 22.48 
267 National institute of Tribal Welfare & 
social action (NITWSA) ,Nayagarh  
DCC-2 & 1-OAH 2010-
11 
11.40     
  2011-
12 
8.18     
  Total 19.58 9.88 29.46 
268 National Resources Centre for Women 
Development, orissa  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.85     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.73 2.45 12.18 

120 
 
269 Nilachal Seva Pratisthan, Puri  OAH-2 & DCC-5 2010-
11 
26.04     
  2011-
12 
24.76     
  Total 50.80 23.81 74.61 
270 Orissa Multipurpose Dev. Centre, 
Kendrapara 
OAH-1 & DCC- 2010-
11 
14.98     
  2011-
12 
11.61     
  Total 26.59 1.68 28.27 
271 The Padmasree Society, Khurda DCC 2010-
11 
2.88     
  2011-
12 
1.44     
  Total 4.32 1.42 5.74 
272 Shakti Organisation, Distt. Rayagada, 
Orissa 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
2.41     
  Total 7.29 2.43 9.72 
273 Shree Ramakrishna Ashrama, Kalahandi OAH 2010-
11 
4.09     
  2011-
12 
2.05     
  Total 6.14 2.56 8.70 
274 Society for Rural Advancement & 
Democratic Humantarian Action, 
Dhenkanal 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 
 
4.88 0.00 4.88 

121 
 
275 Subhadra Mahtab Seva Sadan  OAH 2010-
11 
3.66     
  2011-
12 
3.20     
  Total 6.86 3.22 10.08 
276 Surakhya, Puri  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.33     
  2011-
12 
3.05     
  Total 7.38 1.02 8.40 
277 Union for Learning Trng. & Reformative 
Activ. Khurda  
MMU-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
9.57     
  2011-
12 
10.26     
  Total 19.83 11.14 30.97 
278 Vishwa Jeevan seva Sangh, Khurda DCC-5, Helpline, OAH-2 2010-
11 
26.04     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 26.04 26.61 52.65 
279 Voluntary Institute for Rural 
Development(VIRD) 
DCC 2010-
11 
2.93     
  2011-
12 
1.46     
  Total 4.39 1.90 6.29 
280 Aabhana , Khurda  Helpline 2010-
11 
0.73     
  2011-
12 
4.42     
  Total 
 
5.15 6.64 11.79 

122 
 
281 Rural Development Action Cell  OAH, MFCC 2010-
11 
5.27     
  2011-
12 
11.03     
  Total 16.30 4.05 20.35 
282 The Chetna, Dhenkal  DCC with Dementia  2010-
11 
1.51     
  2011-
12 
6.97     
  Total 8.48 6.96 15.44 
283 Centre for Rehabilitation Services Centre Physiotherapy 2010-
11 
6.31     
  2011-
12 
2.12     
  Total 8.43 2.12 10.55 
284 Laxmi Narayan Seva Pratisthan, Jaipur, 
Odhisa  
OAH 2010-
11 
4.40     
  2011-
12 
4.40     
  Total 8.80 0.00 8.80 
285  Holy Home, Nuapada OAH 2010-
11 
1.16     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 6.04 4.88 10.92 
 Punjab           
286 Bhai Ganaih Charitable Trust,          
Govind nagar  
DCC 2010-
11 
1.02     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 1.02 0 1.02 

123 
 
287 Akhil Bhartiya Jan Seva Samiti, Abhora, 
Punjab  
DCC-2 2010-
11 
1.57     
  2011-
12 
1.57     
  Total 3.14 0.00 3.14 
288 Gurunanak Charitable Trust, Ludhiana,  DCC-2 2010-
11 
1.21     
  2011-
12 
1.81     
  Total 3.02 0.00 3.02 
289 Mahila Kalyan Samiti, Rodki Road, 
Sardulgarh-151507, Distt -Mansa, 
(Phone-01659-51430) 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.96     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 2.96 0.00 2.96 
290 Mahila Mandal, Vill + P.O. Bundala, 
Distt. Jalandhar (Phone-01826-70924) 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
3.68     
  Total 3.68 0.00 3.68 
291 Social Work & Rural  Dev.,Punjab DCC-1, OAH-1 2010-
11 
5.25     
  2011-
12 
3.32     
  Total 8.57 0.00 8.57 
292 Vridh Ashram, Jalalabad Road, Muktsar -
152026,(Phone--01633-262947) 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.28     
  2011-
12 
2.88     
  Total 
 
5.16 0.00 5.16 

124 
 
293 Indian Red Cross Society, Distt Branch 
Faridkot, Red Cross Bhawan, Sadiq Road, 
Faridkot-151203,  
OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
3.03     
  Total 3.03 0.00 3.03 
294 Gyandeep Shiksha Samiti, Bhatinda, 
Punjab 
DCC 2010-
11 
1.46     
  2011-
12 
1.39     
  Total 2.85 0.00 2.85 
295 Lok Sewa Sansthan, Variyam Nagar, 
Abohar-152116, Distt. Ferozpur, 
DCC 2010-
11 
2.92     
  2011-
12 
2.74     
  Total 5.66 2.74 8.40 
296 Sarv Jan Gramin Vikash sansthan, 
Gurdaspur, Punjab  
OAH 2010-
11 
1.49     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 1.49 0.00 1.49 
 Rajasthan           
297 Rajasthan Anusuchit Jati Mahila Evam 
Vikas Samiti 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.59     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 2.59 0.00 2.59 
298 Navjyoti Shiksha Samiti  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.52     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 4.52 0.00 4.52 

125 
 
299 Ganga Vision OAH 2010-
11 
1.15     
  2011-
12 
4.80     
  Total 5.95 4.88 10.83 
300 Jan Vikas Sanchalan, Alwar  OAH 2010-
11 
3.45     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.45 0.00 3.45 
301 Nehru Model school samiti, Sri Ganga 
nagar  
DCC 2010-
11 
1.42     
  2011-
12 
1.42     
  Total 2.84 0.00 2.84 
 Tripura           
302 Abalamban OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.59     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 2.59 0.00 2.59 
303 Minority Development organisation  OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.34     
  Total 8.95 4.61 13.56 
 Tamil Nadu           
304 Rurual Education and Liberation Trust, 
(REAL), triopur  
Physiotherapy,                     
OAH 
2010-
11 
2.47     
2011-
12 
2.17     

126 
 
Total 4.64 7.00 11.64 
305 Mass Welfare Association, TV Malai 
District,  
oah 2010-
11 
2.47     
2011-
12 
      
Total 2.47 4.88 7.35 
306 Bharthi Women Develop ment Centre, 
Thiruvarur 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.86     
  Total 9.74 4.72 14.46 
307 annai Indira Rural Muentra Sangam, 
Malliwaram, tamil nadu 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.43     
  Total 1.43 7.72 9.15 
308 Gramya Social Welfare Society, 
Nagapattinam 
OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
9.55     
  2011-
12 
5.39     
  Total 14.94 5.04 19.98 
309 Home for Aged, Kanyakumari OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.50     
  2011-
12 
4.08     
  Total 7.58 9.07 16.65 
310 Margaret Social Dev. Society, Thanjavur DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.96     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 5.77 2.80 8.57 

127 
 
311 Brundavanam Ed.Social Trust, H397 
Sannathi Street, Maduranthagam, 
Kancheepuram, Tamilnadu 
MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.37     
  2011-
12 
2.67     
  Total 5.04 0.00 5.04 
312 Sri Victoria Edu. Society, Thanjavur OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.87 14.63 
313 Tamil Nadu Pengal Nala Sangam, Trichy OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.68     
  2011-
12 
1.84     
  Total 5.52 5.29 10.81 
314 Women Org. for Rural Development, 
Post Bag No.1, Pandamangalam PO, 
P.Velur Tk, Namakkal dist., Tamilnadu -
637208 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.78     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.66 4.87 14.53 
315 Jaya Balwadi Educational Society, 
Aravakarichi Patti Village, Asur Post -
Trichy-620015,  Trichy, Tamilnadu 
1-OAH & DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.24     
  2011-
12 
8.20     
  Total 16.44 0.00 16.44 
316 Annai Karunalaya Social Welfare 
Association, Kanchipuram 
OAH-2 2010-
11 
9.17     
  2011-
12 
8.95     
  Total 
 
18.12 9.76 27.88 

128 
 
317  Arasan Rural Development Society 
Distt., Tirunelvelli 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.72     
  2011-
12 
4.76     
  Total 9.48 4.88 14.36 
318 Avvai Village Wlfare Soiety, 
Nagapattinam 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.61     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 2.61 0.00 2.61 
319 Bharathamata Family Welfare 
Foundation, Tiruvarur 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.17     
  2011-
12 
4.46     
  Total 6.63 2.30 8.93 
320 Bureau for Integrated Rural 
Development, Kancheepuram 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.85     
  2011-
12 
4.79     
  Total 9.64 7.14 16.78 
321 Centre for Action for Rural Education, 
Erode  
MMU, OAH 2010-
11 
2.37     
  2011-
12 
5.13     
  Total 7.50 7.54 15.04 
322 Development Education for Rural Mass, 
Pudukottai (DERMA) 
OAH  2010-
11 
4.37     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
4.37 4.88 9.25 

129 
 
323 Duraisamy Generaous Social Education 
Association, Kancheepuram 
OAH-1   2010-
11 
4.37     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.37 0.00 4.37 
324 Gandhi Peace Centre, Salem OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
325  Grama Suyraj, Pudukottai OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
11.34     
  2011-
12 
11.34     
  Total 22.68 11.62 34.30 
326 Health Education and Development 
Society, Karur 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.78 14.54 
327 Indian Red Cross Society, Vellore OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
328 Kalaiselvei Karunalaya Social Welfare 
Society, Thiruvallur 
OAH-1, DCC-4 & MMU-1 2010-
11 
19.05     
  2011-
12 
18.09     
  Total 
 
37.14 18.14 55.28 

130 
 
329 Karunalaya, Nagapattinam OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.88 0.00 4.88 
330 Kendra for Integrated Rural Urban 
People Action, Madurai 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
331 Krishna Home, Trich OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
332 Madhar Nala Thondu Niruvanam, 
Cuddalore 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
7.54     
  2011-
12 
7.54     
  Total 15.08 7.54 22.62 
333 Makkal Nalvalu Mantram, Tirunelvali OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.56     
  2011-
12 
4.61     
  Total 9.17 4.55 13.72 
334 Mercy Miruna, Thanjavur OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 
 
9.76 4.88 14.64 

131 
 
335 National Mother and Child Welfare 
Organistion, Thiruvarur 
OAH-1  2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.34 0.00 4.34 
336 Neo Education Social Awareness and 
Management Society, Thiruvannamalai   
DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.92     
  Total 5.91 2.80 8.71 
337 OAZOANE, Pudukottai OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.49 4.88 14.37 
338  Organization for Rural Development, 
Vellore 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.61 14.37 
339 Promote Organization to Viable Venture 
of Empowering the Rural (POVVER), 
Kanayakumar 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total  9.76 4.88 14.64 
340 Rashtriya Seva Samoti, Thiruvaruru OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
  2011-
12 
4.34     
  Total 
 
8.95 0.00 8.95 

132 
 
341 Rural Education for Action and 
Development Agency, Dindigul 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.34     
  Total 8.68 0.00 8.68 
342 Rural Education for Community 
Organisation(RECO.), Puddukkottai 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.70     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.58 4.88 14.46 
343 Singampatty Grama Munetra Sangam 
(SGMS), Sivanganga 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
344 Society for the Improvement of Weaker  
Section, Cuddalore. 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.17     
    2011-
12 
4.61     
    Total 8.78 4.61 13.39 
345 SARAS Truist, Neelgiri OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
    2011-
12 
4.88     
    Total 9.76 3.84 13.60 
346 Society for Rural Development, 
Nagapattinam  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.02     
    2011-
12 
4.88     
    Total 
 
8.90 4.88 13.78 

133 
 
347 Society for Rural and Urban Women’s 
Renaissance Activities(SRUWRA), 
Sivanganga 
OAH-2 2010-
11 
9.76     
    2011-
12 
4.88     
    Total 14.64 0.00 14.64 
348 St. Paul Education Trust, Chennai MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.37     
    2011-
12 
2.23     
    Total 4.60 2.21 6.81 
349 The  Society Organized for Promotion of 
Rural Tribal & Downtrodden (SPORT) , 
Trichy 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.17     
  2011-
12 
3.66     
  Total 2.17 7.58 9.75 
350 Thiruchirappalli Rural Urban Welfare 
Development Education Society,  Trichy 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.88 14.64 
351 Vidivelli Rural Development Society, 
Trichy 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.22 4.88 14.10 
352 Yuvak Vikas Kendra, Theni OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.34     
  2011-
12 
4.26     
  Total 
 
8.60 3.92 12.52 

134 
 
353 Society for Rural Development, Salem OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.61     
2011-
12 
4.88     
Total 9.49 4.88 14.37 
354 Fatima Trust, Nilgiri  OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.43     
2011-
12 
      
Total 2.43 0.00 2.43 
355 Society uplift Network, Dhampur  MFCC 2010-
11 
0.00     
2011-
12 
1.48     
Total 1.48 6.58 8.06 
356 DROPS, Tamil Nadu  OAH 2010-
11 
0.00     
2011-
12 
1.15     
Total 1.15 4.88 6.03 
 Uttar Pradesh           
357 Adarsh Kalyan Seva Samiti, Bahraich OAH-1 2010-
11 
5.66     
  2011-
12 
2.74     
  Total 8.40 2.74 11.14 
358 Jai Gaytri Maa Bal Vidya Mandir, Jaulon DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.33     
  2011-
12 
3.37     
  Total 4.12 0.00 4.12 

135 
 
359 Janta Junior High School, J P Nagar OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.26     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.26 4.54 8.80 
360 Navada Gramodyog Vikas Samiti, J P 
Nagar 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
361 New Public School Samiti, Lucknow DCC-2, OAH-1 2010-
11 
5.81     
  2011-
12 
11.60     
  Total 17.41 17.41 34.82 
362 NIRVAN, Lucknow DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.22     
  Total 1.22 4.11 5.33 
363 Samaj Seva Sansthan, Lucknow DCC-1 2010-
11 
1.50     
  2011-
12 
1.50     
  Total 3.00 2.80 5.80 
364 Sangam Vikas Sewa Sansthan, Gonda OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.87     
  2011-
12 
4.76     
  Total 9.63 7.21 16.84 
365 Nirbal Kalyan Samiti, Barabanki OAH-1 2010- 4.43     

136 
 
11 
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.43 0.00 4.43 
366 Akhil Bharatiya Azad Seva Sansthan DCC-2 2010-
11 
5.81     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 8.62 5.70 14.32 
367 Shri Ganga Prasad Samarak Mahila 
Kalyan Sansthan, Kunda, Pratapgarh 
OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
368 Shaheed Memorial Society, Lucknow OAH-3 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
9.60     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 9.60 7.97 17.57 
369 Jawahar Jyoti Shiksha Evam Gramya 
Vikas Samiti 
OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.24     
  2011-
12 
8.22     
  Total 16.46 4.10 20.56 
370 Upasana Jan Kalyan Seva Samiti, Bareely OAH-1 2208-
09 
1.42     
  2011-
12 
5.42     
  Total 
 
 
6.84 9.05 15.89 

137 
 
371 Arya Sugandh Sansthan, Bijnor OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.27     
  2011-
12 
0.63     
  Total 1.90 8.75 10.65 
372 Gramothan Jan Sewa Sansthan DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.90     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 2.90 0.00 2.90 
373 Gyan Bharthi Mahila Kalyan Samiti, Etah OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.30     
  2011-
12 
6.08     
  Total 8.38 8.38 16.76 
374 PARAKH, Allahabad OAH-1 2010-
11 
5.66     
  2011-
12 
2.03     
  Total 7.69 2.30 9.99 
375 Madhymik Vidyalaya Purab -Gaon-
Sareser Sansthan, Sultanpur 
DCC-1 2010-
11 
3.21     
    2011-
12 
      
    Total 3.21 3.21 6.42 
Uttarkhand           
376 Ramraj gramin,  Uttarkhand  DCC-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.15     
  Total 1.15 0.00 1.15 

138 
 
377 Gramya Mahila Kalyan Sansthan, 
Dehradun 
OAH-1, Helpline 2010-
11 
5.87     
  2011-
12 
9.13     
  Total 15.00 13.47 28.47 
378 Jan Jagriti Seva Samiti, Udham Singh 
Nagar 
OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.42     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 6.30 9.76 16.06 
West Bengal           
379 Chanchal Jan Kalyan Samiti OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.42     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 3.42 0.00 3.42 
380 All India Federation of Scheduled Castes, 
Tribes & Minorities 
MMU-1 2010-
11 
2.66     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 2.66 0.00 2.66 
381 All Bengal Women’s Union OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.69     
  2011-
12 
3.38     
  Total 7.07 0.00 7.07 
382 Calcutta Matropolitan Instt. Of 
Gerontology 
DCC-2, MMU-1 2010-
11 
7.74     
  2011-
12 
6.05     
  Total 13.79 0.00 13.79 

139 
 
383 Janashiksha Prochar Kendra OAH-1 2010-
11 
3.66     
  2011-
12 
1.22     
  Total 4.88 0.00 4.88 
384 Shri Krishna Pratisthan DCC-1 2010-
11 
1.49     
  2011-
12 
2.81     
  Total 4.30 0.00 4.30 
385 Village Welfare Society OAH-1 & DCC-1 2010-
11 
6.79     
  2011-
12 
3.24     
  Total 10.03 0.00 10.03 
386 Ganeshnagar Laxminarayan Club & 
Pathagar 
OAH-1 , DCC-1 2010-
11 
8.51     
  2011-
12 
4.14     
  Total 12.65 1.49 14.14 
387 Hitaljore Kishore Bala Dattabya 
Chikitsalaya 
OAH 2010-
11 
4.06     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 4.06 0.00 4.06 
388 Amar Seva Sangha OAH-1, DCC-1, MMU-1 2010-
11 
7.41   10.07 
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 
 
7.41 0.00   

140 
 
389 Bikramnagar Udayan Sangha OAH-2 2010-
11 
9.75     
  2011-
12 
9.76     
  Total 19.51 0.00 19.51 
390 Netaji Pathchakra OAH-1  2010-
11 
4.88     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 9.76 4.87 14.63 
391 West Bengal SC, ST & Minority Welfare 
Association 
OAH-2, DCC-7 2010-
11 
23.31     
  2011-
12 
14.25     
  Total 37.56 0.00 37.56 
392 Social Welfare and Rural Dev. Society OAH-1  2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 
393  Satdubi Mahila Mandal DCC-2 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
1.61     
  Total 1.61 8.31 9.92 
394 Karimpur Social Welfare Society OAH-1 2010-
11 
0.00     
  2011-
12 
2.36     
  Total 
 
2.36 0.00 2.36 

141 
 
395 Basgeria Prativa Club, Paschim 
Medinipur, WB 
DCC-2 2010-
11 
5.02     
  2011-
12 
3.36     
  Total 8.38 5.00 13.38 
396 Biplobi Rural Development Society,  
Malda 
DCC-3 2010-
11 
9.78     
  2011-
12 
4.89     
  Total 14.67 0.00 14.67 
397 Child and Social Welfare Society, 
Medinipur  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.79     
  2011-
12 
4.71     
  Total 9.50 0.00 9.50 
398 Kalyan Bharathi, hooghly  OAH-1, DCC-1 2010-
11 
7.00     
  2011-
12 
7.41     
  Total 14.41 0.00 14.41 
399 Nepura Rural Development OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.43     
  2011-
12 
4.70     
  Total 9.13 0.00 9.13 
400 Nimbark Math Seva Samithi Trust OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.77     
  2011-
12 
2.44     
  Total 
 
7.21 2.43 9.64 

142 
 
401 Raychak Morning Star Club OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.70     
  2011-
12 
      
  Total 4.70 0.00 4.70 
402 Shree Ramkrishna Satyananda Ashram DCC-1 2010-
11 
2.77     
  2011-
12 
2.68     
  Total 5.45 5.45 10.90 
403 Vivekananda Lokshiksha Niketan OAH-1 2010-
11 
4.70     
  2011-
12 
4.88     
  Total 4.70 0.00 4.70 
404 Gangadhar chak and Deevanchak 
Vivekanand Club, Poorb Medinipur  
DCC 2010-
11 
2.91     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total  2.91 0.00 2.91 
405 Berhampore Prabeen Sabha OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.99     
  2011-
12 
2.18     
  Total 5.17 2.18 7.35 
406 Chiranabin, Howrah  OAH-1 2010-
11 
1.15     
  2011-
12 
1.15     
  Total 
 
2.30 0.00 2.30 

143 
 
407 Vivekananda Adivasi kalyan Samiti, 
Bankura, West Bengal  
OAH-1 2010-
11 
2.61     
  2011-
12 
0.00     
  Total 2.61 0.00 2.61 
408 Seulipur Udayan Club, West Bengal  OAH, MMU, DCC  2010-
11 
6.28     
  2011-
12 
6.57     
  Total 12.85 0.00 12.85 
409 Sainpukur Matri, West Bengal  OAH 2010-
11 
6.40     
  2011-
12 
6.30     
  Total 12.70 6.34 19.04 
 
  

144 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
DETAILS OF THE NUMBER OF BENEFICIARIES COVERED DURING 2012 -13 
AS REPORTED BY THE STATES/UTS (NSAP) 
      Sl. 
No. States/UTs No. of beneficiaries reported 
    
IGNOAP
S IGNWPS IGNDPS NFBS 
Annapurn
a 
1 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
1856680 
813609 376706 58000 93200 
2 Bihar 3819350 415532 27496 29446   
3 Chhattisgarh 662861 119391 35608 11577 22132 
4 Goa 2136 NR NR NR NR 
5 Gujarat 402552 2500 4583 4936 0 
6 Haryana 147191 45108 16804 2054 0 
7 
Himachal 
Pradesh 84825 19068 543 1807 14552 
8 J & K 129000 4730 4048 770   
9 Jharkhand 636213 123733 17305 3036 10442 
10 Karnataka 1239641 202186 56283 4592   
11 Kerala 289141 34244 15686 342 257189 
12 
Madhya 
Pradesh 1476300 364818 154937 37988 0 
13 Maharashtra 1200000 5000 2000 36000 108000 
14 Odisha 1777083 194379 110822 15000 64800 
15 Punjab 166233 15663 3817 213 0 
16 Rajasthan 696933 107550 17549 NR 105293 
17 Tamilnadu 1150537 777458 85655 12415 65113 
18 Uttar Pradesh 3844153 584781 56300 113653 NR 
19 Uttarakhand 245692 11991 2185 2530 0 
20 West Bengal 1310280 951717 47540 33787 65068 
NE States 
     
21 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 31209 NR NR NR NR 
22 Assam 750501 68270 14045 10471 NR 
23 Manipur 72514 NR NR NR NR 
24 Meghalaya 50997 7615 1470 2000 9263 
25 Mizoram 26359 891 544 197 2583 
26 Nagaland 47191 1961 1276 650 6727 
27 Sikkim 18707 645 646 63 NR 
28 Tripura 152550 7432 2426 1778 14552 
   Sub Total 22286829 4880272 1056274 383305 838914 
Union Territories 
     29 A&N Islands 1011 781 NR NR NR 
30 Chandigarh 3784 NR 97 NR NR 
31 D&N Haveli 8891 NR NR NR NR 

145 
 
32 Daman & Diu 1115 NR NR NR NR 
33 NCT Delhi 386068 79834 32314 2700 NR 
34 Lakshadweep 738 NR NR NR NR 
35 Puducherry 23607 NR 1585 NR NR 
  Sub Total 425214 80615 33996 2700 0 
  
GRAND 
TOTAL 22712043 4960887 1090270 386005 838914 
 

146 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
DETAILS OF CENTRAL FUNDS ALLOCATED UNDER NSAP DURING THE LAST 
FIVE YEARS  
 (Rs. in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
States/UTs 
  
Allocation  
  2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
1 Andhra Pradesh 28989.21 36443.00 39667.00 40949.02 67563.36 
2 Bihar 49996.41 59776.00 56002.00 97147.75 101216.67 
3 Chhattisgarh 13408.63 15577.00 17952.00 23506.54 23072.95 
4 Goa 156.75 196.00 84.00 129.00 292.00 
5 Gujarat 2568.67 7262.00 5871.00 8998.00 13246.21 
6 Haryana 4127.50 3532.00 5324.00 6929.82 7505.39 
7 Himachal Pradesh 1989.31 2179.00 2828.00 2934.39 3098.36 
8 J & K 2042.75 3322.00 2564.00 2372.00 4308.89 
9 Jharkhand 20983.60 23606.00 18166.00 27728.08 18215.64 
10 Karnataka 22850.20 31261.00 32296.00 39782.87 45649.44 
11 Kerala 5779.21 5943.00 6615.00 8594.37 9164.00 
12 Madhya Pradesh 43592.42 29747.00 34686.00 53973.36 54351.43 
13 Maharashtra 31332.25 41540.00 28573.00 20505.99 43866.00 
14 Orissa 20802.81 22043.00 37288.00 51086.43 74305.32 
15 Punjab 4792.37 3769.00 4845.00 4414.00 5783.11 
16 Rajasthan 14316.14 15259.00 14507.00 25538.44 25513.08 
17 Tamilnadu 32070.19 28618.00 22876.00 31909.00 57350.39 
18 Uttar Pradesh 84300.35 112302.00 110319.00 131679.43 163952.23 
19 Uttarakhand 4720.53 4745.00 4562.00 7578.09 7904.87 
20 West Bengal 27842.45 37384.00 39407.00 47504.93 78165.01 
NE States      
21 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
488.02 365.00 285.00 504.12 1138.98 
22 Assam 17941.11 17265.00 16787.00 11207.50 22504.42 
23 Manipur 2051.86 2213.00 1126.00 1893.93 1697.50 
24 Meghalaya 1866.47 830.00 1664.00 1486.49 1062.00 
25 Mizoram 602.20 578.00 750.00 792.78 867.57 
26 Nagaland 835.15 691.00 1164.00 1027.72 1677.27 
27 Sikkim 437.90 530.00 422.00 455.53 236.00 
28 Tripura 3339.35 3948.00 4370.00 3978.37 4491.91 
  Sub Total 444223.81 510924.00 511000.00 654607.95 838200.00 
UTs 
 
      
29 A&N Islands 25.00 39.00 75.00 198.00 230.69 
30 Chandigarh 181.00 284.00 145.00 158.00 189.61 
31 D&N Haveli 61.00 96.00 215.00 238.00 272.14 
32 Daman & Diu 13.00 20.00 17.00 32.00 43.44 

147 
 
33 NCT Delhi 5327.00 8371.00 3998.00 3709.00 4860.31 
34 Lakshadweep 1.00 2.00 11.00 22.00 27.44 
35 Puducherry 168.00 264.00 739.00 682.00 872.80 
  Total 5776.00 9076.00 5200.00 5039.00 6496.42 
  
GRAND 
TOTAL 
450000.00 520000.00 516200.00 659646.95 844696.42 
 
  

148 
 
ANNEXURE - IV  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2012 -13) HELD ON FRIDAY, 5 th JULY, 
2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1625 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri M. Anandan   
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri   
4. Shri Mohan Jena 
5. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
6. Smt. Mausam Noor 
7. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
8. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
9. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
10. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
11. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
12. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
13. Shri Mangala Kisan 
14. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 

149 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name Designation  
 
1. Shri Sudhir Bhargava Secretary 
 
2. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava Additional Secretary 
 
3. Shri T.R. Meena Joint Secretary 
 
4. Dr. J.C. Sharma Economic Adviser (Plan) 
 
        
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and also 
the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  
Social Justice and Empowerment) to the sitting of the Committee.  The Chairman 
informed that the meeting had been convened to have a briefing on the subject  
"Implementation of schemes for welfare of Senior Citizens".    With the approval of the 
Chairman, the re presentative of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of  Social Justice and Empowerment) made a power point presentation   
on   the subject. 
3. The Members then raised points/questions, which inter-alia related to :- 
(i) The population of older persons (senior citizens) as per the 2011 census 
State-wise and existing facilities for them.  
 

150 
 
(ii) Perspective planning and the  proposed schemes for the welfare of senior 
citizens in the 12th Plan period. 
 
(iii) Projects sanctioned under th e scheme of Integrated Programme for Older 
Persons (IPOP)  and Grant -in-aid sanctioned to them in the different 
States and Union Territories. 
 
 
(iv) Monitoring the work done by the various NGOs working in the field of 
caring for older persons receiving Central Grant-in-aid and the role of 
State Governments and the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in this regard. 
 
(v) Setting up of Regional Resource and Training Centres (RRTCs) in more 
States/UTs etc. 
 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries put forth by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish replies to those 
points which could not be replied to in fifteen days time. 
 
5. At the end, the Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Mi nistry 
for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner. 
6.           A verbatim of the proceedings was kept on record. 
    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

151 
 
ANNEXURE - V 
 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  TWENTY -FIRST  SITTING  OF  THE STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON  SOCIAL   JUSTICE   AND  EMPOWERMENT  (2012-13) 
HELD  ON  MONDAY, 26TH  AUGUST, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room 'D',  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
6. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
7. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
11. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
12. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director  
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 

152 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
  
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name  
 
Designation and Organisation 
 
1. Shri Mathew Cherian Chief Executive Officer, HelpAge India 
 
2. Ms Anupama Dutta Director,  HelpAge India 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of HelpAge India, an NGO working for welfare of senior citizens, to the 
sitting of the Committee.  He then requested the non -official witnesses to brief the 
Committee and  give their views on the various aspects of subject "Implementation of 
Schemes for Welfare of Senior Citizens".  He also  drew the attention of the non -official 
witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha.   
 
3. The representatives of HelpAge India then put forth before the Committee their 
views/suggestions on various aspects of the subject.  The following points were       
inter-alia  discussed at the sitting of the Committee :- 
 (i) Draft policy on senior citizens, 2011 and its early adoption; 
 
 (ii) Accentuating problems of the senior citizens above 80+ and widows; 
 
 (iii) Need to give universal pension to all aged people; 
 
(iv) Need for greater employment of senior citizens in Government run 
schemes; 
 
(v) Underutilization of funds in the scheme of Integrated Programme for Older 
Persons (IPOP); 

153 
 
 
(vi) Bottlenecks in release of grants, need for greater transparency and entire 
e-filing of applications, etc. 
 
(vii) Implementation of policy of universal health insurance for older persons; 
 
(viii) Construction of well planned old age homes to cater to the needs of senior 
citizens; and 
 
(ix) Position regarding retirement age, pension and health schemes in other 
countries of the world for the senior citizens. 
 
4. The  Chairman thanked the non-official witnesses for giving valuable suggestions 
and  information to the Committee on the subject under examination and also for 
expressing their views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
5. A verbatim of the proceedings was kept on record. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

154 
 
ANNEXURE - VI  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-14) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 25 th 
SEPTEMBER, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
   
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
7. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
8. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
    
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
9. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
10. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
11. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
12. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
13. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
14. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 

155 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation  
 
1. Shri Sudhir Bhargava Secretary 
 
2. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava Additional Secretary 
 
3. Shri Shyam Kapoor Joint Secretary 
 
4. Dr. Sujata Sharma Economic Adviser (Plan) 
 
        
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and also 
the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of  
Social Justice and Empowerment) to the sitting of the Committee.  The Chairman 
informed that th e meeting had been convened for taking oral evidence on the subject  
"Implementation of schemes for welfare of Senior Citizens".    
3. The Members then raised points/questions, which inter-alia related to :- 
(i) Greater  representation of NGOs working for the welfare of senior  citizens 
in the different States in policy formulation and programme implementation 
thereof; 
 
(ii) underutilization of funds in the scheme of  Integrated Programme for Older 
Persons (IPOP) and need for mounting publicity to the scheme; 
 

156 
 
(iii) setting up of  Government run old age homes for senior citizens in each 
district of the country and more day care centres; 
 
(iv) role of senior citizens welfare organizations in policy making for senior  
citizens; 
 
(v) monitoring of the old age p ension schemes of the Ministry of Rural 
Development;  
 
(vi) periodic review of welfare schemes for the senior citizens and benefits 
being given by the various Ministries to senior citizens.  
 
(vii) preparation and submission to the Committee the comprehens ive list of 
NGOs, for the last three years and the amount sanctioned to them – NGO-
wise, year-wise and State-wise; 
 
(viii) the list of National level monitors for monitoring the schemes and  
programmes for the aged persons and the frequency of meetings hel d by 
them and the gist of their recommendations and the action taken thereon 
by the Government of India; and 
 
(ix) endorsement of grant-in-aid to NGOs to the area M.P.  
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to most of the queries put forth by 
the Members to the extent possible and assured to furnish replies to those points which 
could not be replied to by 15th October, 2013. 
 
5. At the end, the Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry 
for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner. 
 
6.           A verbatim of the proceedings was kept on record. 
    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

157 
 
ANNEXURE - VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY,                    
17th DECEMBER, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
8. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
9. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
11. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
12. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 

158 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft Thirty -ninth Report on the subject "Implementation of schemes for 
welfare of S enior Citizens",  Fortieth Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants,  
2013-14 of the Department of Disability Affairs (Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment), Forty-first Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 2013 -14 of the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment (Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) and Forty -second Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 2013 -
14 of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirty -ninth, Fortieth, 
Forty-first and Forty-second Report of the Committee without  any amendment. 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 