1 
 
22 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2011 - 2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
TWENTY – SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
TWENTY - SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2012 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on   21.3.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter- I. 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE I Details of the present status of the 14 recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 
ANNEXURE II SCSP Outlay/Expenditure during Eleventh Plan during the 
years 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. 
 
 
ANNEXURE III State/UTs-wise BPL Families assisted and crossed the 
Poverty Line during the years 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08. 
 
 
ANNEXURE IV Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment letter dated 
11.8.2011. 
 
 
ANNEXURE V Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 5.3.2012.             
        
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
 
                                       

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2011-2012) 
       
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
13. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana  
14. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
17. Shri Kabir Suman 
  *18. Smt. Usha Verma  
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
**27. Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28. Shri Baishnab Parida 
29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
__________________________________________________________________ 
* Smt. Usha Verma ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 3.1.2012. 
** Dr. Ram Dayal Munda was expired on 30.9.2011. 

5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty -Second Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabh a and laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 th 
August, 2011.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 31.1.2012.  
The Report was considered and adopted by the Stand ing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment at their sitting held on 5.3.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
05 March, 2012        Chairman, 
15 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants , 2011-12 relating to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment.  
1.2 The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 4th 
August, 2011.  It contained 21 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Paragraph Nos.  2.3, 3.25, 3.28, 3.29, 3.32, 4.20, 4.37, 5.6, 6.9, 6.10 and 
7.18. 
 (Total 11  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Paragraph Nos. 3.27 and 3.31. 
 (Total 2 - Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I:  
Paragraph Nos.  3.24, 3.26, 6.11 and 7.9. 
(Total 4 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos. 3.30, 4.12, 4.13 and 4.28. 
  (Total 4  - Chapter V)  
 

8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case no t later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the repli es received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Steps Taken in  improving performance of Disability and Social Defence 
Sectors.  
Recommendation (S.No.2,  Para No. 3.24) 
1.5 The Committee note d that against the plan allocation of Rs. 4524.04 crore (BE) 
which was reduced to Rs. 4300 crore, at RE stage, the Ministry has achieved an 
expenditure of Rs. 4185.93 crore. The Committee had found that two important divisions 
of the Ministry i.e. the Disability Division and the Social Defence Division could not utilize 
full funds allocated to them (utilization of Rs. 314.19 crore out of Rs. 450.01 crore a nd 
76.12 crore out of Rs. 222.01 crore respectively). Also there was a saving due to non -
receipt of sufficient proposals from State Governments/voluntary organizations located in 
the North Eastern region. The budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the ye ar 2011 -12 
had been enhanced to Rs. 5375 crore and the Committee were given to understand that 
the additionality of fund requirement in 2011 -12 is mainly for post -matric scholarship for 
SCs and OBCs and a new scheme on pre -matric scholarship for SCs. The C ommittee 
while expressing their unhappiness over the Ministry's not -so-satisfactory performance in 
various schemes due to which there was underutilization and surrender of funds during the 
year 2010 -2011 recommend ed that the Ministry should make maximum ef forts to utilize 
the entire funds allocated to them for the year 2011 -12. Adequate precautionary steps in 
way of review of utilization of funds at suitable intervals, tight monitoring of various 

9 
 
schemes and persuading the States to send the proposals well in advance etc. should be 
undertaken so as to avoid surrender of funds. The Committee strongly recommend ed that 
the Ministry should focus itself in key areas like Disability sector and Social Defence sector 
where the financial and physical performance has been slow in the past. The Ministry 
while allocating funds to various NGOs should also intimate about the same to concerned 
MPs in whose constituency the NGO is working so that they can also monitor the 
implementation of the scheme and utilization of funds. 
 
1.6 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
"The Ministry is continuously making efforts to further improve its utilization of Plan 
outlay especially in the Disability and Social Defence sectors.  As a step in that direction, 
sanctioning powers delegated to Joint Secretary/Special Secretary/Secretary of the 
Ministry have been doubled in November, 2011. 
 
As regards the involvement of MPs in whose constituency an NGO is working, in 
monitoring its progress and utilization of funds, a proposa l for constitution of Vigilance -
cum-Monitoring Committees at the State and district levels is under active consideration, 
in consultation with the Planning Commission.  These Committees would be expected to 
keep a regular watch on the implementation of the  Programmes as per the prescribed 
procedures and guidelines. These Committees would, inter alia,  include Members of 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).  
The  suggestion of the Committee to endorse a copy of the sanction letters of Grant 
in aid released  to NGO(s), to the concerned MPs, in whose constituency the particular 
NGO is working, is being examined".   
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry focus on key areas like 
Disability Sector and Social Defence Sector where the financial and physical 
performance has been slow in the past .  The Ministry have informed that as a step 
in the direction, sanctioning power delegated to Joint Secretary/Special 
Secretary/Secretary of the Ministry has been doubled.  However, the Committee feel 
that this is not enough and steps such as  review of utilization of funds at suitable 
intervals, tight monitoring of various schemes and other concrete steps need to be 
taken up so that funds are utilized properly  in these two ke y areas.  The Committee 
are happy to learn that  there is a proposal for constitution of Vigilance -cum-

10 
 
Monitoring Committees at the State and District levels  and the same is under active 
consideration in consultation with the Planning Commission.  The se would include 
Members of Parliament, State legislatures and Panchayati Raj Institutions.  The 
Ministry have further stated that the suggestion that a copy of the sanctioned letters 
of Grants-in-aid released to NGOs may be forwarded to the concerned MPs is also 
being examined.  The Committee while reiteratin g their original recommendation  
desire that the setting up of Vigilance -cum-Monitoring Committee be expedited and 
urgent action be taken on their suggestion of endorsing a copy of sanction letter to 
concerned MPs.    
B. Revision of Scholarships for OBCs 
Recommendations (S.No.4, Para No. 3.26) 
1.8 The Committee note d that the scheme for Post -matric Scholarship to students 
belonging to SCs ha d been revised with effect from 1st July, 2010 which ha d raised the 
parental income ceiling for eligibility from Rs. 1.00 lakh to Rs. 2.00 lakh and also there was 
a proposal to increase the income ceiling and scholarship rates under the scheme of Post -
matric scholarship for OBCs. The Committee desire d that pare ntal income ceiling for 
availing the scholarships in both the schemes of Post -matric Scholarship for SCs and 
Post-matric Scholarship for OBCs should be revised upwardly to Rs. 3.00 lakh so that 
more students can avail the scholarships. 
1.9 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
"Parental income ceiling under the scheme of PMS for OBCs has been revised 
from Rs.44,500/- to Rs.1.0 lakh p.a. w.e.f. 1.7.2011.  Further revision of the Post Matric 
Scholarship Schemes for SC & OBC students would be undertaken in the XII Plan".   
 
1.10 The Committee have been informed  that the income ceiling of parents for 
awarding scholarship to students belonging to SCs under the Post -matric 
Scholarship Scheme has been  revised from 1.7.2010  and the parental income 

11 
 
ceiling for eligibility has been raised from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2 lakh  per annum .  
However, the income ceiling of Post-matric Scholarship Scheme for OBCs has been 
revised from Rs. 44,500 to Rs. 1 lakh per annum w.e.f. 1.7.2011.  The Com mittee are 
not satisfied with the parental income ceiling of the  Post-matric Scholarship 
Scheme for OBCs and recommend it should at least be brought at par with the Post-
matric Scholarship Scheme for SCs. 
C. Setting up of District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs)  
Recommendation (S.No.19, Para No. 6.11) 
1.11 The Committee noted that the setting up of District Disability Rehabilitation Centres 
(DDRCs) and Composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs) was one of the areas where funds 
have been earmarked under the scheme of SIPDA. In pursuance with the Finance 
Minister's Budget speech (2010 -11), 50 District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) 
and 2 Composite Rehabilitation Centres(CRCs) were proposed  to be set up during the 
year, however against the above target only 21 DDRCs could be sanctioned. Apart from 
non-receipt of proposals from State Governments non -availability of rent free 
accommodation have been cited as problems for DDRCs. Also, the Distr ict Management 
Team headed by the District Collector found it difficult to identify the implementing agency 
suitable for such work as also non -availability of skilled manpower. The Committee were 
given to understand that some of the guideli nes for assistan ce to DDRCs had  been 
revised to address the above probl ems. However, the Committee felt  that the Ministry 
needed to find a solution to other major concerns like finding implementing agencies and 
skilled manpower for setting up DDRCs. The Committee recommen ded that a specific 
team/task force should be appointed for the purpose so that it can help to resolve the local 
issues and the requisite number of DDRCs as per target were set up and made functional 

12 
 
with all infrastructure and manpower facilities covering  maximum number of districts in the 
States.  
                  1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
"Setting up of DDRCs involves a number of steps, including identification of suitable 
implementing agency possessing requisite expertise,  at the District level, which  is to be 
done by the concerned State Government, and as such, appointment of a task forc e at the 
Central level may not serve much purpose.   However, the concerned State Governments 
are being regularly pursed to expeditiously send their complete  proposals.   
21 DDRCs were sanctioned in 2010 -11 and 5 more DDRCs have been sanctioned 
till date in 2011-12.  Proposals have been received in respect of another 62 DDRCs but 
have been found on scrutiny .to be  deficient. The Ministry has taken up the matter with 
the concerned States to remove the deficiencies".   
 
1.13 The Committee are dismayed to note that proposals for setting up 66 DDRCs 
could not go through as they were found to be deficient  on scrutiny.  The Ministry 
have stated that finding a suitable implementing agency with requisite expertise for  
setting up of DDRC is to be done by the State Governments and therefore setting up 
a task force at the Centre level does not serve the purpose.  However, taking view of 
the fact that setting up of DDRCs is an enormous and important task, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry need s to play a proactive role so as to guide t he States in 
sending complete proposals  so that the District Disability Rehabilitation Centres  
(DDRCs) can be set up at the earliest.   
D. Welfare of Senior Citizens. 
Recommendation  (S.No.20, Para No. 7.9) 
1.14 The Committee observed that the Ministry ha d been running Scheme of Integrated 
Programme for Older Persons since 1992 under which grants -in-aid was given to Non -
Government organizations for running of Old Age Homes (OAH), Day Care Centres (DCC) 
and Mobile Medi care Units (MMU). The scheme was revised in 2008 to include new 
projects like maintenance of Respite Care Homes and Continuous Care Homes, running 

13 
 
of Multi Service Centres for older persons, running of Day Care Centres for Alzherimer's 
Disease/Dementia patients, physiotherapy clinics for older persons, training of care givers 
etc. However, the Committee observe d that despite the revision of the scheme widening 
its scope, only 50% of the funds released could be utilized during the year 2010 -11 the 
reason being non-receipt of adequate number of proposals, incomplete proposals and late 
proposals. The Committee desire d that matters concerning the older persons need to be 
given proper attention in India as Governments in other countries of the world have taken 
a step forward to provide basic facilities to older persons as the responsibility of the State 
and implementation of programmes concerning older persons in States should be 
addressed with utmost priority. The Committee were dismayed to note that an important  
scheme of the Ministry i.e. the scheme of Construction of Old Age Homes for Senior 
Citizens could not be launched during 2010-11, even though an allocation of Rs. 100 crore 
had been made specifically for the purpose during 2010 -11. It is more disheartenin g to 
note that the scheme ha d been pushed to further uncertainty as no funds have been kept 
for the scheme during 2011-12.  With the Rs. 100 crore allocation during the year 2010-11, 
the Ministry should have taken up the matter with Planning Commission for  launching of 
the scheme at least on a pilot basis with smaller targets. Under Section 19 of the 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 , the care of older 
persons and senior citizens was the primary responsibility of the Governmen t and hence 
their basic needs can be catered to a great extent by construction of Old Age Homes in 
each district. Therefore, the Committee desire d early and expeditious action in the matter. 
Now that the preparations for 12th plan allocations were under wa y, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment will appropriately take 
up the matter with the Planning Commission and work on a viable proposal to be launched 
during the 12th plan. 
 

14 
 
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
 
"(i) Integrated Programme for Older Persons 
The scheme was revised in 2008 to include new projects like maintenance of 
Respite Care Homes and Continuous Care Homes, running of Multi Service Centres for 
older persons, running of Day Care Centres for Alzheimer‟s Disease/Dementia patients, 
physiotherapy clinics for older persons, training of care givers etc. However, the pace of 
expenditure under the Scheme continues to be unsatisfactory, though c oncerted efforts 
are being made by the M inistry to get adequate number of project proposals from the 
State Governments. Financial norms prescribed under the Scheme are also not attractive 
enough for the NGOs to submit  proposals for financial assistance under it. Therefore, 
keeping in view the r ise in  cost of the living index, a Committee has been constituted to 
recommend  revision in the  financial norms under the scheme.   
  
(ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens:  
 
Sub section (i) of Section 19 (“Establishment of old age Home”) of the Welfare and 
Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 reads as follows:- 
 
“The State Government may establish and maintain such number of old age homes 
at accessible places, as i t may deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginning with at 
least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one hundred fifty 
senior citizens who are indigent” 
  
 To assist State Governments in the discharge of the above statutory resp onsibility, 
the Ministry had initially formulated a Centrally -sponsored Scheme of Assistance for 
Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens for construction of old age 
homes for indigent senior citizens in 300 districts of the country duri ng the XI Plan, at a 
cost of Rs 635 crore so as to cover at least 50% of the districts in the country during the XI 
Plan.  The Ministry‟s XI Plan, however, had a provision of only Rs. 60 crore for this new 
Scheme. On the advice of the Planning Commission a nd the Department of Expenditure, 
the scheme was then recast to fit within the allocation of Rs. 60 crore with a physical target 
of only 100 old age homes in the 11 th Plan, and a reduced pattern of central assistance. 
Although the Ministry did so as per the advice given by the Planning Commission, when 
the revised scheme was sent for the Commission‟s approval, it conveyed vide its letter 
dated 30th July, 2009, that the scheme has not been approved on the ground that a token 
approach for setting up old age homes would not serve any purpose and the position 
would be reviewed during mid -term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. As a result, the plan 
outlay of Rs. 13 crore in 2008-09 and Rs. 15 crore in 2009-10 could not be utilized.  
 
 Pursuant to a substantial increase in the Ministry‟s overall Plan outlay in 2010 -11, 
Rs.100 crore was allowed for the above Scheme in that year‟s budget, and a fresh 
proposal for introducing it wa s sent for the approval of the Planning Commission on 
9.8.2010. The Commission however again rejected the proposal saying that it would be 
conducting a zero base budgeting exercise in the terminal year of XI plan and advised this 

15 
 
Ministry to take up the pr oposal before the XII Five Year Plan Working Group. The 
allocation for the Scheme was therefore reduced to Rs1.00 crore at R.E. stage due to non-
approval by Planning Commission.  
 
 The XII Plan Working Group on Social Welfare, constituted by the Planning 
Commission, has also recommended introduction of the above scheme, and its Report is 
under consideration of the Planning Commission".  
 
1.16 The Committee are dismayed at the fact that as of now, the Construction of 
Old Age Homes for Senior Citizens could n ot be taken up in the Eleventh Plan.  The 
Committee felt that this was not in conjunction with the provisions of Sub section (i) 
of Section 19 of the Welfare and Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 
2007 which provides for the establishment and maintenance of old age homes.  The 
Committee have been informed that the Twelfth Plan Working Group on social 
welfare constituted by the Planning Commission  has also recommend ed 
introduction of the above scheme and its Report is under consideration of the 
Planning Commission.  The Committee desire that the Ministry pursue the matter 
with the Planning Commission for expeditious action so that the scheme can be 
launched in the beginning of Twelfth Plan period.   

16 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (S.No.1, Para No. 2.3) 
                  2.1  The Committee are deeply displeased with the ineffective implementation aspect of 
the Recommendations contained in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants, 2010 -11 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as only 6 out of 21 recommendations 
have been implemented. The Committee advise expeditious implementation of the 
remaining recommendations already accepted by the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Category wise break -up of the 21 recommendations, as reported by the 
Committee, is as under: 
  
Sl. 
No.  
Category of recommendation Number Paragraph no of the 
recommendation in 4 th 
Report of the Committee 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
6 2.22,2.24,2.28,3.33,3.42 
and 5.25 
2. Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government 
1 3.34 
3. Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which need to be reiterated  
5 2.23,2.27,5.11.5.12 and 
6.10 
4. Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are of interim  
nature 
9 2.25,2.26,3.19,3.20,3.32,4.
15,5.24,6.25 and 6.26 
 Total  21  
 

17 
 
Details of the present status of the 14 recommendations, mentioned  at Sl. No. 3 and 4 
above, are given in Annexure-I. The abstract of their present status is as follows:  
 
Sl. 
No.  
Category of recommendation No Paragraph no of the 
recommendation in 4th Report of 
the Committee 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Recommendations on which action has 
been taken by  the Government 
7 2.23,2.26,3.20,3.32,4.15,5.24,6.
25 
2. Recommendations on which action is  
being taken  
7 2.25, 
2.27,3.19,5.11,5.12,6.10,6.26 
 Total  14  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
Recommendation (S. No. 3, Para No. 3.25) 
2.3 The Committee observe that as against the proposal for approval of Rs. 7000 crore, 
the Planning Commission has approved an amount of only Rs. 5375 crore. Funds sought 
for have been drastically curtailed in the Other Backward Classes Division (approved 
outlay of Rs. 716 crore out of proposed Rs. 2020 crore) and in the Social Defence Sector 
(approved outlay of Rs. 124 crore out of proposed Rs. 223 crore). The Committee are 
given to understand that in both these sectors the Planning Commission has not been 
generous and coverage under the Pre -matric and Post -matric scholarships for OBC 
students would be affected due to budgetary constraints. Since the revision in the Post -
matric scholarships are due to be undertaken in the current financial year itself the 
Committee also feel the curtailment of funds in the OBC division would adversely affect 
the scheme. Similarly the slashing of funds in Social Defence sector would affect the 
schemes in that sector. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to take up 

18 
 
urgently with the Planning Commission the issue of increased allocation for both the 
sectors for the next financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The matter of enhanced requirement for Backward Classes & Social Defence 
sectors has been again taken up with the Planning Commission for 2012-13 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S.No.6, Para No. 3.28) 
2.5 The Committee are happy to learn that during the year 2011 -12 funds have been 
earmarked for certain new schemes of the Ministry i.e. Pre -matric scholarship for SC 
students (Rs. 200 crore), Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Centre (Rs. 10.00 crore), 
Educational Economically Backward Classes (Rs. 5.00 crore), National Overseas 
Scholarship for OBCs (R s. 1.00 crore), Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwD (Rs. 
11.98 crore) and Establishment of National Institute/Centre of Universal Design and 
Barrier Free Environment (Rs. 0.01 crore). The Committee would like the Ministry to work 
on the above new sche mes and   ensure  that  the  money  allocated is utilized during 
2011-12. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Action taken so far in respect of four of the above schemes is summarized below:-- 
 
(i) Pre-Matric Scholarship for Scheduled Castes Students: A  Concept  note for the 
scheme of “Pre -matric Scholarship for needy SC students studying in class IX 
and X” was sent to the Planning Commission on 28.4.2011 for its „in principle‟ 
approval. Planning Commission conveyed its “in principle” approval vide letter 
dated 9 .11.2011.  The EFC apprised and recommended the Scheme in its 

19 
 
meeting held on 27.12.2011.  The proposal has now been sent for the approval of 
the Full Planning Commission. 
 
(ii) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Centre: A High Level Committee, under the 
chairmanship of Shri Narendra Jadhav, Member, Planning Commission has been 
set up vide this Ministry's O.M. dt. 29.11.2011, for, inter alia,  planning and 
development of a centre, tentatively titled as “Dr. Ambedkar National Centre for 
Social Justice”, at Janpath, New De lhi.  The Committee has been given three 
months to submit its Report.  Action for establishment and construction of the 
Centre will be taken once the Committee's recommendations become available 
and have been examined.  
 
(iii) Establishment of National Institute /Centre of Universal Design and Barrier Free 
Environment: A Task Force has been set up under DG, CSIR, to consider the 
modalities for establishment of NCUDBE. The Task Force is expected to submit 
its Report shortly, based on which NCUDBE would be set up during the XII Plan. 
 
(iv) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for PwDs:   Planning Commission‟s "in principle" 
approval for taking up this Scheme has been received in Jan, 2012.  The Scheme 
is now being processed for appraisal by EFC.  
   
Action on the remaining new schemes, mentioned in the above recommendation, 
is under consideration. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.7, Para No. 3.29) 
2.7 The Committee in their earlier Report (4th Report on Demands for Grants, 2010-11) 
had recommended for introduction of a scheme of Pre -matric scholarship for SC students. 
The Committee are happy to learn that the Ministry have introduced the Pre -matric 
scholarship scheme for SC students during the current financial year. However, the 
Committee are given to understand that under the new scheme, scholarships are 
proposed to be given to class IX and X students. The Committee feel since the dropout of 
students is more in lower classes, the new scheme aiming at awarding scholarship to only 
class IX and X students will not fully serve the purpose and there is a need to provide 
scholarship to all students i.e. from class I to X. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
the scope of the new Pre -matric scholarship for SC students should be expanded in order 
to cover all students from Class I to Class X 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The announcement in the Finance Minister's Budget Speech, 2011 -12, was limited 
to introduction of a new Scholarship Scheme for needy SC students of Class IX and X.  
Therefore, for the present, action is being taken accordingly. The XII Plan Working Group 
on “Empowerment for the SCs” set up by the Planning Commission has in its Report, 
recommended expansion of the Scheme to cover students studying in Class I -X, action on 
which will be taken in the light of the Plan as finalized.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.10,  Para No. 3.32) 
2.9 The Committee find that out of plan allocation of 184 crore for the N.E. region and 
Sikkim for the year 2010 -11, the utilization was only 78.9 crore. The reasons for less 

21 
 
expenditure can be attributed to inadequate proposals received from the State 
Governments, NGOs and other implementing agencies working for the schemes of the 
Ministry in the region. There have been no release of funds under the schemes of Babu 
Jagjivan Ra m Chhatrawas Yojna (Girls Hostels), Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship, 
ALIMCO and Employment of physically challenged and women with disabilities and for 
construction of Old Age Homes in NE region etc. Considering that a still higher allocation 
of about Rs.  213.50 crore (i.e. 2% allocation of SC schemes and 10% allocation of the 
remaining schemes) has been made during the year 2011 -12, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to implement a more focused action plan for their schemes in the NE region of the 
country so as to have 100% utilization of funds.   
Reply of the Government 
2.10 To generate awareness about the schemes of the Ministry in the NER and to 
improve utilization of funds in the region, the following steps are being taken: 
 
i. A radio programme, called „Sanwarti Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen‟ is being broadcast in all 
regional languages of the NE States through All India Radio.   
ii. The Ministry has also been seeking help of the Ministry of Development of North 
Eastern Region (DONER) and t he North Eastern Council, to impress upon the NE 
States for sending complete proposals on adequate scale under the various schemes 
implemented in the region by this Ministry.  
iii. To boost expenditure in the region and identify problems being faced by the Stat e 
Governments in utilizing the funds, the Ministry has been organizing meetings with 
Social Welfare Secretaries & other officers of Social Welfare Departments of NER 
States as well as representatives of non -Government organizations in the region for 
the last three years . During 2010 -11, a meeting with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Assam, was held on 8.11.2010 at Guwahati wherein various issues related to 

22 
 
development of Scheduled Castes and OBCs were discussed. This was followed by a 
Regional Meeting with P rincipal Secretaries/ Secretaries/Representatives of State 
Governments of North Eastern Region (NER) on the 9th, and a meeting with NGOs 
and Civil Society Organizations working in various sectors such as Disability, Social 
Defence [Senior Citizens and Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drug) Abuse], 
Development of Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes from North Eastern 
Region, on 10 th November. Similarly a meeting with Principal Secretaries and 
Secretaries of Social Welfare/Justice of North East ern States as well as with NGOs 
implementing the schemes of the Ministry was held at  Guwahati on 15-16 November, 
2011.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.13, Para No. 4.20) 
2.11 The Committee are happy to learn that an ambitious programme of the Ministry, a 
centrally sponsored Pilot scheme called Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana has been 
launched for integrated development of 1000 SC majority villages. However, the 
Committee are disappointed to see that the funds allocated under the scheme which were 
Rs. 400 crore in the year 2010 -11, have been reduced to Rs. 98 crore at the RE stage. 
The allocation for 2011 -12 has been kept again at Rs. 100 crore which is too meagre for 
implementation of such an important pilot scheme. The Ministry have stated that funds 
under the scheme were reduced at RE stage, as the Planning Commission had not agreed 
to Ministry's proposal to increase the 'gap filling' to the scheme from Rs. 10.00 lakh to Rs. 
20.00 lakh per village. The Committee are of the view that such an important pilot 
programme of the Ministry should not suffer for want of funds and therefore recommend 
that the matter may be vigorously pursued with the Planning Commission so that gap 
filling funds to the scheme are increased suitably during the next financial year and 12th 

23 
 
plan period. The Committee desire that the Village Development Plans of all the selected 
five States are completed at the earliest and the scheme is implemented in the m ost 
effective manner so that the villages in these States are developed with maximum 
infrastructure and amenities to meet the standard of ideal villages. The Committee also 
recommend that subsequently the scope and reach of the scheme should be expanded so  
as to enable other States/UTs to be part of such an important scheme of providing basic 
facilities to the villages having sizable SC population. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The proposal of the Ministry to increase the rate of Central Assistance under the 
“gap-filling” component of PMAGY from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh per village, on an average, 
was approved by the Government in September, 2011.  Consequently, additional Central 
assistance amounting to Rs.100 crore, on this account, was released to the f ive concerned 
States as follows, in September 2011 (except in case Assam where part of the due amount 
was released in the month of November, 2011):- 
 
(i) Assam(100 villages)                              -  Rs. 10.00 crore 
(ii) Bihar (225 villages)                                - Rs.22.50 crore 
(iii) Himachal Pradesh  (225 villages)          - Rs.22.50 crore 
(iv) Rajasthan  (225 villages)                        - Rs.22.50 crore 
(v) Tamil Nadu (225 villages)                       -Rs.22.50 crore 
Total                                                        Rs.100.00 crore 
 
The Central Advisory Committee constituted for PMAGY under the Chairmanship of 
the Minister of Social Justice & Empowerment, with the Minister, Rural Development, as Co-

24 
 
Chairman, reviewed progress of the Scheme in the five states in its meeting held on 
18.11.11, wherein all the participating States were requested to accelerate the 
implementation of the Scheme. The matter is being followed up with them. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S.No.15, Para No. 4.37) 
2.13 The Committee observe  that the scheme of Top Class Education for SCs is being 
implemented since 2007 -08 under which SC students studying in selected premier 
institutions are given scholarships. Although funds to the tune of Rs. 25.00 crore were 
allocated under the scheme only Rs. 14.15 could be utilized in 2010 -11. The Committee 
find that the number of students availing the scheme has been low since 2008 -09 i.e. only 
378 people availed of the scheme against a target of 1250 in 2008 -09 and 1036 
beneficiaries availed the scheme i n 2010 -11 against the target of 1250. Some of the 
premier institutes in the country like All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
King George Medical College, Lucknow, Indian Statistical Institute (Bangaluru & Kolkata), 
The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi (TERI) have not granted any scholarships 
under the scheme. The Committee recommend that the Ministry regularly take up the 
matter with these institutes through meetings and workshops enlightening them about the 
scheme and persuading th em to avail the fund and subsequently grant scholarships so 
that more and more students take benefit under the scheme. The Committee also feel that 
three years is sufficient time to evaluate the performance of a scheme and since the 
scheme has already comp leted three years, entering the fourth year of its running, the 
Ministry need to take steps for evaluation of the scheme so as to get comprehensive 
details about the implementation aspect for future and perspective planning 
 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The matter has been vigorously pursued with the institutions notified under the 
scheme. This Ministry is regularly taking up the matter with the institutions for submission 
of proposals. During the current year all the Institutions were advised to forward th e 
proposals which was followed up by  reminder dated 6/09/11. A DO from Joint Secretary 
was sent to 72 institutions with highly unsatisfactory performance on 16/6/11. On the 
request of this Ministry, the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) organiz ed 
a meeting on 30/7/11 to discuss the Scheme, under the chairmanship of Special 
Secretary, MHRD. Representatives from Institutions under that Ministry specified under 
the Scheme attended the Meeting wherein they were urged to forward applications of 
eligible SC candidates under the Scheme urged. Enhancement of the current parental 
income ceiling (of Rs. 2 lakh p.a.) for eligibility for Scholarship under the Scheme is under 
active consideration, as this is felt to be a major reason for under utilization of the 1250 
Scholarship available under the scheme annually. Evaluation of the scheme will be 
undertaken in 2012-13. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S.No.16, Para No. 5.6) 
 
 2.15 The Committee have been informed that the objective of the scheme is to provide 
financial assistance to the OBC students studying at post -matriculation or post secondary 
stage to enable them to complete their education. The scholarships are awarded through  
the State Governments/UT Administration to which the applicant actually belongs and 
under the scheme 100% central assistance is provided to State Government/UT 
Administration over and above the committed liability. The demand from States/UTs under 
the scheme has been much higher than budget allocation in the past. However, during the 

26 
 
year 2010-11 out of an allocation of Rs. 379 crore the expenditure has been Rs. 353.32 
crore and the main reason for less expenditure has been attributed to non -receipt of 
sufficient proposals from North East States. The Committee are given to understand that 
since the scholarship scheme is proposed to be revised, a higher outgo to the State 
Governments is expected during 2011 -12 on account of increase in income ceiling and 
rates of maintenance allowance, for which an increased allocation during 2011 -12 i.e. Rs. 
535 crore has been earmarked. As this is an important scheme for educational 
development of OBCs, the Committee fully endorse the increased allocation and also 
recommend that the allocation under the scheme during the 12th plan should be suitably 
enhanced. The Committee are, however, dismayed to learn that though the proposal for 
revision of Post -matric scholarship for SCs has already got the approval of the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs on 30.12.2010 the proposal for revision of Post -matric 
scholarships for OBCs is still pending. The reasons citied by the Ministry in this regard are 
non-explanatory as they have attributed the delay in revisions to non -approval of the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs to the scheme and announcement of elections in 
five States/UTs. However, the Committee feel that the issue of revision of OBC 
scholarships was not taken with due care for which the revisions could not be effected 
during the current financial year itself. If the proposal had been mooted and processed in 
time the scheme could have been revised along with the revisions in the Scheme of Post -
Matric Scholarship for SCs. The Committee recommend that the matter may be reso lved 
at the earliest and approval for the revisions are obtained at once so that the OBC 
students also benefit from revisions in scholarships.                      
                   
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Post matric Scholarship Scheme for OBC students has been revised w.e.f. 
1.7.2011.  The revision has been communicated to all States/UTs vide this Ministry‟s letter 

27 
 
dated 11.08.2011 (Annexure IV) with a request to submit proposals for Central assistance 
as per revised norms.   
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
             
Recommendation  (S.No.17, Para No. 6.9) 
2.17 The Committee understands that the Persons with Disabilities (Equal opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act (PwD Act), 1995 came into effect on 
1.1.1996. Keeping in view the developments in disability sector over 15 years and to 
harmonize the provisions of the Act with the United Nations Convention on Rights for 
Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) and other legislative provisions, it is proposed to 
amend the Act. A Committee has been constituted for this purpose which will submit its 
draft legislation by 30th June, 2011. The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure that the 
aforesaid legislation is finalized and placed in Parliament at the earliest so that the 
amended Act comes into force in this year itself. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The above Committee submitted its Report, inclusive draft of a  new Bill, on 
30.6.2011, after which the follow action has been taken: 
(i) The recommended draft Bill has been  uploaded on the Ministry‟s website, 
seeking comments from the public, 
(ii) 17 concerned Central Ministries and Departments have been consulted on 
the provisions of the Draft Bill pertaining to them.   

28 
 
(iii) The draft Bill was also discussed in a meeting of the Central Coordination 
Committee, set up u/s 3 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 o n 12th 
November, 2011.    
The Ministry will also be consulting States, in whose domain „disability‟ figures 
under the constitutional scheme, on the proposed Bill, and will take step, to introduce it in 
Parliament at the earliest after consultations with State Governments and other 
stakeholders are completed. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S. No.18, Para No. 6.10) 
2.19 The Committee find  that the budgetary provisions for the implementation of the 
PwD Act had been kept at Rs. 100 crore at BE stage which was revised to Rs. 75 crore at 
RE stage. However, the actual expenditure has been only Rs. 50.41 crore. The allocation 
had been enhanced f rom Rs. 20 crore in 2009 -10 with a view to give thrust on providing 
accessible and barrier free environment to persons with disabilities and to make 
Government websites at State and District level accessible to PwDs. The Committee are 
however unhappy to no te that enhanced allocation for 2010 -11 could not be fully utilized 
as the proposals were not received from State Governments in time. The Committee are 
of the view that the Ministry are working in the right direction as making the public places 
disabled friendly will definitely have a salutary effect on the problems being faced by the 
people with disability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that State Governments be 
adequately sensitized in the matter and asked to send complete proposals well in time so  
as to have full utilization of funds in the current financial year. 
 
 

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 States were informed about their notional allocation for the year 2011 -12, and were 
requested to send their proposals for Central Assistance under SIPDA for  the following 
two activities, vide letters dated 25th and 26th May, 2011:- 
(i) To provide barrier free environment in important Government buildings for persons 
with Disabilities and 
(ii) To make Government websites at State and District level accessible to PwDs. 
 
 The issue was also discussed in the Conference of State Ministers of Welfare and 
Social Justice held on 17 th to 18 th June, 2011 at New Delhi wherein State Governments 
were again requested to send adequate proposals under the Scheme to the Ministry.  
 
 All efforts are being made to utilize allocation under the scheme in 2011 -12, to the 
maximum possible extent. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
Recommendation (S.No.21, Para No. 7.18) 
2.21 The Committee are given to understand that the scheme of Assistance for the 
Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse is being implemented for 
identification, counseling, treatment and rehabilitation of addicts through voluntary and 
other eligible organizations. Although an allocation of Rs. 41 crore had been made for the 
scheme only a little more than half i.e. Rs. 29.31 crore could be used. The Committee feel 
that there is a need to sensitize more and more State Governments to send adequate 
number of proposals under the scheme. The Committee are also baffled by the fact that 
no authentic data is available with the Ministry on the number of persons affected by 
alcoholism and drug abuse. Although sample surveys had been carried out by NSSO in a 

30 
 
few States of Punjab, Manipur and Mumbai the pilot survey has been limited to the cities 
of Amritsar, Imphal, and Mumbai. In view of the alarming nature of the problem, the 
Committee feel that concerted efforts need to be made for collecting authentic data o n the 
number of persons affected by Alcoholism and drug abuse. For this, baseline data could 
be collected from State run hospitals and drug de -addiction and rehabilitation centres to 
find out the severity and magnitude of the problem. The Committee also fe el that 
awareness generation being an important component of overall preventive strategy to deal 
with this menace having multi dimensional manifestations in present times having negative 
impact on society, awareness campaigns in this regard should be wide spread among the 
youths in schools and colleges. The Committee recommend that a separate fund should 
be created by the Ministry with funds exclusively earmarked for this purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22 On the request of Ministry of Social Justice an d Empowerment, a Pilot Survey was 
carried out by National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) in March-April, 2010 in the cities of 
Amritsar, Imphal and Mumbai using the method of Network Sampling to test the efficacy of 
sampling design and survey instrument to be adopted for a national survey.  NSSO 
submitted the draft report of pilot survey to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in January 2011. From the draft report, it was observed that the pilot survey 
did not seem to give a realistic picture of the prevalence of drug abuse. It was therefore 
decided that on the basis of experience gained, an advanced pilot survey in 3 States viz. 
Punjab, Maharashtra and Manipur should be conducted in wh ich left-out groups like street 
children, homeless and educational institutions should form part of the sample to be 
surveyed.  Accordingly, NSSO has been requested to carry out the advanced pilot survey 
in Maharashtra, Manipur and Punjab. A Joint Coordina tion Committee comprising 
representatives of MSJE, Ministry of Statics and Programme Implementation, NSSO, 

31 
 
concerned State Governments and other concerned Ministries/organization has been 
constituted to finalize and monitor the Survey.    
The Central Secto r scheme of Assistance for the Prevention of Alcoholism and 
Substance (Drug Abuse) is being implemented for awareness generation, identification, 
counseling, treatment and rehabilitation of addicts through voluntary organization. 
Concerted efforts have bee n made by the Ministry to get adequate number of project 
proposals from the State Governments so that fund allocated for the Scheme is fully 
utilized. State Governments are requested at regular intervals to send adequate number of 
project proposals. Progre ss of implementation of the Scheme is also reviewed during the 
annual State Welfare Ministers/Secretaries Conference wherein State Governments are 
requested to send adequate number of project proposals. 
  The Ministry, in collaboration with National Bal Bh awan, has started an awareness 
generation programme among the children of the age group of 12 -16 years regarding the 
evil of substance abuse. The project is to be implemented by National Bal Bhawan through 
its network of 155 affiliated Bal Bhavans and 77 B al Kendras during the current year. 
Awareness about ill effects of drugs will be generated among children through activities 
like poster making, creative writing, lectures, rallies, nukkad natak etc. The cost of the 
project is Rs.1.06 crore.   
Similarly, i n collaboration with Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan, this Ministry has 
started an awareness generation programme in Punjab and Manipur covering 3000 
villages of 10 Districts in Punjab and 750 villages of 7 Districts of Manipur. Nehru Yuva 
Kendra Sanghathan through its network of volunteers at village level will create awareness 
about the ill effects of alcoholism and Substance (Drug) abuse among the rural masses 
through door to door campaign, candle march, poster campaign, street play etc.  The 
programme will be completed in one year. 

32 
 
The Ministry spends money for awareness generation about its schemes, including 
the Scheme  for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drug) Abuse from its Medic 
Budget.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.5, Para No. 3.27) 
3.1 The Committee have been told that for 12th Five Year Plan four working groups 
have been set up i.e. for empowerment of PwD, empowerment of SCs, empowerment of 
OBCs and Nomadic and semi -nomadic and DNTS and for Social Welfare which would 
make projections for financial resources under the various schemes/ programmes of the 
Ministry for the next Five Year Plan. The Committee while hoping that the Ministry would 
succeed in making better projections for 12th plan recommend that they should lay thrust 
on key areas of development of SCs and OBCs as also seek mor e allocation for Social 
Defence and Disability areas which need to be given a boost with more funds and 
schemes. The Ministry should judiciously review the requirement of funds for all their 
schemes and seek appropriate funds for the 12th Plan period so as  to give maximum 
benefit to the target groups which are covered under various schemes 
   
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The four XII Plan Working Groups have, in their reports submitted to the Planning 
Commission in October, 2011, projected need based financi al requirements for their 
respective sectors for the XII Plan period. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S.No.9, Para No. 3.31) 
3.3 The Committee are unhappy to note that the utilization of funds in the disability 
sector during 2010-11 has been far from satisfaction i.e. Rs. 314.19 crore out of BE of Rs. 

34 
 
450 crore. It is also observed that out of the seven National Institutes only two could utilize 
their funds optimally and as many as five Institutes could not utilize their planned funds in 
full. The Committee have been informed that one of the main reasons for lower 
expenditure in the disability sector has been that there was no Joint Secretary (disability) 
for four months of the financial year. The Joint Secretary is also the Chairperson of the 
Executive Committee of the seven National Institutes, which clears a number of 
expenditure proposals. The Committee feel that the approach of t he Ministry in the matter 
has been very casual and non -serious as the post of Joint Secretary lying vacant for so 
long should have been avoided and some action should have been initiated immediately to 
fill the post keeping in mind the fact that the vacanc y of the post of Joint Secretary would 
directly affect both the sanction of funds as well as sanction of projects. The Committee 
view the lapse to be rather serious in nature and direct the Ministry to ensure that it does 
not recur in future. 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 Filling up of vacancies at the level of Joint Secretaries lies within the purview of the 
Dept. of Personnel and Training, and is constantly taken up with that Department 
whenever vacancy is likely to arise or remains unfilled. 
(Ministry of S ocial Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER – I 
 
Recommendation (S.No.2,  Para No. 3.24) 
4.1 The Committee note that against the plan allocation of Rs. 4524.04 crore (BE) 
which was reduced to Rs. 4300 crore, at RE stage, the Ministry has achieved an 
expenditure of Rs. 4185.93 crore. The Committee find that two important divisions of the 
Ministry i .e. the Disability Division and the Social Defence Division could not utilize full 
funds allocated to them (utilization of Rs. 314.19 crore out of Rs. 450.01 crore and 76.12 
crore out of Rs. 222.01 crore respectively). Also there was a saving due to non -receipt of 
sufficient proposals from State Governments/voluntary organizations located in the North 
Eastern region. The budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the year 2011 -12 has been 
enhanced to Rs. 5375 crore and the Committee are given to understand th at the 
additionality of fund requirement in 2011 -12 is mainly for post -matric scholarship for SCs 
and OBCs and a new scheme on pre -matric scholarship for SCs. The Committee while 
expressing their unhappiness over the Ministry's not -so-satisfactory performa nce in 
various schemes due to which there was underutilization and surrender of funds during the 
year 2010-2011 recommend that the Ministry should make maximum efforts to utilize the 
entire funds allocated to them for the year 2011 -12. Adequate precautionary steps in way 
of review of utilization of funds at suitable intervals, tight monitoring of various schemes 
and persuading the States to send the proposals well in advance etc. should be 
undertaken so as to avoid surrender of funds. The Committee strongly  recommends that 
the Ministry should focus itself in key areas like Disability sector and Social Defence sector 
where the financial and physical performance has been slow in the past. The Ministry 

36 
 
while allocating funds to various NGOs should also intimate  about the same to concerned 
MPs in whose constituency the NGO is working so that they can also monitor the 
implementation of the scheme and utilization of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Ministry is continuously making efforts to further improve its utilization of Plan 
outlay especially in the Disability and Social Defence sectors.  As a step in that direction, 
sanctioning powers delegated to Joint Secretary/Special Secretary/Secretary of the 
Ministry have been doubled in November, 2011. 
 
As regards the involvement of MPs in whose constituency an NGO is working, in 
monitoring its progress and utilization of funds, a proposal for constitution of Vigilance -
cum-Monitoring Committees at the State and district levels is under active consideration, 
in consultation with the Planning Commission.  These Committees would be expected to 
keep a regular watch on the implementation of the Programmes as per the prescribed 
procedures and guidelines. These Committees would, inter alia,  include Members of 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).  
The  suggestion of the Committee to endorse a copy of the sanction letters of Grant 
in aid released  to NGO(s), to the concerned MPs, in whose constituency the particular 
NGO is working, is being examined.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 

37 
 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.4,  Para No. 3.26) 
4.3 The Committee note that the scheme for Post -matric Scholarship to students 
belonging to SCs has been revised with effect from 1st July, 2010 which has raised the 
parental income ceiling for eligibility from Rs. 1.00 lakh to Rs. 2.00 lakh and also there is a 
proposal to increase the income ceiling and scholarship rates under the scheme of Post -
matric scholarship for OBCs. The Committee desire that parental income ceiling for 
availing the scholarships in both the schemes of Post -matric Scholarship for SCs and  
Post-matric Scholarship for OBCs should be revised upwardly to Rs. 3.00 lakh so that 
more students can avail the scholarships. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 Parental income ceiling under the scheme of PMS for OBCs has been revised from 
Rs.44,500/- to Rs.1.0 lakh p.a. w.e.f. 1.7.2011.  Further revision of the Post Matric 
Scholarship Schemes for SC & OBC students would be undertaken in the XII Plan. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
 

38 
 
Recommendation (S.No.19, Para No. 6.11) 
4.5 Further the Committee note  that the setting up of District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centres (DDRCs) and Composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs) is one of the areas where 
funds have been earmarked under the scheme of SIPDA. In pursuance with the Finance 
Minister's Budget speech (20 10-11), 50 District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) 
and 2 Composite Rehabilitation Centres(CRCs) were proposed to be set up during the 
year, however against the above target only 21 DDRCs could be sanctioned. Apart from 
non-receipt of proposals f rom State Governments non -availability of rent free 
accommodation have been cited as problems for DDRCs. Also, the District Management 
Team headed by the District Collector finds it difficult to identify the implementing agency 
suitable for such work as al so non -availability of skilled manpower. The Committee are 
given to understand that some of the guidelines for assistance to DDRCs have been 
revised to address the above problems. However, the Committee feel that the Ministry 
need to find a solution to oth er major concerns like finding implementing agencies and 
skilled manpower for setting up DDRCs. The Committee recommend that a specific 
team/task force should be appointed for the purpose so that it can help to resolve the local 
issues and the requisite nu mber of DDRCs as per target are set up and made functional 
with all infrastructure and manpower facilities covering maximum number of districts in the 
States.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 Setting up of DDRCs involves a number of steps, including identification of suitable 
implementing agency possessing requisite expertise,  at the District level, which  is to be 
done by the concerned State Government, and as such, appointment of a task forc e at the 
Central level may not serve much purpose.   However, the concerned State Governments 
are being regularly pursed to expeditiously send their complete  proposals.   

39 
 
21 DDRCs were sanctioned in 2010 -11 and 5 more DDRCs have been sanctioned 
till date in 2011-12.  Proposals have been received in respect of another 62 DDRCs b ut 
have been found on scrutiny to be  deficient. The Ministry has taken up the matter with the 
concerned States to remove the deficiencies.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation  (S.No.20, Para No. 7.9) 
4.7 The Committee observe that the Ministry has been running Scheme of Integrated 
Programme for Older Persons since 1992 under which grants -in-aid is given to Non -
Government organizations for running of Old Age Homes (OAH), Day Care Centres (DCC) 
and Mobile Me dicare Units (MMU). The scheme was revised in 2008 to include new 
projects like maintenance of Respite Care Homes and Continuous Care Homes, running 
of Multi Service Centres for older persons, running of Day Care Centres for Alzherimer's 
Disease/Dementia patients, physiotherapy clinics for older persons, training of care givers 
etc. However, the Committee observe that despite the revision of the scheme widening its 
scope, only 50% of the funds released could be utilized during the year 2010 -11 the 
reason being non-receipt of adequate number of proposals, incomplete proposals and late 
proposals. The Committee desire that matters concerning the older persons need to be 
given proper attention in India as Governments in other countries of the world have taken 
a step forward to provide basic facilities to older persons as the responsibility of the State 
and implementation of programmes concerning older persons in States should be 
addressed with utmost priority. The Committee are dismayed to note that an important 
scheme of the Ministry i.e. the scheme of Construction of Old Age Homes for Senior 

40 
 
Citizens could not be launched during 2010-11, even though an allocation of Rs. 100 crore 
had been made specifically for the purpose during 2010 -11. It is more disheartening  to 
note that the scheme has been pushed to further uncertainty as no funds have been kept 
for the scheme during 2011-12. With the Rs. 100 crore allocation during the year 2010 -11, 
the Ministry should have taken up the matter with Planning Commission for l aunching of 
the scheme at least on a pilot basis with smaller targets. Under Section 19 of the 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 the care of older 
persons and senior citizens is the primary responsibility of the Government an d hence 
their basic needs can be catered to a great extent by construction of Old Age Homes in 
each district. Therefore, the Committee desire early and expeditious action in the matter. 
Now that the preparations for 12th plan allocations are under way, the  Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment will appropriately take 
up the matter with the Planning Commission and work on a viable proposal to be launched 
during the 12th plan. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 (i) Integrated Programme for Older Persons 
The scheme was revised in 2008 to include new projects like maintenance of 
Respite Care Homes and Continuous Care Homes, running of Multi Service Centres for 
older persons, running of Day Care Centres for Alzheimer‟s Disease/Dementia  patients, 
physiotherapy clinics for older persons, training of care givers etc. However, the pace of 
expenditure under the Scheme continues to be unsatisfactory, though c oncerted efforts 
are being made by the Ministry to get adequate number of project pro posals from the 
State Governments. Financial norms prescribed under the Scheme are also not attractive 
enough for the NGOs to submit  proposals for financial assistance under it. Therefore, 

41 
 
keeping in view the rise in  cost of the living index, a Committee  has been constituted to 
recommend  revision in the  financial norms under the scheme.   
 (ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens:  
 
Sub section (i) of Section 19 (“Establishment of old age Home”) of the Welfare and 
Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 reads as follows:- 
 
“The State Government may establish and maintain such number of old age homes 
at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginni ng with at 
least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one hundred fifty 
senior citizens who are indigent” 
  
 To assist State Governments in the discharge of the above statutory responsibility, 
the Ministry had initially formulated  a Centrally -sponsored Scheme of Assistance for 
Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens for construction of old age 
homes for indigent senior citizens in 300 districts of the country during the XI Plan, at a 
cost of Rs 635 crore so as to cover at least 50% of the districts in the country during the XI 
Plan.  The Ministry‟s XI Plan, however, had a provision of only Rs. 60 crore for this new 
Scheme. On the advice of the Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure, 
the scheme was then recast to fit within the allocation of Rs. 60 crore with a physical target 
of only 100 old age homes in the 11 th Plan, and a reduced pattern of central assistance. 
Although the Ministry did so as per the advice given by the Planning Commission, when 
the revised scheme was sent for the Commission‟s approval, it conveyed vide its letter 
dated 30th July, 2009, that the scheme has not been approved on the ground that a token 
approach for setting up old age homes would not serve any purpose and the position  
would be reviewed during mid -term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. As a result, the plan 
outlay of Rs. 13 crore in 2008-09 and Rs. 15 crore in 2009-10 could not be utilized.  
 

42 
 
 Pursuant to a substantial increase in the Ministry‟s overall Plan outlay in 201 0-11, 
Rs.100 crore was allowed for the above Scheme in that year‟s budget, and a fresh 
proposal for introducing it was sent for the approval of the Planning Commission on 
9.8.2010. The Commission however again rejected the proposal saying that it would be 
conducting a zero base budgeting exercise in the terminal year of XI plan and advised this 
Ministry to take up the proposal before the XII Five Year Plan Working Group. The 
allocation for the Scheme was therefore reduced to Rs1.00 crore at R.E. stage due to non-
approval by Planning Commission.  
 
 The XII Plan Working Group on Social Welfare, constituted by the Planning 
Commission, has also recommended introduction of the above scheme, and its Report is 
under consideration of the Planning Commission.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (S.No.8, Para No. 3.30) 
5.1 The Committee observe that a large number of utilization certificates are 
outstanding in respect of grants released to the States upto March, 2008. The No. of UCs 
outstanding as on 31.12.2009 st ood at 11708 and the amount involved was Rs. 835.27 
crore. Despite the best efforts of the Ministry in monitoring the receipt of the utilization 
certificates, this remains a major problem area for the Ministry. The Ministry have informed 
that no further gr ants are released by the Ministry to the voluntary 
organizations/implementing agencies without obtaining and accepting the UCs of the 
grants released in the previous year. The Committee are dismayed to note that during 
2010-11, funds to many States/UT coul d not be released due to non -receipt of UCs under 
various schemes of the Ministry like Pre -matric scholarship scheme for OBCs, Post -matric 
scholarship for OBCs, construction of Hostels for OBCs, SCA to SCSP etc. However, in 
the opinion of the Committee, wh en the Ministry do not release funds to the States/UTs 
ultimately it is the disadvantaged section who suffer because they are the target groups 
and the funds under various schemes are meant for their betterment. Therefore, the 
Committee would like the Mini stry to take a more pragmatic and judicious approach in the 
matter of withholding the release of funds to States. The steps taken in the matter should 
be more persuasive in nature rather than stringent, specially in the scholarship schemes 
which directly a ffect the educational development of SC/OBC students. As for the 
pendency of UCs, the Committee recommend that special drives should be undertaken 
State-wise to obtain utilization certificates as this is also a method of evaluation of the 
proper/utilization of funds available under the scheme. 

44 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The requirement of obtaining due Utilisation Certificates from implementing 
agencies is a pre -requisite under General Financial Rules of the Government of India, for  
release of further grants -in-aid/ financial assistance to implementing agencies. All the 
implementing Agencies are periodically requested to send pending Utilization Certificates 
for previous releases.  Further grant is considered for release after receiving sati sfactory 
report on utilization of funds released in the past.  The matter is regularly pursued with 
states, so that the interests of the target groups are not adversely affected. 
 
This matter was taken up in the three regional review meetings with the Stat e 
Governments held in 2010 -11, and reiterated in the State Social Welfare Ministers‟ 
Conference held in 17 -18 June, 2011. The Ministry will continue to closely monitor the 
pendency of utilization of certificates, and take appropriate action for its reduction.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
Recommendation (S.No.11,  Para No. 4.12) 
 5.3 The Committee note  that the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) is an umbrella 
strategy to ensure earmarking of funds for development of Scheduled Castes in proportion 
to their population by the Central Ministries/Departments and States/UTs. The Ministry 
provide Special Central Assistance (SCA) to States as an additive to their own Scheduled 
Castes Sub Plan (SCSP). At present 27 States/UTs having sizable SC population are 
implementing Scheduled Castes Sub Plan. The allocation made is based on the 
percentage of SC population as per 2001 census. The Committee are unhappy to note 
that the percentage of expenditure over the outlay of the SCSP scheme has been 
hovering at around 14.5% since 2008 -09 and not all the States are allocating funds in 

45 
 
proportion to their SC population. In so me States such as Karnataka, Gujarat, Assam, 
Haryana, Sikkim etc., the percentage of SCSP outlay over plan outlay falls far short of 
their percentage of SC population. The availability of data on the No. of BPL families who 
have been assisted is also very limited. Only 2 States have furnished the figures for the 
number of BPL families who were assisted and who crossed the poverty line in the year 
2007-08. The Committee have taken a serious note of this and desire that they should be 
informed why the data co uld not be collected and furnished by the other States. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with States not 
allocating funds in proportion to SC population and persuade them to allocate funds as per 
the laid down nor ms. Attempts should also be made to collect data on BPL families who 
have crossed the poverty line after getting assistance under SCSP.  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 I. Allocation of Population-proportionate Funds by States under SCSP.   
 
The outlays earmarked by the concerned States/UTs under SCSP vis -à-vis 
proportion of SCs in respective States‟ population from 2007 -08 to 2010-11 is enclosed at 
Annexure-II. The Statement at the Annexure brings out that, in the year 2010 -11, of the 
27 States/UTs which need to earmark outlay under SCSP:- 
 
(i) 15 States/UTs did so to the required extent or more, 
(ii)  in the case of 6 States/UTs, the shortfall was less than 15%, and  
(iii)  in the case of  6 States/UTs, the shortfall was more than 15% 
 
The Ministry will  continue to pursue with states which have had a shortfall in 
allocating  of their plan outlays under SCSP 
 

46 
 
 
II. Data on Beneficiaries of SCA to SCSP who have crossed the Poverty Line  
 
The Ministry is constantly pursuing concerned States /UTs to furnish data on the 
number of beneficiaries of the years 2005 -06, 2006-07 and 2007 -08, who have crossed the 
poverty line. The list of States which have furnished the data on BPL beneficiaries under 
SCA to SCSP for the years 2005 -06, 2006-07 and 2007-08 is enclosed at Annexure-III, the 
abstract of which is given below: 
The year of 
extending 
assistance 
No. of States, UTs (out of a total of 27 concerned 
States/UTs) from which information regarding No. of 
beneficiaries who were able to cross the poverty  line, has 
been received 
2005-06 20 
2006-07 9 
2007-08 9 
 
The matter is being regularly pursued with defaulting at various levels, including 
through letters from the Union Minister, SJ&E, to the Chief Ministers. 
The Ministry had also requested the Programme Evaluation Organization, Planning 
Commission, to conduct a national level evaluation of the flagship programmes of the 
Ministry, including Scheme of Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Scheduled Caste Sub 
Plan (SCSP). The Programme Evaluation Org anization has informed that the evaluation of 
the SCA to SCSP scheme has been entrusted to the National Institute of Rural Development 
(NIRD), Hyderabad.  The final report of the study is likely to be received from the NIRD by 
the end of July, 2012. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
 

47 
 
Recommendation (S.No.12,  Para No. 4.13) 
5.5 Regarding the funds under SCA to Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan the Committee 
have been informed that the matter has been continuously taken up by the Minister (Social 
Justice and Empowerment) with the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and 
also the Fin ance Minister for enhanced allocation. The budgetary allocation for the 
scheme has also been enhanced from Rs. 600 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs. 775 crore in 2011 -
12 i.e. an enhancement of Rs. 175 crore. The Committee note that the main objective of 
the plan is to give thrust to the development programmes for SCs with reference to their 
occupational pattern and the need for increasing the productivity of and income from their 
limited resources. Under the scheme, the State Governments have been given the 
flexibility to use the funds for subsidy against loan to the SC BPL persons for self 
employment and training and development of infrastructure. The scheme is proposed to 
be revised in the 12th plan by enhancing the maximum amount of subsidy admissible 
under the scheme from the present Rs. 10,000/ - per beneficiary and also to make villages 
having 40% or more SC population eligible for infrastructure development programmes 
rather than 50% SC population villages. The Committee feel that there are loopholes in the 
implementation of the scheme as data on the No. of families who have crossed the 
poverty line is very vague. The Committee recommend that the scheme be revamped in 
the 12th plan period by enforcing strict guidelines on the State Governments for 
implementation o f the scheme. Certain benchmarks and guidelines need to be fixed for 
selecting the beneficiary as also some definite feedback mechanism also needs to be 
fixed as to how the scheme has elevated the BPL families in the States. The Committee 
also recommend th at there should be a reassessment of the SC population villages 
eligible for infrastructure development programmes and the ceiling of 40% population for 
eligibility should also be reviewed. 
 

48 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6  Observation of the Committee will be kept in mind while revising the Scheme of SCA 
to SCSP in the 12th Plan.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
Recommendation  (S.No.14, Para No. 4.28) 
5.7 The Committee note that the primary objective of the scheme is to provide hostel 
facilities to SC Boys and Girls studying in middle schools, higher secondary schools, 
colleges and universities with broader vision of retention and reduction of their dropout  
rate in educational institutes. The State Governments/UTs and the Central and State 
universities/Institutions are eligible for central assistance for construction of hostels or 
expansion of hostel facilities while NGOs and deemed universities get grants o nly for 
expansion. The actual expenditure under both heads of boys hostels and girls hostels has 
been comparatively less than the allocation made in 2010 -11 (against allocation of Rs. 
80.00 for girls hostels only Rs. 43.91 crore could be utilized and again st allocation of Rs. 
50.00 crore for boys hostel only Rs. 34.28 crore was utilized). During the last two years 
against 53 girls hostels and 61 boys hostels sanctioned the number of hostels completed 
is 'Nil'. Even if the two year gestation period for completion of hostels is taken into account, 
the achievement during the year 2008-09 has not been satisfactory since out of 64 and 45 
hostels sanctioned respectively for girls and boys only one and four hostels respectively 
could be completed. The Committee tak e serious note of this and desire that since funds 
under the scheme are not a constraint, the Ministry should impress upon the State 
Governments to take expeditious action to ensure that hostel accommodation for SC boys 
and girls is developed at the earliest as per target date.  
 

49 
 
The Committee further feel that rates of subsistence allowance given to the 
hosteller/students staying in hostels is far too less even after its revision on 31 -12-2010. 
The Committee recommend that these rates should be suitably re vised upwardly 
especially to meet the needs of the students who are staying far away from their houses in 
hostel accommodation for pursuing their education. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The matter of accelerating progress under BJRCY will be pursued with the 
concerned States/UTs.  Further Central assistance is considered for release only after 
receiving satisfactory progress report on construction of the hostels sanctioned earlier and 
utilization certificates.     
           The recommendation of the Committee regarding further revision of subsistence 
allowance for hostellers would be considered when the next revision is undertaken of the 
Scheme of Post-matric Scholarship for SC students. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -9/2011(PS)/PREM dated 
31.1.2012) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
05 March, 2012       Chairman 
15 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
         Social Justice and Empowerment 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
Annexure – I 
 
S. 
No.  
Para 
No.  
Recommendation  Status of Implementation  
1 2.23 The Committee have noted that while 
separate provisions have been made by 
the Ministry for educational development 
of SCs with Rs. 2115 crore and OBCs 
with Rs. 455 crore  such a provision has 
not been made under the head of 
educational development of the p ersons 
with disability.  The Committee have also 
been informed that earlier too there was a 
Centrally sponsored scheme of providing 
scholarship to students with disability 
which has since been transferred to States 
in the 90‟s.  What is more disheartening 
to note is that it was a conscious decision 
of the Government of India taken up by 
Planning Commission and the Ministry 
was also a party to this decision.  The 
Ministry‟s argument that the educational 
development needs of the persons with 
disability are ta ken care of by other 
schemes such as Sarva Siksha Abhiyan 
(SSA) does not hold water as  SSA being 
a big umbrella programme with 
provisions for all sections of society 
cannot give focused attention to the 
holistic educational requirements of the 
persons wit h disability. As far as States 
are concerned they have their own 
resource constraints.  Educational 
development is the key for overall 
development and security of this section 
and keeping in view the priority given to 
education by the Government, the right  to 
education made a fundamental right under 
Part III of the Constitution, it is 
imperative that the educational needs of 
the persons with disability  are taken care 
of.  For this, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry not to deviate from this 
priority and urgently make some 
provision under the head educational 
development of the persons with 
disability.  The Ministry should revive the 
earlier provision/scheme in this direction 
and act to provide some kind of 
scholarship to the students with disability.   
The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard as early as 
possible. 
“Disability” is in the State list. As per 
available information, the following 16 State 
Governments are implementing their own 
scholarship Schemes for students with 
disability:- 
1. Bihar 2. Chhattisgarh 3. Haryana 4. 
Jharkhand 5. Karnataka 6. Maharashtra 
7. Orissa 8. Punjab 9. Rajasthan 10. 
Tamil Nadu 11. Uttarakhand 12. West 
Bengal 13. Assam 14. Meghalaya 15. 
Nagaland 16. Goa. 
 
Special provision for students with 
disabilities under SSA has been enhanced 
from Rs.1200/ - per child to Rs.3000/ - per 
child w.e.f. 2010-11. 
 
The Ministry is also offering a total of 1500 
scholarships per year for students with 
disabilities from two funds with which it is 
administratively concerned:- 
1. National Fund for People with 
Disabilities – 500 scholarships 
2. Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India Trust Fund  for Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities – 1000 
scholarships 
           The above scholarships are being 
administered through the Nat ional 
Handicapped Finance and Development 
Corporation. 
 
The Ministry‟s Plan Budget for 2011 -12 
includes a provision of Rs. 11.98 crore to 
introduce a new Rajiv Gandhi National 
Fellowship (RGNF) scheme for students 
with disabilities, to pursue M. Phil & Ph.  D 
programmes on the line of the existing 
RGNF for SC & ST students..   
 
The XII Plan Working Group on Disability 
has recommended a comprehensive set of 
scholarships, for students with disabilities.  
Their implementation would depend on the 

51 
 
final XII Plan allocation. 
2 
 
2.25 The Committee observes that for most of 
the NGO related programmes/schemes 
run by the Ministry, substantial amount of 
funds were released at the fag end of the 
financial year i.e. January to March. 
While the Secretary during the evidence 
has tried to justify the above action by 
saying that the release of funds to NGOs 
particularly in the case of schemes on 
disability and social defence sector during 
the last quarter of the financial year is 
O.K. with the Ministry because the NGOs 
still have sufficient time/full year to 
utilize the amount.  However, in the 
opinion of the Committee this is clearly 
against the sound budgetary principle, as 
funds released at the fag end are prone to 
be diverted and mis -utilized and most of 
the time not  subject to any kind of audit 
and monitoring. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should 
ensure that proposals complete in all 
respects are received well in advance 
preferably at the commencement of the 
financial year and processed expeditiously 
in batches.  Due care should be taken at 
this stage only so as to avoid the 
undesirable trend of rushing release of 
funds at the end of the financial year. 
 
The Ministry on its part makes all efforts to 
get complete proposals, with State 
Government‟s recommendations, on time. 
However, the response of NGOs and State 
Governments to this has been uneven. The 
Ministry is continuing to vigorously pursue 
the matter with them.  
 
3 2.26 On the launching of the Pre -matric 
scholarship to cover all SC students, the 
Committee during their examination of 
the Demands for Grants for 2009 -10 had 
been informed that the concept note for 
initiation of the scheme has been sent to 
the Planning Commiss ion, which has 
already approved it in principle.  
However, since the financial implications 
were high, the scheme could not be 
launched during the last budget and it 
would be mooted only when there is an 
enhancement of allocation.  Now after 
having a look at the current Budget, the 
Committee fails to understand as to why 
the scheme of Pre -matric scholarship for 
all SC students does not feature in the 
Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme for all SCs 
could not be incorporated in the Ministry‟s 
Plan budget of 2010 -11 despite significant 
increase in its Plan allocation as the increase 
was enough only to enable long pending 
revision of Post -matric Scholars hip for SC 
and OBC students.  
 
A new Centrally - sponsored “Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Caste 
Students” studying in classes IX &X has 
now been announced in the budget speech, 
2011-12. This would benefit estimated 43 
lakh S.C. students.   An allocation of Rs.200 
crore has been provided for this purpose in 
the Ministry‟s budget for the year 2011 -12 
which will need to be augmented.  Action is 

52 
 
current budget though there has been 
considerable enhancement in the 
budgetary allocation.  The Secretary, 
during the evidence has submitted that 
things have been put off till formulation 
of the XII Five Year Plan in this regard.   
The Committee view this serious lapse on 
the part of the Ministry because during 
the current budget exercise itself some 
kind of prov ision of Pre -matric 
scholarship covering all SC students 
should have been initiated. The 
Committee directs the Ministry to take 
note of this and take necessary action in 
this regard so that the scheme is able to 
take off at least during the next financial 
year.  
 
being taken to obtain approval of the 
competent authority on the detailed scheme.  
 
 
4 2.27 The Committee note that funds to the tune 
of Rs. 100 crore could not be utilized in 
full and got blocked under the Pradhan 
Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana because of 
non approval of the scheme by the 
Planning Commission.  The Committee 
also observes that the Pla nning 
Commission has now approved the 
scheme on 11.3.2010 and an allocation of 
Rs. 400 crore has been made for the 
scheme during 2010 -11.  The scheme 
being a flagship programme of the 
Ministry aims at the integrated 
development of villages having more than 
50%  Scheduled Caste population through 
convergent implementation of existing 
Central and State schemes.  Since a huge 
amount of Rs. 400 crore has been 
earmarked for the scheme, efforts should 
be made for successful implementation of 
the said programme du ring 2010 -11 by 
utilizing the entire amount allocated for 
the purpose.   The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry to look into the 
reasons for under –utilization/non-
utilization of funds under the schemes of 
Construction of Old Age Homes for 
Indigent Senio r Citizens, Financial 
Assistance to Women with Disability to 
look after their children after birth and 
Educational and Economical 
Development of De-notified and Nomadic 
Tribes, B. R. Ambedkar Foundation, 
Spinal Injury Centre, Research and 
Training and take  suitable remedial 
Full budgeted amount was released to  B. R. 
Ambedkar Foundation and the Spinal Injury 
Centre during 2010 -11. The position in 
regard to other sch emes is briefly given  
below:  
(i) Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram 
Yojna (PMAGY):  Finance Minister had 
announced    introduction of a new Centrally 
sponsored Pilot Scheme of “Pradhan Mantri 
Adarsh Gram Yojna (PMAGY)” in 1000 
SC-majority villages of the country     in his 
budget speech 2009 -10, and Rs.100 crore 
had been provided for the purpose. The 
scheme was approved on 13.3.2010 and its 
guidelines were circulated to the concerned 
five States (and Central Ministries) on 
16.3.2010.  Under the first phase of the pilot 
Scheme, integrated development of 1000 
SC-majority villages located in five States 
U.P., Bihar, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu (225 
villages each) and Assam (100 villages) was 
to be taken up - primarily through 
convergent implementation of all relevant 
Central and State schemes. To the extent 
needs of the identified villages cannot be  
met through convergence,  they are to be 
met through „gap -filling‟ funds  for which 
Central assistance is to  be provided @ 
Rs.10.0 lakh per village with    State 
Governments expected to contribute a 

53 
 
measures to avoid the repeated under -
utilization/non-utilization of funds in 
these schemes.  
 
matching share. 
 
Since Uttar Pradesh did not agree to 
implement the Scheme despite persuasion, 
therefore, it was been decided in January 
2011 to replace it with Himachal Pradesh.   
So far, based on complete proposals 
received from Bihar, Rajasthan, Assam, 
Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh, full 
admissible amount  of Central assistance 
under the scheme has been released to these 
States, as per the details given below: 
Release of Central Assistance under Centrally Sponsored Pilot Scheme 
of PMAGY (Amount in Rs. crore) 
State District  No. of Blocks 
from which 
villages have 
been selected 
No. of 
selected 
villages  
CA 
Released 
up to 
31.3.11 
(incl. amt 
released 
in 
March, 
2010)                     
Rajasthan Sri Ganga 
nagar 
3 160 22.725 
Hanuman 
garh 
2 65 
Sub Total 2 5 225 
Tamil 
Nadu 
Tiruvarur 10 157 22.725 
Cuddalore 3 68 
Sub Total 2 13 225 
Bihar Gaya 16 225 22.725 
Sub Total 1 16 225 
Assam 
Nowgaon 13 50 10.10 
Morigaon 4 50 
Sub Total 2 17 100 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Sirmour 5 125 22.725 
Solan 4 100 
Sub Total 2 10 225 
Grand Total 9 61 1000 101.00 
 The Planning Commission vide their D.O. 
letter dated 1 -11-2010 had suggested that the 
Ministry may first complete the exercise of 
covering 1000 villages and evaluate its impact. 
Therefore, the Commission did not agree to the 
proposal of the Ministry to inc rease rate of 
Central Assistance from Rs 10.00 lakh to 20.00 
lakh per village. Hence Budget Estimate of Rs 
400.00 crore was reduced to Rs 98.00 crore at 
Revised Estimate stage, out of which an 
amount of Rs. 97.00 crore was released up to 
31.3.2011.  
The allocation for 2011-12 for the scheme is 
again kept at Rs. 100.00 crore. During the 
current year, Planning Commission agreed 
for increasing the rate of Central assistance 
from Rs 10.00 lakh to 20.00 lakh per 

54 
 
village. 
(ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of 
Assistance for Establishment of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens : Sub 
section (i) of  Section 19 (“Establishment of 
old age Home”) of the Welfare and 
Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens 
Act, 2007 reads as follows: -“The State 
Government may estab lish and maintain 
such number of old age homes at accessible 
places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased 
manner, beginning with at least one in each 
district to accommodate in such homes a 
minimum of one hundred fifty senior citizens 
who are indigent” 
To assist State Governments in the 
discharge of the above statutory 
responsibility, the Ministry had initially 
formulated a Centrally -sponsored 
Scheme of Assistance for Establishment 
of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior 
Citizens for construction of old age 
homes for indigent senior citizens in 300 
districts of the country during the XI 
Plan, at a cost of Rs 635 crore so as to 
cover at least 50% of the districts in the 
country during the XI Plan. Ministry‟s XI 
Plan, however, had a provision of only 
Rs. 60 crore for this new Scheme. On the 
advice of the Planning Commission and 
the Department of Expenditure, the 
scheme was then recast to fit within the 
allocation of Rs. 60 crore with a physical 
target of only 100 old age homes in the 
11th Plan, and a reduced pattern of central 
assistance. Although the Ministry did so 
as per the advice given by the Planning 
Commission, when the revised scheme 

55 
 
was sent for the Commission‟s approval, 
it conveyed vide its letter dated 30 th July, 
2009, that the scheme has not been 
approved on the ground that a token 
approach for setting up old age homes 
would not serve any purpose and the 
position would be reviewed during mid -
term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. As a 
result, the plan outlay of Rs.1 crore for 
the scheme in 2007 -08, Rs. 1 3 crore in 
2008-09 and Rs. 15 crore in 2009 -10 
could not be utilized.  
 
An outlay of Rs. 100.00 crore was made 
in the Scheme, in 2010 -11. A fresh 
proposal for introducing the new 
Centrally-sponsored Scheme was sent for 
the approval of the Planning Commission 
on 9.8.2010. The Planning Commission 
rejected the proposal saying that it would 
be conducting a zero base budgeting 
exercise in the terminal year of XI plan 
and advised this Ministry to take up the 
proposal before the XII Five Year Plan 
Working Group. T he BE under the 
Scheme was therefore reduced to Rs1.00 
crore at R.E. stage due to non approval of 
the scheme by Planning Commission.  
 
The Working Group on Social Welfare, 
constituted by the Planning Commission 
for formulation of XII Five Year Plan, 
reconsidered the matter and has 
recommended introduction of the new 

56 
 
scheme of Construction of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens 
during the plan period. The Report of the 
Working Group has been submitted to 
Planning Commission in October, 2011.  
(iii) Scheme of Financial Assistance to 
Women with Disabilities to look after their 
Children after Birth: The Scheme could not 
be launched during 2009-10 in view of a ban 
by the Ministry of Finance on introduction of 
new schemes unless it follows from a budget 
announcement. However, the ministry had 
requested the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development (WCD) to incorporate a 
component in their prop osed schemes, Indira 
Gandhi Matriva Sahyaog Yojana (IGMSY)–
conditional maternity benefit scheme for   
pregnant and lactating women of 19 years of 
age and above for providing financial 
assistance to  eligible mothers  with 
disabilities. The Ministry of WCD in their 
Scheme incorporated a provision of flexi 
fund, amounting to 2.5 per cent of total 
annual expenditure under the scheme, and 
advised the State Governments that this fund 
can be utilized for funding need -based 
interventions during the course of 
implementation of the scheme. Some 
indicative examples of such interventions 
could be additional cash transfer to disabled 
women to take care of their child, incentive 
for first child birth at age of 21 years and 
beyond, spacing of three years between first 
two births, etc.  The matter of adequate 
coverage of Women with Disabilities under 
the IGMSY is being pursued with the 
Ministry of WCD. 
 
(iv) Scheme for Educational and 
Economic Development of De -notified 
and Nomadic Tribes:  The Scheme could 
not be launched during 2010 -11 as the 
Report of the National Commission set 
up to study the developmental aspects of 

57 
 
de-notified tribes, nomadic and semi -
nomadic tribes was still under 
consideration of the Government.  
(v) Research & Train ing Scheme:  Efforts 
are made to obtain proposals from reputed 
research and evaluation agencies and 
universities under the scheme each year. 
Meeting of the Research Advisory 
Committee are held as necessary from time 
to time to consider and approve proposals  
received. 
5 3.19 The Committee observe that there are 
serious discrepancies and mismatch of 
figures on the number of assisted 
population/beneficiaries who have 
crossed the below poverty line under the 
SCA to SCSP obtained by the Ministry 
from the concerned 8 States for which the 
figures are available.  The Secretary 
himself was candid enough to accept 
during the evidence the figures to be 
rather odd and not correct.  The 
Committee consider that the Scheme of 
SCA to SCSP has tremendous potential 
for the ov erall development of the 
scheduled caste population and 
data/feedback on the physical progress, 
utilization of funds and consequent 
information on the raising standard of 
living of the SC population is an 
important input as far as the assessment of 
the sch eme is concerned.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to 
have a fresh look at the whole state of 
affairs. Instead of being contended with 
the information sent by States, Officers 
should be deputed to undertake an 
exercise of verifying and cros schecking 
the figures obtained from the concerned 
States so as to ascertain the accuracy and 
authenticity of the information. The 
States, which are not furnishing the 
requisite information on the number of 
beneficiaries, should be persuaded to send 
it at t he earliest. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. 
Ministry has received information from 12 
States on the number of Scheduled Caste 
families who have been able to cross the 
poverty line after having availed financial 
assistance under the scheme of SCA to SCSP 
during 2005 -06. Further, partial information 
has been received from eight other 
States/UTs viz. Assam, Gujarat, H.P., Orissa, 
Sikkim, Chandigarh, Delhi and 
Puducherry. They have been requested to 
expedite complete information.   
The defaulting States/UTs viz. Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Manip ur, 
Uttarakhand and Tripura have been reminded 
to provide information at the earliest. This 
matter was also taken up with the Principal 
Secretary/Secretary of these States during 
meetings of Principal Secretary/Secretary of 
Social Welfare of States held du ring 
October-November, 2010. 
During his evidence before the Committee, 
the Secretary had mentioned that information 
from only two States, viz. Kerala and 
Karnataka, was prima facie anomalous. Chief 
Secretaries of Govt. of Kerala and Principal 
Secretary of Govt. Karnataka States have 
been requested on 30 th April, 2010 and 10 th 
May, 2010 respectively to get the data 
verified and a report furnished to this 
Ministry at the earliest. The response from 
the two State Governments is still awaited.  
The Ministry had also requested the 
Programme Evaluation Organization, 
Planning Commission to conduct the 

58 
 
national level evaluation of flagship 
programmes of this Ministry which, inter 
alia, includes the Central Sector Scheme of 
Special Central Assistance (SCA) to 
Scheduled caste Sub Plan (SCSP). The 
Programme Evaluation Organization vide 
their letter dated 9 -08-2010 had informed 
that the evaluation of the suggested Schemes 
of the Ministry including that SCA to SCSP 
is being undertaken by them.  
6  3.20 
 
The Committee observes that not all the 
States/ UTs are formulating and 
implementing Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan 
as part of their annual plans by 
earmarking resources in proportion to 
their share in total population. The 
Committee also note with serious conce rn 
that the percentage of SCSP outlay in 
respect of States after having reached to a 
benchmark of 17.16% during the year 
2007-08 has been showing a declining 
trend i.e. 14.22% in 2008-09 & 13.34% in 
2009-10.  Also, all the Central Ministries 
are not unifor mly earmarking their 
allocation under the scheme.  In this 
context, the Committee in their earlier 
Report presented to the Parliament on 
17.12.2009 had recommended that the 
Ministry should take up the above issue 
with the Planning Commission in the right 
earnest.  The Committee are happy to note 
that the Ministry have taken up the issue 
with the Planning Commission and the 
latter have also realized the fundamental 
lacuna in the existing guidelines and 
informed the Ministry that they are in the 
process of wo rking out fresh guidelines 
for central Ministries.  The Committee are 
also in agreement with Planning 
Commission‟s observation that the 
present provision of uniform earmarking 
of 16% by States and the Central 
Ministries is not working out well and 
there is a need to review and reformulate 
the guidelines.   The Committee 
recommend the Ministry should not leave 
the matter there and take it forward with 
Planning Commission on the urgent need 
for an exhaustive review of the existing 
Special Component Plan (SCP) for 
Scheduled Castes, now renamed as 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), was 
introduced in 1979-80, to channelize flow of 
benefits and outlays f rom the Plan of States 
and Central Ministries for the development 
of Scheduled Castes, in proportion to the 
percentage of SC population, which is 16.2% 
as per Census, 2001. Guidelines on 
formulation, implementation and monitoring 
of SCSP have been issued b y the Planning 
Commission from time to time.  
Consolidated guidelines for formulation and 
implementation of SCSP by States to 
earmark the outlays under SCSP in 
proportion to SC population in their total 
population were last issued by the Planning 
Commission in October, 2005 for 
implementation from the Annual Plan, 2006 -
07. Minister (SJ&E) wrote letters in 2009 to 
Chief Ministers of those states which failed 
to earmark the outlays under SCSP 
proportionate to their SC population. The 
matter is being taken up again with 
defaulting States as well as with the Planning 
Commissions.  
Similar guidelines in this regard for Central 
Ministries were issued to 62 Central 
Ministries/ Departments in December, 2006, 
for implementation from the Annual Plan, 
2007-08. Implemen tation of the above 
guidelines by Central Ministries/ 
Departments had not been satisfactory.  
To rectify the above situation, the Ministry 
of SJ&E had conveyed certain concrete 
suggestions to the Planning Commission. 

59 
 
guidelines on SCA to SCSP to make these 
more rational, flexible and acceptable for 
the Ministries and the States. 
Pursuant to this, the Planning Commissi on, 
vide its Order dated 4 -6-2010, constituted a 
Task Force under the chairmanship of Dr. 
Narendra Jadhav, Member, with Secretaries 
of Ministries of SJ&E and Tribal Affairs and 
Principal Secretaries of four States, namely, 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Prad esh and 
Tamil Nadu, to re -examine and revise the 
extant Guidelines for implementation of 
Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan and Tribal Sub -
Plan (TSP) by Central Ministries and State 
Governments. The Task Force, submitted its 
First Report, covering Central Ministries / 
Departments, on 25 th November, 2010. 
Following are some of the important 
recommendations:- 
(i) Imposing an obligation on 25 
Ministries (mainly those dealing with 
social sectors and poverty alleviation) 
to earmark plan outlays under SCSP to 
varying extent, de pending on their 
nature of work, instead of a uniform 
16.2% obligation on all Ministries, as 
before, and   
(ii) Since the aggregate SCSP allocation 
based on the above Ministry -wise 
allocation was to fall short of the level 
of 16.2% of the Plan outlay by about 
1.9 percentage points, to keep an 
amount equivalent to such shortfall, 
initially under the Planning 
Commission, in Annual Plan, 2011 -12, 
which may be allocated later to 
suitable Ministries for SC -related 
programmes, after necessary 
consultation and examination.  
The Planning Commission accepted the first 
recommendation mentioned above, and 
issued instructions accordingly  to concerned 
Central Ministries/Departments for 
implementation from Annual Plan and 
Budget, 2011 -12 vide its letter dated 
15.12.2010. The Finance Ministry also 
incorporated necessary instructions about 
SCSP in its Budget Circular for 2011-12, and 
the Controller General of Accounts also 

60 
 
issued necessary consequential instructions 
on 15.12.2010.  Almost all Ministries, with 
the sole major exce ption of the Ministry of 
Rural Development, complied with the above 
guidelines.  Also, the Planning Commission 
did not keep untied funds under its own 
Demand for Grants, 2011 -12 to the extent of 
the shortfall, as per the second 
recommendation of the Task F orce.  The 
Ministry is continuously pursuing the matter 
with the Planning Commission and also the 
Ministry of Rural Development.  
7 3.32 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the 
budgetary allocation under the post-matric 
scholarship scheme has been increased 
significantly from Rs.750 crore during the 
year 2009-10 to Rs. 1700 crore during the 
year 2010-2011. The Committee are given 
to understand that with th is enhanced 
allocation, the Ministry will undertake the 
much-awaited revision in the scholarship 
amounts which are at present extremely 
low. Apart from fulfilling the much -felt 
needs of the students, this will certainly 
go a long way in the educational 
empowerment of the scheduled caste 
students. However, since the Ministry are 
yet to work out the details of the revision,  
the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation on early revision of the 
scholarship and hope that in this exercise 
every aspect of the scholarship will be 
taken into account and the scheme is 
dovetailed and revamped in  total ready to 
be implemented by the next academic 
session. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the decision taken in this 
regard at the earliest. 
The Post-matric Scholarship Scheme for SC 
students has been revised with effect from 1 st 
July, 2010, vide his Ministry‟s Order dated 
31.12.2010, so as to:-  
 raise the parental income ceiling for 
eligibility from Rs.1.00 lakh to 
Rs.2.00 lakh,  
 rationalize the groupin g of Courses, 
and  
 upward revision of maintenance and 
other allowances by approximately  
60%. 
 
8 4.15 The Committee are  constrained to note 
that the progress of construction of hostels 
for OBC boys and girls has not at all been 
satisfactory, as during the last five years 
out of 353 hostels sanctioned, only 140 
hostels could be completed.  The reason 
for shortfall and non -materialization of 
the remaining sanctioned hostels as 
furnished to the Committee that 
ultimately OBC hostels are sanctioned to 
State Governments and grants get held up 
due to non -furnishing of Utilization 
Certificates by the States is not at all 
acceptable to the Committee.  The 
Ministry‟s submission that there is a two 
The Scheme of “Construction of Hostels for 
OBC Boys and Girls” has been revised in 
2010-11 and communicated to all States/UT 
Administrations on 10.12.2010.  The scheme 
provides, inter-alia, that – 
(i) While submitting proposals for 
release of Central assistance, the 
implementing agencies shall 
give an undertaking that they 
would construct the hostels 
within one year of release of 
Central assistance.  This is as per 
the recommendation of the 

61 
 
year time period, tendering process and 
issue of technical sanction involved in 
construction of hostels is also not 
convincing because the Committee 
observe that even hostels sanctioned 
during 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 
could not be completed on time for 
reasons not known to the Committee. The 
Committee observe that the present 
construction period of two years for 
hostels is an unusually long period 
allowing for prolonged delay in 
construction and also cost escalation due 
to increase in prices of cement and steel 
etc.   Considering the fact that huge 
constructions are completed in no time 
these days with advanced building 
materials and in comparison, hostels are 
small buildings with simple d ormitory 
type halls accommodating hardly 100 to 
200 students per hostel, the construction 
should not stretch beyond a year. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should ask State 
Governments to acquire land before 
issuing financial sanctions, stipulate in its 
sanctions that construction be completed 
within a year and gear up its machinery 
for strict monitoring of the whole process 
of construction so that these hostels are 
completed in a time bound manner strictly 
within a year‟s time-frame.   
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee. 
(ii) Agencies, having clear title and 
possession over the land, where 
the hostel is to be constructed, 
will submit the proposals in the 
prescribed format which 
envisages to indicate the details 
of land where construction is 
proposed like n ame of owner, 
Department/institution, plot No., 
area and location.   
(iii) The scheme also stipulates to 
send documents like 
documentary evidence of land 
availability, plot No. and plot 
area as well as site plan. 
The Ministry‟s sanction letters also stipulate 
that construction of the hostel shall be 
undertaken by implementing agencies, taking 
into account the physical norms and other 
parameters envisaged in the scheme.  The 
sanction letter further envisages that the 
construction work of hostel is completed 
within a period of one year from the date of 
sanction of the grant.   
 
 
9 5.11 The Committee find that the assistive 
devices are provided free of cost to 
persons having income up to Rs. 6,500/ - 
per month and at 50 percent concession to 
persons with income between Rs. 6,500/ - 
and Rs. 10,000/ -.  The maximum 
admissible amount for purchase of a 
device is Rs. 6,500/ -.  On the one hand 
while the use of advanced assistive 
devices has brought a qualitative change 
in the lives of the persons with disability, 
on the other hand the cost of the devices 
have gone up due to advancement in 
technology making these beyond the 
reach of the persons with disability.  
There is an urgent need for early revision 
in the guidelines of the scheme to upgrade 
the ceiling limits and mak e these devices 
within the reach of the persons with 
disability. Therefore, the Committee 
A Committee comprising representatives 
of various stakeholders Non -
Governmental Organizations, National 
Institutes under this Ministry, Artificial 
Limbs Manufacturing Corporation 
(ALIMCO) a PSU under the Ministry and 
representatives of the State Govt. was 
constituted to delibera te upon the issues 
concerning revision of various provisions 
under the scheme. The Committee 
submitted its report on 1.4.2011 based  on 
which the revision proposals  is under 
preparation  for approval by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee..  
 

62 
 
recommends the Ministry to urgently 
bring changes in the existing ceiling limits 
by revising the guidelines of the above 
scheme.  
10 5.12 The C ommittee further note that even 
though the appliances provided are of 
good quality and ISI marked even then 
the issue of breakage, wear and tear in the 
appliances do come and at the moment 
the ADIP scheme does not have any 
provision to address the issue of  regular 
wear and tear in the costly devices 
distributed. In this regard the Ministry 
have maintained that follow up camps are 
held to look into any defects. However, in 
the absence of such a provision in -built in 
the ADIP scheme for repair and 
maintenance of these devices at regular 
intervals, the beneficiaries are often put 
into difficulty and inconvenience when 
these devices don‟t work properly. The 
warranties coming with the devices as 
provided by the companies are not enough 
for this. As such, there is  a need for 
inclusion of such a provision with 
financial assurance in the scheme itself 
for repair and maintenance.   Therefore, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry 
to take necessary steps in this direction 
and revise the guidelines of ADIP scheme 
if need arises to address the above issues.  
Action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard may be furnished to the Committee 
within three months of presentation of this 
report.  
 
As mentioned in reply to Recommendation 
No. 5.11 (para 15) that Committee 
constituted f or the revision of various 
provisions of ADIP Scheme has submitted its 
Report, on which further action is being 
taken. The issues relating to repair and 
maintenance of the devices given under 
ADIP are being addressed in the proposed 
revision of the scheme as per the 
recommendations of the Committee.  
11 5.24 The Committee observes that the National 
Handicapped Finance Development 
Corporation (NHFDC) offers financial 
assistance in the form of concessional 
loans to persons with disability through 
the State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs).  
However, a look at the re lease of funds to 
SCAs in the year 2009 -10 shows that 
many States such as Assam, Goa, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim and 
Tripura did not receive any grant and as 
such there was no beneficiary coverage in 
these States.  Out of these States, the 
The main reasons for non -release of funds to 
States of Assam, Goa,  Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Sikkim and Tripura were:- 
(i) Non-receipt of proposals from 
State Channelizing Agency (SCA); 
(ii) Non-submission of utilization 
details,  
(iii) Non-repayment of over dues; and 
(iv) In case of Madhya Pradesh, lack of 
sufficient Government Guarantee 
of the State Govt. 

63 
 
States of  Goa, Karnataka did not receive 
any grant even during 2008 -09.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to 
look into the specific problems being 
faced by these States and hurdles if any 
should be cleared so that the people with 
disability in these States are  not deprived 
of the benefits of NHFDC.  
 
The matter was pursued with the concerned 
State Governments. As a result, during 2011-
12, funds we re released to Assam, Goa, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Sikkim for 
implementation of NHFDC‟s schemes.  
12 6.10  The Committee are unhappy to observe 
the „nil‟ expenditure under the Scheme of 
Assistance for Construction of Old Age 
Homes for the Indigent Senior Citizens 
during the years 2007 -08, 2008 -09 & 
2010-11.  The reason cited by the 
Ministry for incurring „nil‟ expenditure is 
that the scheme is still awaiting approval 
of the Planning Commission despite 
regular follow up.  The Committee have 
been given to understand that the scheme 
had been initiated in the year 2007 -08 in 
pursuance of the Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
Act, 2007 with the noble intention of 
constructing old age homes for senior 
citizens. However, even after three years 
since the above Act has come into force, 
concrete steps have not been taken to 
implement the above scheme.  In view of 
the fact that substantial allocation of Rs. 
100 crore has been made under the 
scheme for the year 2010 -11, the 
Committee recommend that the scheme 
should be formulated early and the details 
of the scheme worked out expeditiously 
within the firs t trimester of the financial 
year so that the entire amount allocated 
for the purpose could be utilized.   The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Ministry and Planning 
Commission within three months of 
presentation of this report. 
Please s ee reply given to the 
Recommendation at S. No 6, Para 2.27 (sub 
para  ii) 
 
13 6.25 The Committee note with concern that at 
present there is no National Policy on 
Drug and Substance Abuse Prevention 
and Rehabilitation.  About the steps taken 
in this direction, the Committee have been 
informed that a sub -committee of the 
National Consultative Committee on De -
addiction and Rehabilitation (NCCDR) 
has been constituted.  The Ministry have 
informed that there is a large number of 
people who are under the spell of  some 
kind of drugs/alcohols and their de -
addiction and rehabilitation is an area of 
national concern calling for collective 
A National Consultative Committee on De -
addiction and Rehabilitation (NCCDR) has 
been set up in July 2008 to advise Central 
and State Governments on issues connected 
with drug demand reduction, especially 
education/awareness building, de -addiction 
and rehabilitation. On the recommendations 
of NCCDR, a Sub -Committee was 
constituted on 28 th February 2009 for , inter-
alia, drafting a National Policy on 
Prevention of Alcoholis m and Substance 

64 
 
action.  The Committee also endorse the 
above view/ information shared by the 
Ministry and consider that a national 
strategy to tac kle the issue of drug 
addiction is a priority area and the 
constitution of the above Committee is 
definitely a positive development.  A 
National Policy on  Drug and Substance 
Abuse Prevention and Rehabilitation is 
absolutely necessary not only for curbing 
the increasing number of drug addicts in 
the country but also in rehabilitating the 
addicts and giving them a new lease of 
life. Most nations of the world have 
already formulated their national policy 
on drug abuse highlighting their strategy 
to curb the menace and India should not 
be left behind. While recommending the 
Ministry to expedite the early finalization 
of the above policy within a stipulated 
time frame, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to ensure that the National 
Policy in this regard should be a n all 
comprehensive one covering every aspect 
of the problem.   It should also be in tune 
with the UN Charter of Drug Abuse.  
Smaller issues of having preventive 
strategy in schools through dissemination 
of information and awareness to larger 
issue of tack ling cross border trade of 
narcotics should also be incorporated in 
the above policy.  
Abuse and Rehabilitation of its victims 
The Sub-Committee after discussions and 
deliberations has prepared a draft National 
Policy, which was discussed in the Second 
meeting of the NCCDR held on 9.9.2010. 
The Sub-Committee is preparing the revised 
draft policy based on the suggestions 
received in the NCCDR meeting held on 
9.9.2010.  Efforts will be made to make the 
policy as comprehensive as possible as 
recommended by the Standing Committee.  
The Ministry in collaboration with Nehru 
Yuva Ken dra Sanghathan has started an 
awareness generation programme in the State 
of Punjab and Manipur. This programme will 
cover 3000 villages covering 10 Districts in 
the State of Punjab and 750 villages covering 
7 Districts in the State of Manipur. Nehru 
Yuva Kendra Sanghathan through its 
network of volunteers at village level will 
create awareness about the ill affects of 
alcoholism and Substance (Drug) abuse 
among the rural masses through door to door 
campaign, wall writing, candle march, poster 
campaign, str eet play etc.  De -addiction 
camps will also be organized for the 
identified addicts.  The whole programme 
will be completed in one years time. 
Further, the Ministry in collaboration with 
National Bal Bhawan has also started an 
awareness generation programm e among the 
children of the age group of 12-16 years. The 
project is to be implemented by National Bal 
Bhavan through a series of activities like 
poster making, creative writing, lecture, 
rally, nukkad natak etc. at local, zonal and 
national level.   
The Department of Revenue has also 
prepared a draft policy with respect to 
curbing the supply of drugs & narcotics.  It is 
the nodal Department with regard to 
administration of the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985.   

65 
 
14 6.26 The Committee observes that only one 
state i.e. the State of Rajasthan has 
availed the funds for organizing de -
addiction camps for three successive 
years. In this regard, the Committee are 
not happy with the reason advanced by 
the Ministry that the scheme being 
demand driven, the fund could be 
disbursed to only one organization as 
demand had been made only by them. 
Drug addiction being an all pervasive 
phenomenon prevalent in the country, a 
sizeable population in States like Punjab, 
Uttar Pradesh, North Eas t being under its 
influence and more number adding each 
day, it is very unfortunate that the 
Ministry is not able to bring many States 
under the fold of the scheme. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
keep it in mind and improve the position 
by tryi ng to motivate, guide and 
appropriately assist the States so that 
organizations/NGOs from all the States 
throng to avail the grants for organizing 
de-addiction camps.  
The matter has been was taken up  during the 
regional meetings with State Secretaries of  
Social Welfare/Social Justice held in 
October/November, 2010 as well as in the 
State Social Welfare Ministers Conference 
organized in June, 2011. During the year 
2011-12, so far proposals have been received 
from the States of Karnataka and Rajasthan 
for organizing De-addiction Camps. 
In a meeting organized separately for North 
Eastern States on 15.11.11 at Guwahati, 
State Government representatives as well as 
NGOs from the region were requested to 
send proposals for organizing                de -
addiction c amps in greater numbers.  
National Institute of Social Defense would 
undertake a programme in collaboration with 
the State Governments for capacity building 
of NGOs.    
 
  

66 
 
Annexure – II 
 
SCSP Outlay/Expenditure during Eleventh Plan 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 
 
l. No. State/U.T %  of SC 
Populatio
n (2001 
Census) 
Annual Plan 2007-08   Annual Plan 2008-09   Annual Plan 2009-10 Annual Plan 2010-11 
Total State 
Plan Outlay  
SCSP Outlay SCSP 
Expndr. 
Percent-age 
to Col.5 to 4 
Total State 
Plan Outlay  
SCSP 
Outlay 
SCSP Expndr. Percent-age 
to Col.9 to 8 
Total State Plan 
Outlay  
SCSP Outlay SCSP 
Expndr. 
Percent-age 
to Col.13 to 12 
Total State Plan Outlay  SCSP Outlay Percent-
age to 
Col.17 to 
16 
1 2 3 4 
5 6 7 
8 
9 10 11 
12 
13 14 15 
16 
17 18 
1 Andhra Pradesh 16.20 30500.00 4355.90 NR 14.28 44000.00 7630.42 NR 17.34 33496.75 5243.17 5455.84 15.65 36800.00 6131.39 16.66 
2 Assam 6.90 3800.00 81.09 49.88 2.13 5011.51 100.72 84.38 2.01 6000.00 115.67 100.70 1.93 7645.00 140.27 1.83 
3 Bihar 15.70 10200.00 2131.21 NR 20.89 13500.00 2428.26 2131.21 17.99 16000.00 2721.02 2721.02 17.01 20000.00 3375.12 16.88 
4 Chattisgarh 11.60 7413.72 2722.31 800.78 36.72 9600.00 1103.68 568.59 11.50 10947.76 1271.66 1206.89 11.62 12277.83 1612.13 13.13 
5 Goa 1.80 1430.00 26.95 11.66 1.88 1737.65 19.42 8.47 1.12 2240.00 16.15 15.50 0.72 2710.00 24.51 0.90 
6 Gujarat 7.10 16000.00 1134.40 NR 7.09 21000.00 1200.00 408.27 5.71 23500.00 1294.94 822.65 5.51 30000.00 1363.46 4.54 
7 Haryana 16.40 5300.00 1023.00 939.23 19.30 6650.00 1433.27 1385.28 21.55 10000.00 1493.21 1385.28 14.93 18260.00 2148.30 11.77 
8 
Himachal 
Pradesh 24.70 2100.00 231.00 170.36 11.00 2400.00 594.00 594.00 24.75 2700.00 668.00 594.00 24.74 3000.00 742.00 24.73 
9 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 7.60 4850.00 368.60 NR 7.60 4500.00    - NR 0 5500.00 319.73 NR 5.81 6000.00 455.65 7.59 
10 Jharkhand 11.80 6676.00 729.96 536.67 10.93 8015.00 1012.75 648.37 12.64 8200.00 852.86 852.86 10.40 9240.00 956.94 10.36 
11 Karnataka 16.20 17782.58 2916.00 1972.28 16.40 26188.83 3232.00 2575.68 12.34 29500.00 4779.00 2916.59 16.20 31050.00 3866.60 12.45 
12 Kerala 9.80 6950.00 681.80 545.73 9.81 7700.00 746.63 650.63 9.70 8920.00 875.12 848.57 9.81 10025.00 983.45 9.81 
13 Madhya Pradesh 15.20 12011.00 1832.60 1709.58 15.26 14182.61 2209.81 1832.58 15.58 16174.17 2499.60 2000.91 15.45 19000.00 2918.00 15.36 
14 Maharashtra 10.20 20200.00 2060.00 488.43 10.20 25000.00 2332.80 1890.66 9.33 35958.94 2651.99 1285.28 7.38 33934.53 3461.00 10.20 
15 Manipur 2.60 1374.31 33.04 23.81 2.40 1660.00 48.30 33.24 2.91 2000.00 58.06 50.71 2.90 2600.00 62.40 2.40 
16 Orissa 16.50 5105.00 843.96 787.79 16.53 7500.00 1239.75 1123.63 16.53 9500.00 1563.03 1410.72 16.45 11000.00 1817.90 16.53 
17 Punjab 28.90 5111.00 1330.00 749.73 26.02 6210.00 1792.00 1235.87 28.86 8600.00 2488.31 2124.19 28.93 9150.00 2640.00 28.85 
18 Rajasthan 17.20 11950.00 1787.77 1998.95 14.96 14020.00 2179.31 2352.35 15.54 17322.00 2735.49 2735.49 15.79 24000.00 3896.10 16.23 
19 Sikkim 5.02 691.14 34.70 15.33 5.02 852.00 42.60 24.53 5.00 1045.00 NA 24.53 0 1175.00 30.77 2.62 
20 Tamil Nadu 19.00 14000.00 1649.85 2903.62 11.78 16000.00 2379.20 3453.35 14.87 17500.00 2721.22 2618.56 15.55 20068.00 3827.84 19.07 
21 Tripura 17.40 1220.00 205.22 NR 16.82 1450.00 242.19 183.19 16.70 1680.00 280.11 280.11 16.67 1860.00 308.25 16.57 
22 Uttar Pradesh 21.10 25000.00 5307.00 4340.78 21.23 35000.00 7403.00 6789.41 21.15 39000.00 8275.00 8057.54 21.22 42000.00 8881.00 21.15 
23 Uttaranchal 17.90 4378.63 749.82 350.19 17.12 4775.00 854.73 300.67 17.90 5800.81 1044.15 332.52 18.00 6800.00 1224.00 18.00 
24 West Bengal 23.00 9150.00 2328.83 2328.00 25.45 11602.38 2677.83 1929.97 23.08 14150.00 3258.37 3258.37 23.03 17985.00 4142.40 23.03 
25 
 
 
Chandigarh 
 
 
17.50 
 
 
269.91 
 
 
46.72 
 
 
31.58 
 
 
17.31 
 
 
304.65 
 
 
45.91 
 
 
40.55 
 
 
15.07 
 
 
319.22 
 
 
55.92 
 
 
NR 
 
 
17.52 
 
 
450.91 
 
 
79.15 
 
 
17.55 
 
 

67 
 
26 Delhi 16.90 9000.00 1525.13 1534.05 16.95 10000.00 1694.15 1725.00 16.94 10000.00 1782.39 2094.30 17.82 11400.00 1901.56 16.68 
27 Puducherry* 16.20 1455.00 150.15 149.73 10.32 1750.00 2.83 152.72 0.16 2250.00 176.83 176.83 7.86 2500.00 354.96 14.20 
  ALL INDIA 16.20 233918.29 36287.01 22438.16 15.51 300609.63 44645.56 32122.60 14.85 338304.65 49241.00 43369.96 14.56 390931.27 57345.15 14.67 
  
 
Source: State Plan approval letters and SCSP documents of the State 
Govts. 
        
  
* Include TSP allocation  
               
  
NA: Not Available. 
              
  
NR: Not Reported. 
               
  

68 
 
Annexure-III 
State / UTs-wise BPL Families assisted and crossed the Poverty Line during 2005-
06, 2006-07 and 2007-08  
 
Sl. 
No. 
States 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
  No. of BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of 
BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of 
BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
No. of 
BPL 
families 
assisted 
No. of 
assisted 
families 
who 
crossed 
the 
poverty 
line 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 Andhra Pradesh 96213 21496 NR NR NR NR   
2 Assam 34595 96* 6752 1130** 9957 1554** 10323 811^ 
3 Bihar NR NR NR NR NR NR   
4 Chhattisgarh 1082 915 1181 1040 1457 1157   
5 Gujarat 5260 2363 6187 2961 11989 5888 8303 4668 
6 Goa NR NR NR NR NR NR   
7 Haryana 15664 13229 15896 13512 16327 $ 12589 $ 
8 Himachal Pradesh 25590 56*** 23414 37*** 21145 22# 95772 24943 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 526 526 NR NR NR NR   
10 Jharkhand NR NR NR NR NR NR     
11 Karnataka 13985 13985 NR NR NR NR   
12 Kerala 499 38 3239 2199 14298 10008   
13 Madhya Pradesh 7444 4914 8273 4130 9211 4516 8393 4417 
14 Maharashtra 23357 15645 NR NR NR NR   
15 Manipur NR NR NR NR NR NR   
16 Orissa 9151 N.A. NR NR NR NR   
17 Punjab 6435 2767 8250 3712 NR NR   

69 
 
18 Rajasthan 2645 1908 2470 1623 NR NR   
19 Sikkim 120 N.A.  98 N.A. NR NR   
20 Tamilnadu 168492 67397 229020 91608 80302 45611   
21 Tripura 1991 211 1066 118 2877 281 1798 215 
22 Uttar Pradesh 67016 36857 82040 61530 103781 77836 82084 62088 
23 Uttarakhand 5282 NR 3776 NR 1503 NR   
24 West Bengal 15443 8030 NR NR 34858  17976   
25 Chandigarh N.A. ~ 99 70 121 115 108 100 
26 Delhi 253 N.A. 77 NA 366 NA 347  
27 Puducherry 774 @. NR NR NR NR   
 Total 501817 190433 391838 183670 308192 164964 219717 97242 
N.R: Not reported.    N.A: Not available 
* Monthly Monitoring Report received from the sub Divisional Welfare Officers up to June, 2010. 
** Monitoring Report of the Sub-Divisional Welfare Officers up to June 2010. 
*** Data received only from Industries Department. 
# Data received only from Animal Husbandry Department. 
$ State Govt. has informed that Corporation has not sufficient infrastructure to conduct the survey t o 
ascertain how many families have been able to cross the poverty line during 2007-08. 
@ BPL SC families assisted during 2005-06 will be evaluated after the loan period 2010-11. 
^ Monitoring report of the Sub-Divisional Welfare Officers upto may, 2011. 
~No such specific survey carried out. 
 
  

70 
 
ANNEXURE - IV        
 
File No.11014/21/2006-BC-I  
Government of India  
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment  
***  
 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi,  
Dated : 11
th 
August, 2011  
 
To  
 
The Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in-Charge of OBC Welfare,  
All States/UTs. 
 
  
Subject: Revision of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Post-Matric Scholarship 
for students belonging to OBCs (PMS-OBC).  
 
Sir,  
 
The Government of India has been implementing the Scheme of Post -Matric 
Scholarship to students belonging to OBCs since 1998. It aims to provide financial assistance 
to students belonging to OBCs for pursuing post -matriculation courses through recognized 
institutions. Under the Scheme, Central Assistance is provided on 100% basis to all 
States/UTs over and above their respective “committed liability” except in the case of North 
Eastern States, which are exempted from committed liability.  
 
2. Components of the Scheme include:  
 
(i)  maintenance allowance;  
(ii) reimbursement of non -refundable compulsory fee charged by educational 
institutions; and  
(iii)  certain other allowances.  
 
3. The Scheme has now been revised w.e.f. 01.07.2011. The revision consists of the 
following:-  
 
I. Changes in (i) income ceiling; (ii) grouping of courses; and (iii) rates of maintenance 
and other allowances, as per details given in para 4 below, and  
 
II. The Scheme was, to begin with, meant to be open -ended, but has, in practice, been 
implemented subject to allocation available for it. This “Funds -Limited” nature is 
now being formalized, as per details given in para 5 below.  
         

71 
 
4. The changes effective from 01.07.2011 are summarized below:  
Sl.  
No.  
Item / Component  Present Provision / Rates (with 
relevant Section / para of the 
existing Scheme)  
Revised Provision / Rates 
(w.e.f. 01.07.2011)  
1.  Ceiling on family income  (Para III) Rs.44,500/- p.a.  Rs.1 lakh p.a.  
2.  Grouping of Courses  (Para IV) 
Group A  
Medical /Engineering including Degree 
level Courses in Indian Medicine, 
B.A.M&S and Comparable courses in 
Ayurveda, Unani/ Tibbia and 
Homeopathic System of Medicines.  
B.Sc (Agriculture/B.V.Sc/B.F.Sc  
(Fisheries)  
Higher technical and all professional 
studies like Degree and Post -matric 
courses in Agricultural and Veterinary 
Science.  
Group B  
Diploma level courses in Indian Medicine 
and Comparable courses in Ayurvedic, 
Unani/Tibbia and Homeopathic system 
of Medicine.  
Diploma & comparable courses in 
Engineering, Technology, Architecture, 
medicine, diploma level Courses in 
printing technology and courses for 
Overseer, draftsman, surveyor, 
Commercial Pilot License, Diploma and 
higher courses in Hotel Management 
catering technology and applied 
Nutrition.  
Degree and post -graduate course in 
nursing and pharmacy.  
Wireless and television operators/ sound 
recording and sound engineering motion 
picture, photography, film 
direction/acting. 
screenplay/writing/Degree/post graduate 
Diploma courses in business 
management, Chartered and Cost 
/Works Accountancy.  
Group A  
(i) Degree and Post Graduate 
level courses including M.Phil., 
Ph.D. and Post Doctoral 
research in Medicine (Allopathic, 
Indian and other recognized 
systems of medicines), 
Engineering, Technology, 
Planning, Architecture, Design, 
Fashion Technology, Agriculture, 
Veterinary & Allied Sciences, 
Management, Business Finance/ 
Administration, Computer 
Science/Applications.  
(ii) Commercial Pilot License 
(including helicopter pilot and 
multiengine rating) course.  
(iii) Post Graduate Diploma 
courses in various branches of 
management & medicine.  
(iv) C.A./I.C.W.A./C.S./I.C.F.A. 
etc.  
(v) M. Phil., Ph.D. and Post 
Doctoral Programmes (D. Litt., 
D.Sc. etc.).  
(vi) L.L.M.  
Group B  
Graduate/Post/Graduate 
courses leading to Degree, 
Diploma, Certificate in areas like 
Pharmacy (B. Pharma), Nursing 
(B Nursing), LLB, BFS, other 
para-medial branches like 
rehabilitation diagnostics etc., 
Mass Communication, Hotel 
Management & Catering, 
Travel/Tourism/ Hospitality 
Management, interior 
Decoration, Nutrition & Dietetics, 
Commercial Art, Financial 
Services (e.g. Banking, 
Insurance, Taxation etc.) for 
which entrance qualification is 
minimum Sr. Secondary (10+2).  

72 
 
 
 
  
Sl.  
No.  
Item / 
Component  
Present Provision / Rates (with 
relevant Section / para of the 
existing Scheme)  
Revised Provision / Rates 
(w.e.f. 01.07.2011)  
  Post Graduate courses in Science 
subjects.  
Group C  
Certificate courses in 
Engineering/Technology/Architecture and 
Medicine, Diploma and Certificate courses 
in Agriculture, Pharmacy, veterinary 
Science, Fisheries, Dairy development, 
Hygiene and Public Health , sanitary 
Inspector‟s Course, courses for Rural 
services, Cooperation and Community 
development, Sub -Officer‟ course at the 
national Fire Service College, Nagpur, 
Library Science.  
Degree /Post Graduate Diploma and Post 
Graduate Courses in Teachers‟ training, 
Library Science and Physical Education , 
Music Fine Arts and Law, Craft Instructor‟s 
Training Course, Certificate Course in 
Hotel Management/Catering Technology 
and Applied Nutrition, Passenger transport 
Management, Associate degree I 
Pharmacy , Post graduate courses in Arts 
and Commerce subjects.  
Group D  
General Courses upto Graduate level (2
nd 
year and onward)  
Group E  
Classes X1th and X11th in 10+2 System  
Intermediate courses and first year of 
General courses upto graduate level.  
(ii) Post Graduate courses not 
covered under Group A e.g. 
MA/M.Sc./M.Com/ 
M.Ed./M.Pharma etc.  
Group C  
All other courses leading to a 
graduate degree not covered 
under Group A & B e.g. BA/B.Sc./ 
B.Com etc.  
Group D  
All post-matriculation level non-
degree courses for which entrance 
qualification is High School (Class 
X), e.g. senior secondary 
certificate (class XI and XII); both 
general and vocational stream, ITI 
courses, 3 year diploma courses in 
Polytechnics, etc.  

73 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Item / Component  Present Provision / Rates 
(with relevant Section / 
para of the existing 
Scheme)  
Revised Provision / Rates (w.e.f. 
01.07.2011)  
3  Maintenance 
Allowance  
(Rs. per month)  
(Para IV)  
 
 Day 
Scholars 
Hosteller 
Group A 190/- 425/- 
Group B 190/- 290/- 
Group C 190/- 290/- 
Group D 120/- 230/- 
Group E 90/- 150/- 
  
 
 
   Day 
Scholars 
Hosteller 
Group A 350/- 750/- 
Group B 335/- 510/- 
Group C 210/- 400/- 
Group D 160/- 260/- 
4  Other Allowances  (Para IV)  
(Rs.)  
 
(Rs.)  
4.1  Study Tour charges  500/- p.a.  
(subject to actual expenditure)  
900/- p.a.  
(subject to actual expenditure)  
4.2  Thesis Typing & 
Printing charges  
600/- (Maximum) 1000/- (Maximum)  
4.3  Book Allowance for 
correspondence 
course  
500/- p.a.  900/- p.a.  
4.4  Reader charges for 
blind students  
(Rs. per month)  
   
Group A, B, C 100/- 
Group D 75/- 
Group E 50/- 
  
Group A, B 175/- 
Group C 130/- 
Group D 90/- 
4.5  Scholarship for CPL 
Course  
Maintenance allowance at the 
rates applicable to Group B 
courses, in addition to all 
compulsory fees including fee for 
flight charges. The number of 
awards for CPL will be 20 per 
annum on first -cum-first-serve 
basis.  
   
   
    
Rs.5,000/- per flying hour i n 
single/multiengine aircraft for 200 hours, 
as per DGCA approved rates. In 
addition, maintenance allowance at the 
rates applicable to Group „A‟ courses 
will be provided (This will be subject to 
the candidate undergoing the CPL 
training in DGCA approved fl ying 
institutions and his confirmation to meet 
the balance of the cost on his own). The 
number of awards for CPL will be 20 
per annum on first -cum-first serve 
basis.  
 
  

74 
 
5.  “Funds-Limited” nature of the revised Scheme & Procedure for Capping  
 
Even under the existing PMS -OBC Scheme, due to budgetary constraint, in practice, it 
has not been possible for the Central Government to provide assistance for giving scholarship 
to all eligible students. Therefore, a notional allocation (NA) under the Sch eme was being 
conveyed at the beginning of the financial year since 2008 -09 to States/UTs having OBC 
population, in proportion to their total population as per census and they were being requested 
to send proposals within the NA. As mentioned in para 3(II)  above, this is now being 
formalized under the revised Scheme, as per broad procedure outlined below :-  
 
(i)  At the beginning of the financial year, notional allocation(NA) of funds of States/UTs 
will be made by this Ministry, from the overall annual out lay of the Scheme, on the 
basis of population of each State/UT, excluding States/UTs having no notified list of 
OBCs (viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Lakshadweep).  
 
(ii)  States/UTs will sub -allocate their NA, district -wise and group -wise, for all non -
professional courses. However, such sub -allocation would not be necessary for 
professional courses, as institutions of professional education tend to be 
concentrated in major cities/centres. The State Government is expected to lay down 
criteria for selection for award of scholarship under both types of courses – 
professional and non-professional, to the extent of available funds, based on merit -
cum-means.  
 
 
(iii)  States will earmark at least 25% of the total outlay under the Scheme for Group D 
courses which include, Class -XI and XII and all other post -matriculation level non -
degree courses, diploma courses in polytechnics etc. Such earmarking would 
encourage more OBC students to join entry -level courses of tertiary education 
which would enable them subsequently to take up courses leading to higher 
qualifications.  
 
 
(iv)  States/UTs will incur expenditure under the Scheme at least to the extent of 
“Central assistance or NA plus their committed liability”, and should normally limit 
the number of scholarships accordingly. However, they would be free to allocate 
funds from the State -Plan, over and above the level of their committed liability plus 
the Central Assistance received, fo r funding additional scholarships under the 
Scheme. Any such additional expenditure will have to be borne by the State 
Government/UT Administration itself, over and above their committed liability, and 
will generally not be eligible for reimbursement from the Centre. However, additional 
expenditure incurred by a State/UT beyond the level of Central Assistance may be 
considered for reimbursement by the Central Government, to the extent of 
availability of savings (mainly from States which are not able to full y avail of their 
notional allocation, for any reason), towards the end of a financial year.  
         
(v)  Central assistance given to a State/UT would have to be first utilized to cover 
renewal cases (i.e students already awarded scholarships during the p revious 
years against Central Assistance), and only the balance amount left may be utilized 
to cover new cases.  
 
The above lays down the broad principles and procedure for implementing the 
“Capping” feature. Each State Government may please work out its S tate-specific detailed 
modalities for implementing the “Capping” feature of the revised PMS -OBC Scheme, keeping 

75 
 
in view the above broad principles/ procedure and its own circumstances, and send to this 
Ministry a copy of its guidelines issued in this behal f to the implementing agencies - as far as 
possible, with the first request for Central Assistance under the revised Scheme, and failing 
that, as soon thereafter as possible.  
 
   
6.  Under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, recurring expenditure of the last yea r of a Five 
Year Plan gets transferred to States as their committed liability, from the first year of the next 
Five Year Plan. In the instant case, however, as the revision is taking place in the last year of 
the XI Five Year Plan, Government of India have  decided, as a special case, that additional 
committed liability arising on account of the revision of the Scheme w.e.f. 01.07.2011 
shall be passed on to the States / UTs at the end of the XII Five Year Plan (i.e. w.e.f. 
01.04.2017) and not at the end of the XI Plan. However, committed liability as per old 
scholarship rates, at the end of the XI Plan, will get transferred to States / UTs with effect from 
1.4.2012, as per past practice.  
 
7.  Other provisions of the Scheme remain unchanged.  
 
8.  State Governments/UTs, which have already sent proposals for 2011 -12, are 
requested to revise their proposal for Central Assistance in 2011 -12, in the light of the 
provisions contained in para 4 of this letter, and send the revised proposal to this Min istry, so 
as to reach the undersigned (by name), as early as possible but in any case, by 15 th 
September, 2011. In case the proposal for Central Assistance under the Scheme for the 2011-
12 has not yet been sent, it may now please be sent, in the light of t he above revision, by the 
above date, to enable the Ministry to release Central Assistance at the earliest. 
 
  
Yours faithfully,  
Sd/-  
(P.P. Mitra)  
Joint Secretary 
  

76 
 
ANNEXURE - V  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 5TH MARCH, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 'D' , PHA, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
7. Shri Mohan Jena 
8. Shri G. V. Harsha Kumar 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
11. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
    MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
14. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
15. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Choulda  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

77 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft Reports of the Committee i.e. Nineteenth Report on Action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Social Justice  and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject "Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and  Empowerment  and three Action Taken Reports (Twentieth, Twenty -First and 
Twenty-Second) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministries of Minority Affairs, 
Tribal Affairs and Social Justice and Empowerment respectively. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration all the draft Reports and adopted the 
same with some additions in the 19 th Report on Action taken by t he Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
"Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry of Social Just ice and 
Empowerment.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  
 
  

78 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   FIFTEENTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
 Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 21  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos.  2.3, 3.25, 3.28, 3.29, 
3.32, 4.20, 4.37, 5.6, 6.9, 6.10 and 7.18). 
 
11 52.38 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies (Paragraph Nos. 3.27 
and 3.31). 
2 9.52 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph Nos.  
3.24, 3.26, 6.11 and 7.9) 
4 19.05 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.30, 4.12, 4.13 and 
4.28). 
4 19.05 
           
 